**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  302-1  (2008)  :  Safety  of  household  and  similar  electrical 
appliances.  Part  1:  General  Requirements  [ETD  32: 
Electrical  Appliances] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  302-1  :  2008 

( w^  ^^sm ) 

Indian  Standard 

SAFETY  OF  HOUSEHOLD  AND  SIMILAR  ELECTRICAL 

APPLIANCES 

PART  1   GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 

( Sixth  Revision ) 


ICS   13.120;  97.060 


©  BIS  2008 

BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,    9   BAHADUR   SHAH   ZAFAR   MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 


August  2008  Price  Group  16 


Filcclrical  Appliances  Sectional  Committee,  E  FD  32 


FOREWORD 

Hiis  Indian  Standard  (Part  I)  (Sixth  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  drai't 
finalized  by  the  Electrical  Appliances  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Electrotcchnical  Division 
Council. 

The  nci^d  and  importance  of  a  standard  prescribing  the  general  and  safety  requirements  and  constructional  details 
oi'  appliances  with  a  view  to  ensure  safe  and  reliable  operation  need  not  be  over  emphasized.  This  standard  is 
concerned  with  electrical  and  mechanical  construction  in  so  far  as  they  affect  safety,  durability  and  reliability  in 
service  of  the  appliances,  primarily  used  for  household  purposes.  A  standard  of  this  kind,  without  reference  to 
any  particular  appliance,  may  not  cover  in  detail  ail  the  requirements  with  which  an  individual  appliance  should 
comply.  Consequently,  compliance  with  this  standard  is  not  in  itself  a  complete  guarantee  cither  of  safety  or 
performance  of  an  appliance. 

TKl..  standard  was  originally  published  in  1951  and  revised  in  1960,  1963,  1967,  1973  and  1979.  This  revision 
has  been  done  with  a  view  to: 

a)  alitjnint^  with  the  latest  international  practice;  and 

b)  incorporating  the  experience  gained  in  implementation  of  the  earlier  version. 

In  this  revised  version  following  changes  have  been  made: 

1)  Additional  definitions  included; 

2)  Details  on  routine  test  added; 

3)  Additional  symbols  in  the  marking  clause  incorporated; 

4)  Operation  under  overload  conditions  of  appliances  with  heating  elements  has  been  kept  void; 

5)  Test  for  transient  over  voltage  test  added; 

6)  Maximum  winding  temperature  of  insulation  Class  F,  H,  200,  220  and  250  added; 

7)  Test  for  electromagnetic  compatibility  (EMC)  added; 

8)  Creepage  distances  specified  based  on  working  voltage,  material  group,  pollution  degree  and  type  of 
insulation; 

9)  Test  for  glow  wire  and  needle  flame  test  added; 

10)  Figure  on  construction  of  cord  anchorages  and  example  of  parts  of  earthing; 
1  1)  Terminal  incorporated; 

12)  Figure  on  examples  of  clearances  added; 

13)  Annex  on  test  for  appliances  powered  by  rechargeable  batteries  incorporated; 

14)  Annex  on  ageing  test  on  motors  added; 

15)  Annex  on  test  on  appliances  powered  by  rechargeable  batteries  added; 

16)  Annex  on  test  for  thermal  motor  protectors  added; 

17)  Annex  on  needle-flame  test  added; 

18)  Annex  on  test  for  capacitors  added; 

19)  Annex  cm  test  for  safety  isolating  Iransformers  added; 

20)  Annex  on  test  for  switches  added; 

2 1 )  Annex  on  test  for  motors  having  basic  insulation  that  is  inadequate  for  the  rated  voltage  of  the  appliance 
added; 

22)  Annex  on  recjuirements  of  coated  printed  circuit  board  added; 

23)  Annex  on  ovcrvoltage  categories  added; 

24)  Annex  on  guidance  for  tiieasurement  of  clearances  and  creepage  distances  added; 

(Continued  on  third  cover) 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Indian  Standard 

SAFETY  OF  HOUSEHOLD  AND  SIMILAR  ELECTRICAL 

APPLIANCES 


PART  1  GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS 


( Sixth  Revision ) 


1  SCOPE 


1.1  This  standard  deals  with  the  safety  of  electrical 
appliances  for  household  and  similar  purposes,  their 
rated  voltage  being  not  more  than  250  V  for  single- 
phase  appliances  and  415  V  for  other  appliances. 

Appliances  not  intended  for  normal  household  use  but 
which  nevertheless  may  be  a  source  of  danger  to  the 
public,  such  as  appliances  intended  to  be  used  by 
laymen  in  shops,  in  light  industry  and  on  farms,  are 
within  the  scope  of  this  standard. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  such  appliances  axe  catering  equipment, 
cleaning  appliances  for  industrial  and  commercial  use,  and 
appliances  for  hairdressers. 

As  far  as  is  practicable,  this  standard  deals  with  the 
common  hazards  presented  by  appliances  that  are 
encountered  by  all  persons  in  and  around  the  home. 
However,  in  general,  it  does  not  take  into  account: 

a)  the  use  of  appliances  by  young  children  or 
infirm  persons  without  supervision;  and 

b)  playing  with  the  appliance  by  young  children. 

NOTES 

1  Attention  is  drawn  to  the  fact  that  for  appliances 
intended  to  be  used  in  vehicles  or  on  board  ships  or 
aircraft,  additional  requirements  may  be  necessary; 

2  This  standard  does  not  apply  to; 

a)  appliances  intended  exclusively  for  industrial 
purposes; 

b)  appliances  intended  to  be  used  in  locations  where 
special  conditions  prevail,  such  as  the  presence  of  a 
corrosive  or  explosive  atmosphere  (dust,  vapour  or 
gas); 

c)  audio,  video  and  similar  electronic  apparatus; 

d)  appliances  for  medical  purposes; 

e)  hand-held  motor-operated  electric  tools; 

0    personal  computers  and  similar  equipment;  and 
g)   transportable  motor-operated  electric  tools  . 

2  REFERENCES 

The  standards  listed  below  contain  provisions  which, 
through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of 
this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  editions 
indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to 
revision  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 


standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility 
of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standards 
listed  below: 


IS  No. 

IS/IEC  60127 
(all  parts) 
325  :  1996 
616:2003 


694:  1988 


996  :  1979 
1271  :  1985 

1293:2005 


1401  :2007 


1709:  1984 
2071  (Parti): 
1993 

2071  (Part  2): 

1974 
2102  (Parti): 

1993 


2824  :  2007 


5921  (Part  6) 

1987 


Title 
Miniature  fuses 

Three  phase  ac  induction  motors 
Audio,  video  and  similar  electronic 
apparatus  —  Safety  requirements 
{third  revision) 

PVC  insulated  cables  for  working 
voltages  up  to  and  including  1  1 00  V 
(third  revision) 
Single  phase  electric  motors 
Thermal  evaluation  and  classification 
of  electrical  insulation  (first  revision) 
Plugs    and    socket-outlets    for 
household  and  similar  purposes  of 
rated  voltage  upto  and  including 
250  V  and  rated  current  upto  and 
including  16  A  (third  revision) 
Protection  of  persons  and  equipment 
by    enclosures    —    Probes    for 
verification  {second  revision) 
a.c.  Motor  capacitors  (second  revision) 
High-voltage  test  techniques:  Part  1 
General  definitions  and  test  (second 
revision) 

Methods  of  high  voltage  testing:  Part  2 
Test  procedures  (first  revision) 
General  tolerances:  Part  1  Tolerances 
for  linear  and  angular  dimensions 
without  individual  tolerance 
indications  (third  revision) 
Method  for  the  determination  of  the 
proof  and  the  comparative  tracking 
indices  of  solid  insulating  materials 
(second  revision) 

Specification  of  mettal-clad  base 
materials  for  printed  circuits  for  use 
in  electronic  and  telecommunication 
equipment:  Part  6  Epoxide  woven 
glass  fabric  copper-clad  laminated 
sheet,    general    purpose    grade 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


IS  No. 


Title 


IS  No. 


Title 


5921  (Part?) :      Specification  for  metal-clad  base 

1987  materials  for  printed  circuits  for  use 

in  electronic  and  telecommunication 
equipment;  Part  7  Epoxide  woven 
glass  fabric  copper-clad  laminated 
sheet  of  defined  flammability 
(vertical  burning  test) 
9000  (Part  3/         Basic  environmental  testing  procedures 

Sec  1):1977       for  electronic  and  electrical  items: 

Part  3  Dry  heat  test,  Section  1  General 

9000  (Part  7/         Basic  environmental  testing  procedures 

Sec  1  to  5)  :1979for  electronic  and  electrical  items: 
Part  7  Impact  test 

9(X}0  (Part  7/         Basic  environmental  testing  procedures 

Sec  7) :  2006  for  electronic  and  electrical  items: 
Part  7  Impact  Test,  Section  7  Test 
Eh :  Hammer  tests 

9206  :  1979  Dimensions  of  caps  for  tungsten 

filament  general  service  electric  lamps 

9968  (Part  1 ) :      Elastomer  insulated  cables:  Part  1  Foe 
1988  vi^orking  voltages  upto  and  including 

1  100  V  (first  revision) 

10276  (Part  1) :    Edison  screw  lamp-holders:  Part  1 
1982  Requirements 

10322  (Parti) :     Luminaires:  Part  1  General  require- 
1982  ments  and  tests 

1 1 000  (Part  2/      Fire  hazard  testing:  Part  2  Test  methods, 
Sec  1) :  1984       Section  1  Glow-wire  test  and  guidance 

1 1 000  (Part  2/      Fine  hazard  testing:  Part  2  Test  methods, 
Sec  2) :  1984      Section  2  Needle-flame  test 

11239  (Part  12) :  Method  of  test  for  rigid  cellular  thermal 
1988  insulation    materials:    Part    12 

Horizontal  burning  characteristics 

12063  :  1987  Classification  of  degree  of  protection 
provided  by  enclosures  of  electrical 
equipment 

14700  (Part  4/       Electromagnetic  compatibility  (EMC): 

Sec  2) :  1999  Part  4  Tesring  and  measurement 
techniques.  Section  2  Electrostatic 
discharge  immunity  test — Basic  EMC 
publication 

IS  14700  (Part  4/    Electromagnetic  compatibility  (EMC) : 

Sec  3) :  2(X)5        Part  4  Testing  and  measurement  tech- 
niques, Section  3  Radiated,  radio 
frequency,  electromagneric  field 
immunity  test 

14700  (Part  4/       Electromagnetic  compatibility  (EMC): 
Sec  4) :  1999      Part  4  Tesring  and  measurement 
techniques.  Section  4  Electrical  fast 
transient/burst  immunity  test 

IS  14700  (Part  4/    Electromagnetic  compatibility  (EMC) : 
Sec  1 1):  2007     Part  4  Testing  and  measurement  tech- 
niques. Section  1 1  Voltage  dips,  short 
interruptions  and  voltage  variations 
immunity  test 


15382  (Part  1) :  Insulation  coordination  for  equipment 
2003  within  low-voltage  systems:  Part  1 

Principles,  requirements  and  tests 
15382  (Part  3) :     Insulation  coordination  for  equipment 
2006  within  low- voltage  systems:  Part  3 

Use  of  coatings  to  achieve  insulation 
coordination  of  printed  board 
assemblies 
ISQC  302400  :     Fixed  capacitors  for  use  in  electronic 
1994  equipment  —  Sectional  specification 

for  fixed  capacitors  for  electromagnetic 
interference    suppression    and 
connection  to  the  supply  mains 
IS/IEC  60730-1  :  Automatic  electric  controls  for  house- 
1990  hold  and  similar  use  —  Part  1: 

General  requirements 
IS/IEC  60320-1 :  Appliances  couplers  for  household 
2001  and  similar  general  purposes  — 

Part  1:  General  requirements 
1S/IEC60320-2-2 :  AppHancescouplersforhouseholdand 
1998  similar  general  purposes:  Part  2-2: 

Interconnection    couplers    for 
household  and  similar  equipment 
1S/IEC60320-2-3  :Appliancescouplersforhouseholdand 
1998  similar  general  purposes — Part  2-3: 

Appliance  couplers  with  a  degree  of 
protection  higher  than  IPXO 
IS/IEC  61058-1  :  Switches  for  appliances:  Part  1 
200 1  General  requirements 

IS/IEC  61558-1  :  Safety  of  power  transformers,  power 
1997  supply  units  and  similar  —  Part  1: 

General  requirements  and  tests 
IS/IEC  61558-2-6 :  Safety  of  power  transformers,  power 
1997  supply  units  and  similar  —  Part  2: 

Particular  requirements  —  Section  6: 
Safety  isolaUng  transformers  for 
general  use 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

3.1  General  —  When  the  terms  voltage  and  current 
are  used,  they  are  r.m.s.  values,  unless  otherwise 
specified. 

3.1.1  Rated  Voltage  —  Voltage  assigned  to  the 
appliance  by  the  manufacturer. 

3.1.2  Rated  Voltage  Range  —  Voltage  range  assigned 
to  the  appliance  by  the  manufacturer,  expressed  by  its 
lower  and  upper  hmits. 

3.1.3  Working  Voltage  —  Maximum  voltage  to  which 
the  part  under  consideration  is  subjected  when  the 
appliance  is  supplied  at  its  rated  voltage  and  operating 
under  normal  operation. 

NOTES 

1  The  different  positions  of  controls  and  switching  devices  are 

taken  into  account. 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


2  Working  voltage  takes  into  account  resonant  voltages. 

3  When  deducing  the  working  voltage,  the  effect  of  transient 
voltages  is  ignored. 

3.1.4  Rated  Power  Input  —  Power  input  assigned  to 
the  appliance  by  the  manufacturer. 

3.1.5  Rated  Power  Input  Range  —  Power  input  range 
assigned  to  the  appliance  by  the  manufacturer, 
expressed  by  its  lower  and  upper  limits. 

3.1.6  Rated  Current  —  Current  assigned  to  the 
appliance  by  the  manufacturer. 

NOTE  —  If  no  current  is  assigned  to  the  appUance,  the  rated 
current  is: 

a)  for  heating  appliances,  the  current  calculated  from  the  rated 
power  input  and  the  rated  voltage;  and 

b)  for  motor-operated  appliances  and  combined  appliances, 
the  current  measured  when  the  appliance  is  supplied  at  rated 
voltage  and  operated  under  normal  operation. 

3.1.7  Rated  Frequency  —  Frequency  assigned  to  the 
appliance  by  the  manufacturer, 

3.1*8  Rated  Frequency  Range  —  Frequency  range 
assigned  to  the  appliance  by  the  manufacturer, 
expressed  by  its  lower  and  upper  limits, 

3.1.9  Normal  Operation  —  Conditions  under  which 
the  appliance  is  operated  in  normal  use  when  it  is 
connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

3.1.10  Rated  Impulse  Voltage  —  Voltage  derived  from 
the  rated  voltage  and  the  overvoltage  category  of  the 
appliance,  characterizing  the  specified  withstand 
capability  of  its  insulation  against  transient  overvoltages. 

3.1.11  Dangerous  Malfunction  —  Unintended 
operation  of  the  appliance  that  may  impair  safety. 

3.2  Cord 

3.2.1  Detachable  Cord  —  Flexible  cord,  for  supply  or 
interconnection,  intended  to  be  connected  to  the 
appliance  by  means  of  a  suitable  appliance  coupler. 

3.2.2  Interconnection  Cord  —  External  flexible  cord 
provided  as  part  of  a  complete  appliance  for  purposes 
other  than  connection  to  the  supply  mains. 

NOTE  —  A  remote  hand-held  switching  device,  an  external 
interconnection  between  two  parts  of  an  appliance  and  a  cord 
connecting  an  accessory  to  the  appliance  or  to  a  separate 
signalling  circuit  are  examples  of  interconnection  cords. 

3.2.3  Supply  Cord  —  Flexible  cord,  for  supply 
purposes,  that  is  fixed  to  the  appliance. 

3.2.4  Type  X  Attachment  —  Method  of  attachment  of 
the  supply  cord  such  that  it  can  easily  be  replaced. 

NOTE  —  The  supply  cord  may  be  specially  prepared  and  only 
available  from  the  manufacturer  or  its  service  agent.  A  specially 
prepared  cord  may  include  a  part  of  the  appliance. 

3.2.5  Type  Y  Attachment  —  Method  of  attachment  of 


the  supply  cord  such  that  any  replacement  is  intended 
to  be  made  by  the  manufacturer,  its  service  agent  or 
similar  qualified  person. 

3.2.6  Type  Z  Attachment  —  Method  of  attachment  of 
the  supply  cord  such  that  it  cannot  be  replaced  without 
breaking  or  destroying  the  appliance. 

3.2.7  Supply  Leads  —  Set  of  wires  intended  for 
connecting  the  appliance  to  fixed  wiring  and 
accommodated  in  a  compartment  within  or  attached 
to  the  appliance. 

3.3  Type  of  Insulation  and  Construction 

3.3.1  Basic  Insulation  —  Insulation  applied  to  live  parts 
to  provide  basic  protection  against  electric  shock. 

3.3.2  Supplementary  Insulation  —  Independent 
insulation  applied  in  addition  to  basic  insulation,  in 
order  to  provide  protection  against  electric  shock  in 
the  event  of  a  failure  of  basic  insulation. 

3.3.3  Double  Insulation — Insulation  system  comprising 
both  basic  insulation  and  supplementary  insulation. 

3.3.4  Reinforced  Insulation  —  Single  insulation 
applied  to  live  parts,  that  provides  a  degree  of  protection 
against  electric  shock  equivalent  to  double  insulation 
under  the  conditions  specified  in  this  standard. 

NOTE  —  It  is  not  implied  that  the  insulation  is  one 
homogeneous  piece.  The  insulation  may  comprise  several 
layers  which  cannot  be  tested  singly  as  supplementary 
insulation  or  basic  insulation. 

3.3.5  Functional  Insulation  —  Insulation  between 
conductive  parts  of  different  potential  which  is 
necessary  only  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the 
appliance. 

3.3.6  Protective  Impedance  —  Impedance  connected 
between  live  parts  and  accessible  conductive  parts  of 
class  II  constructions  so  that  the  current,  in  normal  use 
and  under  likely  fault  conditions  in  the  appliance,  is 
limited  to  a  safe  value. 

3.3.7  Class  0  Appliance  —  Appliance  in  which 
protection  against  electric  shock  relies  upon  basic 
insulation  only,  there  being  no  means  for  the 
connection  of  conductive  accessible  parts,  if  any,  to 
the  protective  conductor  in  the  fixed  wiring  of  the 
installation,  reliance  in  the  event  of  a  failure  of  the 
basic  insulation  being  placed  upon  the  environment. 

NOTES 

1  Class  0  appliances  have  either  an  enclosure  of  insulating 
material  which  may  form  a  part  or  the  whole  of  the  basic 
insulation,  or  a  metal  enclosure  which  is  separated  from  live 
parts  by  an  appropriate  insulation.  If  an  appliance  with  an 
enclosure  of  insulating  material  has  provision  for  earthing 
internal  parts,  it  is  considered  to  be  a  class  1  appliance  or  class 

01  appliance. 

2  Class  0  construction  is  not  allowed  in  India  for  safety  reason. 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


3.3.8  Class  01  Appliance  — Appliance  having  at  least 
basic  insulation  throughout  and  incorporating  an 
earthing  terminal  but  having  a  supply  cord  without 
earthing  conductor  and  a  plug  without  earthing 

contact. 

NOTE  —  Class  01  construction  is  not  allowed  in  India  for  safety 
reason, 

3.3.9  Class  I  Appliance  —  Appliance  in  which 
protection  against  electric  shock  does  not  rely  on  basic 
insulation  only  but  which  includes  an  additional  safety 
precaution,  in  that  conductive  accessible  parts  are 
connected  to  the  protective  earthing  conductor  in  the 
lixed  wiring  of  the  installation  in  such  a  way  that 
conductive  accessible  parts  cannot  become  live  in  the 
event  of  a  failure  of  the  basic  insulation. 

NOTE  —  This  provision  includes  a  protective  earthing 
conductor  in  the  supply  cord. 

3.3.10  Class  II  Appliance  —  Appliance  in  which 
protection  against  electric  shock  docs  not  rely  on  basic 
insulation  only  but  in  which  additional  safety 
precautions  are  provided,  such  as  double  insulation  or 
reinforced  insulation,  there  being  no  provision  for 
protective  earthing  or  reliance  upon  installation 
conditions. 

NOTES 

1  Such  an  appliance  may  be  of  one  of  the  following  types: 

a)  An  appliance  having  a  durable  and  substantially  continuous 
enclosure  of  insulating  material  which  envelops  all  metal 
parts,  with  the  exception  of  small  parts,  such  as  nameplates, 
screws  and  rivets,  which  are  isolated  from  live  parts  by 
insulation  at  least  equivalent  to  reinforced  insulation;  such 
an  appliance  is  called  an  insulation-encased  Class  II 
appliance; 

b)  An  appliance  having  a  substantially  continuous  metal 
enclosure,  in  which  double  insulation  or  reinforced 
insulation  is  used  throughout;  such  an  appliance  is  called  a 
inetal-encascd  Class  II  appliance;  and 

c )  An  appHance  which  is  a  combination  of  an  insulation-encased 
Class  II  appliance  and  a  metal-encased  Class  II  appliance. 

2  The  enclosure  of  an  insulation-encased  Class  II  appliance 
may  form  a  part  or  the  whole  of  the  supplementary  insulation 
or  of  the  reinforced  insulation. 

3  If  an  appliance  with  double  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation 
throughout  has  provision  for  earthing,  it  is  considered  to  be  a 
Class  I  appliance  or  a  Class  01  appliance. 

3.3.11  Class  II  Construction  —  Part  of  an  appliance 
lor  which  protection  against  electric  shock  relies  upon 
double  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 

3.3.12  Class  III  Appliance  —  Appliance  in  which 
protection  against  electric  shock  relies  on  supply  at 
safety  extra-low  voltage  and  in  which  voltages  higher 
ihan  those  of  safely  extra-low  voltage  are  not  generated. 

3.3.13  Class  III  Construction  —  Part  of  an  appliance 
for  which  protection  against  electric  shock  relies  upon 
safety  extra-low  voltage  and  in  which  voltages  higher 
than  those  of  safety  extra-low  voltage  are  not  generated. 


3.3.14  Clearance  —  Shortest  distance  in  air  between 
two  conductive  parts  or  between  a  conductive  part  and 
the  accessible  surface. 

3.3.15  Creepage  Distance  —  Shortest  distance  along 
the  surface  of  insulation  between  two  conductive  parts 
or  between  a  conductive  part  and  the  accessible  surface. 

3.4  Extra-Low  Voltage 

3,4.1  Extra-Low  Voltage  —  Voltage  supplied  from  a 
source  within  the  appliance  that  does  not  exceed  50  V 
between  conductors  and  between  conductors  and  earth 
when  the  appliance  is  supplied  at  rated  voltage. 

3A.2  Safety  Extra-Low  Voltage  —  Voltage  not 
exceeding  42  V  between  conductors  and  earth,  the  no- 
load  voltage  not  exceeding  50  V. 

When  safety  extra-low  voltage  is  obtained  from  the 
supply  mains,  it  is  to  be  through  a  safety  isolating 
transformer  or  a  convertor  with  separate  windings,  the 
insulation  of  which  complies  with  double  insulation 
or  reinforced  insulation  requirements. 

NOTES 

1  The  voltage  limits  specified  are  based  on  the  assumption 
that  the  safety  isolating  transformer  is  supplied  at  its  rated 
voltage. 

2  Safety  extra-low  voltage  is  also  known  as  SELV. 

3.4.3  Safety  Isolating  Transformer —  Transformer,  the 
input  winding  of  which  is  electrically  separated  from 
the  output  winding  by  an  insulation  at  least  equivalent 
to  double  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation,  that  is 
intended  to  supply  an  appliance  or  circuit  at  safety 
extra-low  voltage. 

3.4.4  Protective  Extra-Low  Voltage  Circuit  —  Earthed 
circuit  operating  at  safety  extra-low  voltage  which  is 
separated  from  other  circuits  by  basic  insulation  and^ 
protective  screening,  double  insulation  or  reinforced 
insulation. 

NOTES 

1  Protective  screening  is  the  separation  of  circuits  from  live 
parts  by  means  of  an  earthed  screen. 

2  A  protective  extra-low  voltage  circuit  is  also  known  as  a  PELV 
circuit. 

3.5  Type  of  Appliance 

3.5.1  Portable  Appliance  —  Appliance  that  is  intended 
to  be  moved  while  in  operation  or  an  appliance,  other 
than  a  fixed  appliance,  having  a  mass  less  than  18  kg. 

3.5.2  Hand-Held  Appliance  —  Portable  appliance 
intended  to  be  held  in  the  hand  during  normal  use. 

3.5.3  Stationary  Appliance  —  Fixed  appliance  or  an 
appliance  which  is  not  a  portable  appliance. 

3.5.4  Fixed  Appliance  —  Appliance  that  is  intended  to 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


be  used  while  fastened  to  a  support  or  while  secured 
in  a  specific  location. 

3.5.5  Built-in  Appliance  —  Fixed  appliance  intended 
to  be  installed  in  a  cabinet,  in  a  prepared  recess  in  a 
wall  or  in  a  similar  location. 

3.5.6  Heating  Appliance  —  Appliance  incorporating 
heating  elements  but  without  any  motor. 

3.5.7  Motor-Operated  Appliance  —  Appliance 
incorporating  motors  but  without  any  heating  element. 

NOTE  —  Magnetically  driven  appliances  are  considered  to  be 
motor-operated  appliances. 

3.5.8  Combined  Appliance  —  Appliance  incorporating 
heating  elements  and  motors, 

3.6  Type  of  Attachment 

3.6.1  Non-detachable  Part  —  Part  that  can  only  be 
reiiioved  or  opened  with  the  aid  of  a  tool  or  a  part  that 
fulfills  the  test  of  22.11. 

3.6.2  Detachable  Part  —  Part  that  can  be  removed 
without  the  aid  of  a  tool,  a  part  that  is  removed  in 
accordance  with  the  instructions  for  use,  even  if  a  tool 
is  needed  for  removal,  or  a  part  that  does  not  fulfil  the 

test  of  22.11. 

NOTES 

1  If  for  installation  purposes  a  part  has  to  be  removed,  this  part 
is  not  considered  to  be  detachable  even  if  the  instructions  state 
that  it  is  to  be  removed. 

2  Components  that  can  be  removed  without  the  aid  of  a  tool 
are  considered  to  be  detachable  parts. 

3  A  part  that  can  be  opened  is  considered  to  be  a  part  that  can 
be  removed. 

3.6.3  Accessible  Part  —  Part  or  surface  that  can  be 
touched  by  means  of  test  probe  B  of  IS  1401,  and  if 
the  part  or  surface  is  metal,  any  conductive  part 
connected  to  it. 

3.6.4  Live  Part  —  Conductor  or  conductive  part 
intended  to  be  energized  in  normal  use,  including  a 
neutral  conductor  hut,  by  convention,  not  a  PEN 

conductor. 

NOTES 

1  Parts,  accessible  or  not,  complying  with  8.1.4  are  not 
considered  to  be  live  parts. 

2  A  PEN  conductor  is  a  protective  earthed  neutral  conductor 
combining  the  functions  of  both  a  protective  conductor  and  a 
neutral  conductor. 

3-6.5  Tool  —  Screwdriver,  coin  or  any  other  object  that 
may  be  used  to  operate  a  screw  or  similar  fixing  means. 

3.7  Thermostat  and  Thermo  Cut-Outs 

3.7.1  Thermostat  —  Temperature-sensing  device,  the 
operating  temperature  of  which  may  be  either  fixed  or 
adjustable  and  which  during  normal  operation  keeps 


the  temperature  of  the  controlled  part  between  certain 
limits  by  automatically  opening  and  closing  a  circuit. 

3.7.2  Temperature  Limiter  —  Temperature-sensing 
device,  the  operating  temperature  of  which  may  be 
either  fixed  or  adjustable  and  which  during  normal 
operation  operates  by  opening  or  closing  a  circuit  when 
the  temperature  of  the  controlled  part  reaches  a  pre- 
determined value. 

NOTE  —  It  does  not  make  the  reverse  operation  during  the 
normal  duty  cycle  of  the  appliance.  It  may  or  may  not  require 
manual  resetting. 

3.7.3  Thermal  Cut-Out  —  Device  which  during 
abnormal  operation  limits  the  temperature  of  the 
controlled  part  by  automatically  opening  the  circuit, 
or  by  reducing  the  current,  and  is  constructed  so  that 
its  setting  cannot  be  altered  by  the  user. 

3.7.4  Self-Resetting  Thermal  Cwf-(9wr-~  Thermal  cut- 
out that  automatically  restores  the  current  after  the 
relevant  part  of  the  appliance  has  cooled  down 
sufficiently. 

3.7.5  Non-self-Resetting  Thermal  Cut-Out  —  Thermal 
cut-out  that  requires  a  manual  operation  for  resetting, 
or  replacement  of  a  part,  in  order  to  restore  the  current. 

NOTE  —  Manual  operation  includes  disconnection  of  the 
appliance  from  the  supply  mains. 

3.7.6  Protective  Device  —  Device,  the  operation  of 
which  prevents  a  hazardous  situation  under  abnormal 
operation  conditions. 

3.7.7  Thermal  Link  —  Thermal  cut-out  which  operates 
only  once  and  requires  partial  or  complete  replacement. 

3.8  Miscellaneous 

3.8.1  All-Pole  Disconnection  —  Disconnection  of  both 
supply  conductors  by  a  single  initiating  action  or,  for 
three-phase  appliances,  disconnection  of  the  three 
supply  conductors  by  a  single  initiating  action. 

NOTE  —  For  three-phase  appliances,  the  neutral  conductor  is 
not  considered  to  be  a  supply  conductor. 

3.8.2  Ojf  Position  —  Stable  position  of  a  switching 
device  in  which  the  circuit  controlled  by  the  switch  is 
disconnected  from  its  supply  or,  for  electronic 
disconnection,  the  circuit  is  de-energized. 

NOTE  —  The  off  position  does  not  imply  an  alKpole 
disconnection. 

3.8.3  Visibly  Glowing  Heating  Element  —  Heating 
element  that  is  partly  or  completely  visible  from  the 
outside  of  the  appliance  and  has  a  temperature  of  at 
least  650  ""C  when  the  appliance  has  been  operated 
under  normal  operation  at  rated  power  input  until 
steady  conditions  have  been  established. 

3.8.4  PTC  Heating  Element  —  Element  intended  for 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


heating  consisting  mainly  of  positive  temperature 
coefficient  resistors  thai  are  thermally  sensitive  and 
have  a  rapid  non-linear  increase  in  resistance  when  the 
temperature  is  raised  through  a  particular  range. 

3.8.5  User  Maintenance  —  Any  maintenance  operation 
stated  in  the  instructions  for  use,  or  marked  on  the 
appliance,  that  the  user  is  intended  to  perform. 

3.9  Electronic  Component  and  Circuits 

3.9.1  Electronic  Component  —  Part  in  which 
conduction  is  achieved  principally  by  electrons  moving 
through  a  vacuum,  gas  or  semiconductor. 

NOTE  —  Neon  indicators  are  not  considered  to  be  electronic 
coiTiponcnts. 

3.9.2  Electronic  Circuit ^Cxxcmi  incorporating  at  least 
one  electronic  component. 

3.9.3  Protective  Electronic  O'rcwiY—  Electronic  circuit 
that  prevents  a  hazardous  situation  under  abnormal 
operating  conditions. 

NOTE  —  Parts  of  the  circuit  may  also  be  used  for  functional 
purposes. 

3.9.4  Software  Class  B  ~  Software  that  includes  code 
intended  to  prevent  hazards  if  a  fault,  other  than  a 
software  fault,  occurs  in  the  appliance. 

3.9.5  Software  Class  C  —  Software  that  includes  code 
intended  to  prevent  hazards  without  the  use  of  other 
protective  devices. 

4  GENERAL  REQUIREMENT 

4.1  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  in  normal 
use  they  function  safely  so  as  to  cause  no  danger  to 
persons  or  surroundings,  even  in  the  event  of 
carelessness  that  may  occur  in  normal  use. 

In  general  this  principle  is  achieved  by  fulfilling  the 
relevant  requirements  specified  in  this  standard  and 
compliance  is  checked  by  carrying  out  all  the  relevant 

tests. 

5  GENERAL  CONDITIONS  FOR  THE  TESTS 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  tests  are  carried  out  in 
accordance  with  this  clause. 

5.1  Tests  according  to  this  standard  are  type  tests. 

NOTRS 

1  Routine  tests  are  described  in  Annex  A. 

2  Schedule  of  acceptance  test  are  given  in  Part  2  of  this 
standard. 

5.2  The  tests  are  carried  out  on  a  single  appliance  that 
shall  withstand  all  the  relevant  tests.  However,  the  tests 
of  20, 22  (except  22,11  and  22.18)  to  26, 28, 30  and  31 
may  be  carried  out  on  separate  appliances.  The  test 
of  22.3  is  carried  out  on  a  new  appliance. 


NOTE  —  Additional  samples  may  be  required  if  the  appliance 
has  to  be  tested  under  different  conditions,  for  example  if  it 
can  be  supplied  with  different  voltages. 

If  an  intentionally  weak  part  becomes  open  circuit 
during  the  tests  of  19,  an  additional  appliance  may  be 
needed. 

The  testing  of  components  may  require  the  submission 
of  additional  samples  of  these  components. 

If  the  test  of  Annex  C  has  to  be  carried  out,  six  samples 
of  the  motor  are  needed. 

If  the  test  of  Annex  D  has  to  be  carried  out,  an  additional 
appliance  may  be  used. 

If  the  tests  of  Annex  G  are  carried  out,  four  additional 
transformers  are  needed. 

If  the  tests  of  Annex  H  are  carried  out,  three  switches 
or  three  additional  appliances  are  needed. 

NOTES 

1  The  cumulative  Stress  resulting  from  successive  tests  on 
electronic  circuits  is  to  be  avoided.  It  may  be  necessary  to 
replace  components  or  to  use  additional  samples.  The  number 
of  additional  samples  should  be  kept  to  a  minimum  by  an 
evaluation  of  the  relevant  electronic  circuits. 

2  If  an  appliance  has  to  be  dismantled  in  order  to  carry  out  a 
test,  care  is  to  be  taken  to  insure  that  it  is  reassembled  as 
originally  supplied.  In  case  of  doubt,  subsequent  tests  may  be 
carried  out  on  a  separate  sample. 

5.3  The  tests  are  carried  out  in  the  order  of  the  clauses. 
However,  the  test  of  22.11  on  the  appliance  at  room 
temperature  is  carried  out  before  the  tests  of  8.  The 
tests  of  14  and  21.2  and  22.24  are  carried  out  after  the 
tests  of  29. 

If  it  is  evident  from  the  construction  of  the  appliance 
that  a  particular  test  is  not  applicable,  the  test  is  not 
carried  out. 

5.4  When  testing  appliances  that  are  also  supplied  by 
other  energies  such  as  gas,  the  influence  of  their 
consumption  has  to  be  taken  into  account. 

5.5  The  tests  are  carried  out  with  the  appliance  or  any 
movable  part  of  it  placed  in  the  most  unfavourable 
position  that  may  occur  in  normal  use. 

5.6  Appliances  provided  with  controls  or  switching 
devices  are  tested  with  these  controls  or  devices 
adjusted  to  their  most  unfavourable  setting,  if  the 
setting  can  be  altered  by  the  user, 

NOTES 

1  If  the  adjusting  means  of  the  control  is  accessible  without 
the  aid  of  a  tool,  this  subclause  applies  whether  the  setting  can 
be  altered  by  hand  or  with  the  aid  of  a  tool.  If  the  adjusting 
means  is  not  accessible  without  the  aid  of  a  tool  and  if  the 
setting  is  not  intended  to  be  altered  by  the  user,  this  subclause 
does  not  apply. 

2  Adequate  sealing  is  regarded  as  preventing  alteration  of  the 
setting  by  the  user. 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


5.7  The  tests  are  carried  out  in  a  draught-free  location 
al  an  ambient  temperature  of  27  ±  5  ""C. 

5.8  If  the  temperature  attained  by  any  part  is  limited 
by  a  temperature  sensitive  device  or  is  influenced  by 
the  temperature  at  which  a  change  of  state  occurs,  for 
example  when  water  boils,  the  ambient  temperature  is 
maintained  at  23 ''C  ±  2°C  in  case  of  doubt. 

5.8.1  Appliances  for  ac  only  are  tested  with  ac  at  rated 
frequency,  and  those  for  ac  and  dc  are  tested  at  the 
more  unfavourable  supply. 

Appliances  for  ac  that  are  not  marked  with  rated 
frequency  are  tested  with  50  Hz. 

5.8.2  Appliances  having  more  than  one  rated  voltage 
are  tested  on  the  basis  of  the  most  unfavourable  voltage. 

For  motor-operated  appliances,  and  combined 
appliances,  marked  with  a  rated  voltage  range,  when 
it  is  specified  that  the  supply  voltage  is  equal  to  the 

rated  voltage  multiplied  by  a  factor^  the  appliance  is 
supplied  at: 

a)  the  upper  limit  of  the  rated  voltage  range 
multiplied  by  this  factor,  if  greater  than  1 ;  and 

b)  the  lower  limit  of  the  rated  voltage  range 
multiplied  by  this  factor,  if  smaller  than  1. 

When  a  factor  is  not  specified,  the  supply  voltage  is 
the  most  unfavourable  within  the  rated  voltage  range. 

NOTES 

1  If  a  heating  appliance  has  a  rated  voltage  range,  the  upper 
limit  of  the  voltage  range  will  usually  be  the  most  unfavourable 
voltage  within  the  range. 

2  For  motor-operated  appliances,  combined  appliances  and 
appliances  having  more  than  one  rated  voltage  or  rated  voltage 
range,  it  may  be  necessary  to  make  some  of  the  tests  at  the 
minimum,  the  mean  and  the  maximum  values  of  the  rated 
voltage  or  the  rated  voltage  range  in  order  to  establish  the  most 
unfavourable  voltage. 

5.8.3  For  heating  appliances,  and  combined  appliances, 
marked  with  a  rated  power  input  range,  when  it  is 
specified  that  the  power  input  is  equal  to  the  rated 
power  input  multiplied  by  a  factor,  the  appliance  is 
operated  at: 

a)  the  upper  limit  of  the  rated  power  input  range 
multiplied  by  this  factor,  if  greater  than  1;  and 

b)  the  lower  limit  of  the  rated  power  input  range 
multiplied  by  this  factor,  if  smaller  than  1. 

When  a  factor  is  not  specified,  the  power  input  is  the 
most  unfavourable  within  the  rated  power  input  range. 

5.8.4  For  appliances  marked  with  a  rated  voltage  range 
and  rated  power  input  corresponding  to  the  mean  of 
the  rated  voltage  range,  when  it  is  specified  that  the 
power  input  is  equal  to  rated  power  input  multiplied 
by  a  factor,  the  appliance  is  operated  at: 


a)  calculated  power  input  corresponding  to  the 
upper  limit  of  the  rated  voltage  range 
multiplied  by  this  factor,  if  greater  than  1 ;  and 

b)  calculated  power  input  corresponding  to  the 
lower  limit  of  the  rated  voltage  range 
multiplied  by  this  factor,  if  smaller  than  1 . 

When  a  factor  is  not  specified,  the  power  input 
corresponds  to  the  power  input  at  the  most 
unfavourable  voltage  within  the  rated  voltage  range. 

5.9  When  alternative  heating  elements  or  accessories 
are  made  available  by  the  appliance  manufacturer,  the 
appliance  is  tested  with  those  elements  or  accessories 
which  give  the  most  unfavourable  results. 

5.10  The  tests  are  carried  out  on  the  appliance  as 
supplied.  However,  an  appliance  constructed  as  a  single 
appliance  but  supplied  in  a  number  of  units  is  tested 
after  assembly  in  accordance  with  the  instructions 
provided  with  the  appliance. 

Built-in  appliances  and  fixed  appliances  are  installed 
in  accordance  with  the  instructions  provided  with  the 
appliance  before  testing. 

5.11  Appliances  intended  to  be  connected  to  fixed 
wiring  by  means  of  a  flexible  cord  are  tested  with  the 
appropriate  flexible  cord  connected  to  the  appliance. 

5.12  For  heating  appliances  and  combined  appliances, 
when  it  is  specified  that  the  appliance  has  to  operate  at 
a  power  input  multiplied  by  a  factor,  this  applies  only 
to  heating  elements  without  appreciable  positive 
temperature  coefficient  of  resistance. 

For  heating  elements  with  appreciable  positive 
temperature  coefficient  of  resistance,  other  than  PTC 
heating  elements,  the  supply  voltage  is  determined  by 
supplying  the  appliance  at  rated  voltage  until  the 
heating  element  reaches  its  operating  temperature.  The 
supply  voltage  is  then  rapidly  increased  to  the  value 
necessary  to  give  the  power  input  required  for  the 
relevant  test,  this  value  of  the  supply  voltage  being 
maintained  throughout  the  test. 

NOTE  —  In  general,  the  temperature  coefficient  is  considered 
to  be  appreciable  if,  at  rated  voltage,  the  power  input  of  the 
appliance  in  cold  condition  differs  by  more  than  25  percent 
from  the  power  input  at  operating  temperature. 

5.13  The  tests  for  appliances  with  PTC  heating 
elements  are  carried  out  at  a  voltage  corresponding  to 
the  specified  power  input.  When  a  power  input  greater 
than  the  rated  power  input  is  specified,  the  factor  for 
multiplying  the  voltage  is  equal  to  the  square  root  of 
the  factor  for  multiplying  the  power  input. 

5.14  If  Class  I  appliances  have  accessible  metal  parts 
that  are  not  earthed  and  are  not  separated  from  live 
parts  by  an  intermediate  metal  part  that  is  earthed,  such 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


parts  are  checked  for  compliance  with  the  appropriate 
requirements  specified  for  Class  II  construction. 

If  Class  I  appliances  have  accessible  non-metallic  parts, 
such  parts  are  checked  for  compliance  with  the 
appropriate  requirements  specified  for  Class  II 
construction  unless  these  parts  are  separated  from  live 
parts  by  an  intermediate  metal  part  that  is  earthed. 

NOTE  —  Guidance  is  given  in  Annex  P  for  enhanced 
requirements  that  may  be  used  to  ensure  an  acceptable  level  of 
protection  against  electrical  and  thermal  hazards  for  particular 
types  of  appliances  used  in  an  installation  without  a  protective 
earthing  conductor  in  countries  that  have  warm  damp  equable 
climates. 

5.15  If  appliances  have  parts  operating  at  safety  extra- 
low  voltage,  such  parts  are  checked  for  compliance 
with  the  appropriate  requirements  specified  for 
Class  III  construction. 

5.16  When  testing  electronic  circuits,  the  supply  is  to 

be  free  from  perturbations  from  external  sources  that 
can  influence  the  results  of  the  tests. 

5.17  Appliances  powered  by  rechargeable  batteries  are 
tested  in  accordance  with  Annex  B. 

5.18  If  linear  and  angular  dimensions  are  specified 
without  a  tolerance,  IS  2102  (Part  I)  is  applicable. 

6  CLASSIFICATION 

6.1  Appliances  shall  be  of  one  of  the  following  classes 
with  respect  to  protection  against  electric  shock: 

Class  I,  Class  II,  Class  III. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
relevant  tests. 

6.2  Appliances  shall  have  the  appropriate  degree  of 
protection  against  harmful  ingress  of  water. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
relevant  tests. 

NOTE  ~~  The  degrees  of  protection  against  harmful  ingress  of 
water  are  given  in  IS  12063. 

7  MARKING  AND  INSTRUCTIONS 

7.1  Appliances  shall  be  marked  with  the: 

a)  Rated  voltage  or  rated  voltage  range,  in  volts; 

b)  Symbol  for  nature  of  supply,  unless  the  rated 
frequency  is  marked; 

c)  Rated  power  input  in  watts  or  rated  current, 
in  amperes; 

d)  Name,  trade-mark  or  identification  mark  of 
the  manufacturer  or  responsible  vendor; 

e)  Model  or  type  reference; 

f)  Symbol  for  Class  II  appliances  only  (see  7.6); 

g)  IP  number  according  to  degree  of  protection 
against  ingress  of  water,  other  than  IPXO; 


h)    Country  of  manufacture;  and 

j)     Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTES 

1  The  first  numeral  of  the  IP  number  need  not  be  marked  on 
the  appliance. 

2  Additional  markings  are  allowed  provided  they  do  not  give 
rise  to  misunderstanding. 

3  If  components  are  marked  separately,  the  marking  of  the 
appliance  and  that  of  the  components  is  to  be  such  that  there 
can  be  no  doubt  with  regard  to  the  marking  of  the  appliance 
itself. 

4  If  the  appliance  is  marked  with  rated  pressure,  the  units  used 
may  be  bars  but  only  together  with  pascals  and  placed  in 
brackets. 

7.2  Stationary  appliances  for  multiple  supply  shall  be 
marked  with  the  substance  of  the  following: 

WARNING:  Before  obtaining  access  to  terminals,  all  supply 
circuits  must  be  disconnected. 

This  warning  shall  be  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
terminal  cover. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.3  Appliances  having  a  range  of  rated  values  and 
which  can  be  operated  without  adjustment  throughout 
the  range  shall  be  marked  with  the  lower  and  upper 
limits  of  the  range  separated  by  a  hyphen. 

NOTE  —  Example:  1 15-230  V:  The  appliance  is  suitable  for 
any  value  within  the  marked  range  (a  curling  iron  with  a  PTC 
heating  element). 

Appliances  having  different  rated  values  and  which 
have  to  be  adjusted  for  use  at  a  particular  value  by  the 
user  or  installer  shall  be  marked  with  the  different 
values  separated  by  an  oblique  stroke. 

NOTES 

1  Example:  1 1 5/230  V  or  240  V:  The  appliance  is  only  suitable 
for  the  marked  values  (a  shaver  with  a  selector  switch). 

2  This  requirement  is  also  applicable  to  appliances  with 
provision  for  connection  to  both  single-phase  and  multi-phase 
supplies. 

Example:  230  V/400  V  or  240/415  V:  The  appliance 
is  only  suitable  for  the  voltage  values  indicated, 
230  V/240V  being  for  single-phase  operation  and 
400  V/415  V  for  three-phase  operation  (a  dishwasher 
with  terminals  for  both  supplies). 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.4  If  the  appliance  can  be  adjusted  for  different  rated 
voltages,  the  voltage  to  which  the  appliance  is  adjusted 
shall  be  clearly  discernible. 

NOTE  —  If  frequent  changes  in  voltage  setting  are  not  required, 
this  requirement  is  considered  to  be  met  if  the  rated  voltage  to 
which  the  appliance  is  to  be  adjusted  can  be  determined  from 
a  wiring  diagram  fixed  to  the  appliance.  The  wiring  diagram 
may  be  on  the  inside  of  a  cover  that  has  to  be  removed  to 
connect  the  supply  conductors.  It  is  not  to  be  on  a  label  loosely 
attached  to  the  appliance. 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.5  For  appliances  marked  with  more  than  one  rated 
voltage  or  with  one  or  more  rated  voltage  ranges,  the 
rated  power  input  or  rated  current  for  each  of  these 
voltages  or  ranges  shall  be  marked.  However,  if  the 
diiference  between  the  limits  of  a  rated  voltage.range 
does  not  exceed  1 0  percent  of  the  mean  value  of  the 
range,  the  marking  for  rated  power  input  or  rated 
current  may  be  related  to  the  mean  value  of  the  range. 

The  upper  and  lower  limits  of  the  rated  power  input  or 
rated  current  shall  be  marked  on  the  appliance  so  that 
(he  relation  betw^een  input  and  voltage  is  clear. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.6  When  symbols  are  used,  they  shall  be  as  follows: 


'"V^ 


3N  '■>-' 


direct  current 

alternating  current 
three-phase  alternating  current 
three-phase  alternating  current 
with  neutral 

fuse-link 


NOTE  —  The  rated  current  of  the  fuse  link  may  be 
indicated  in  association  with  this  symbol. 

time-lag  miniature  fuse-link 
X  where  X  is  the  symbol  for  the 

time/current  characteristic  as 
given  in  IS/IEC  60127-1 

protective  earth 
:    Class  II  equipment 
lamp 


NOTE   —    The    rated    wattage    of   the    lamp    may    be 
indicated  in  association  with  this  symbol. 


read  the  instructions 


caution 


{ 


equipotentiality 
dangerous  voltage 


The  symbol  for  nature  of  supply  shall  be  placed  next 
to  the  inarking  for  rated  voltage. 

The  symbol  for  Class  II  appliances  shall  be  placed  so 
that  it  will  be  obvious  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  technical 
information  and  is  unlikely  to  be  confused  with  any 
other  marking. 


Units  of  physical  quantites  and  their  symbols  shall  be 
those  of  the  international  standardized  system. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTE  —  Additional  symbols  are  allowed  provided  that  they 
do  not  give  rise  to  misunderstanding. 

7.7  Appliances  to  be  connected  to  more  than  two  supply 
conductors  and  appliances  for  multiple  supply  shall 
have  a  connection  diagram  fixed  to  them,  unless  the 
correct  mode  of  connection  is  obvious. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTES 

1  The  correct  mode  of  connection  for  three-phase  appliances 
is  considered  to  be  obvious  if  the  terminals  for  the  supply 
conductors  are  indicated  by  arrows  pointing  towards  the 
terminals. 

2  Marking  in  words  is  an  acceptable  means  of  indicating  the 
correct  mode  of  connection. 

3  The  connection  diagram  may  be  the  wiring  diagram  referred 
to  in  7.4. 

7.8  Except  for  type  Z  attachment,  terminals  used  for 
connection  to  the  supply  mains  shall  be  indicated  as 
follows: 

a)  Terminals  intended  exclusively  for  the  neutral 
conductor  shall  be  indicated  by  the  letter  N; 
and 

b)  Protective  earthing  terminals  shall  be 
indicated  by  symbol  specified  in  7.6. 

These  indications  shall  not  be  placed  on  screws, 
removable  washers  or  other  parts  which  can  be 
removed  when  conductors  are  being  connected. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.9  Unless  it  is  obviously  unnecessary,  switches  which 
may  give  rise  to  a  hazard  when  operated  shall  be 
marked  or  placed  so  as  to  indicate  clearly  which  part 
of  the  appliance  they  control.  Indications  used  for  this 
purpose  shall,  wherever  practicable,  be  comprehensible 
without  a  knowledge  of  languages  or  national 
standards. 

Comphance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.10  The  different  positions  of  switches  on  stationary 
appliances  and  the  different  positions  of  controls  on 
all  appliances  shall  be  indicated  by  figures,  letters  or 
other  visual  means. 

NOTE  —  This  requirement  also  applies  to  switches  which  are 
part  of  a  control. 

If  figures  are  used  for  indicating  the  different  positions, 
the  off  position  shall  be  indicated  by  the  figure  0  and 
the  position  for  a  higher  value,  such  as  output,  input, 
speed  or  cooling  effect,  shall  be  indicated  by  a  higher 
figure. 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


The  figure  0  shall  not  be  used  for  any  other  indication 
unless  it  is  positioned  and  associated  with  other 
numbers  so  that  it  does  not  give  rise  to  confusion  with 
the  indication  of  the  off  position. 

NOTE  ~  For  example,  figure  0  may  be  used  on  a  digital 
programming  keyboard. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.11  Controls  intended  to  be  adjusted  during 
installation  or  in  normal  use  shall  be  provided  with  an 
indication  for  the  direction  of  adjustment. 

NOTE  —  An  indication  of  '+'  and  '-   is  considered  to  be 
sufficient. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12  Instructions  for  use  shall  be  provided  with  the 
appliance  so  that  the  appliance  can  be  used  safely. 

NOTE  —  Instructions  for  use  may  be  marked  on  the  appliance 
as  long  as  they  are  visible  in  normal  use. 

If  it  is  necessary  to  take  precautions  during  user 
maintenance,  appropriate  details  shall  be  given. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12.1  If  it  is  necessary  to  take  precautions  during 
installation  of  the  appliance,  appropriate  details  shall 
be  given. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12.2  If  a  stationary  appliance  is  not  fitted  with  a 
supply  cord  and  a  plug,  or  with  other  means  for 
disconnection  from  the  supply  mains  having  a  contact 
separation  in  all  poles  that  provide  full  disconnection 
under  overvoltage  category  III  conditions,  the 
instructions  shall  state  that  means  for  disconnection 
must  be  incorporated  in  the  fixed  wiring  in  accordance 
with  the  wiring  rules. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12.3  If  the  insulation  of  the  fixed  wiring  supplying 
an  appliance  for  permanent  connection  to  the  supply 
mains  can  come  into  contact  with  parts  having 
temperature  rise  exceeding  50  K  during  the  test  of  11, 
the  instructions  shall  state  that  the  fixed  wiring 
insulation  must  be  protected,  for  example,  by  insulating 
sleeving  having  an  appropriate  temperature  rating. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  during  the 

test  of  11. 

7.12.4  The  instructions  for  built-in  apphances  shall 
include  information  with  regard  to  the  following: 

a)  Dimensions  of  the  space  to  be  provided  for 
the  appliance; 

b)  Dimensions  and  position  of  the  means  for 
supporting  and  fixing  the  appliance  within 

this  space; 


c)  Minimum  distances  between  the  various  parts 
of  the  appliance  and  the  surrounding 
structure; 

d)  Minimum  dimensions  of  ventilating  openings 
and  their  correct  arrangement; 

e)  Connection  of  the  appliance  to  the  supply 
mains  and  the  interconnection  of  any  separate 
components;  and 

f)  Necessity  to  allow  disconnection  of  the 
appliance  from  the  supply  after  installation, 
unless  the  appliance  incorporates  a  switch 
complying  with  24.3. 

The  disconnection  may  be  achieved  by  having 
the  plug  accessible  or  by  incorporating  a 
switch  in  the  fixed  wiring  in  accordance  with 
the  wiring  rules. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12.5  For  appliances  with  Type  X  attachment  having 
a  specially  prepared  cord,  the  instructions  shall  contain 
the  substance  of  the  following. 

If  the  supply  cord  is  damaged,  it  must  be  replaced  by  a 
special  cord  or  assembly  available  from  the 
manufacturer  or  its  service  agent. 

For  appliances  with  Type  Y  attachment,  the  instructions 
shall  contain  the  substance  of  the  following. 

If  the  supply  cord  is  damaged,  it  must  be  replaced  by 
the  manufacturer,  its  service  agent  or  similarly  qualified 
persons  in  order  to  avoid  a  hazard. 

For  appliances  with  Type  Z  attachment,  the  instructions 
shall  contain  the  substance  of  the  following. 

The  supply  cord  cannot  be  replaced.  If  the  cord  is 
damaged  the  appliance  should  be  scrapped. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12.6  The  instructions  for  heating  appliances 
incorporating  a  non-self-resetting  thermal  cut-out  that 
is  reset  by  disconnection  of  the  supply  mains  shall 
contain  the  substance  of  the  following: 

CAUTION:  In  order  to  avoid  a  hazard  due  to  inadvertent 

resetting  of  the  thermal  cutout,  this  appliance  must  not  be 
supphed  through  an  external  switching  device,  such  as  a  tinier, 
or  connected  to  a  circuit  that  is  regularly  switched  on  and  off 
by  the  utility. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection, 

7.12.7  The  instructions  for  fixed  appliances  shall  state 
how  the  appliance  is  to  be  fixed  to  its  support. 

NOTE  —  The  method  of  fixing  is  not  to  depend  on  the  use  of 
adhesives  since  they  are  not  considered  to  be  a  reliable  fixing  nneans. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.12.8  The  instructions  for  appliances  connected  to  the 
water  mains  shall  state: 


10 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


a)  the  maximum  inlel  water  pressure,  in  pascals; 
and 

b)  the  minimum  inlet  water  pressure,  in  pascals, 
if  this  is  necessary  for  the  correct  operation 
of  the  appliance. 

The  instructions  for  appliances  connected  to  the  water 
mains  by  detachable  hose-sets  shall  state  that  the  new 
hose-sets  supplied  with  the  appliance  are  to  be  used 
and  that  old  hose-sets  should  not  be  reused. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.13  Instructions  and  other  text  required  by  this 
standard  shall  be  written  in  an  official  language  of  the 
country  in  which  the  appliance  is  to  be  sold. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.14  The  markings  required  by  the  standard  shall  be 
clearly  legible  and  durable. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  rubbing 
the  marking  by  hand  for  15s  with  a  piece  of  cloth 
soaked  with  water  and  again  for  15s  with  a  piece  of 
cloth  soaked  with  petroleum  spirit. 

After  all  the  tests  of  this  standard,  the  marking  shall  be 
clearly  legible.  It  shall  not  be  easily  possible  to  remove 
marking  plates  nor  shall  they  show  curling. 

NOTES 

1  In  considering  the  durability  of  the  marking,  the  effect  of 
normal  use  is  taken  into  account.  For  example,  marking  by 
means  of  paint  or  enamel,  other  than  vitreous  enamel,  on 
containers  that  arc  likely  to  be  cleaned  frequently,  is  not 
considered  to  be  durable. 

2  The  petroleum  spirit  to  be  used  for  the  test  is  aliphatic  solvent 
hexane  having  a  maximum  aromatics  content  of  0.1  percent 
by  volume,  a  kauri-butanol  value  of  29,  an  initial  boiling  point 
of  approximately  65°C,  a  dry  point  of  approximately  69''C 
and  a  specific  mass  of  approximately  0.66  kg/l. 

7.15  The  markings  specified  in  7.1  to  7.5  shall  be  on  a 
main  part  of  the  appliance. 

Markings  on  the  appliance  shall  be  clearly  discernible 
from  the  outside  of  the  appliance  but  if  necessary  after 
removal  of  a  cover.  For  portable  appliances  it  shall  be 
possible  to  remove  or  open  this  cover  without  the  aid 
of  a  tool. 

For  stationary  appliances  at  least  the  name  or  trade- 
mark or  identification  mark  of  the  manufacturer  or 
responsible  vendor  and  the  model  or  type  reference 
shall  be  visible  when  the  appliance  is  installed  as  in 
normal  use.  These  markings  may  be  beneath  a 
detachable  cover.  Other  markings  may  be  beneath  a 
cover  only  if  they  are  near  to  the  terminals.  For  fixed 
appliances,  this  requirement  applies  after  the  appliance 
has  been  installed  according  to  the  instructions 
provided  with  the  appliance. 


Indications  for  switches  and  controls  shall  be  placed 
on  or  near  these  components.  They  shall  not  be  placed 
on  parts  which  can  be  positioned  or  re-positioned  in 
such  a  way  that  the  marking  is  misleading. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

7.16  If  compliance  with  this  standard  depends  upon 
the  operation  of  a  replaceable  thermal  link  or  fuse  link, 
the  reference  number  or  other  means  for  identifying 
the  link  shall  be  marked  at  such  a  place  that  it  is  clearly 
visible  when  the  appliance  has  been  dismantled  to  the 
extent  necessary  for  replacing  the  link. 

NOTE:  —  Marking  on  the  link  is  allowed  as  long  as  the  marking 
is  legible  after  the  link  has  functioned. 

This  requirement  does  not  apply  to  links  which  can 
only  be  replaced  together  with  a  part  of  the  appliance. 

CompHance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

8  PROTECTION  AGAINST  ACCESS  TO  LIVE 
PARTS 

8.1  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  and  enclosed  so 
that  there  is  adequate  protection  against  accidental 
contact  with  live  parts. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the  tests 
of  8.1.1  to  8.1.3,  as  applicable,  taking  into  account  8.1.4 
and  8.1.5. 

8.1.1  The  requirement  of  8.1  applies  for  all  positions 
of  the  appliance  when  it  is  operated  as  in  normal  use, 
and  after  the  removal  of  detachable  parts, 

NOTE  —  This  excludes  the  use  of  screw-type  fuses  and  screw- 
type  miniature  circuit  breakers  which  are  accessible  without 
the  aid  of  a  took 

Lamps  located  behind  a  detachable  cover  are  not 
removed,  provided  that  the  appliance  can  be  isolated 
from  the  supply  mains  by  means  of  a  plug  or  an  all- 
pole  switch.  However,  during  insertion  or  removal  of 
lamps  which  are  located  behind  a  detachable  cover, 
protection  against  contact  with  live  parts  of  the  lamp 
cap  shall  be  ensured. 

Test  probe  B  of  IS  1401  is  applied  without  appreciable 
force,  the  appliance  being  in  every  possible  position 
except  that  appliances  normally  used  on  the  floor  and 
having  a  mass  exceeding  40  kg  are  not  tilted.  Through 
openings,  the  test  probe  is  applied  to  any  depth  that 
the  probe  will  permit  and  is  rotated  or  angled  before, 
during  and  after  insertion  to  any  position.  If  the  opening 
does  not  allow  the  entry  of  the  probe,  the  force  on  the 
probe  in  the  straight  position  is  increased  to  20  N.  If 
the  probe  then  enters  the  opening,  the  test  is  repeated 
with  the  probe  in  the  angled  position. 

It  shall  not  be  possible  to  touch  live  parts  or  live  parts 
protected  only  by  lacquer,  enamel,  ordinary  paper, 


11 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


cotton,  oxide  film,  beads,  or  sealing  compound  except 
self-hardening  resins,  with  the  probe. 

8.1.2  Test  probe  13  of  IS  1401  is  applied  without 
appreciable  force  through  openings  in  Class  II 
appliances  and  Class  II  constructions,  except  for  those 
giving  access  to  lamp  caps  and  live  parts  in  socket- 
outlets. 

NOTE  —  Appliance  outlets  are  not  considered  to  be  socket- 
outlets. 

The  test  probe  is  also  applied  through  openings  in 
earthed  metal  enclosures  having  a  non-conductive 
coating  such  as  enamel  or  lacquer 

It  shall  not  be  possible  to  touch  live  parts  with  the  test 

probe. 

8.1.3  Instead  of  test  probe  B  and  test  probe  13,  for 
appliances  other  than  those  of  Class  II,  test  probe  41 
of  IS  1 40 1  is  applied  without  appreciable  force  to  live 
parts  of  visibly  glowing  heating  elements,  all  poles  of 
which  can  be  disconnected  by  a  single  switching  action. 
It  is  also  applied  to  parts  supporting  such  elements, 
provided  that  it  is  obvious  from  the  outside  of  the 
aj:>pliance,  without  removing  covers  and  similar  parts, 
that  these  supporting  parts  are  in  contact  with  the 
clement. 

It  shall  not  be  possible  to  touch  these  live  parts. 

NOTE  —  For  appliances  provided  with  a  supply  cord  and 
without  a  switching  device  in  their  supply  circuit,  the 
withdrawal  of  the  plug  from  a  socket-outlet  is  considered  to 
be  a  single  switching  action. 

8.1.4  An  accessible  part  is  not  considered  to  be  live  if: 

a)     the  part  is  supplied  at  safety  extra-low  voltage, 
provided  that: 

1 )  for  ac,  the  peak  value  of  the  voltage  does 
not  exceed  42.4  V;  and 

2)  for  dc,  the  voltage  does  not  exceed 
42.4  V. 


b)  the  part  is  separated  from  live  parts  by 
protective  impedance. 

li  protective  impedance  is  used,  the  current  between 
the  part  and  the  supply  source  shall  not  exceed  2  mA 
for  dc,  its  peak  value  shall  not  exceed  0.7  mA  for  ac 

and, 

a)  for  voltages  having  a  peak  value  over  42.4  V 
up  to  and  including  450  V,  the  capacitance 
shall  not  exceed  0.1  pF;  and 

b)  for  voltages  having  a  peak  value  over  450  V 
up  to  and  including  15  kV,  the  discharge  shall 
not  exceed  45  pC. 


Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement,  the  appliance 
being  supplied  at  rated  voltage. 

Voltages  and  currents  are  measured  between  the 
relevant  parts  and  each  pole  of  the  supply  source. 
Discharges  are  measured  immediately  after  the 
interruption  of  the  supply.  The  quantity  of  electricity 
in  the  discharge  is  measured  using  a  resistor  having  a 
nominal  non-inductive  resistance  of  2  GOOQ. 

NOTE  —  The  quantity  of  electricity  is  calculated  from  the 
sum  of  all  areas  recorded  on  the  voltage/time  graph  without 
taking  voltage  polarity  into  account. 

8.1.5  Live  parts  of  built-in  appliances,  fixed  appliances 
and  appliances  delivered  in  separate  units,  shall  be 
protected  at  least  by  basic  insulation  before  installation 
or  assembly. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the  test 
of  8.1.1. 

8.2  Class  II  appliances  and  Class  II  constructions  shall 
be  constructed  and  enclosed  so  that  there  is  adequate 
protection  against  accidental  contact  with  basic 
insulation  and  metal  parts  separated  from  live  parts  by 
basic  insulation  only. 

It  shall  only  be  possible  to  touch  parts  which  are 
separated  from  live  parts  by  double  insulation  or 
reinforced  insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  applying 
test  probe  B  of  IS  1401,  as  described  in  8.1,1. 

NOTES 

1  This  requirement  applies  for  all  positions  of  the  appliance 
when  it  is  operated  as  in  normal  use  and  after  removing 
detachable  parts. 

2  Built-in  appliances  and  fixed  appliances  are  tested  after 
installation. 

9  STARTING  OF  MOTOR-OPERATED  APP- 
LIANCES 

NOTE  —  Requirements  and  tests  are  specified  in  Part  2,  when 
necessary. 

10  POWER  INPUT  AND  CURRENT 

10.1  If  an  appliance  is  marked  with  rated  power  input, 
the  power  input  at  normal  operating  temperature  shall 
not  deviate  from  the  rated  power  input  by  more  than 
the  deviation  shown  in  Table  1 . 

The  deviation  for  motor-operated  appliances  applies 
for  combined  appliances  if  the  power  input  of  the 
motors  is  more  than  50  percent  of  the  rated  power  input. 

NOTE  —  In  case  of  doubt,  the  power  input  of  motors  may  be 
measured  separately. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement  when  the 
power  input  has  stabilized: 


12 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


a)  all  circuits  which  can  operate  simultaneously 
being  in  operation; 

b)  the  appliance  being  supplied  at  rated  voltage; 
and 

c)  the  appliance  being  operated  under  normal 
operation. 

Table  1  Power  Input  Deviation 

{Clause  10. 1) 


SI 

No. 

(1) 


Type  of 
Appliance 

(2) 


Rated  Power 
Input,  VV 

(3) 


Deviation 


(4) 


iii) 


Ail  appliances 
Heating  appliances 
and  combined 
appliances 


Motor-operated 

appliances 


<25 

>25  and 
<200 

>200 


>25  and 
<300 
>300 


+20  percent 
±10  percent 

+5  percent  or  20  W 
(whichever  is  the 
greater) -10  percent 

+20  percent 

+  15  percenter  60  W 
(whichever  is  the 
greater) 


If  the  power  input  varies  throughout  the  operating 
cycle,  the  power  input  is  determined  as  the  mean  value 
of  the  power  input  occurring  during  a  representative 

period. 

NOTKS 

1  The  test  is  carried  out  at  both  the  upper  and  lower  limits  of 
the  ranges  for  appliances  marked  with  one  or  more  rated  voltage 
ranges,  unless  the  marking  of  the  rated  power  input  is  related 
to  the  mean  value  of  the  relevant  voltage  range,  in  which  case 
the  test  is  carried  out  at  a  voltage  equal  to  the  mean  value  of 
that  range. 

2  The  permissible  deviations  apply  for  both  limits  of  the  range 
for  appliances  marked  with  a  rated  voltage  range  having  limits 
differing  by  more  than  10  percent  of  the  mean  value  of  the 
range. 

10.2  If  an  appliance  is  marked  with  rated  current,  the 
current  at  normal  operating  temperature  shall  not 
deviate  from  the  rated  current  by  more  than  the 
deviation  shown  in  Table  2. 

The  deviation  for  motor-operated  appliances  applies 
for  combined  appliances  if  the  current  of  the  motors  is 
more  than  50  percent  of  the  rated  current. 

NOTE  —  In  case  of  doubt,  the  current  of  the  motors  may  be 
measured  separately. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement  when  the 
current  has  stabilized: 

a)  all  circuits  which  can  operate  simultaneously 
being  in  operation, 

b)  the  appliance  being  supplied  at  rated  voltage, 
and 


c)     the  appliance  being  operated  under  normal 
operation. 

Table  2  Current  Deviation 

(Clause  10,2) 


SI  No. 

Type  of 

Rated 

Deviation 

Appliance 

Current 

(i) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

i) 
ii) 


iii) 


All  appliances 
Healing 
appliances  and 
combined 
appliances 

Motor-operated 
appliances 


<0.2 

>  0.2  and  <  1.0 

>1.0 


>0.2and<1.5 
>1.5 


+20  percent 

±10  percent 

+5  percent  or  0.10 

A  (whichever  is 

the  greater) -10 

percent 

+20  percent 

+  15  percent  or 

0.30  A  (whichever 

is  the  greater) 


If  the  current  varies  throughout  the  operating  cycle, 
the  current  is  determined  as  the  mean  value  of  the 
current  occurring  during  a  representative  period. 

NOTES 

1  The  test  is  carried  out  at  both  the  upper  and  lower  limits  of 
the  ranges  for  appliances  marked  with  one  or  more  rated  voltage 
ranges,  unless  the  marking  of  the  rated  current  is  related  to  the 
mean  value  of  the  relevant  voltage  range,  in  which  case  the 
tests  are  carried  out  at  a  voltage  equal  to  the  mean  value  of 
that  range. 

2  The  permissible  deviations  apply  for  both  limits  of  the  range 
for  appliances  marked  with  a  rated  voltage  range  having  limits 
differing  by  more  than  10  percent  of  the  mean  value  of  the 
range. 

11  HEATING 

11.1  Appliances  and  their  surroundings  shall  not  attain 
excessive  temperatures  in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  determining  the  temperature 
rise  of  the  various  parts  under  the  conditions  specified 
in  11,2  to  11.7. 

11.2  Hand-held  appliances  are  held  in  their  normal 
position  of  use. 

Appliances  with  pins  for  insertion  into  socket-outlets 
are  plugged  into  an  appropriate  wall-mounted  socket- 
outlet. 

Built-in  appliances  are  installed  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions. 

Other  heating  appliances  and  other  combined 
appliances  are  placed  in  a  test  corner  as  follows: 

a)  Appliances  normally  placed  on  a  floor  or 
table,  are  placed  on  the  floor  of  the  test  corner 
at  a  distance  of  about  15  cm  from  the  walls  of 
the  test  corner; 


13 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


NOTE  —  This  distance  includes  the  natural  projections 
such  as  kooks,  bolts,  appliance  inlets,  etc  of  the 
appliance. 

b)  Appliances  normally  fixed  to  a  wall  are  fixed 
to  one  of  the  walls,  as  near  to  the  other  wall 
and  floor  or  ceiling  as  is  likely  to  occur,  taking 
into  account  the  instructions;  and 

c)  Appliances  normally  fixed  to  a  ceiling  are 
fixed  to  the  ceiling  as  near  to  the  walls  as  is 
likely  to  occur,  taking  into  account  in  the 
instructions. 

Other  motor-operated  appliances  are  positioned  as 

follows: 

a)  Appliances  normally  placed  on  a  floor  or  table 
in  use  are  placed  on  a  horizontal  support; 

b)  Appliances  normally  fixed  to  a  wall  are  fixed 
to  a  vertical  support;  and 

c)  Appliances  normally  fixed  to  a  ceiling  are 
fixed  underneath  a  horizontal  support. 

Dull  black-painted  plywood  approximately  20  mm 
thick  is  used  for  the  test  corner,  the  supports  and  for 
the  installation  of  built-in  appliances. 

For  appliances  provided  with  an  automatic  cord  reel, 
one-third  of  the  total  length  of  the  cord  is  unreeled. 
The  temperature  rise  of  the  cord  sheath  is  determined 
as  near  as  possible  to  the  hub  of  the  reel  and  also 
between  the  two  outermost  layers  of  the  cord  on  the 
reel . 

For  cord  storage  devices,  other  than  automatic  cord 
icels,  which  are  intended  to  accommodate  the  supply 
cord  partially  while  the  appliance  is  in  operation,  50  cm 
of  the  cord  is  unwound.  The  temperature  rise  of  the 
stored  part  of  the  cord  is  determined  at  the  most 
unfavourable  place. 

11.3  Temperature  rises,  other  than  those  of  windings, 
are  determined  by  means  of  fine-wire  thermocouples 
positioned  so  that  they  have  minimum  effect  on  the 
temperature  of  the  part  under  test. 

NOTE  ~  Thermocouples  having  wires  with  a  diameter  not 
exceeding  0.3  mm  arc  considered  to  be  fine-wire  thermocouples. 

Thermocouples  used  for  determining  the  temperature 
rise  of  the  surface  of  walls,  ceiling  and  floor  of  the  test 
ct)rner  are  attached  to  the  back  of  small  blackened  disks 
of  copper  or  brass,  15  inm  in  diameter  and  1  mm  thick. 
The  front  of  the  disk  is  flush  with  the  surface  of  the 
board. 

As  far  as  is  possible,  the  appliance  is  positioned  so 
that  the  thermocouples  detect  the  highest  temperatures. 

rhe  temperature  rise  of  electrical  insulation,  other  than 
ihat  of  windings,  is  determined  on  the  surface  of  the 
insulation  at  places  where  failure  could  cause, 


a)  a  short  circuit; 

b)  contact  between  live  parts  and  accessible 
metal  parts  bridging  of  insulation;  and 

c)  a  reduction  of  clearances  or  creepage 
distances  below  the  values  specified  in  29. 

NOTES 

1  If  it  is  necessary  to  dismantle  the  appliance  to  position 
theriTiocouples,  care  has  to  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
appliance  has  been  correctly  reassembled.  In  case  of  doubt, 
the  power  input  is  remeasured, 

2  The  point  of  separation  of  the  cores  of  a  multicore  cord 
and  the  point  where  insulated  wires  enter  lampholders  are 
e;£ampJes  of  places  where  thermocouples  are  positioned. 

Temperature  rises  of  windings  are  determined  by  the 
resistance  method  unless  the  windings  are  non-uniform 
or  if  it  is  difficult  to  make  the  necessary  connections, 
in  which  case  the  temperature  rise  is  determined  by 
means  of  thermocouples. 

NOTE  —  The  temperature  rise  of  a  winding  is  calculated  from 
the  formula: 

where 

At  temperature  rise  of  the  winding; 

Hf  resistance  at  the  beginning  of  the  test; 

/?2  resistance  at  the  end  of  the  test; 

k  234.5  for  copper  windings  and  225  for  aluminium 

windings; 

/,  room  temperature  al  the  beginning  of  the  test;  and 

^  room  temperature  at  the  end  of  the  test. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  test,  the  windings  are  to  be  at 
room  temperature.  It  is  recommended  that  the 
resistance  of  windings  at  the  end  of  the  test  be 
determined  by  taking  resistance  measurements  as  soon 
as  possible  after  switching  off  and  then  at  short  intervals 
so  that  a  curve  of  resistance  against  time  can  be  plotted 
for  ascertaining  the  resistance  at  the  instant  of  switching 
off. 

11.4  Heating  appliances  are  operated  under  normal 
operation  and  at  1.15  times  rated  power  input. 

11.5  Motor-operated  appliances  are  operated  under 
normal  operation  and  supplied  with  the  most 
unfavourable  voltage  between  0.94  times  and  1.06 
times  the  rated  voltage. 

11.6  Combined  appliances  are  operated  under  normal 
operation  and  supplied  with  the  most  unfavourable 
voltage  between  0.94  times  and  1 .06  times  the  rated 
voltage. 

11.7  The  appliance  is  operated  for  a  duration 
corresponding  to  the  most  unfavourable  conditions  of 
normal  use. 


14 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


NOTE  —  The  duration  of  the  test  may  consist  of  more  than 
one  cycle  of  operation. 

11.8  During  the  test,  the  temperature  rises  are 
monitored  continuously  and  shall  not  exceed  the  values 
shown  in  Table  3.  However,  if  the  temperature  rise  of 
the  motor  winding  exceeds  the  value  specified  in 
Table  3  or  if  there  is  doubt  with  regard  to  the 
temperature  classification  of  the  insulation  of  the  motor, 
the  tests  of  Annex  C  are  carried  out. 

Protective  devices  shall  not  operate  and  sealing 
compound  shall  not  flow  out.  However,  components 
in  protective  electronic  circuits  are  allowed  to  operate 
provided  they  are  tested  for  the  number  of  cycles  of 
operation  specified  in  24,1.4. 

12  VOID 

13  LEAKAGE  CURRENT  AND  ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH  AT  OPERATING  TEMPERATURE 

13.1  At  operating  temperature,  the  leakage  current  of 
the  appliance  shall  not  be  excessive  and  its  electric 
strength  shall  be  adequate. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  tests  of  13.2  and  13.3. 

The  appliance  is  operated  under  normal  operation  for 
the  duration  specified  in  11.7. 

Heating  appliances  are  operated  at  1 .  15  times  the  rated 
power  input. 


Motor-operated  appliances  and  combined  appliances 
are  supplied  at  1.06  times  rated  voltage. 

Three-phase  appliances  which,  according  to  the 
instructions  for  installation,  are  also  suitable  for  single- 
phase  supply  are  tested  as  single-phase  appliances  with 
the  three  circuits  connected  in  parallel. 

Protective  impedance  and  radio  interference  filters  are 
disconnected  before  carrying  out  the  tests. 

13.2  The  leakage  current  is  measured  by  means  of  the 
circuit  described  in  Fig.  I  between  any  pole  of  the 
supply  and  accessible  metal  parts  connected  to  metal 
foil  having  an  area  not  exceeding  20  cm  x  1 0  cm  which 
is  in  contact  with  accessible  surfaces  of  insulating 
materials. 

NOTE  —  The  voltmeter  shall  be  capable  of  measuring  the  true 
rm.s.  value  of  the  voltage. 

For  single-phase  appliances,  the  measuring  circuit  is 
shown  in  the  following  figures: 

a)  if  of  Class  II,  see  Fig,  2;  and 

b)  if  other  than  Class  II,  see  Fig.  3. 

The  leakage  current  is  measured  with  the  selector 
switch  in  each  of  the  positions  a  and  b. 

For  three-phase  appliances,  the  measuring  circuit  is 
shown  in  the  following  figures: 

a)  if  of  Class  II,  see  Fig.  4;  and 

b)  if  other  than  Class  II,  see  Fig.  5. 


Ai 

Test  terminals 

B9 


r 


Ha 


T 


Weighted  touch  current 
(perception/reaction) 


500 


(peak  value) 


U, 


Rg      1  500  a 
Rb        500  a 

Cs         0.22  pF 


R^       lOOOOn 
Ci       0,022  pF 


FiG.  1  Circuit  for  Measuring  Network,  Touch  Current  Weighted  for  Perception  or  Reaction 

15 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Key 

C — Circuit  of  Fig.  4 

1  —  Accessible  part 

2  —  inaccessible  metal  part 

3  —  Basic  insulation 


4  —  Supplementary  insulation 

5  —  Double  insulation 

6  —  Reinforced  insulation 


Img,  2  Circuit  Diagram  for  Leakage  Current  Measurement  at  Operating  Temperature  for  Single-Phase 

Connection  of  Class  II  Appliances 


Key 

C —  Circuit  of  Fig.  1 

Fig.  3  Circuit  Diagram  for  Leakage  Current  Measurement  at  Operating  Temperature  for  Single-Phase 
Connection  of  Appliances,  Other  than  Those  of  Class  II 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Key 

C — Circuit  of  Fig.  1 

1  —  Accessible  part 

2  —  Inaccessible  metal  part 


Basic  insulation 


Connections  and  supplies 

L^,  L2,  L3,  N~  Supply  voltage  with  neutral 

4  —  Supplementary  insulation 

5  —  Double  insulation 


Fig.  4  Circuit  Diagram  for  Leakage  Current  Measurement  at  Operating  Temperature 
FOR  Three-Phase  Connection  of  Class  II  Appliances 


N 
Li 
L2 
L3 
*^®y  Connections  and  supplies 

C--  Circuit  of  Fig.  1  l,,  L^,  L„  A/—  Supply  voltage  with  neutral 

Fig.  5  Circuit  Diagram  for  Leakage  Current  Measurement  at  Operating  Temperature  for  Three-Phase 
Connection  of  Appliances  Other  than  Those  of  Class  II 


17 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Table  3  Maximum  Normal  Temperature  Rises 

(Clauses  11,8,  17,  22.13  an^  29.3.3) 


SI  No.  Part  Temperature  Rise 

(1) (2) (3) 

i)  Windings"',  if  the  winding  insulation  according  to  IS  1271  is: 

a)  Class  A  ^^  (^^) 

b)  Class  E  90(80) 

c)  Class  B  9^  (°^) 

d)  Class  F  '^^ 

e)  Class  H  ^^^ 

f)  Class  200  ^^0 

g)  Class  220  ^8** 
h)  Class  250  210 

ii)         Pins  of  appliance  inlets: 

a)  for  very  hot  conditions  130 

b)  for  hot  conditions  95 

c)  for  cold  conditions  45 
iii)        Terminals,  including  earthing  tern^inals,  for  external  conductors  of  stationary  60 

appliances,  unless  they  are  provided  with  a  supply  cord 
iv)        Ambient  of  switches,  thermostats  and  temperature  limiters  ^*: 

a)  without  T-marking  30 

b)  with  T-marking  T-25 
v)        Rubber  or  polyvinyl  chloride  Insulation  of  internal  and  external  wiring,  including 

supply  cords: 

a)  without  temperature  rating  50 

b)  with  temperature  rating  (r)  T-25 
vi)         Cord  sheaths  used  as  supplementary  insulation  35 
vii)         Sliding  contacts  of  cord  reels                                                                                                                               65 
viii)       Points  where  the  insulation  of  wires  can  come  into  contact  with  parts  of  a  terminal  50^* 

block  or  compartment  for  fixed  wiring,  for  a  stationary  appliance  not  provided  with 
a  supply  cord 

ix)         Rubber,  other  than  synthetic,  used  for  gaskets  or  other  parts,  the  deterioration  of 
which  could  affect  safety: 

a)  when  used  as  supplementary  insulation  or  as  reinforced  insulation  40 

b)  in  other  cases  50 
^)         Lampholders  with  T-marking    : 

a)  B15  and  322  marked  Tl  140 

b)  B15  and  B22  marked  T2  185 

c)  other  lampholders  T-25 
xi)         Lampholders  without  T-marking  : 

a)E14  and  815  110 

b)B22  andE27  140 

c)  other  lampholders  and  starter  holders  for  fluorescent  lamps  55 
xii)        Material  used  as  insulation,  other  than  that  specified  for  wires  and  windings  ^^: 

a)  impregnated  or  varnished  textile,  paper  or  press-board  70 

b)  laminates  bonded  with: 

1)  melamine-formaldehyde,  phenol-formaldehyde  or  phenol-furfural  resins 

2)  urea-formaldehyde  resin 

c)  printed  circuit  boards  bonded  with  epoxy  resin 

d)  moulding  of: 

1)  phenol-formaldehyde  with  cellulose  fillers 

2)  phenol-formaldehyde  with  mineral  fillers 

3)  melamine-formaldehyde 

4)  urea-formaldehyde 

e)  polyester  with  glass  reinforcement 

f)  silicone  rubber 

g)  polytetrafiuoroethylene 
h)  pure  mica  and  tightly  sintered  ceramic  material  when  such  materials  are  used 

as  supplementary  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation 
j)  thermoplastic  material 
'^^^O       Wood,  in  general 

Wooden  supports,  walls,  ceiling  and  fioor  of  the  test  corner  and  65 

wooden  cabinet: 

1)  stationary  appliances  liable  to  be  operated  continuously  for  long  periods  60 

2)  other  appliances  65 
^^^)       Outer  surface  of  capacitors   : 

a)  with  marking  of  maximum  operating  temperature  (7^  "^  T-25 


85 

(175) 

65 

(150) 

120 

85 

(175) 

100 

(200) 

75 

(150) 

65 

(150) 

110 

145 

265 

400 

18 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


Table  3  (Concluded) 


SI  No. 

(1) 


Part 

(2) 


Temperature  Rise 

(3) 


b)  without  marking  of  maximum  operating  temperature: 

1)  small  ceramic  capacitors  for  radio  and  television  interference  suppression  50 

2)  capacitors  complying  with  ISQC  302400  50 

3)  other  capacitors  20 
xv)  External  enclosure  of  motor-operated  appliances,  except  handles  held  in  normal  use  60 
xvi)        Surfaces  of  handles,  knobs,  grips  and  similar  parts  which  are  continuously  held  in 

normal  use  (for  example,  soldering  irons) 

a)  of  metal 

b)  of  porcelain  or  vitreous  material  30 

c)  of  moulded  material,  rubber  or  wood  40 
xvii)       Surfaces  of  handles,  knobs,  grips  and  similar  parts  which  are  held  for  short  periods  50 

only  in  normal  use  (  switches): 

a)  of  metal 

b)  of  porcelain  or  vitreous  material  35 

c)  of  moulded  material,  rubber  or  wood  45 
xviii)      Parts  in  contact  with  oil  having  a  flash-point  of  t  °C  60 

/-50 

NOTES 

1  If  other  materials  than  those  mentioned  in  the  table  arc  used,  they  are  not  to  be  subjected  to  temperatures  in  excess  of  their  thermal 
capabilities  as  determined  by  ageing  tests. 

2  The  values  in  the  table  are  based  on  an  ambient  temperature  not  normally  exceeding  25  ''C  but  occasionally  reaching  35  'C. 
However,  the  temperature  rise  values  specified  are  based  on  25  °C. 

3  The  temperature  rise  limit  for  metal  applies  to  parts  having  a  metal  coating  at  least  0.1  mm  thick  and  to  metal  parts  having  a  plastic 
coating  less  than  0.3  mm  thick. 

4  The  temperature  of  the  terminals  of  switches  is  measured  if  the  switch  is  tested  in  accordance  with  Annex  H. 

'*  To  allow  for  the  fact  that  the  average  temperature  of  windings  of  universal  motors,  relays,  solenoids  and  similar  components  is 
usually  above  the  temperature  at  the  points  on  the  windings  where  thermocouples  are  placed,  the  figures  without  parentheses  apply 
when  the  resistance  method  is  used  and  those  within  parentheses  apply  when  thermocouples  are  used.  For  windings  of  vibrator 
coils  and  ac  motors,  the  figures  without  parentheses  apply  in  both  cases. 

For  motors  constructed  so  that  the  circulation  of  air  between  the  inside  and  the  outside  of  the  case  is  prevented  but  which  are  not 
necessarily  sufficiently  enclosed  to  be  considered  airtight,  the  temperature  rise  limits  may  be  increased  by  5  K. 

2*  T  means  the  maximum  ambient  temperature  in  which  the  component  or  its  switch  head  can  operate.  The  ambient  is  the  temperature 
of  the  air  at  the  hottest  point  at  a  distance  of  5  mm  from  the  surface  of  the  component  concerned.  However,  if  a  thermostat  or  a 
temperature  limiter  is  mounted  on  a  heat-conducting  part,  the  declared  temperature  limit  of  the  mounting  surface  (T,)  is  also 
applicable.  Therefore,  the  temperature  rise  of  the  mounting  surface  has  to  be  measured.  The  temperature  rise  limit  does  not  apply  to 
switches  or  controls  tested  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  occurring  in  the  appliance. 

^*  This  limit  may  be  exceeded  if  the  instruction  specified  in  7.12.3  is  supplied. 

*^  Locations  for  measuring  the  temperature  rises  are  specified  in  Table  12.1  of  IS  10322  (Part  1). 

^'  The  values  in  parentheses  apply  to  locations  where  the  part  is  fixed  to  a  hot  surface. 

^^  There  is  no  specific  limit  for  thermoplastic  material.  However,  the  temperature  rise  has  to  be  determined  in  order  that  the  tests  of 
30.1  can  be  carried  out. 

^^  The  limit  specified  concerns  the  deterioration  of  wood  and  it  does  not  take  into  account  deterioration  of  surface  finishes. 

^*  There  is  no  Umit  for  the  temperature  rise  of  capacitors  that  are  short-circuited  in  19.11. 

'^  Temperature  marking  for  capacitors  mounted  on  printed  circuit  boards  may  be  given  in  the  technical  sheet. 


For  three-phase  appliances,  the  leakage  current  is  a) 

measured  with  the  switches  a,  b  and  c  in  the  closed  b) 

position.  The  measurements  are  then  repeated  with  ^\ 

each  of  the  switches  a,  b  and  c  open  in  turn,  the  other 

two  switches  remaining  closed.  For  appliances  intended  ^\ 

to  be  connected  in  star  connection  only,  the  neutral  is 

not  connected.  e) 

After  the  appliance  has  been  operated  for  a  duration 
as  specified  in  11.7,  the  leakage  current  shall  not  exceed 
the  foliowing  values: 


for  Class  II  appliances 
for  Class  III  appliances 
for     portable     Class     I 
appliances 

for  stationary  Class  I 
motor-operated  appliances 
for  stationary  Class  I 
heating  appliances  or  0,21 
mA  per  kW  rated  power 
input  of  the  s^pliance  with 
a  maximum  of  L5  mA, 
whichever  is  higher 


0.21mA 
0.5  mA 
0.21  mA 

3.5  mA 
0.21mA 


19 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


For  combined  appliances,  the  total  leakage  current  may 
be  within  the  limits  specified  for  heating  appliances  or 
motor- operated  appliances,  whichever  is  the  greater, 
but  the  two  limits  are  not  added. 

If  the  appliance  incorporates  capacitors  and  is  provided 
with  a  single-pole  switch,  the  measurements  are 
repeated  with  the  switch  in  the  off  position. 

If  the  appliance  incorporates  a  thermal  control  which 
operates  during  the  test  of  11,  the  leakage  current  is 
measured  immediately  before  the  control  opens  the  circuit. 

NOTES 

1  The  test  with  the  switch  in  the  off  position  is  carried  out  to 
verify  that  capacitors  connected  behind  a  single-pole  switch 
do  not  cause  an  excessive  leakage  current. 

2  It  is  recommended  that  the  appliance  is  supplied  through  an 
isolating  transformer;  otherwise  it  is  to  be  insulated  from  earth. 

3  The  metal  foil  has  the  largest  area  possible  on  the  surface 
under  test  without  exceeding  the  dimensions  specified.  If  its 
area  is  smaller  than  the  surface  under  test,  it  is  moved  to  test 
all  pans  of  the  surface. 

The  heat  dissipation  of  the  appliance  is  not  to  be 
affected  by  the  metal  foil. 

13.3  The  appliance  is  disconnected  from  the  supply 
and  the  insulation  is  immediately  subjected  to  a  voltage 
having  a  frequency  of  50  Hz  for  1  min,  in  accordance 
with  IS  2071  (Parti). 

The  high-voltage  source  used  for  the  test  is  to  be 
capable  of  supplying  a  short  circuit  current  I^  between 
the  output  terminals  after  the  output  voltage  has  been 
adjusted  to  the  appropriate  test  voltage.  The  overload 
release  of  the  circuit  is  not  to  be  operated  by  any  current 
below  the  tripping  current  7^.  The  values  of /^  and  /^  are 
given  in  Table  5  for  various  high-voltage  sources. 

The  test  voltage  is  applied  between  live  parts  and 
accessible  parts,  non-metallic  parts  being  covered  with 
metal  foil.  For  Class  II  constructions  having 
intermediate  metal  between  live  parts  and  accessible 
parts,  the  voltage  is  applied  across  the  basic  insulation 
and  the  supplementary  insulation. 

NOTE  —  Care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  overstressing  the 
components  of  electronic  circuits. 

The  values  of  the  test  voltages  are  specified  in  Table  4. 

No  breakdown  shall  occur  during  the  test. 

NOTE  —  Glow  discharges  without  drop  in  voltage  are 
neglected. 

14  TRANSIENT  OVER  VOLTAGES 

Appliances  shall  withstand  the  transient  over  voltages 
to  which  they  may  be  subjected. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  subjecting  each  clearance 
having  a  value  less  than  those  specified  in  Table  6  to 
an  impulse  voltage  test. 


Table  4  Voltage  for  Electric  Strength  Test 

(Clauses  13.3  and  19.13) 


SI 

Insulation 

Test  Voltage 

No. 

V 

'^                                 l^                            ■"    *N 

Rated  Voltage'^               Working 

SEL      <150    >150and        >250  V 

<250'^ 

(1) 

(2) 

(3)         (4)           (5)                 (6) 

1  000 

1250 


1000 
1750 


12  U+    700 
1,2C/+1450 


2  500     3  000        2AU+  2  400 


i)       Basic  insulation  500 
ii)      Supplementary 

insulation 
iii)     Reinforced 

insulation 

'*  For  multi-phase  appliances,  the  line  to  neutral  or  line  to  earth  voltage 
is  u$ed  for  rated  voltage.  The  test  voltage  for  480  V  multi-phase 
appliances  is  that  specified  for  a  rated  voltage  in  the  range  > 
150  V  and  5  250  V. 

^'  For  appliances  having  a  rated  voltage  <  1 50  V,  these  test  voltages  apply 
to  parts  having  a  working  voltage  >  1 50  V  <  250  V. 

Table  5  Characteristics  of  High  Voltage  Sources 

(Clause  13.3) 


SI 
No. 


(1) 


Test  Voltage 

V 

(2) 


Minimum  Current 

m/L 

/' 

'""> 

f. 

Ir 

(3) 

(4) 

200 

100 

80 

40 

40 

20 

i)  <  4  000 

ii)  >4  000  and  <10  000 
»i)  >10  000and<20  000 


NOTE  —  The  currents  are  calculated  on  the  basis  of  the  short  circuit 
and  release  energies  of  800  VA  and  400  VA  respectively  at  the  upper  end 
of  the  voltage  ranges. 

The  impulse  test  voltage  has  a  no-load  wave  shape 
corresponding  to  the  1.2/50  ^s  standard  impulse 
specified  in  IS  2071  (Part  1).  It  is  supplied  from  a 
generator  having  a  virtual  impedance  of  12  Q.  The 
impulse  test  voltage  is  applied  three  times  for  each 
polarity  with  intervals  of  at  least  1  s. 

NOTE  —  The  generator  is  specified  in  IS  2071  (Part  2). 

The  impulse  test  voltage  is  specified  in  Table  6  for  rated 
impulse  voltages  given  in  Table  15. 


Table  6  Impulse  Test  Voltage 

(Clause  14) 

SI  No. 

Rated  Impulse  Voltage        Impulse  Test  Voltage 

V                                         V 

(1) 

(2)                                       (3) 

i) 

330                                     350 

ii) 

500                                      550 

iii) 

800                                      910 

iv) 

1  500                                    1  750 

V) 

2  500                                   2  950 

vi) 

4  000                                  4  800 

vii) 

6  000                                  7  300 

viii) 

8  000                                  9  800 

ix) 

10  000                                 12  300 

20 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


There  shall  be  no  flashover.  However,  ilashover  of 
functional  insulation  is  allowed,  if  the  appliance 
complies  with  19  when  the  clearance  is  short-circuited. 

NOTES 

1  The  impulse  test  voltages  have  been  calculated  using 
correction  factors  for  testing  at  locations  situated  at  sea  level. 
It  is  considered  that  they  are  appropriate  for'  any  location 
between  sea  level  and  500  m.  If  tests  are  carried  out  at  other 
locations,  other  correction  factors  should  be  used  as  noted 
in  4.1.1.2.1.2  of  IS  15382  (Part  1). 

2  The  details  of  a  test  for  complete  appliances  are  under 
consideration. 

15  MOISTURE  RESISTANCE 

15.1  The  enclosure  of  the  appliance  shall  provide  the 
degree  of  protection  against  moisture  in  accordance 
with  the  classification  of  the  appliance. 

Compliance  is  checked  as  specified  in  15.1.1  taking 
into  account  15.1.2,  the  appliance  not  being  connected 
to  the  supply  mains. 

The  appliance  shall  then  withstand  the  electric  strength 
test  of  16.3  and  inspection  shall  show  that  there  is  no 
trace  of  water  on  insulation  which  could  result  in  a 

reduction  of  clearances  and  creepage  distances  below 
the  values  specified  in  29. 

NOTE  —  The  external  enclosure  is  carefully  wiped  to  remove 
any  surplus  water  before  inspection.  Care  has  to  be  taken  when 
dismantling  to  avoid  displacing  any  water  within  the  appliance. 

15.1.1  Appliances  other  than  those  classified  IPXO  are 
subjected  to  the  tests  according  to  following  clauses 
of  IS  12063  as  mentioned  below: 

a)  IPXl  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.1; 

b)  IPX2  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.2; 

c)  IPX3  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.3(a); 

d)  IPX4  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.4(a); 

e)  IPX5  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.5; 

f)  IPX6  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.6;  and 

g)  IPX7  appliances  as  described  in  14.2.7.  For 
this  test  the  appliance  is  immersed  in  water 
containing  approximately  1  percent  NaCl. 

NOTE  —  The  hand-held  spray  nozzle  may  be  used  for  testing 
appliances  that  cannot  be  placed  under  the  oscillating  tube 
specified  in  IS  12063. 

Water  valves  containing  live  parts  and  that  are 
incorporated  in  external  hoses  for  connection  of  an 
appliance  to  the  water  mains  are  subjected  to  the  test 
specified  for  IPX7  appliances. 

15.1.2  Hand-held  appliances  are  turned  continuously 
through  the  most  unfavourable  positions  during  the  test. 

Built-in  appliances  are  installed  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions. 

Appliances  normally  used  on  the  floor  or  table  are 


placed  on  a  horizontal  unperforated  support  having  a 
diameter  of  twice  the  oscillating  tube  radius  minus 
15  cm. 

Appliances  normally  fixed  to  a  wall  and  appliances 
with  pins  for  insertion  into  socket-outlets  are  mounted 
as  in  normal  use  in  the  centre  of  a  wooden  board  having 
dimensions  which  are  15  ±  5  cm  in  excess  of  those  of 
the  orthogonal  projection  of  the  appliance  on  the  board. 
The  wooden  board  is  placed  at  the  centre  of  the 
oscillating  tube. 

For  IPX3  appliances,  the  base  of  wall-mounted 
appliances  is  placed  at  the  same  level  as  the  pivot  axis 
of  the  oscillating  tube. 

For  IPX4  appliances,  the  horizontal  centre  line  of  the 
appliance  is  aligned  with  the  pivot  axis  of  the  oscillating 
tube.  However,  for  appliances  normally  used  on  the 
floor  or  table,  the  movement  is  limited  to  two  times 
90"  from  the  vertical  for  a  period  of  5  min,  the  support 
being  placed  at  the  level  of  the  pivot  axis  of  the 
oscillating  tube. 

If  the  instructions  for  wall-mounted  appliances  state 
that  the  appliance  is  to  be  placed  close  to  the  floor 
level  and  specifies  a  distance,  a  board  is  placed  under 
the  appliance  at  that  distance.  The  dimensions  of  the 
board  are  15  cm  more  than  the  horizontal  projection 
of  the  appliance. 

Appliances  normally  fixed  to  a  ceiling  are  mounted 
underneath  a  horizontal  unperforated  support  that  is 
constructed  to  prevent  water  spraying  onto  its  top 
surface.Thepivotaxisof  the  oscillating  tube  is  located 
at  the  same  level  as  the  underside  of  the  support  and 
aligned  centrally  with  the  appliance.  The  spray  is 
directed  upwards. 

For  1PX4  appliances,  the  movement  of  the  tube  is 
limited  to  two  times  90"  from  the  vertical  for  a  period 
of  5  min. 

Appliances  with  type  X  attachment,  except  those 
having  a  specially  prepared  cord,  are  fitted  with  the 
lightest  permissible  type  of  flexible  cord  of  the  smallest 
cross-sectional  area  specified  in  Table  13. 

Detachable  parts  are  removed  and  subjected,  if 
necessary,  to  the  relevant  treatment  with  the  main  part. 
However,  if  the  instructions  state  that  a  part  has  to  be 
removed  for  user  maintenance  and  a  tool  is  needed, 
this  part  is  not  removed. 

15.2  Appliances  subject  to  spillage  of  liquid  in  normal 
use  shall  be  constructed  so  that  such  spillage  does  not 
affect  their  electrical  insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test. 

Appliances  with  type  X  attachment,  except  those 
having  a  specially  prepared  cord,  are  fitted  with  the 


21 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


lightest  permissible  type  of  Hcxiblc  cord  of  the  smallest 
cross-sectional  area  specified  in  Table  13. 

Appliances  incorporating  an  appUance  inlet  arc  tested 
with  or  without  an  appropriate  connector  in  position, 
whichever  is  most  unfavourable. 

Detachable  parts  are  removed. 

[he  liquid  container  of  the  appliance  is  completely 
filled  with  water  containing  approximately  1  percent 
NaCl  and  a  further  quantity,  equal  to  15  percent  of  the 
capacity  of  the  container  or  0.25  1,  whichever  is  the 
greater,  is  poured  in  steadily  over  a  period  of  1  min. 

The  appliance  shall  then  withstand  the  electric  strength 
test  of  16.3  and  inspection  shall  show  that  there  is  no 
trace  of  water  on  insulation  that  could  result  in  a 
reduction  of  clearances  or  creepage  distances  below 
the  values  specified  in  29. 

15.3  Appli^tnces  shall  be  proof  against  humid 
conditions  that  may  occur  in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test. 

Appliances  that  were  subjected  to  the  tests  of  15.1 
or  15.2  are  placed  in  normal  ambient  conditions  for  24  h. 

Cable  entries,  if  any,  are  left  open.  If  knock-outs  are 
provided,  one  of  them  is  opened.  Detachable  parts  are 
removed  and  subjected,  if  necessary,  to  the  humidity 
test  with  the  main  part. 

The  humidity  test  is  carried  out  for  48  h  in  a  humidity 
cabinet  containing  air  with  a  relative  humidity  not  less 
than  90  percent.  The  temperature  of  the  air  is 
maintained  within  1  K  of  any  convenient  value  t 
between  15'^C  and  35°C.  Before  being  placed  in  the 
humidity  cabinet,  the  appliance  is  brought  to  a 
temperature  of  t ,"/  °C. 

NOTES 

1  hi  most  cases,  ttie  appliance  may  be  brougtit  to  the  specified 
temperature  by  keeping  it  at  this  temperature  for  at  least  4  h 
before  the  humidity  test. 

2  A  relative  humidity  of  (93  ±  3)  percent  can  be  obtained  by 
placing  a  saturated  solution  of  Na^SO,  or  KNO^  in  water  in  the 
humidity  cabinet,  the  container  having  a  sufficiently  large 
contact  surface  with  the  air. 

3  The  specified  conditions  may  be  achieved  by  ensuring  a 
constant  circulation  of  the  air  within  a  thermally  insulated 
cabinet. 

The  appliance  shall  then  withstand  the  tests  of  16  in 
the  humidity  cabinet  or  in  the  room  in  which  the 
appliance  was  brought  to  the  prescribed  temperature 
after  reassembly  of  those  parts  that  inay  have  been 
removed. 

16  LEAKAGE  CURRENT  AND  ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 

16.1  The  leakage  current  of  the  appliance  shall  not  be 


excessive  and  its  electric  strength  shall  be  adequate. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  tests  of  16.2  and  16.3. 

Protective  impedance  is  disconnected  from  live  parts 
before  carrying  out  the  tests. 

The  tests  are  carried  out  on  the  appliance  at  room 
temperature  and  not  connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

16.2  An  ac  test  voltage  is  applied  between  live  parts 
and  accessible  metal  parts  that  are  connected  to  metal 
foil  having  an  area  not  exceeding  20  cm  x  10  cm  in 
contact  with  accessible  surfaces  of  insulating  materials. 

The  test  voltage  is, 

a)  1,06  times  rated  voltage,  for  single-phase 
appliances;  and 

b)  1.06  times  rated  voltage,  divided  by  ^  for 
three-phase  appliances. 

The  leakage  current  is  measured  within  5  s  after  the 
application  of  the  test  voltage. 

The  leakage  current  shall  not  exceed  the  following 
values: 

a)  for  class  II  appliances  :  0.21  mA 

b)  for  class  III  appliances  :  0.5  mA 

c)  for  portable  class  I  appliances  :  0.21  mA 

d)  for  stationary  class  I  motor-  :  3.5  mA 
operated  appliances 

e)  for  stationary  class  I  heating  :  0.21  mA  or 
appliances  rated  power  input  0.21  mA 
of  the  appliance  with  a  maxi-  per  kW 
mum  of  1.5  mA,  whichever 

is  higher. 

The  values  specified  above  are  doubled  if  all  controls 
have  an  off  position  in  all  poles.  They  are  also  doubled, 
if: 

a)  the  appliance  has  no  control  other  than  a 
thermal  cut-out;  or 

b)  all  thermostats,  temperature  limiters  and 
energy  regulators  do  not  have  an  off  position; 
or 

c)  the  appliance  has  radio  interference  filters.  In 
this  case  the  leakage  current  with  the  filter 
disconnected  shall  not  exceed  the  limits 
specified. 

For  combined  appliances,  the  total  leakage  current  may 
be  within  the  limits  specified  for  heating  appliances  or 
motor-operated  appliances,  whichever  is  the  greater, 
but  the  two  limits  arc  not  added. 

16.3  Immediately  after  the  lest  of  16.2,  the  insulation 

is  subjected  to  a  voltage  of  substantially  sinusoidal 
waveform  having  a  frequency  of  50  Hz  for  1  min.  The 


22 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


values  of  the  test  voltage  for  different  types  of 
insulation  are  given  in  Table  7. 

Accessible  parts  of  insulating  material  are  covered  with 
metal  foil. 

NOTE  —  Care  is  to  be  taken  that  the  metal  foil  is  placed  so 
that  no  flashover  occurs  at  the  edges  of  the  insulation. 

Table  7  Test  Voltages 

(Clause  16.3) 


SI 

Insulation 

Test  Voltage 

No. 

V 

^ 

Rated  Voltage'^ 

Working 

^^ 

^ 

Voltage  (0^ 

SEL 

<150 

>l50and 

>250 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

i) 

Basic 

insulation 

500 

1250 

1250 

1.2  (/+     950 

ii) 

Supplementary 

insulation 

— 

1250 

1750 

1.2^7+  1450 

iii) 

Reinforced 

insulation 

— 

2  500 

3  000 

2.4  t;+2  400 

'*  For  muUi -phase  appliances,  the  line  to  neutral  or  line  to  earth  voltage 
is  used  for  rated  voltage.  The  test  voltage  for  415  V  multi-phase 
appliances  is  that  specified  for  a  rated  voltage  in  the  range 
>  150  V  and  <  250  V. 

^'  Forappliances  having  a  rated  voltage  <  150  V,  these  test  voltages  apply 
to  parts  having  a  working  voltage  >  1 50  V  and  <  250  V. 

A  test  voltage  is  applied  between  accessible  metal  parts 
and  the  supply  cord  which  is  wrapped  with  metal  foil 
where  it  is  located  in  an  inlet  bushing,  a  cord  guard  or 
a  cord  anchorage,  any  clamping  screws  being  tightened 
to  two-thirds  of  the  torque  specified  in  Table  14.  The 
test  voltage  is  1  250  V  for  Class  I  appliances  and 
1  750  V  for  Class  II  appliances. 

NOTES 

1  The  high-voltage  source  used  for  the  test  is  described  in  Note 
3  of  13.3. 

2  For  Class  II  constructions  incorporating  both  reinforced 
insulation  and  double  insulation,  care  is  to  be  taken  that  the 
voltage  applied  to  the  reinforced  insulation  does  not  ovcrstress 
the  basic  insulation  or  the   supplementary  insulation. 

3  In  constructions  where  basic  insulation  and  supplementary 
insulation  cannot  be  tested  separately,  the  insulation  is 
subjected  to  the  test  voltages  specilled  for  reinforced  insulation. 

4  When  testing  insulating  coatings,  the  metal  foil  may  be 
pressed  against  the  insulation  by  means  of  a  sandbag  so  that 
the  pressure  is  approximately  5  kPa.  The  test  may  be  limited 
to  places  where  the  insulation  is  likely  to  be  weak,  for  example 
where  there  are  sharp  metal  edges  under  the  insulation. 

5  If  practicable,  insulating  linings  are  tested  separately. 

6  Care  is  to  be  taken  to  avoid  overstressing  the  components  of 
electronic  circuits. 

Initially,  not  more  than  half  the  prescribed  voltage  is 
applied,  then  it  is  raised  gradually  to  the  full  value. 

No  breakdown  shall  occur  during  the  test. 


17  OVERLOAD  PROTECTION  OF  TRANS- 
FORMERS AND  ASSOCIATED  CIRCUITS 

Appliances  incorporating  circuits  supplied  from  a 
transformer  shall  be  constructed  so  that  in  the  event  of 
short  circuits  which  are  likely  to  occur  in  normal  use, 
excessive  temperatures  do  not  occur  in  the  transformer 
or  in  the  circuits  associated  with  the  transformer. 

NOTES 

1  Examples  are  the  short-cifcuiting  of  bare  or  inadequately 
insulated  conductors  of  accessible  circuits  operating  at  safety 
extra-low  voltage. 

2  Failure  of  basic  insulation  is  not  considered  likely  to  occur 
in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  applying  the  most 
unfavourable  short  circuit  or  overload  which  is  likely 
to  occur  in  normal  use,  the  appliance  being  supplied 
with  1 .06  times  or  0.94  times  rated  voltage,  whichever 
is  the  more  unfavourable. 

The  temperature  rise  of  the  insulation  of  the  conductors 
of  safety  extra-low  voltage  circuits  shall  not  exceed  Uie 
relevant  value  specified  in  Table  3  by  more  than  15  K. 

The  temperature  of  windings  shall  not  exceed  the 
values  specified  in  Table  8.  However,  these  limits  do 
not  apply  to  fail-safe  transformers  complying  with  15.5 
of  IS/IEC  61558-1. 

18  ENDURANCE 

NOTE  —  Requirements  and  tests  are  specified  in  Part  2  of  this 
standard,  when  necessary. 

19  ABNORMAL  OPERATION 

19.1  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  as  a  result 
of  abnormal  or  careless  operation,  the  risk  of  fire, 
mechanical  damage  impairing  safety  or  protection 
against  electric  shock  is  obviated  as  far  as  is  practicable. 

Electronic  circuits  shall  be  designed  and  applied  so 
that  a  fault  condition  will  not  render  the  appliance 
unsafe  with  regard  to  electric  shock,  fire  hazard, 
mechanical  hazard  or  dangerous  malfunction. 

Appliances  incorporating  heating  elements  are 
subjected  to  the  tests  of  19.2  and  19.3.  In  addition, 
such  appliances  having  a  control  that  limits  the 
temperature  during  11  are  subjected  to  the  tests  of  19.4 
and,  when  applicable,  to  the  test  of  19.5.  Appliances 
incorporating  PTC  heating  elements  are  also  subjected 
to  the  test  of  19.6. 

Appliances  incorporating  motors  are  subjected  to  the 
tests  of  19.7  to  19.10,  as  appHcable. 

Appliances  incorporating  electronic  circuits  are  also 
subjected  to  the  tests  of  19.11  and  19.12,  as  applicable. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  tests  are  continued  until 
a  non-self-resetting  thermal  cut-out  operates  or  until 


23 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


steady  conditions  are  established.  If  a  heating  clenrient 
or  an  intentionally  weak  part  becomes  permanently 
open-circuited,  the  relevant  lest  is  repeated  on  a  second 
sample.  This  second  test  shall  be  terminated  in  the  same 
mode  unless  the  test  is  otherwise  satisfactorily 
completed. 

NOTES 

1  An  intcmionaliy  weak  part  is  a  part  intended  to  rupture  under 
conditions  of  abnormal  operation  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of 
a  condition  which  could  impair  compliance  with  this  standard. 
Such  a  part  may  be  a  replaceable  component,  such  as  a  resistor 
or  a  capacitor  or  a  part  of  a  component  to  be  replaced,  such  as 
an  inaccessible  thermal  link  incorporated  in  a  motor 

2  Fuses,  thermal  cut-outs,  overcurrent  protection  devices,  or 
similar  devices  incorporated  in  the  appliance,  may  be  used  to 
provide  the  necessary  protection.  The  protective  device  in  the 
fixed  wiring  does  not  provide  the  necessary  protection. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  only  one  abnormal 
condition  is  simulated  at  any  one  time. 

NOTES 

1  If  more  than  one  of  the  tests  are  applicable  to  the  same 
appliance,  these  tests  are  carried  out  consecutively  after  the 
appliance  has  cooled  down  to  room  temperature. 

2  For  combined  appliances,  the  tests  are  carried  out  with  motors 
and  heating  elements  operating  simultaneously  under  normal 
operation,  the  appropriate  tests  being  applied  one  at  a  time  to 
each  motor  and  heating  element. 

3  When  it  is  stated  that  a  control  is  short-circuited,  it  may  be 
rendered  inoperative  instead. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  compliance  with  the  tests 
of  this  clause  is  checked  as  described  in  19.13. 

19.2  Apphances  with  heating  elements  are  tested  under 
the  conditions  specified  in  11  but  with  restricted  heat 
dissipation.  The  supply  voltage,  determined  prior  to 
the  test,  is  that  required  to  provide  a  power  input  of 
0.85  times  rated  power  input  under  normal  operation 
when  the  power  input  has  stabilized.  This  voUage  is 
maintained  throughout  the  test. 

NOTE  — Controls  thatoperatcduring  the  test  of  11  are  allowed 
to  operate. 

19.3  The  test  of  19.2  is  repeated  but  with  a  supply 

voltage,  determined  prior  to  the  test,  equal  to  that 
required  to  provide  a  power  input  of  1 .24  times  rated 
power  input  under  normal  operation  when  the  power 
input  has  stabilized.  This  voltage  is  maintained 
throughout  the  test. 

NOTE  —  Controls  that  operate  during  the  test  of  11  are  allowed 
to  operate. 

19.4  The  appliance  is  tested  under  the  conditions 
specified  in  11.  Any  control  that  hmits  the  temperature 
during  the  test  of  11  is  short-circuited. 

NOTE  —  If  (he  appliance  incoiporates  more  than  one  control, 
they  are  short-circuited  in  turn. 

19.5  The  test  of  19.4  is  repeated  on  Class  I  appliances 
mcorporating  tubular  sheathed  or  embedded  heating 


elements.  However,  controls  are  not  short-circuited  but 
one  end  of  the  element  is  connected  to  the  sheath  of 
the  heating  element. 

This  test  is  repeated  with  the  polarity  of  the  supply  to 
the  appliance  reversed  and  with  the  other  end  of  the 
element  connected  to  the  sheath. 

The  test  is  not  carried  out  on  appliances  intended  to  be 
permanently  connected  to  fixed  wiring  and  on 
appliances  where  an  all-pole  disconnection  occurs 
during  the  test  of  19.4. 

NOTES 

1  Appliances  with  a  neutral  are  tested  with  the  neutral  connected 
to  the  sheath. 

2  For  embedded  heating  elements,  the  metal  enclosure  is 
considered  to  be  the  sheath. 

19.6  Appliances  with  PTC  heating  elements  are 
supplied  at  rated  voltage  until  steady  conditions  with 
regard  to  power  input  and  temperature  are  established. 

The  working  voltage  of  the  PTC  heating  element  is 
increased  by  5  percent  and  the  appliance  is  operated 
until  steady  conditions  are  re-established.  The  voltage 
is  then  increased  in  similar  steps  until  1 .5  times  working 
voltage  is  reached,  or  until  the  PTC  heating  element 
ruptures,  whichever  occurs  first. 

19.7  The  appliance  is  operated  under  stalled  conditions 
by; 

a)  locking  the  rotor  if  the  locked  rotor  torque  is 
smaller  than  the  full  load  torque;  and 

b)  locking  moving  parts  of  other  appliances. 

NOTES 

1  If  an  appliance  has  more  than  one  motor,  the  test  is  carried 
out  for  each  motor  separately. 

2  Void. 

3  Requirements  regarding  provisions  of  protective  devices, 
namely  fuse,  thermal  cut-outs,  overcurrent  protective  devices 
or  similar  devices  are  specified  in  Part  2  of  this  standard. 

Appliances  incorporating  motors  and  having  capacitors 
in  the  circuit  of  an  auxiliary  winding,  are  operated  with 
the  rotor  locked,  the  capacitors  being  open-circuited 
one  at  a  time.  The  test  is  repeated  with  the  capacitors 
short-circuited  one  at  a  time  unless  they  are  of  class 
P2ofIS  1709. 

NOTE  —  This  test  is  carried  out  with  the  rotor  locked  since 
some  motors  may  start  thus  giving  rise  to  inconsistent  vesviUs. 

For  each  of  the  tests,  appliances  provided  with  a  timer 
or  programmer  are  supplied  at  rated  voltage  for  a  period 
equal  to  the  maximum  period  allowed  by  the  timer  or 

programmer. 

Other  appliances  are  supplied  at  rated  voltage  for  a 
period: 

a)     of  30  s  for: 


24 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


1)  hand-held  appliances;  and 

2)  appliances  that  have  to  be  kept  switched 
on  by  hand  or  foot,  and  appliances  that 
are  continuously  loaded  by  hand; 

b)  of  5  min  for  other  appliances  that  are  operated 
while  attended;  and 

c)  until  steady  conditions  are  established,  for 
other  appliances. 

NOTE  —  Appliances  that  are  tested  for  5  min  are  indicated 
in  the  relevant  Part  2  of  this  standard. 

During  the  test,  the  temperature  of  the  windings  shall 
not  exceed  the  relevant  value  specified  in  Table  8. 

19.8  One  phase  of  appliances  incorporating  three-phase 
motors  is  disconnected.  The  appliance  is  then  operated 
under  normal  operation  and  supplied  at  rated  voltage 
for  the  period  specified  in  19.7. 

19.9  A  running  overload  test  is  carried  out  on 

appliances  incorporating  motors  that  are  intended  to 
be  remotely  or  automatically  controlled  or  liable  to  be 
operated  continuously. 

The  appliance  is  operated  under  normal  operation  and 
supplied  at  rated  voltage  until  steady  conditions  are 
established.  The  load  is  then  increased  so  that  the 
current  through  the  motor  windings  is  raised  by 
10  percent  and  the  appliance  is  operated  again  until 
steady  conditions  are  established,  the  supply  voltage 
being  maintained  at  its  original  value.  The  load  is  again 
increased  and  the  test  is  repeated  until  the  protective 
device  operates  or  the  motor  stalls. 

During  the  test  the  winding  temperature  shall  not 
exceed: 

a)  140  ""C,  for  class  A  winding  insulation; 

b)  155  °C,  for  Class  E  winding  insulation; 

c)  165  °C,  for  Class  B  winding  insulation; 

d)  180  °C,  for  Class  F  winding  insulation; 


e)  200  °C,  for  Class  H  winding  insulation; 

f)  220  °C,  for  Class  200  winding  insulation; 

g)  240  °C,  for  Class  220  winding  insulation;  and 
h)  270  ''C,  for  Class  250  winding  insulation. 

NOTE  —  If  the  load  cannot  be  increased  in  appropriate  steps, 
the  motor  is  removed  from  the  appliance  and  tested  separately. 

19.10  Appliances  incorporating  series  motors  are 
operated  with  the  lowest  possible  load  and  supplied  at 
1,3  times  rated  voltage  for  1  min. 

During  the  test,  parts  shall  not  be  ejected  from  the 
appliance. 

19.11  Electronic  circuits  are  checked  by  evaluation  of 
the  fault  conditions  specified  in  19.11.2  for  all  circuits 
or  parts  of  circuits,  unless  they  comply  with  the 
conditions  specified  in  19.11.1. 

NOTE  —  In  general,  examination  of  the  appliance  and  its 
circuit  diagram  will  reveal  the  fault  conditions  which  have  to 
be  simulated,  so  that  testing  can  be  limited  to  those  cases  that 
may  be  expected  to  give  the  most  unfavourable  results. 

Appliances  incorporating  a  protective  electronic  circuit 
are  subjected  to  the  tests  of  19.11.3  and  19.11,4. 

Appliances  having  a  switch  with  an  off  position 
obtained  by  electronic  disconnection,  or  a  switch  that 
can  place  the  appliance  in  a  stand-by  mode,  are 
subjected  to  the  tests  of  19.11.4. 

NOTE  —  The  sequence  of  tests  for  the  evaluation  of  electronic 
circuits  is  given  in  Annex  Q. 

If  the  safety  of  the  appliance  under  any  of  the  fault 
conditions  depends  on  the  operation  of  a  miniature 
fuse-link  complying  with  IS/IEC  60127,  the  test 
of  19.12  is  carried  out. 

During  and  after  each  test,  the  temperature  of  the 
windings  shall  not  exceed  the  values  specified  in 
Table  8.  However,  these  limits  do  not  apply  to  fail-safe 
transformers  complying  with  15.5  of  IS  1401.  The 


Table  8  Maximum  Winding  Temperature 

{Clauses  11,  19  J  and  19.11) 


SI 
No. 

Type  of  Appliance 

Temperature 

Class 

Class 

Class 

Class 

Class 

Class 

Class 

Class 

A 

E 

B 

F 

H 

200 

220 

250 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

i)     Appliances  other  than  those  operated  until 
steady  conditions  are  established 

ii)     Appliances  operated  until  steady  conditions 
are  established: 

a)  if  impedance  protected 

b)  if  protected  by  a  protective  device: 

1)  during  the  first  hour,  maximum  valuez 

2)  after  the  first  hour,  maximum  value 

3)  after  the  first  hour,  arithmetic  average 


200 


150 


215 


165 


225 


175 


240 


190 


260 


210 


280 


230 


300 


250 


330 


280 


200 

215 

225 

240 

260 

280 

300 

330 

175 

190 

200 

215 

235 

255 

275 

305 

150 

165 

175 

190 

210 

230 

250 

280 

25 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


appliance  shall  comply  with  the  conditions  specified 
in  19»13.  Any  current  flowing  through  protective 
impedance  shall  not  exceed  the  hmits  specified  in  8.1.4. 

NOTE  —  Unless  it  is  necessary  to  replace  components  after 
any  of  the  tests,  the  electric  strength  test  required  by  19.13 
need  only  be  carried  out  after  the  final  test  on  the  electronic 
circuit. 

If  a  conductor  of  a  printed  circuit  board  becomes  open- 
circuited,  the  appliance  is  considered  to  have  withstood 
the  particular  test,  provided  all  three  of  the  following 
conditions  are  met: 

a)  the  base  material  of  the  printed  circuit  board 
withstands  the  test  of  Annex  E; 

b)  any  loosened  conductor  does  not  reduce 
clearances  or  creepage  distances  between  live 
parts  and  accessible  metal  parts  below  the 
values  specified  in  29;  and 

c)  the  appliance  withstands  the  tests  of  19.11.2 
with  the  open-circuited  conductor  bridged. 

19,11.1  Fault  conditions  (a)  to  (f)  specified  in  19.11.2 
are  not  applied  to  circuits  or  parts  of  circuits  when  both 
of  the  following  conditions  are  met: 

a)  the  electronic  circuit  is  a  low-power  circuit 
as  described  below;  and 

b)  protection  against  electric  shock,  fire  hazard, 
mechanical  hazard  or  dangerous  malfunction 
of  other  parts  of  the  appliance  does  not  rely 


on  the  correct  functioning  of  the  electronic 
circuit. 

An  example  of  a  low-power  circuit  is  shown  in  Fig.  7 
and  is  determined  as  follows: 

The  appliance  is  supplied  at  rated  voltage  and  a 
variable  resistor,  adjusted  to  its  maximum  resistance, 
is  connected  between  the  point  to  be  investigated 
and  the  opposite  pole  of  the  supply  source.  The 
resistance  is  then  decreased  until  the  power 
consumed  by  the  resistor  reaches  a  maximum. 
Points  closest  to  the  supply  source  at  which  the 
maximum  power  delivered  to  this  resistor  does  not 
exceed  15  W  at  the  end  of  5  s  are  called  low -power 
points.  The  part  of  the  circuit  farther  from  the  supply 
source  than  a  low-power  point  is  considered  to  be  a 
low-power  circuit. 

NOTES 

1  The  measurenfients  are  made  from  only  one  pole  of  the 
supply  source,  preferably  the  one  that  gives  the  fewest  low- 
power  points, 

2  When  determining  the  low-power  points,  it  is 
recommended  to  start  with  points  close  to  the  supply  source. 

3  The  power  consumed  by  the  variable  resistor  is  measured 
by  a  wattmeter. 

19,11.2  The  following  fault  conditions  are  considered 
and,  if  necessary,  applied  one  at  a  time,  consequential 
faults  being  taken  into  consideration: 

a)     short  circuit  of  functional  insulation,  if 


Fig.  6  VOID 


® 


<^ 


© 


D  is  a  point  farthest  from  the  supply  source  where  the  maximum  power  delivered  to  external  load  exceeds  15  W. 

A  and  B  are  points  closest  to  the  supply  source  where  the  maximum  power  delivered  to  external  load  does  not  exceed 
15  W.  These  are  low-power  points. 

Points  A  and  B  are  separately  short-circuited  to  C. 

The  fault  conditions  (a)  to  (f)  specified  in  19.11.2  are  applied  individually  to  Z^,  Zg,  Z^,  Z^  and  Z^,  where  applicable. 

Fig.  7  Example  of  an  Electronic  Circuit  with  Low-Power  Points 


26 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


clearances  or  creepage  distances  are  less  than 
the  values  specified  in  29; 

b)  open  circuit  at  the  terminals  of  any 
component; 

c)  short  circuit  of  capacitors,  unless  they  comply 
with  ISQC  302400; 

d)  short  circuit  of  any  two  terminals  of  an 
electronic  component,  other  than  an  integrated 
circuit.  This  fault  condition  is  not  applied 
between  the  two  circuits  of  an  optocoupler; 

e)  failure  of  triacs  in  the  diode  mode;  and 

f)  failure  of  an  integrated  circuit.  All  possible 
output  signals  are  considered  for  faults 
occurring  within  the  integrated  circuit.  If  it 
can  be  shown  that  a  particular  output  signal 
is  unlikely  to  occur,  then  the  relevant  fault  is 
not  considered. 

NOTES 

i  Components  such  as  thynstors  and  triacs  ate  not 

subjected  to  fault  condition  (f). 

2  Microprocessors  are  tested  as  integrated  circuits. 

Fault  condition  19.11.2  (0  is  applied  to  encapsulated 
and  similar  components,  if  the  circuit  cannot  be 
assessed  by  other  methods. 

Positive  temperature  coefficient  resistors  are  not  short- 
circuited  if  they  are  used  within  the  manufacturer's 
specification.  However,  PTC-S  thermistors  are  short- 
circuited. 

In  addition,  each  low-power  circuit  is  short-circuited 
by  connecting  the  low-power  point  to  the  pole  of  the 
supply  source  from  which  the  measurements  were 

made. 

For  simulation  of  the  fault  conditions,  the  appliance  is 
operated  under  the  conditions  specified  in  11  but 
supplied  at  rated  voltage. 

When  any  of  the  fault  conditions  are  simulated,  the 
duration  of  the  test  is, 

a)  as  specified  in  11.7  but  only  for  one  operating 
cycle  and  only  if  the  fault  cannot  be 
recognized  by  the  user,  for  example,  a  change 
in  temperature; 

b)  as  specified  in  19.7,  if  the  fault  can  be 
recognized  by  the  user,  for  example,  when  the 
motor  of  a  kitchen  machine  stops;  and 

c)  until  steady  conditions  are  established,  for 
circuits  continuously  connected  to  the  supply 
mains,  for  example,  stand-by  circuits. 

In  each  case,  the  test  is  ended  if  a  non-self-resetting 
interruption  of  the  supply  occurs  within  the  appliance. 

19.11.3  If  the  appliance  incorporates  a  protective 
electronic  circuit  which  operates  to  ensure  compliance 


with  19,  the  relevant  test  is  repeated  with  a  single  fault 
simulated,  as  indicated  in  (a)  to  (t)  of  19.11.2. 

19.11.4  Appliances  having  a  switch  with  an  off  position 
obtained  by  electronic  disconnection,  or  a  switch  that 
can  be  placed  in  the  stand-by  mode,  are  subjected  to  the 
tests  of  19.11.4.1  to  19.11.4.7,  The  tests  are  carried  out 
with  the  appliance  supplied  at  rated  voltage,  the  switch 
being  set  in  the  off  position  or  in  the  stand-by  mode. 

Appliances  incorporating  a  protective  electronic  circuit 
are  subjected  to  the  tests  of  19.11.4.1  to  19.11.4.7.  The 
tests  are  carried  out  after  the  protective  electronic  circuit 
has  operated  during  the  relevant  tests  of  19  except  19.2, 
19.6  and  19.11.3.  However,  appliances  that  are 
operated  for  30  s  or  5  min  during  the  test  of  19.7  are 
not  subjected  to  the  tests  for  electromagnetic 
phenomena. 

The  tests  are  carried  out  with  surge  arresters 
disconnected,  unless  they  incorporate  spark  gaps. 

NOTE  —  If  the  appliance  has  several  modes  of  operation,  the 
tests  are  carried  out  with  the  appliance  operating  in  each  mode, 
if  necessary, 

19.11.4.1  The  appliance  is  subjected  to  electrostatic 
discharges  in  accordance  with  IS  14700  (Part  4/Sec 
2),  test  level  4  being  applicable.  Ten  discharges  having 
a  positive  polarity  and  ten  discharges  having  a  negative 
polarity  are  applied  at  each  preselected  point. 

19.11.4.2  The  appliance  is  subjected  to  radiated  fields 
in  accordance  with  IS  14700  (Part  4/Sec  3)  test  level  3 
being  applicable. 

NOTE  —  The  dwell  time  for  each  frequency  is  to  be  sufficient 
to  observe  a  possible  malfunction  of  the  protective  electronic 
circuit. 

19,1L4.3  The  appliance  is  subjected  to  fast  transient 
bursts  in  accordance  with  IS  14700  (Part  4/Sec  4).  Test 
level  3  is  applicable  for  signal  and  control  lines.  Test 
level  4  is  applicable  for  the  power  supply  lines.  The 
bursts  are  applied  for  2  min  with  a  positive  polarity 
and  for  2  min  with  a  negative  polarity, 

19.11,4.4  The  appliance  is  subjected  to  voltage  dips 
and  interruptions  in  accordance  with  IS  14700  (Part  4/ 
Sec  1 1).  The  durations  specified  in  Table  1  of  IS  14700 
(Part  4/Sec  1 1)  are  applied  to  each  test  level,  the  dips 
and  interruptions  being  applied  at  zero  crossing  of  the 
supply  voltage. 

19.12  If  safety  of  the  appliance  depends  upon  the 
operation  of  a  miniature  fuse-link  complying  with 
IS/IEC  60127  during  any  of  the  fault  conditions 
specified  in  19.11.2,  the  test  is  repeated  but  with  the 
miniature  fuse-link  replaced  by  an  ammeter.  If  the 
current  measured: 

a)     does  not  exceed  2. 1  times  the  rated  current  of 
the  fuse-link,  the  circuit  is  not  considered  to 


27 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


be  adequately  protected  and  the  test  is  carried 
out  with  the  fuse-link  short-circuited; 

b)  is  at  least  2.75  times  the  rated  current  of  the 
fuse-link,  the  circuit  is  considered  to  be 
adequately  protected;  and 

c)  is  between  2.1  times  and  2.75  times  the  rated 
current  of  the  fuse-link,  the  fuse-link  is  short- 
circuited  and  the  test  is  carried  out: 

1)  for  the  relevant  period  or  for  30  min, 
whichever  is  the  shorter,  for  quick; 

2)  acting  fuse-links;  and 

3)  for  the  relevant  period  or  for  2  min, 
whichever  is  the  shorter,  for  time  lag  fuse- 
links. 

NOTES 

1  In  case  of  doubt,  the  maximum  resistance  of  the  fuse-link 
has  to  be  taken  into  account  when  determining  the  current. 

2  The  verification  whether  the  fuse-link  acts  as  a  protective 
device  is  based  on  the  fusing  characteristics  specified  in 
IS/IEC  60127,  which  also  gives  the  information  necessary 
to  calculate  the  maximum  resistance  of  the  fuse-link. 

3  Other  fuses  are  considered  to  be  intentionally  weak  parts 
in  accordance  with  19.1. 

19.13  During  the  tests  the  appliance  shall  not  emit 
flames,  molten  metal,  or  poisonous  or  ignitabie  gas  in 
hazardous  amounts  and  temperature  rises  shall  not 
exceed  the  values  shown  in  Table  9. 

After  the  tests  and  when  the  appliance  has  cooled  to 
approximately  room  temperature,  the  enclosure  shall 
not  have  deformed  to  such  an  extent  that  compliance 
with  8  is  impaired  and  the  appliance  shall  comply  with 
20,2,  if  it  can  still  be  operated- 
Table  9  Maximum  Abnormal  Temperature  Rise 
(Clauses  19.13  anJ  20.1) 


SI 

No. 

(1) 

Part 

(2) 

Temperature  Rise 
K 

(3) 

i)       Wooden    supports,    walls,    ceiling  150 

and  floor  of  the  test  corner  and 

wooden  cabinets^^ 
ii)       Insulation  of  the  supply  cord''  150 

lit)      Supplementary      insulation      and    1.5       times       the 

reintbrced    insulation    other    than    relevant  value 

thermoplastic  materials^'  specified  in  Table  3 

'^    For  motor-operated  appliances  these  temperature  rises  are  not 

deteOTiined. 
'*     riiere  is  no  specific  limit  for  supplementary  insulation  and  reinforced 

insulation  of  tUemnoplastic  material. 

However,  the  temperature  rise  has  to  be  determined  so  that  the  test  of 
30.1  can  be  carried  out. 


When  the  insulation,  other  than  that  of  Class  III 
appliances,  has  cooled  down  to  approximately  room 
temperature,  it  shall  withstand  the  electric  strength  test 
of  16.3,  the  test  voltage,  however,  being  as  specified 
in  Table  4. 


NOTE  —  The  humidity  treatment  of  15.3  is  not  applied  before 
this  electric  strength  test. 

For  appliances  which  are  immersed  in  or  filled  with 
conducting  liquid  in  normal  use,  the  appliance  is 
immersed  in  or  filled  with  water  for  24  h  before  the 
electric  strength  test  is  carried  out. 

The  appliance  shall  not  undergo  a  dangerous 
malfunction,  and  there  shall  be  no  failure  of  protective 
electronic  circuits  if  the  appliance  is  still  operable. 

Appliances  tested  with  an  electronic  switch  in  the  off 
position,  or  in  the  stand-by  mode,  shall  not  become 
operational. 

20  STABILITY  AND  MECHANICAL  HAZARDS 

20.1  Appliances,  other  than  fixed  appliances  and  hand- 
held appliances,  intended  to  be  used  on  a  surface  such 
as  the  floor  or  a  table  shall  have  adequate  stability. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test, 
appliances  incorporating  an  appliance  inlet  being  fitted 
with  an  appropriate  connector  and  flexible  cord. 

The  appliance  is  placed  in  any  normal  position  of  use 
on  a  plane  inclined  at  an  angle  of  1 0''  to  the  horizontal, 
the  supply  cord  resting  on  the  inclined  plane  in  the 
most  unfavourable  position.  However,  if  part  of  an 
appliance  comes  into  contact  with  the  horizontal 
supporting  surface  when  the  appliance  is  tilted  through 
an  angle  of  10°,  the  appliance  is  placed  on  a  horizontal 
support  and  tilted  in  the  most  unfavourable  direction 
through  an  angle  of  10°. 

NOTES 

1  The  appliance  is  not  connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

2  The  test  on  the  horizontal  support  may  be  necessary  for 
appliances  provided  with  rollers,  castors  or  feet. 

3  Castors  or  wheels  are  blocked  to  prevent  the  appliance  from 
rolling. 

Appliances  provided  with  doors  are  tested  with  the 
doors  open  or  closed,  whichever  is  the  more 
unfavourable. 

Appliances  intended  to  be  filled  with  liquid  by  the  user 
in  normal  use  are  tested  empty  or  filled  with  the  most 
unfavourable  quantity  of  water  up  to  the  capacity 
indicated  in  the  instructions. 

The  appliance  shall  not  overturn. 

The  test  is  repeated  on  appliances  with  heating  elements 
with  the  angle  of  inclination  increased  to  15°.  If  the 
appliance  overturns  in  one  or  more  positions,  it  is 
subjected  to  the  tests  of  11  in  each  of  these  overturned 
positions. 

During  this  test,  temperature  rises  shall  not  exceed  the 
values  shown  in  Table  9. 


28 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


20.2  Moving  parts  of  appliances  shall,  as  far  as  is 
compatible  with  the  use  and  working  of  the  appliance, 
be  positioned  or  enclosed  to  provide  adequate 
protection  against  personal  injury  in  normal  use. 

NOTE  —  For  some  appliances  complete  protection  is 
impracticable,  for  example  sewing  machines,  food  mixers  and 
electric  knives. 

Protective  enclosures,  guards  and  similar  parts  shall 
be  non-detachable  parts  and  shall  have  adequate 
mechanical  strength. 

NOTE  —  Enclosures  that  can  be  opened  by  overriding  an 
interlock  by  applying  the  test  probe  are  considered  to  be 
detachable  parts. 

The  unexpected  reclosure  of  self-resetting  thermal  cut- 
outs and  overcurrent  protective  devices  shall  not  cause 
a  hazard. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  appliances  in  which  self-resetting 
thermal  cut-outs  and  overcurrent  protective  devices  could  cause 
a  hazard  are  food  mixers  and  wringers. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection,  by  the  tests  of  21.1 
and  by  applying  a  force  not  exceeding  5  N  by  means  of  a 
test  probe  that  is  similar  to  test  probe  B  of  IS  1401  but 
having  a  circular  stop  face  with  a  diameter  of  50  mm, 
instead  of  the  non-circular  face. 

For  appliances  provided  with  movable  devices  such  as 
those  intended  for  varying  the  tension  of  belts,  the  test 
with  the  test  probe  is  carried  out  with  these  devices 
adjusted  to  the  most  unfavourable  position  within  their 
range  of  adjustment.  If  necessary,  belts  are  removed. 

It  shall  not  be  possible  to  touch  dangerous  moving  parts 
with  this  test  probe. 

21  MECHANICAL  STRENGTH 

21.1  Appliances  shall  have  adequate  mechanical 
strength  and  be  constructed  to  withstand  such  rough 
handling  that  may  be  expected  in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  applying  blows  to  the 
appliance  in  accordance  with  test  Ehb  of  IS  9000 
(Part  7/Sec  7),  the  spring  hammer  test. 

The  appliance  is  rigidly  supported  and  three  blows, 
having  an  impact  energy  of  0.5  J,  are  applied  to  every 
point  of  the  enclosure  that  is  likely  to  be  weak. 

NOTE— Void. 

If  necessary,  the  blows  are  also  applied  to  handles, 
levers,  knobs  and  similar  parts  and  to  signal  lamps  and 
their  covers  but  only  if  the  lamps  or  covers  protrude 
iroin  the  enclosure  by  more  than  10  mm  or  if  their 
surface  area  exceeds  4  cm^.  Lamps  within  the  appliance 
and  their  covers  are  only  tested,  if  they  are  likely  to  be 
damaged  in  normal  use. 

NOTE  —  When  applying  the  release  cone  to  the  guard  of  a 
visibly  glowing  heating  element,  care  is  to  be  taken  that  the 


hammer  head  passing  through  the  guard  does  not  strike  the 
heating  element. 

After  the  test,  the  appliance  shall  show  no  damage  that 
could  impair  compliance  with  this  standard  and 
compliance  with  8.1, 15,1  and  29  shall  not  be  impaired. 
In  case  of  doubt,  supplementary  insulation  and 
reinforced  insulation  are  subjected  to  the  electric 
strength  test  of  16.3. 

NOTES 

1  Damage  to  the  finish,  small  dents  that  do  not  reduce 
clearances  or  creepage  distances  below  the  values  specified  in 
29,  and  small  chips  that  do  not  adversely  affect  protection 
against  access  to  live  parts  or  moisture,  are  ignored. 

2  If  a  decorative  cover  is  protected  by  an  inner  cover,  fracture 
of  the  decorative  cover  is  ignored  if  the  inner  cover  itself 
withstands  the  test. 

If  there  is  doubt  as  to  whether  a  defect  has  occurred  by 
the  application  of  the  preceding  blows,  this  defect  is 
neglected  and  the  group  of  three  blows  is  applied  to 
the  same  place  on  a  new  sample  which  shall  then 
withstand  the  test. 

NOTE  —  Cracks  not  visible  to  the  naked  eye  and  surface 
cracks  in  fib  re -re  info  reed  mouldings  and  similar  materials 
arc  ignored. 

21,2  Accessible  parts  of  solid  insulation  shall  have 
sufficient  strength  to  prevent  penetration  by  sharp 
implements. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  subjecting  the  insulation  to 
the  following  test,  unless  the  thickness  of 
supplementary  insulation  is  at  least  1  mm  and  that  of 
reinforced  insulation  is  at  least  2  mm. 

The  insulation  is  raised  to  the  temperature  measured 
during  the  test  of  11.  The  surface  of  the  insulation  is 
then  scratched  by  means  of  a  hardened  steel  pin,  the 
end  of  which  has  the  form  of  a  cone  with  an  angle  of 
40°.  Its  tip  is  rounded  with  a  radius  of  0.25  ±0.02  mm. 
The  pin  is  held  at  an  angle  of  80°  to  85°  to  the  horizontal 
and  loaded  so  that  the  force  exerted  along  its  axis  is 
1 0  ±  0.5  N.  The  scratches  are  made  by  drawing  the  pin 
along  the  surface  of  the  insulation  at  a  speed  of 
approximately  20  mm/s.  Two  parallel  scratches  are 
made.  They  are  spaced  sufficiently  apart  so  that  they 
arc  not  affected  by  each  other,  their  length  covering 
approximately  25  percent  of  the  length  of  the 
insulation.  Two  similar  scratches  are  made  at  90"  to 
the  first  pair  without  crossing  them. 

The  test  fingernail  of  Fig.  8  is  then  applied  to  the 
scratched  surface  with  a  force  of  approximately  10  N. 
No  further  damage,  such  as  separation  of  the  material, 
shall  occur.  The  insulation  shall  then  withstand  the 
electric  strength  test  of  16.3. 

The  hardened  steel  pin  is  then  applied  perpendicularly 
with  a  force  of  30  ±  0.5  N  to  an  unscratched  part  of 
the  surface.  The  insulation  shall  then  withstand  the 


29 


o 


^: 


f//  /  /?  ^  n  ^  /  7/  //, 


M/^ 


K^ 


(B; 


o 

o 

00 


Key 


/4  —  Insulating  material. 

B  —  Spring  diameter  1 8  mm. 

C  —  Loop. 


10 


25 


-I       .^ 

"'■-  V I  y 


~I 


CD       ^ 


5  I 


09 


62 


r^^^ ^^^ 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  8  Test  Fingernail 


IS  302-1:  2008 


electric  strength  test  of  16.3  with  the  pin  still  applied 
and  used  as  one  of  the  electrodes. 

22  CONSTRUCTION 

22.1  If  the  appliance  is  marked  with  the  first  numeral 
of  the  IP  system,  the  relevant  requirements  of  IS  12063 
shall  be  fulfilled. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  relevant  tests. 

22.2  For  stationary  appliances,  means  shall  be  provided 
to  ensure  all-pole  disconnection  from  the  supply  mains. 
Such  means  shall  be  one  of  the  following: 

a)  a  supply  cord  fitted  with  a  plug; 

b)  a  switch  complying  with  24.3; 

c)  a  statement  in  the  instructions  that  a 
disconnection  incorporated  in  the  fixed  wiring 
is  to  be  provided;  and 

d)  an  appliance  inlet. 

Single-pole  switches,  and  single-pole  protective 
devices  that  disconnect  heating  elements  from  the 
supply  mains,  in  single-phase,  permanently  connected 
Class  I  appliances  shall  be  connected  to  the  phase 
conductor. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection, 

22.3  Appliances  with  pins  for  insertion  into  socket- 
outlets  shall  not  impose  undue  strain  on  these  socket- 
outlets.  The  means  for  retaining  the  pins  shall  withstand 
the  forces  to  which  the  pins  are  likely  to  be  subjected 
in  normal  use- 
Compliance  is  checked  by  inserting  the  pins  of  the 
appliance  into  a  socket-outlet  without  earthing  contact. 
The  socket-outlet  has  a  horizontal  pivot  at  a  distance 
of  8  mm  behind  the  engagement  face  of  the  socket- 
outlet  and  in  the  plane  of  the  contact  tubes. 

The  torque  that  has  to  be  applied  to  maintain  the 
engagement  face  of  the  socket-outlet  in  the  vertical 
plane  shall  not  exceed  0.25  Nm. 

NOTE  —  The  torque  to  keep  the  socket-outlet  itself  in  the 
vertical  plane  is  not  included  in  this  value. 

A  new  sample  of  the  appliance  is  firmly  held  so  that 
the  retention  of  the  pins  is  not  affected.  The  appliance 
is  placed  in  a  heating  cabinet  for  1  h  at  a  temperature 
of  70  ±  2  ''C.  The  appliance  is  then  removed  from  the 
heating  cabinet  and  a  pull  force  of  50  N  is  immediately 
applied  for  1  min  to  each  pin  along  their  longitudinal 
axes. 

When  the  appliance  has  cooled  down  to  room 
temperature,  the  pins  shall  not  have  been  displaced  by 
more  than  1  mm. 

i^^ach  pin  is  then  subjected  in  turn  to  a  torque  of  0.4  Nm, 
which  is  applied  for  1  min  in  each  direction.  The  pins 


shall  not  rotate  unless  rotation  does  not  impair 
compliance  with  this  standard. 

22.4  Appliances  for  heating  liquids  and  appliances 
causing  undue  vibration  shall  not  be  provided  with  pins 
for  insertion  into  socket-outlets. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.5  Appliances  intended  to  be  connected  to  the  supply 
mains  by  means  of  a  plug  shall  be  constructed  so  that 
in  normal  use  there  is  no  risk  of  electric  shock  from 
charged  capacitors  when  the  pins  of  the  plug  are 
touched. 

NOTE  —  Capacitors  having  a  rated  capacitance  up  to  0. 1  pF 
are  not  considered  to  entail  a  risk  of  electric  shock. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test. 

The  appliance  is  supplied  at  rated  voltage.  Any  switch 
is  then  placed  in  the  off  position  and  the  appliance  is 
disconnected  from  the  supply  mains  at  the  instant  of 
voltage  peak.  One  second  after  disconnection,  the 
voltage  between  the  pins  of  the  plug  is  measured  with 
an  instrument  that  does  not  appreciably  affect  the  value 
to  be  measured. 

The  voltage  shall  not  exceed  34  V. 

22.6  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  their 
electrical  insulation  cannot  be  affected  by  water  that 
could  condense  on  cold  surfaces  or  by  liquid  that  could 
leak  from  containers,  hoses,  couplings  and  similar  parts 
of  the  appliance.  The  electrical  insulation  of  Class  II 
appliances  and  Class  II  constructions  shall  not  be 
affected  if  a  hose  ruptures  or  a  seal  leaks. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and,  in  case  of 
doubt,  by  the  following  test. 

Drops  of  coloured  water  solution  are  applied  by  a 
syringe  to  parts  inside  the  appliance  where  leakage  of 
a  liquid  could  occur  and  affect  electrical  insulation. 
The  appliance  is  in  operation  or  at  rest,  whichever  is 
the  more  unfavourable. 

After  this  test,  inspection  shall  show  that  there  is  no 
trace  of  liquid  on  windings  or  insulation  that  could 
result  in  a  reduction  of  creepage  distances  below  the 
values  specified  in  29.2. 

22.7  Appliances  containing  liquid  or  gases  in  normal 
use  or  having  steam-producing  devices  shall 
incorporate  adequate  safeguards  against  the  risk  of 
excessive  pressure. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and,  if  necessary, 
by  an  appropriate  test. 

22.8  For  appliances  having  compartments  to  which 
access  can  be  gained  without  the  aid  of  a  tool  and  that 
are  likely  to  be  cleaned  in  normal  use,  the  electrical 


31 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


connections  shall  be  arranged  so  that  they  are  not 
subject  to  pulling  during  cleaning. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

22.9  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  parts  such 
as  insulation,  internal  wiring,  windings,  commutators 
and  slip  rings  are  not  exposed  to  oil,  grease  or  similar 
substances,  unless  the  substance  has  adequate 
insulating  properties  so  that  compliance  with  the 
standard  is  not  impaired. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the  tests 
of  this  standard. 

22.10  It  shall  not  be  possible  to  reset  voltage- 
maintained  non-self-resetting  thermal  cut-outs  by  the 
operation  of  an  automatic  switching  device 
incorporated  within  the  appliance. 

NOTE  —  VoUage-maintained  controls  will  automatically  reset 
if  they  become  de-energized. 

Non-self-resetting  thermal  motor  protectors  shall  have 
a  trip-free  action  unless  they  are  voltage  maintained. 

NOTR  —  Trip-free  is  an  automatic  action  that  is  independent 
of  manipulation  or  position  of  the  actuating  member. 

Reset  buttons  of  non-self-resetting  controls  shall  be 
located  or  protected  so  that  their  accidental  resetting 
is  unlikely  to  occur  if  this  could  result  in  a  hazard. 

NOTE  —  For  example,  this  requirement  precludes  the  location 
of  reset  buttons  on  the  back  of  an  appliance,  which  could  result 
in  them  being  reset  by  pushing  the  apphance  against  a  wall. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.11  Non-detachable  parts  that  protect  against  access 
to  live  parts,  moisture  or  contact  with  moving  parts 
shall  be  fixed  in  a  reliable  manner  and  withstand  the 
mechanical  stress  occurring  during  normal  use.  Snap- 
in  devices  used  for  fixing  such  parts  shall  have  an 
obvious  locked  position.  The  fixing  properties  of  snap- 
in  devices  used  in  parts  that  are  likely  to  be  removed 
during  installation  or  servicing  shall  be  reliable. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  tests. 

Parts  that  arc  likely  to  be  removed  during  installation 
or  servicing  are  disassembled  and  assembled  10  times 
before  the  test  is  carried  out. 

NOTE  —  Servicing  includes  replacement  of  the  supply  cord. 

The  test  is  carried  out  at  room  temperature.  However, 
if  compliance  may  be  affected  by  the  temperature  of 
the  appliance,  the  test  is  also  carried  out  immediately 
after  it  has  been  operated  under  the  conditions  specified 
m  11. 

The  test  is  applied  to  all  parts  that  are  likely  to  be 
detachable  whether  or  not  they  are  fixed  by  screws, 
rivets  or  similar  parts. 


A  force  is  applied  without  jerks  for  10  s  in  the  most 
unfavourable  direction  to  parts  likely  to  be  weak.  The 
force  is  as  follows: 

a)  Push  force,  50  N;  and 

b)  Pull  force: 

if  the  shape  of  the  part  is  such  that  the 
fingertips  cannot  easily  slip  off,  50  N; 
if  the  projection  of  the  part  that  is  gripped  is 
less  than  10  mm  in  the  direction  of  removal, 
30  N. 

The  push  force  is  applied  by  test  probe  11  of  IS  1401. 

The  pull  force  is  applied  by  a  suitable  means,  such  as 
a  suction  cup,  so  that  the  test  results  are  not  affected. 
While  the  force  is  being  applied,  the  test  fingernail  of 
Fig.  8  is  inserted  in  any  aperture  or  joint  with  a  force 
of  10  N.  The  fingernail  is  then  slid  sideways  with  a 
force  of  10  N  but  is  not  twisted  or  used  as  a  lever. 

If  the  shape  of  the  part  is  such  that  an  axial  pull  is 
unlikely*  the  pull  force  is  not  applied  but  the  test 
fingernail  is  inserted  in  any  aperture  or  Joint  with  a 
force  of  10  N  and  is  then  pulled  for  10  s  by  means  of 
the  loop  with  a  force  of  30  N  in  the  direcfion  of  removal. 

If  the  part  is  likely  to  be  twisted,  the  following  torque 
is  applied  at  the  same  fime  as  the  pull  or  push  force: 

a)  2  Nm,  for  major  dimensions  up  to  50  mm; 
and 

b)  4  Nm,  for  major  dimensions  over  50  mm. 

This  torque  is  also  applied  when  the  test  fingernail  is 
pulled  by  means  of  the  loop. 

If  the  projection  of  the  part  which  is  gripped  is  less 
than  10  mm,  the  torque  is  reduced  by  50  percent. 

Parts  shall  remain  in  the  locked  position  and  not 
become  detached. 

22.12  Handles,  knobs,  grips,  levers  and  similar  parts 
shall  be  fixed  in  a  reliable  manner  so  that  they  will  not 
work  loose  in  normal  use  if  loosening  could  result  in  a 
hazard.  If  these  parts  are  used  to  indicate  the  position 
of  switches  or  similar  components,  it  shall  not  be 
possible  to  fix  them  incorrectly  if  this  could  result  in  a 
hazard. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspecUon,  by  manual  test 
and  by  trying  to  remove  the  part  by  applying  an  axial 

force  of: 

a)  1 5  N,  if  an  axial  pull  is  unlikely  to  be  applied 
in  normal  use;  and 

b)  30  N,  if  an  axial  pull  is  likely  to  be  applied  in 
normal  use. 

The  force  is  applied  for  1  min. 


32 


18  302.1:2008 


NOTE  —  Sealing  compound  and  similar  materials,  other  than 
self-hardening  resins,  are  not  considered  to  be  adequate  to 
prevent  loosening. 

22.13  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  when 
handles  are  gripped  in  normal  use,  contact  is  unlikely 
between  the  operator's  hand  and  parts  having  a 
temperature  rise  exceeding  the  value  specified  in 
Table  3  for  handles  which  are  held  for  short  periods 
only  in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and,  if  necessary, 
by  determining  the  temperature  rise. 

22.14  Appliances  shall  have  no  ragged  or  sharp  edges, 
other  than  those  necessary  for  the  functioning  of  the 
appliance,  that  could  create  a  hazard  for  the  user  in 
normal  use  or  during  user  maintenance. 

Pointed  ends  of  self-tapping  screws  or  other  fasteners 
shall  be  located  so  that  they  are  unlikely  to  be  touched 
by  the  user  in  normal  use  or  during  user  maintenance. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection, 

22.15  Storage  hooks  and  similar  devices  for  flexible 
cords  shall  be  smooth  and  well-rounded. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.16  Automatic  cord  reels  shall  be  constructed  so  that 
they  do  not  cause: 

a)  undue  abrasion  or  damage  to  the  sheath  of 
the  flexible  cord; 

b)  breakage  of  conductor  strands;  and 

c)  undue  wear  of  contacts. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test,  which  is 
carried  out  without  passing  current  through  the  flexible 

cord. 

Two-thirds  of  the  length  of  the  cord  is  unreeled.  If  the 
withdrawable  length  of  the  cord  is  less  than  225  cm,  the 
cord  is  unreeled  so  that  a  length  of  75  cm  remains  on 
the  reel.  An  additional  length  of  75  cm  of  the  cord  is 
then  unreeled  and  pulled  in  a  direction  so  that  the  greatest 
abrasion  occurs  to  the  sheath,  taking  into  account  the 
normal  position  of  use  of  the  appliance.  Where  the  cord 
leaves  the  appliance,  the  angle  between  the  axis  of  the 
cord  during  the  test  and  the  axis  of  the  cord  when  it  is 
unreeled  without  substantial  resistance  is  approximately 
60".  The  cord  is  allowed  to  be  recoiled  by  the  reel. 

NOTE  —  If  the  cord  does  not  recoil  at  the  angle  of  60",  this 
angle  is  adjusted  to  the  maximum  that  will  allow  recoil. 

The  test  is  carried  out  6  000  times  at  a  rate  of 
approximately  30  times  per  minute  or  at  the  maximum 
rate  allowed  by  the  construction  of  the  cord  reel  if  this 
is  less. 

NOTE  —  It  may  be  necessary  to  interrupt  the  test  to  allow  the 
cord  to  cool. 


After  this  test,  the  cord  and  cord  reel  are  inspected.  In 
case  of  doubt  the  cord  is  subjected  to  the  electric 
strength  test  of  16.3,  a  test  voltage  of  I  000  V  being 
applied  between  the  conductors  of  the  cord  connected 
together  and  metal  foil  wrapped  around  the  cord. 

22.17  Spacers  intended  to  prevent  the  appliance  from 
overheating  walls  shall  be  fixed  so  that  it  is  not  possible 
to  remove  them  from  the  outside  of  the  appliance  by 
hand  or  by  means  of  a  screwdriver  or  a  spanner. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

22.18  Current-carrying  parts  and  other  metal  parts,  the 
corrosion  of  which  could  result  in  a  hazard,  shall  be 
resistant  to  corrosion  under  normal  conditions  of  use, 

NOTE  —  Stainless  steel  and  similar  corrosion-resistant  alloys 
and  plated  steel  are  considered  to  be  satisfactory  for  the  purpose 
of  this  requirement. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  verifying  that  after  the  tests 
of  19,  the  relevant  parts  show  no  sign  of  corrosion. 

NOTE  —  Attention  is  to  be  paid  to  the  compatibility  of  the 
materials  of  terminals  and  to  the  effect  of  heating. 

22.19  Driving  belts  shall  not  be  relied  upon  to  provide 
the  required  level  of  insulation  unless  they  are 
constructed  to  prevent  inappropriate  replacement. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.20  Direct  contact  between  live  parts  and  thermal 
insulation  shall  be  effectively  prevented  unless  such 
material  is  non-corrosive,  non-hygroscopic  and  non- 
combustible; 

NOTE  —  Glass-wool  is  an  example  of  thermal  insulation  which 
is  satisfactory  for  the  purpose  of  this  requirement.  Non- 
impregnated  slag-wool  is  an  example  of  corrosive  thermal 
insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and,  if  necessary, 
by  appropriate  tests. 

22.21  Wood,  cotton,  silk,  ordinary  paper  and  similar 
fibrous  or  hygroscopic  material  shall  not  be  used  as 
insulation,  unless  impregnated. 

NOTES 

1  Insulating  material  is  considered  to  be  impregnated  if  the 
interstices  between  the  fibres  of  the  material  are  substantially 
filled  with  a  suitable  insuiant. 

2  Magnesium  oxide  and  mineral  ceramic  fibres  used  for  the 
electrical  insulation  of  heating  elements  are  not  considered  to 
be  hygroscopic  materials. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.22  Appliances  shall  not  contain  asbestos. 
Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.23  Oils  containing  polychlorinated  biphenyi  (PCB) 
shall  not  be  used  in  appliances. 


33 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.24  Bare  heating  elements  shall  be  supported  so  that 
the  heating  conductor  is  unlikely  to  come  into  contact 
with  accessible  metal  parts,  if  they  rupture. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  after  cutting  the 
heating  conductor  in  the  most  unfavourable  place. 

NOTES 

1  No  force  is  applied  to  the  conductor  after  it  has  been  cut. 

2  This  test  is  carried  out  after  the  tests  of  29. 

22.25  Appliances,  other  than  those  of  Class  III,  shall 
be  constructed  so  that  sagging  heating  conductors 
cannot  come  into  contact  with  accessible  metal  parts. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTE  —  This  requirement  may  be  met  by  providing 
supplementary  insulation  or  a  core  which  effectively  prevents 
the  heating  conductor  from  sagging. 

22.26  Appliances  having  parts  of  Class  III  construction 
shall  be  constructed  SQ  that  the  insulation  between  parts 
operating  at  safety  extra-low  voltage  and  other  live  parts 
complies  with  the  requirements  for  double  insulation 
or  reinforced  insulation. 

CompHance  is  checked  by  the  tests  specified  for  double 
insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 

22.27  Parts  connected  by  protective  impedance  shall 
be  separated  by  double  insulation  or  reinforced 
insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  tests  specified  for  double 
insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 

22.28  For  Class  II  appliances  connected  in  normal  use 
to  the  gas  mains  or  to  the  water  mains,  metal  parts 
conductively  connected  to  the  gas  pipes  or  in  contact 
with  the  water  shall  be  separated  from  live  parts  by 
double  insulaUon  or  reinforced  insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.29  Class  II  appliances  intended  to  be  permanently 
connected  to  fixed  wiring  shall  be  constructed  so  that 
the  required  degree  of  access  to  live  parts  is  maintained 
after  installation. 

NOTE  —  The  protection  against  access  to  live  parts  may  be 
affected,  for  example,  by  the  installation  of  metal  conduits  or 
cables  provided  with  a  metal  sheath. 

Comphance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.30  Parts  of  Class  II  construction  which  serve  as 
supplementary  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation,  and 
which  could  be  omitted  during  reassembly  after 
servicing,  shall  be 

a)     fixed  so  that  they  cannot  be  removed  without 
being  seriously  damaged, 
or 


b)  constructed  so  that  they  cannot  be  replaced 
in  an  incorrect  position  and  if  they  are  omitted, 
the  appliance  is  rendered  inoperable  or 
manifestly  incomplete. 

NOTE  —  Servicing  includes  replacement  of  components  such 
as  supply  cords  and  switches. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

22.31  Clearances  and  creepage  distances  over 
supplementary  insulation  and  reinforced  insulation 
shall  not  be  reduced  below  the  values  specified  in  29 
as  a  result  of  wear.  If  a  part,  such  as  a  wire,  screw,  nut 
or  spring,  becomes  loose  or  falls  out  of  position, 
clearances  and  creepage  distances  between  live  parts 
and  accessible  parts  shall  not  be  reduced  below  the 
values  specified  for  supplementary  insulation. 

NOTE  —  For  the  purpose  of  this  requirement: 

a)  only  the  normal  position  of  use  of  the  appliance  is  taken 
into  account; 

b)  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  two  independent  fixings  will 
become  loose  at  the  same  time; 

c)  parts  fixed  by  means  of  screws  or  nuts  and  locking  washers 
are  not  regarded  as  liable  to  become  loose,  provided  that 
these  screws  or  nuts  are  not  required  to  be  removed  during 
the  replacement  of  the  supply  cord  or  other  servicing; 

d)  wires  connected  by  soldering  are  not  considered  to  be 
adequately  fixed  unless  they  are  held  in  place  near  the 
terminals  independently  of  the  solder; 

e)  wires  connected  to  terminals  are  not  considered  to  be 
adequately  secured  unless  an  additional  fixing  is  provided 
near  the  terminal,  so  that  in  the  case  of  stranded  conductors, 
the  fixing  clamps  both  the  insulation  and  conductor;  and 

f)  short  rigid  wires  are  not  regarded  as  liable  to  be  dislodged 
from  a  terminal  if  they  remain  in  position  when  the  terminal 
screw  is  loosened. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection,  by  measurement 
and  by  manual  test. 

22.32  Supplementary  insulation  and  reinforced 
insulation  shall  be  constructed  or  protected  so  that 
the  deposition  of  pollution  resulting  from  wear  of 
parts  within  the  appliance  does  not  reduce  clearances 
or  creepage  distances  below  the  values  specified 
in  29. 

Parts  of  natural  or  synthetic  rubber  used  as 
supplementary  insulation  shall  be  resistant  to  ageing 
or  be  located  and  dimensioned  so  that  creepage 
distances  are  not  reduced  below  the  values  specified 
in  29.2,  even  if  cracks  occur. 

Ceramic  material  which  is  not  tightly  sintered,  similar 
materials  or  beads  alone  shall  not  be  used  as 
supplementary  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 

NOTE  —  Insulating  material  in  which  heating  conductors  are 
embedded  is  considered  to  be  basic  insulation  and  not 
reinforced  insulation. 


34 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

If  the  rubber  part  has  to  be  resistant  to  ageing,  the 
following  test  is  carried  out. 

The  part  is  suspended  freely  in  an  oxygen  bomb,  the 
effective  capacity  of  the  bomb  being  at  least  10  times  the 
volume  of  the  part.  The  bomb  is  filled  with  oxygen  not 
less  than  97  percent  pure,  to  a  pressure  of  2. 1  ±  0.07  MPa 
and  maintained  at  a  temperature  of  70  ±  1  ""C. 

NOTE  —  The  use  of  the  oxygen  bomb  presents  some  danger 
unless  handled  with  care.  Precautions  should  be  taken  to  avoid 
the  risk  of  explosion  due  to  sudden  oxidation. 

The  part  is  kept  in  the  bomb  for  96  h.  It  is  then  removed 
from  the  bomb  and  left  at  room  temperature  out  of 
direct  sunlight  for  at  least  16  h. 

The  part  is  then  examined  and  shall  show  no  crack 
visible  to  the  naked  eye. 

In  case  of  doubt,  the  following  test  is  carried  out  to 
determine  if  ceramic  material  is  tightly  sintered. 

The  ceramic  material  is  broken  into  pieces  that  are 
immersed  in  a  solution  containing  1  g  of  fuchsine  in 
each  100  g  of  methylated  spirit.  The  solution  is 
maintained  at  a  pressure  not  less  than  1 5  MPa  for  a  period 
so  that  the  product  of  the  test  duration  in  hours  and  the 
test  pressure  in  megapascals  is  approximately  180. 

The  pieces  are  removed  from  the  solution,  rinsed,  dried 
and  broken  into  smaller  pieces. 

The  freshly  broken  surfaces  are  examined  and  shall 
not  show  any  trace  of  dye  visible  to  the  naked  eye. 

2233  Conductive  liquids  that  are  or  may  become 
accessible  in  normal  use  shall  not  be  in  direct  contact 
with  live  parts.  Electrodes  shall  not  be  used  for  heating 
liquids. 

For  Class  II  construction,  conductive  liquids  that  are 
or  may  become  accessible  in  normal  use  shall  not  be 
in  direct  contact  with  basic  insulation  or  reinforced 
insulation. 

For  Class  II  construction,  conductive  liquids  which  are 
in  contact  with  live  parts  shall  not  be  in  direct  contact 
with  reinforced  insulation. 

NOTES 

1  Liquids  that  are  in  contact  with  unearthed  accessible  metal 
parts  are  considered  to  be  accessible. 

2  An  air  layer  is  not  considered  to  be  sufficient  as  one  of  the 
layers  of  double  insulation  if  it  is  likely  to  be  bridged  by  leaking 
liquid. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.34  Shafts  of  operating  knobs,  handles,  levers  and 
similar  parts  shall  not  be  live  unless  the  shaft  is 
inaccessible  when  the  part  is  removed. 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  applying 
the  test  probe  as  specified  in  8.1  after  removal  of  the 
part  even  with  the  aid  of  a  tool. 

22.35  For  constructions  other  than  those  of  Class  III, 
handles,  levers  and  knobs  which  are  held  or  actuated 
in  normal  use  shall  not  become  live  in  the  event  of  an 
insulation  fault.  If  these  handles,  levers  or  knobs  are 
of  metal  and  if  their  shafts  or  fixings  are  likely  to 
become  live  in  the  event  of  an  insulation  fault,  they 
shall  be  adequately  covered  by  insulating  material  or 
their  accessible  parts  shall  be  separated  from  their 
shafts  or  fixings  by  supplementary  insulation. 

NOTE  —  The  insulating  material  is  considered  to  be  adequate 
if  it  complies  with  the  electric  strength  test  of  16.3  for 
supplementary  insulation. 

For  stationary  appliances  this  requirement  does  not 
apply  to  handles,  levers  and  knobs,  other  than  those  of 
electrical  components,  provided  that  they  are  reliably 
connected  to  an  earthing  terminal  or  earthing  contact 
or  separated  from  live  parts  by  earthed  metal. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  if  necessary 
by  the  relevant  tests. 

22.36  For  appliances  other  than  those  of  Class  III, 
handles  which  are  continuously  held  in  the  hand  in 
normal  use  shall  be  constructed  so  that  when  gripped 
in  normal  use,  the  operator's  hand  is  not  likely  to  touch 
metal  parts  unless  thay  are  separated  from  live  parts 
by  double  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.37  For  Class  II  appliances,  capacitors  shall  not  be 
connected  to  accessible  metal  parts  and  their  casings, 
if  of  metal,  shall  be  separated  from  accessible  metal 
parts  by  supplementary  insulation. 

This  requirement  does  not  apply  to  capacitors 
complying  with  the  requirements  for  protective 
impedance  specified  in  22.42. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
relevant  tests. 

22.38  Capacitors  shall  not  be  connected  between  the 
contacts  of  a  thermal  cut-out 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.39  Lampholders  shall  be  used  only  for  the 
connection  of  lamps. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.40  Motor-operated  appliances  and  combined 
appliances  which  are  intended  to  be  moved  while  in 
operation,  or  which  have  accessible  moving  parts,  shall 
be  fitted  with  a  switch  to  control  the  motor.  The 
actuating  member  of  this  switch  shall  be  easily  visible 
and  accessible. 


35 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.41  Appliances  shall  not  incorporate  components, 
other  than  lamps,  containing  mercury. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

22.42  Protective  impedance  shall  consist  of  at  least  two 
separate  components  whose  impedance  is  unlikely  to 
change  significantly  during  the  lifetime  of  the 
appliance.  If  any  one  of  the  components  is  short- 
circuited  or  open-circuited  the  values  specified  in  8.1.4 
shall  not  be  exceeded. 

NOTE  —  Resistors  complying  with  test  a)  of  14.1  of  IS  616 
and  Class  Y  capacitors  complying  with  ISQC  302400  are 
considered  to  be  components  having  sufficiently  stable 
impedance. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

22.43  Appliances  which  can  be  adjusted  for  different 
voltages  shall  be  constructed  so  that  accidental 
changing  of  the  setting  is  unlikely  to  occur 

Compliance  is  checked  by  manual  test. 

22.44  Appliances  shall  not  have  an  enclosure  that  is 
shaped  and  decorated  so  that  the  appliance  is  likely  to 
be  treated  as  a  toy  by  children. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTE  —  Examples  are  enclosures  representing  animals  or 
persons  or  resembling  scale  models. 

22.45  When  air  is  used  as  reinforced  insulation,  the 
appliance  shall  be  constructed  so  that  clearances  cannot 
be  reduced  below  the  values  specified  in  29.1.3  due  to 
deformation  as  a  result  of  an  external  force  applied  to 
the  enclosure. 

NOTES 

1  A  sufficiently  rigid  construction  is  considered  to  meet  this 
requirement. 

2  Deformation  due  to  manhandling  the  appliance  has  to  be 
taken  into  account. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 

test. 

22.46  Software  used  in  protective  electronic  circuits 
shall  he  software  Class  B  or  software  Class  C. 

NOTE  —  Failure  of  software  class  B  in  the  presence  of  another 
fault  in  the  appliance,  or  failure  of  software  class  C  alone,  could 
result  in  dangerous  malfunction,  electric  shock,  fire,  mechanical 
or  other  hazards.  Software  class  A  denotes  software  used  for 
functional  purposes. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  evaluating  the  software  in 
accordance  with  Annex  R. 

NOTE  —  If  the  software  programme  is  modified,  the  evaluation 
and  relevant  tests  are  repeated  if  the  modification  can  inlluence 
the  results  of  the  test  involving  protective  electronic  circuits. 


22.47  Appliances  intended  to  be  connected  to  the  water 
mains  shall  withstand  the  water  pressure  expected  in 
normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  connecting  the  appliance 
to  a  water  supply  having  a  static  pressure  equal  to  twice 
the  maximum  inlet  water  pressure  or  \  .2  MPa, 
whichever  is  higher,  for  a  period  of  5  min. 

There  shall  be  no  leakage  from  any  part,  including  any 
inlet  water  hose. 

22.48  Appliances  intended  to  be  connected  to  the  water 
mains  shall  be  constructed  to  prevent  backsiphonage 
of  non-potable  water  into  the  water  mains. 

NOTE  —  Compliance  by  the  relevant  tests  is  under 
consideration. 

23  INTERNAL  WIRING 

23.1  Wireways  shall  be  smooth  and  free  from  sharp 
edges. 

Wires  shall  be  protected  so  that  they  do  not  come  into 
contact  with  burrs,  cooling  fins  or  similar  edges  which 
may  cause  damage  to  their  insulation. 

Holes  in  metal  through  which  insulated  wires  pass  shall 
have  smooth  well-rounded  surfaces  or  be  provided  with 
bushings. 

Wiring  shall  be  effectively  prevented  from  coming  into 
contact  with  moving  parts. 

Internal  wiring  and  electrical  connections  between 
different  parts  of  the  appliance  shall  be  adequately 
protected  or  enclosed. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

23.2  Beads  and  similar  ceramic  insulators  on  live  wires 
shall  be  fixed  or  located  so  that  they  cannot  change 
their  position  or  rest  on  sharp  edges.  If  beads  are  inside 
flexible  metal  conduits,  they  shall  be  contained  within 
an  insulating  sleeve,  unless  the  conduit  cannot  move 
in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

23.3  Different  parts  of  an  appliance  that  can  move 
relative  to  each  other  in  normal  use  or  during  user 
maintenance  shall  not  cause  undue  stress  to  electrical 
connections  and  internal  conductors,  including  those 
providing  earthing  continuity.  Flexible  metallic  tubes 
shall  not  cause  damage  to  the  insulation  of  the 
conductors  contained  within  them.  Open-coil  springs 
shall  not  be  used  to  protect  the  wiring.  If  a  coiled  spring, 
the  turns  of  which  touch  one  another,  is  used  for  this 
purpose,  there  shall  be  an  adequate  insulating  lining 
in  addition  to  the  insulation  of  the  conductors. 


36 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


NOTE  —  The  sheath  of  a  flexible  cord  complying  with  IS  694 

or  IS  9968  (Part  I)  is  regarded  as  an  adequate  insulating  lining. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
following  test. 

If  flexing  occurs  in  normal  use,  the  appliance  is  placed 
in  the  normal  position  of  use  and  is  supplied  at  rated 
voltage  and  operated  under  normal  operation. 

The  movable  part  is  moved  backwards  and  forwards, 
so  that  the  conductor  is  flexed  through  the  largest  angle 
allowed  by  the  construction,  the  rate  of  flexing  being 
30  per  minute.  The  number  of  flexings  is: 

a)  10  000,  for  conductors  flexed  during  normal 
use;  and 

b)  100,  for  conductors  flexed  during  user 
maintenance. 

NOTE  —  A  flexing  is  one  movement,  either  backwards  or 
forwards. 

The  appliance  shall  not  be  damaged  to  the  extent  that 
compliance  with  this  standard  is  impaired  and  it  shall 
be  fit  for  further  use.  In  particular,  the  wiring  and  its 
connections  shall  withstand  the  electric  strength  test 
of  16.3,  the  test  voltage  being  reduced  to  1  000  V  and 
applied  between  live  parts  and  accessible  metal  parts 
only. 

23.4  Bare  internal  wiring  shall  be  rigid  and  fixed  so 
that,  in  normal  use,  clearances  or  creepage  distances 
cannot  be  reduced  below  the  values  specified  in  29. 

Compliance  is  checked  during  the  tests  of  29.1  and  29.2. 

23.5  The  insulation  of  internal  wiring  shall  withstand 
the  electrical  stress  likely  to  occur  in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  as  follows. 

The  basic  insulation  shall  be  electrically  equivalent  to 
the  basic  insulation  of  cords  complying  with  IS  694  or 
IS  9968  (Part  1 )  or  comply  with  the  following  electric 
strength  test. 

A  voltage  of  2  000  V  is  applied  for  15  min  between 
the  conductor  and  metal  foil  wrapped  around  the 
insulation.  There  shall  be  no  breakdown. 

NOTES 

1  If  the  basic  insulation  of  the  conductor  does  not  fulfil  one  of 
these  conditions,  the  conductor  is  considered  to  be  bare, 

2  The  test  is  only  applied  to  wiring  subjected  to  the  supply 
voltage. 

3  For  Class  II  construction,  the  requirements  for  supplementary 
insulation  and  reinforced  insulation  apply  except  that  the  sheath 
of  a  cord  complying  with  IS  694  or  IS  9968  (Part  1 )  may  provide 
supplementary  insulation. 

23.6  When  sleeving  is  used  as  supplementary  insulation 
on  internal  wiring,  it  shall  be  retained  in  position  by 
positive  means. 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

NOTE  —  A  sleeve  is  considered  to  be  fixed  by  positive  means, 
if  it  can  only  be  removed  by  breaking  or  cutUng  or  if  it  is 
clamped  at  both  ends. 

23.7  Conductors  identified  by  the  colour  combination 
green/yellow  shall  only  be  used  for  earthing 
conductors. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

23.8  Aluminium  wires  shall  not  be  used  for  internal 
wiring. 

NOTE  —  Windings  are  not  considered  to  be  internal  wiring. 
Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

23.9  Stranded  conductors  shall  not  be  consolidated  by 
lead-tin  soldering  where  they  are  subjected  to  contact 
pressure,  unless  the  clamping  means  is  constructed  so 
that  there  is  no  risk  of  bad  contact  due  to  cold  flow  of 
the  solder. 

NOTES 

1  The  requirement  may  be  met  by  using  spring  terminals. 
Securing  the  clamping  screws  alone  is  not  considered  to  be 
adequate. 

2  Soldering  of  the  tip  of  a  stranded  conductor  is  allowed. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

23.10  The  insulation  and  sheath  of  internal  wiring, 
incorporated  in  external  hoses  for  the  connection  of 
an  appliance  to  the  water  mains,  shall  be  at  least 
equivalent  to  that  of  light  polyvinyl  chloride  sheathed 
flexible  cord. 

Compliance  is  checked  by.  inspection. 

NOTE  —  The  mechanical  characteristics  specified  in  IS  694 

are  not  evaluated. 

24  COMPONENTS 

24.1  Components  shall  comply  with  the  safety 
requirements  specified  in  the  relevant  Indian  Standards 
wherever  exists  as  far  as  they  reasonably  apply. 

NOTE  —  Compliance  with  the  Indian  Standard  for  the  relevant 
component  does  not  necessarily  ensure  compliance  with  the 
requirements  of  this  standard. 

Unless  otherwise  specified,  the  requirements  of  29  of 
this  standard  apply  between  live  parts  of  components 
and  accessible  parts  of  the  appliance. 

Motors  are  not  required  to  comply  with  IS  996  or 
IS  325. 

Unless  components  have  been  previously  tested  and 
found  to  comply  with  the  relevant  Indian  Standards, 
wherever  exists,  for  the  number  of  cycles  specified, 
they  are  tested  in  accordance  with  24.1.1  to  24.1.6. 


37 


18  302-1:2008 


Components  that  have  not  been  separately  tested  and 
found  to  comply  with  the  relevant  Indian  Standards, 
wherever  exists,  components  that  are  not  marked  or 
not  used  in  accordance  with  their  marking,  are  tested 
in  accordance  with  the  conditions  occurring  in  the 
appliance,  the  number  of  samples  being  that  required 
by  the  relevant  standard. 

NOTE  —  For  automatic  controls,  marking  includes 
documentation  and  declaration. 

When  an  Indian  Standard  does  not  exist  for  a 
component,  there  are  no  additional  tests  specified. 

24.1.1  The  relevant  standard  for  capacitors  likely  to 
be  permanently  subjected  to  the  supply  voltage  and 
used  for  radio  interference  suppression  or  for  voltage 
dividing  is  ISQC  302400.  If  they  have  to  be  tested, 
they  are  tested  in  accordance  with  Annex  E 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  capacitors  likely  to  be  permanently 

subjected  to  the  supply  voltage  are  capacitors  incorporated  in 

appliances: 

d)   for  which  30.2.3  is  applicable,  and 

b)  for  which  30.3.2  is  applicable,  unless  the  capacitor  is 

disconnected  from  the  supply  mains  by  an  on-off  switch. 

This  switch  has  to  be  double-pole  if  the  capacitor  is 

connected  to  earth. 

24.1.2  The  relevant  standard  for  safety  isolating 
transformers  is  IS/IEC  61558-2-6.  If  they  have  to  be 
tested,  they  are  tested  in  accordance  with  Annex  G. 

24.1.3  The  relevant  standard  for  switches  is 
IS/IEC  61058.  The  number  of  cycles  of  operation 
declared  for  7.1.4  of  IS/IEC  61058  shall  be  at  least 
10  000.  If  they  have  to  be  tested,  they  are  tested  in 
accordance  with  Annex  H. 

NOTE  —  The  declared  number  of  operating  cycles  is  only 
applicable  for  switches  required  for  compliance  with  this 
standard. 

If  the  switch  operates  a  relay  or  contactor,  the  complete 
switching  system  is  subjected  to  the  test. 

NOTE  ~-  Motor  starting  relays  complying  with  IS/lEC  61058 
are  not  retested. 

24.1.4  The  relevant  standard  for  automatic  controls  is 
IS/IEC  60730- 1  together  with  its  relevant  Part  2. 

The  number  of  cycles  of  operation  declared  for  6.10 
and  6.11  of  IS/IEC  60730-1  shall  not  be  less  than  the 

following: 

a)  thermostats  10  000 

b)  temperature  limiters  1  000 

c)  self-resetting  thermal  cut-outs  300 

d)  voltage-maintained  non-self-  1  000 
resetting  thermal  cut-outs 

e)  other  non-self-resetting  thermal  30 
cut-outs 


f)  timers 

g)  energy  regulators 


3  000 
10  000 


NOTE  —  The  declared  numbers  of  operating  cycles  are  not 
applicable  for  automatic  controls  which  operate  during  the  test 
of  11,  if  the  appliance  meets  the  requirements  of  this  standard 
when  they  are  short-circuited. 

If  automatic  controls  have  to  be  tested,  they  are  also 
tested  in  accordance  with  11.3.5  to  11.3,8  and  17  of 
IS/IEC  60730-1  as  Type  I  controls. 

NOTES 

1  The  tests  of  12, 13  and  14  of  IS/IEC  60730-1  are  not  carried 
out  before  carrying  out  the  te^t  of  17. 

2  The  ambient  temperature  during  the  test  of  17  of  IS/IEC 
60730-1  is  that  occurring  during  the  test  of  11  in  the  appliance, 
as  specified  in  footnote  2  of  Table  3. 

Thermal  motor  protectors  are  tested  in  combination 
with  their  motor  under  the  conditions  specified  in 
Annex  D. 

For  water  valves  containing  live  parts  and  that  are 
incorporated  in  external  hoses  for  connection  of  an 
appliance  to  the  water  mains,  the  degree  of  protection 
provided  by  enclosures  against  harmful  ingress  of  water 
declared  shall  be  IPX7. 

24.1.5  The  relevant  standard  for  appliance  couplers  is 
IS/IEC  60320-1.  However,  for  appliances  classified 
higher  than  IPXO,  the  relevant  standard  is 
IS/IEC  60320-2-3. 

The  relevant  standard  for  interconnection  couplers  is 
IS/IEC  60320-2-2. 

24.1.6  The  relevant  standard  for  small  lampholders 
similar  to  EiO  lampholders  is  IS  10276,  the 
requirements  for  EIO  lampholders  being  appplicable. 

24.2  Appliances  shall  not  be  fitted  with: 

a)  switches  or  automatic  controls  in  flexible 
cords; 

b)  devices  that  cause  the  protective  device  in  the 
fixed  wiring  to  operate  in  the  event  of  a  fault 
in  the  appliance;  and 

c)  thermal  cut-outs  that  can  be  reset  by  a 
soldering  operation. 

NOTE  —  The  use  of  solder  having  a  melting  point  at  least 
230  X  is  allowed. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

24.3  Switches  intended  to  ensure  all-pole  disconnection 
of  stationary  appliances,  as  required  in  22.2,  shall  be 
directly  connected  to  the  supply  terminals  and  shall 
have  a  contact  separation  in  all  poles,  providing  full 
disconnection  under  overvoltage  category  III 
conditions. 


38 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


NOTES 

1  Full  disconnection  is  contact  separation  of  a  pole  to  ensure 
the  equivalent  of  basic  insulation,  in  accordance  with 
IS/lEC  61058,  between  the  supply  mains  and  those  parts  that 
are  intended  to  be  disconnected. 

2  Rated  impulse  voltages  for  over  voltage  categories  are  given 
in  Table  15. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurenient, 

24.4  Plugs  and  socket-outlets  for  extra-low  voltage 
circuits,  and  those  used  as  terminal  devices  for  heating 
elements,  shall  not  be  interchangeable  with  plugs  and 
socket-outlets  listed  in  IS  1293  or  with  connectors  and 
appliance  inlets  complying  with  the  standard  sheets  of 
IS/IEC  60320-1. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

24.5  Capacitors  in  auxiliary  windings  of  motors  shall 
be  marked  with  their  rated  voltage  and  their  rated 
capacitance  and  shall  be  used  in  accordance  with  these 
markings. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
appropriate  tests.  In  addition,  for  capacitors  connected 
in  series  with  a  motor  winding,  it  is  verified  that,  when 
the  appliance  is  supplied  at  1 , 1  times  rated  voltage  and 
under  minimum  load,  the  voltage  across  the  capacitor 
does  not  exceed  1.1  times  its  rated  voltage. 

24.6  The  working  voltage  of  motors  directly  connected 
to  the  supply  mains  and  having  basic  insulation  that  is 
inadequate  for  the  rated  voltage  of  the  appliance,  shall 
not  exceed  42  V.  In  addition,  they  shall  comply  with 
the  requirements  of  Annex  L 

CompHance  is  checked  by  measurement  and  by  the 
tests  ol  Annex  I. 

25  SUPPLY  CONNECTION  AND  EXTERNAL 
FLEXIBLE  CORDS 

25.1  Appliances,  other  than  those  intended  to  be 
permanently  connected  to  fixed  wiring,  shall  be 
provided  with  one  of  the  following  means  for 
connection  to  the  supply  mains; 

a)  supply  cord  fitted  with  a  plug; 

b)  an  appliance  inlet  having  at  least  the  same 
degree  of  protection  against  moisture  as 
required  for  the  appliance;  and 

c)  pins  for  insertion  into  socket- outlets. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.2  Appliances,  other  than  stationary  appliances  for 
multiple  supply,  shall  not  be  provided  with  more  than 


one  means  of  connection  to  the  supply  mains. 
Stationary  appliances  for  multiple  supply  may  be 
provided  with  more  than  one  means  of  connection 
provided  that  the  relevant  circuits  are  adequately 
insulated  from  each  other. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
following  test. 

A  voltage  of  1  250  V  of  substantially  sinusoidal 
waveform  and  having  a  frequency  of  50  Hz  is  applied 
for  1  min  between  each  means  of  connection  to  the 
supply  mains. 

NOTE  —  This  test  may  be  combined  with  that  of  16.3. 

During  this  test,  no  breakdown  shall  occur. 

25.3  Appliances  intended  to  be  permanently  connected 
to  fixed  wiring  shall  allow  the  connection  of  the  supply 
conductors  after  the  appliance  has  been  fixed  to  its 
support  and  shall  be  provided  with  one  of  the  following 
means  for  connection  to  the  supply  mains: 

a)  a  set  of  terminals  allowing  the  connection  of 
cables  of  fixed  wiring  having  the  nominal 
cross-sectional  areas  specified  in  26.6;  and 

b)  a  set  of  terminals  allowing  the  connection  of 
a  flexible  cord. 

NOTES 

1  In  this  case  it  is  allowed  to  connect  the  supply  cord  before 
the  appliance  is  fixed  to  its  support.  The  appliance  may  be 
provided  with  a  flexible  cord. 

a)  A  set  of  supply  leads  accommodated  in  a  suitable 
compartment;  and 

b)  A  set  of  terminals  and  cable  entries,  conduit  entries,  knock- 
outs or  glands,  which  allow  the  connection  of  the 
appropriate  types  of  cable  or  conduit. 

2  If  a  fixed  appliance  is  constructed  so  that  parts  can  be 
removed  to  facilitate  easy  installation,  the  requirement  is 
considered  to  be  met  if  it  is  possible  to  connect  the  fixed 
wiring  without  difficulty  after  a  part  of  the  appliance  has 
been  fixed  to  its  support.  In  this  case,  removable  parts  are  to 
be  constructed  for  ease  of  reassembly  without  risk  of  incorrect 
assembly  or  damage  to  the  wiring  or  terminals. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  if  necessary 
by  making  the  appropriate  connections. 

25.4  For  appliances  intended  to  be  permanently 
connected  to  the  fixed  wiring  and  having  a  rated  current 
not  exceeding  16  A,  cable  and  conduit  entries  shall  be 
suitable  for  cables  or  conduits  having  a  maximum 
overall  dimension  shown  in  Table  10. 

Conduit  entries,  cable  entries  and  knock-outs  shall  be 
constructed  or  located  so  that  the  introduction  of  the 
conduit  or  cable  does  not  reduce  clearances  or  creepage 
distances  below  the  values  specified  in  29. 


39 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Table  10  Dimensions  of  Cables  and  Conduits 

(Clause  25.4) 

SI  Number  of  Maximum  Overall  Dimension 

No.    Conductors  Including 
Earthing  Conductors 


Cable 


Conduit 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 


13.0 
14.0 
14,5 
15.5 


16.0(23.0) 

16.0(23.0) 
20.0  (23,0) 
20.0  (29.0) 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

25.5  Supply  cords  shall  be  assembled  to  the  appliance 
by  one  of  the  following  methods: 

a)  Type  X  attachment; 

b)  Type  Y  attachment;  and 

c)  Type  Z  attachment,  if  allowed  in  the  relevant 
Part  2. 

Type  X  attachments,  other  than  those  having  a  specially 
prepared  cord,  shall  not  be  used  for  flat  twin  tinsel 
cords. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.6  Plugs  shall  not  be  fitted  with  more  than  one 
flexible  cord. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.7  Supply  cords  shall  not  be  lighter  than; 

a)  braided  cord,  if  allowed  in  the  relevant  Part  2; 

b)  ordinary  tough  rubber  sheathed  cord; 

c)  ordinary  polychloroprene  sheathed  flexible 
cord; 

d)  flat  twin  tinsel  cord,  if  allowed  in  the  relevant 
Part  2; 

e)  light  polyvinyl  chloride  sheathed  cord,  for 
appliances  having  a  mass  not  exceeding  3  kg; 
and 

f)  ordinary  polyvinyl  chloride  sheathed  cord,  for 
appliances  having  a  mass  exceeding  3  kg. 

NOTE  —  A  lower  number  in  the  code  designation  of  the 
cord  in  IS  694  or  IS  9968  (Part  1)  indicates  a  lighter  type. 

Polyvinyl  chloride  sheathed  cords  shall  not  be  used 
for  appliances  if  the  temperature  rise  of  external  metal 
parts  exceeds  75  K  during  the  test  of  11.  However, 
Ihey  may  be  used  if: 

a)  the  appliance  is  constructed  so  that  the  supply 
cord  is  not  likely  to  touch  such  metal  parts  in 
normal  use;  and 

b)  the  supply  cord  is  appropriate  for  higher 


temperatures.  In  this  case,  Type  Y  attachment 
or  Type  Z  attachment  shall  be  used. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

25.8  Conductors  of  supply  cords  shall  have  a 
nominal  cross-sectional  area  not  less  than  that  shown 
in  Table  11. 

Table  11  Minimum  Cross-Sectional  Area  of 
Conductors 

(Clauses  25.8  and  26,5) 


SI 
No, 

(1) 


Rated  Current  of 

Appliance 

A 

(2) 


Nominal  Cross-Sectional 
Area 

(3) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 

v) 

vi) 

vii) 

viii) 

ix) 


>0.2 

>3 

>6 

>10 
>16 
>25 
>32 
>40 


and 
and 
and 
and 
and 
and 
and 
and 


<0.2 
<3 
<6 
<10 

<16 
<25 
<32 
<40 
<63 


Tinsel  cord 

O.Sa 

0.75 

1.0(0.75)^^ 

1.5(1.0)^^ 

2.5 

4 

6 

10 


1) 


'>  These  cords  may  only  be  used  if  tlieir  length  does  not  exceed  2  m 
between  the  point  where  the  cord  or  cord  guard  enters  the  appliance 
and  the  entry  to  the  plug. 

^^  Cords  having  the  cross-sectional  areas  indicated  in  the  parentheses  may 
be  used  for  portable  appliances,  if  their  length  does  not  exceed  2  m. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement  of  conductor 
resistance  on  the  supply  cord  provided  with  the 
appliances.  The  conductor  resistance  shall  be  as  given 
in  IS  694  or  IS  9968  (Part  1). 

25.9  Supply  cords  shall  not  be  in  contact  v^ith  sharp 
points  or  edges  of  the  appliance. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.10  The  supply  cord  of  Class  I  apphances  shall  have 
a  green/yellow  core  that  is  connected  to  the  earthing 
terminal  of  the  appliance  and  to  the  earthing  contact 
of  the  plug. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.11  Conductors  of  supply  cords  shall  not  be 
consolidated  by  lead-tin  soldering  where  they  are 
subjected  to  contact  pressure,  unless  the  clamping 
means  is  constructed  so  that  there  is  no  risk  of  a  bad 
contact  due  to  cold  flow  of  the  solder. 

NOTES 

1  The  requirement  may  be  met  by  using  spring  terminals. 
Securing  the  clamping  screws  alone  is  not  considered  to  be 
adequate. 

2  Soldering  of  the  tip  of  a  stranded  conductor  is  allowed. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 


40 


25.12  The  insulation  of  the  supply  cords  shall  not  be 
damaged  when  moulding  the  cord  to  part  of  the 

enclosure. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.13  Inlet  openings  for  supply  cords  shall  be 
constructed  so  that  the  sheath  of  the  supply  cord  can 
be  introduced  without  risk  of  damage.  Unless  the 
enclosure  at  the  inlet  opening  is  insulating  material,  a 
non-detachable  lining  or  non-detachable  bushing  shall 
be  provided  that  complies  with  29.3  for  supplementary 
insulation.  If  the  supply  cord  is  unsheathed,  a  similar 
additional  bushing  or  lining  is  required. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.14  Appliances  provided  with  a  supply  cord  that  are 
moved  while  in  operation  shall  be  constructed  so  that 
the  supply  cord  is  adequately  protected  against 
excessive  flexing  where  it  enters  the  appliance. 

NOTE  —  This  does  not  apply  to  appliances  with  automatic 
cord  reels  that  are  tested  by  22.16  instead. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test  that  is 
carried  out  on  an  apparatus  having  an  oscillating 
member  as  shown  in  Fig.  9. 


IS  302-1  :  2008 

The  part  of  the  appliance  that  includes  the  inlet  opening 
is  fixed  to  the  oscillating  member  so  that,  when  the 
supply  cord  is  at  the  middle  of  its  travel,  the  axis  of  the 
cord  where  it  enters  the  cord  guard  or  inlet  is  vertical 
and  passes  through  the  axis  of  oscillation.  The  major 
axis  of  the  section  of  flat  cords  shall  be  parallel  to  the 
axis  of  oscillation. 

The  cord  is  loaded  so  that  the  force  applied  is: 

a)  10  N,  for  cords  having  a  nominal  cross- 
sectional  area  exceeding  0.75  mm^;  and 

b)  5  N,  for  other  cords. 

The  distance  X,  as  shown  in  Fig.  9,  between  the  axis  of 
oscillation  and  the  point  where  the  cord  or  cord  guard 
enters  the  appliance,  is  adjusted  so  that  when  the 
oscillating  member  moves  over  its  full  range,  the  cord 
and  load  make  the  minimum  lateral  movement. 

The  oscillating  member  is  moved  through  an  angle  of 
90°  (45°  on  either  side  of  the  vertical),  the  number  of 
flexings  for  Type  Z  attachments  being  20  000  and  for 
other  attachments  10  000.  The  rate  of  flexing  is  60/min. 

NOTE  —  A  flexing  is  one  movement  of  90°. 


(E)~ 


(F) 


Key 


1+ 


(G) 


A  —  Axis  of  oscillation 
C—  Counterweight 
E —  Adjustable  carrier  plate 
G  —  Load 


B  —  Oscillating  frame 

D  —  Sample 

F—  Adjustable  bracket 

Fig.  9  Flexing  Test  Apparatus 


41 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


The  cord  and  its  associated  parts  are  turned  through 
an  angle  of  90"^  after  half  the  number  of  flexings,  unless 
a  flat  cord  is  fitted. 

During  the  test,  the  conductors  are  supplied  at  rated 
voltage  and  loaded  with  the  rated  current  of  the 
appliance. 

NOTE  —  Current  is  not  passed  through  the  earthing  conductor 

The  test  shall  not  result  in: 

a)  a  short  circuit  between  the  conductors; 

b)  a  breakage  of  more  than  10  percent  of  the 
strands  of  any  conductor; 

c)  separation  of  the  conductor  from  its  terminal; 

d)  loosening  of  any  cord  guard; 

e)  damage  to  the  cord  or  cord  guard  which  could 
impair  compliance  with  this  standard;  and 

f)  broken  strands  piercing  the  insulation  and 
becoming  accessible. 

NOTES 

1  Conductors  include  earthing  conductors. 

2  A  short  circuit  between  conductors  of  the  cord  is  considered 
to  occur  it  the  current  exceeds  a  value  equal  to   twice  the 

rated  current  of  the  appliance. 

25.15  Appliances  provided  with  a  supply  cord,  and 
appliances  intended  to  be  permanently  connected  to 
fixed  wiring  by  a  flexible  cord,  shall  have  a  cord 
anchorage.  The  cord  anchorage  shall  relieve 
conductors  from  strain,  including  twisting,  at  the 
terminals  and  protect  the  insulation  of  the  conductors 
from  abrasion. 

It  shall  not  be  possible  to  push  the  cord  into  the 
appliance  to  such  an  extent  that  the  cord  or  internal 
parts  of  the  appliance  could  be  damaged. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection,  by  manual  test 
and  by  the  following  test. 

A  mark  is  made  on  the  cord  while  it  is  subjected  to  the 
pull  force  shown  in  Table  12,  at  a  distance  of 
approximately  20  mm  from  the  cord  anchorage  or  other 
suitable  point. 

The  cord  is  then  pulled,  without  jerking,  for  1  s  in  the 
most  unfavourable  direction  with  the  force  specified. 
The  test  is  carried  out  25  times. 

The  cord,  unless  on  an  automatic  cord  reel,  is  then 
subjected  to  a  torque  that  is  applied  as  close  as  possible 
to  the  appliance.  The  torque  is  specified  in  Table  12 
and  is  applied  for  1  min. 

During  the  tests,  the  cord  shall  not  be  damaged  and 
shall  show  no  appreciable  strain  at  the  terminals.  The 
pull  force  is  reapplied  and  the  cord  shall  not  be 
longitudinally  displaced  by  more  than  2  mm. 


Table  12  Pull  Force  and  Torque 

(Clause  25A5) 

SI 

Mass  of 

Pull  Force 

Torque 

No. 

Appliance 

kg 

N 

Nm 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

i) 

<1 

30 

0.1 

ii) 

>1  and<4 

60 

0.25 

iii) 

>4 

100 

0.35 

25.16  Cord  anchorages  for  Type  X  attachments  shall 
be  constructed  and  located  so  that: 

a)  replacement  of  the  cord  is  easily  possible; 

b)  it  is  clear  how  the  relief  from  strain  and  the 
prevention  of  twisting  are  obtained; 

c)  they  are  suitable  for  the  different  types  of 
supply  cord  that  may  be  connected,  unless  the 
cord  is  specially  prepared; 

d)  the  cord  cannot  touch  the  clamping  screws  of 
the  cord  anchorage  if  these  screws  are 
accessible,  unless  they  are  separated  from 
accessible  metal  parts  by  supplementary 
insulation; 

e)  the  cord  is  not  clamped  by  a  metal  screw 
which  bears  directly  on  the  cord; 

f)  at  least  one  part  of  the  cord  anchorage  is 
securely  fixed  to  the  appliance,  unless  it  is 
part  of  a  specially  prepared  cord; 

g)  screws  which  have  to  be  operated  when 
replacing  the  cord  do  not  fix  any  other 
component.  However,  this  does  not  apply  if: 

1)  after  removal  of  the  screws,  or  if  the 
component  is  incorrectly  repositioned, 
the  appliance  becomes  inoperative  or  is 
obviously  incomplete;  and 

2)  the  parts  intended  to  be  fastened  by  them 
cannot  be  removed  without  the  aid  of  a 
tool  during  the  replacement  of  the  cord; 

h)  if  labyrinths  can  be  bypassed  the  test  of  25.15 
is  nevertheless  withstood; 

j)  Class  I  appliances,  they  are  of  insulating 
material  or  are  provided  with  an  insulating 
lining,  unless  failure  of  the  insulation  of  the 
cord  does  not  make  accessible  metal  parts  live; 
and 

k)  for  Class  II  appliances,  they  are  of  insulating 
material  or,  if  of  metal,  they  are  insulated  from 
accessible  metal  parts  by  supplementary 
insulation. 

NOTES 

1  If  the  cord  anchorage  for  Type  X  attachment  comprises 
one  or  more  clamping  members  to  which  pressure  is  applied 
by  means  of  nuts  engaging  with  studs  that  are  securely 


42 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


attached  to  the  appHance,  the  cord  anchorage  is  considered 
to  have  one  part  securely  fixed  to  the  appliance,  even  if  the 
clamping  member  can  be  removed  from  the  studs. 

2  If  the  pressure  on  the  clamping  members  is  applied  by 
means  of  one  or  more  screws  engaging  with  separate  nuts  or 
with  a  thread  in  a  part  that  is  integral  with  the  appliance,  the 
cord  anchorage  is  not  considered  to  have  one  part  securely 
fixed  to  the  appliance.  This  does  not  apply  if  one  of  the 
clamping  members  is  fixed  to  the  appliance  or  the  surface  of 
the  appliance  is  of  insulating  material  and  shaped  so  that  it 
is  obvious  that  this  surface  is  one  of  the  clamping  members. 

3  Examples  of  acceptable  and  unacceptable  constructions  of 
cord  anchorages  are  shown  in  Fig.  10. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the  test 
of  25.15  under  the  following  conditions. 

The  tests  are  carried  out  with  the  lightest  permissible 
type  of  cord  of  the  smallest  cross-sectional  area 
specified  in  Table  13  and  then  with  the  next  heavier 
type  cord  having  the  largest  cross-sectional  area 
specified.  However,  if  the  appliance  is  fitted  with  a 
specially  prepared  cord,  the  test  is  carried  out  with  this 
cord. 

The  conductors  are  placed  in  the  terminals  and  any 
terminal  screws  tightened  just  sufficiently  to  prevent 
(lie  conductors  from  easily  changing  their  position.  The 
clamping  screws  of  the  cord  anchorage  are  tightened 
with  two-thiids  of  the  torque  specified  in  28.1. 

Screws  of  insulating  material  bearing  directly  on  the 
cord  are  fastened  with  two-thirds  of  the  torque  specified 
m  col  I  of  Table  14,  the  length  of  the  slot  in  the  screw 
head  being  taken  as  the  nominal  diameter  of  the  screw. 

After  the  test,  the  conductors  shall  not  have  moved  by 
more  than  1  mm  in  the  terminals. 

25.17  For  Type  Y  attachment  and  Type  Z  attachment, 
cord  anchorages  shall  be  adequate. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  test  of  25.15. 

NOTE  —  The  test  is  carried  out  on  the  cord  supplied  with  the 
appliance. 

25.18  Cord  anchorages  shall  be  arranged  so  that  they 
are  only  accessible  with  the  aid  of  a  tool  or  shall  be 
constructed  so  that  the  cord  can  only  be  fitted  with  the 
aid  of  a  tool. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.19  For  Type  X  attachment,  glands  shall  not  be  used 
as  cord  anchorages  in  portable  appliances.  Tying  the 
cord  into  a  knot  or  tying  the  cord  with  string  is  not 
allowed. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

25.20  The  insulated  conductors  of  the  supply  cord  for 
Type  Y  attachment  and  Type  Z  attachment  shall  be 
additionally  insulated  from  accessible  metal  parts  by 
basic  insulation  for  Class  I  appliances,  and  by 


supplementary  insulation  for  Class  II  appliances.  This 
insulation  may  be  provided  by  the  sheath  of  the  supply 
cord  or  by  other  means. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
relevant  tests. 

25.21  The  space  for  the  connection  of  supply  cords 
having  Type  X  attachment,  or  for  the  connection  of 
fixed  wiring,  shall  be  constructed: 

a)  so  that  it  is  possible  to  check  that  the  supply 
conductors  are  correctly  positioned  and 
connected  before  fitting  any  cover; 

b)  so  that  any  cover  can  be  fitted  without  risk  of 
damage  to  the  conductors  or  their  insulation; 
and 

c)  for  portable  appliances,  so  that  the  uninsulated 
end  of  a  conductor,  should  it  become  free  from 
the  terminal,  cannot  come  into  contact  with 
accessible  metal  parts. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  after  fitting  cables 
or  flexible  cords  having  the  largest  cross-sectional  area 
specified  in  Table  13. 

Portable  appliances  are  subjected  to  the  following 
additional  test  unless  they  are  provided  with  pillar 
terminals  and  the  supply  cord  is  clamped  within  30  mm 
of  them. 

NOTE  —  The  supply  cord  may  be  clamped  by  a  cord 
anchorage. 

The  clamping  screws  or  nuts  are  loosened  in  turn.  A 
force  of  2  N  is  applied  to  the  conductor  in  any  direction 
at  a  position  adjacent  to  the  terminal.  The  uninsulated 
end  of  the  conductor  shall  not  come  into  contact  with 
accessible  metal  parts. 

25.22  Appliance  inlets  shall: 

a)  be  located  or  enclosed  so  that  live  parts  are 
not  accessible  during  insertion  or  removal  of 
the  connector; 

b)  be  located  so  that  the  connector  can  be 
inserted  without  difficulty; 

c)  be  located  so  that,  after  insertion  of  the 
connector,  the  appliance  is  not  supported  by 
the  connector  when  it  is  placed  in  any  position 
of  normal  use  on  a  flat  surface;  and 

d)  not  be  an  appliance  inlet  for  cold  conditions 
if  the  temperature  rise  of  external  metal  parts 
of  the  appliance  exceeds  75  K  during  the  test 
of  11,  unless  the  supply  cord  is  unlikely  to 
touch  such  metal  parts  in  normal  use. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTE  —  Appliance  inlets  complying  with  IS/lEC  60320-1 
prevent  access  to  live  parts  during  insertion  or  removal  of  the 

connector. 


43 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ACCEPTABLE  CONSTRUCTIONS 


cf!b 


^i% 


mm 


jBl 


Od^ 


:XD 


^g^ 


Construction  showing  studs  securely  attached  to  the  appliance 


^-njr^^ 


,d: 


r?^v\v^^V/^;;i|  171, ...,.., 


w 


Construction  showing  part  of  appliance  of  insulating  Construction  showing  one  of  the  clamping 

material  and  so  shaped  that  it  obviously  forms  members  is  fixed  to  the  appliance 

part  of  a  cord  clamp. 

NOTE  —  Clamping  screws  may  screw  into  threaded  holes  in  the  appliance  or  pass  through  holes  where  they  are  secured  by 
nuts. 

UNACCEPTABLE  CONSTRUCTIONS 


A^\ 


cjy 


IT 


Es|i 


p|p^mi^ 


m 


<^ 


^m%< 


Construction  showing  no  part  securely  fixed  to  the  appliance. 

NOTE  —  Clamping  screws  may  screw  into  threaded  holes  in  the  appliance  or  pass  through  holes  where  they  are  secured  by 
nuts. 

Fig.  10  Constructions  of  Cord  Anchorages 


44 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


25.23  Interconnection  cords  shall  comply  with  the 
requirements  for  the  supply  cord,  except  that; 

a)  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  conductors  of 
the  interconnection  cord  is  determined  on  the 
basis  of  the  maximum  current  carried  by  the 
conductor  during  the  test  of  11  and  not  by  the 
rated  current  of  the  appliance;  and 

b)  the  thickness  of  the  insulation  of  the  conductor 
may  be  reduced  if  the  voltage  of  the  conductor 
is  less  than  the  rated  voltage. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection,  by  measurement 
and  if  necessary  by  tests,  such  as  the  electric  strength 
test  of  16.3. 

25.24  Interconnection  cords  shall  not  be  detachable 
without  the  aid  of  a  tool  if  compliance  with  this 
standard  is  impaired  when  they  are  disconnected. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  if  necessary 
by  appropriate  tests. 

25-25  The  dimensions  of  pins  of  appliances  that  are 
inserted  into  socket-outlets  shall  be  compatible  with 
the  dimensions  of  the  relevant  socket-outlet. 
Dimensions  of  the  pins  and  engagement  face  are  to  be 
in  accordance  with  the  dimensions  of  the  relevant  plug 
listed  in  IS  1293. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

26  TERMINALS  FOR  EXTERNAL  CONDUCTORS 

26.1  Appliances  shall  be  provided  with  terminals  or 
equally  effective  devices  for  the  connection  of  external 
conductors.  The  terminals  shall  only  be  accessible  after 
the  removal  of  a  non-detachable  cover.  However, 
earthing  terminals  may  be  accessible  if  a  tool  is 
required  to  make  the  connections  and  means  are 
provided  to  clamp  the  wire  independently  from  its 
connection. 

NOTES 

1  Screw  type  terminals,  screwless  terminals  and  clamping  units 
are  considered  to  be  effective  devices. 

2  The  terminals  of  a  component  such  as  a  switch  may  he  used 
as  terminals  for  external  conductors  as  long  as  they  comply 
with  the  requirements  of  this  clause. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 

test. 

26.2  Appliances  having  Type  X  attachment,  except 
those  having  a  specially  prepared  cord,  and  appliances 
tor  connection  to  fixed  wiring  shall  be  provided  with 
terminals  in  which  the  connections  are  made  by  means 
of  screws,  nuts  or  similar  devices,  unless  the 
connections  are  soldered. 

1  he  screws  and  nuts  shall  not  be  used  to  fix  any  other 
component  except  that  they  may  also  clamp  internal 


conductors  if  these  are  arranged  so  that  they  are 
unlikely  to  be  displaced  when  fitting  the  supply 
conductors. 

If  soldered  connections  are  used,  the  conductor  shall 
be  positioned  or  fixed  so  that  reliance  is  not  placed 
upon  the  soldering  alone  to  maintain  it  in  position. 
However,  soldering  alone  may  be  used  if  barriers  are 
provided  so  that  clearances  and  creepage  distances 
between  live  parts  and  other  metal  parts  cannot  be 
reduced  below  the  values  specified  for  supplementary 
insulation  if  the  conductor  becomes  free  at  the  soldered 
joint. 

NOTE  —  Hooking  the  wire  into  a  hole  in  the  terminal  before 
soldering  is  considered  to  be  a  suitable  means  for  maintaining 
the  conductor  in  position,  other  than  that  of  a  tinsel  cord, 
provided  that  the  hole  is  not  unduly  large. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

26.3  Terminals  for  Type  X  attachment  and  those  for 
connection  to  fixed  wiring  shall  be  constructed  so  that 
they  clamp  the  conductor  between  metal  surfaces  with 
sufficient  contact  pressure  but  without  causing  damage 
to  the  conductor. 

The  terminals  shall  be  fixed  so  that  when  the  clamping 
means  is  tightened  or  loosened: 

a)  the  terminal  does  not  become  loose; 

b)  internal  wiring  is  not  subjected  to  stress;  and 

c)  clearances  and  creepage  distances  are  not 
reduced  below  the  values  specified  in  29. 

NOTES 

1  Terminals  may  be  prevented  from  loosening  by  fixing  with 
two  screws,  by  fixing  with  one  screw  in  a  recess  so  that  there 
is  no  appreciable  movement,  or  by  other  suitable  means.  The 
use  of  sealing  compound  without  other  means  of  locking  is 
not  considered  to  be  sufficient.  However,  self-hardening  resins 
may  be  used  to  lock  terminals  that  are  not  subject  to  torsion  in 
normal  use. 

2  Conductors  are  considered  to  be  damaged  if  they  show  deep 
or  sharp  indentations. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

26.4  Terminals  for  Type  X  attachment,  except  Type  X 
attachments  having  a  specially  prepared  cord,  and 
terminals  for  connection  to  fixed  wiring,  shall  not 
require  special  preparation  of  the  conductor.  They  shall 
be  constructed  or  placed  so  that  the  conductor  cannot 
slip  out  when  clamping  screws  or  nuts  are  tightened. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  of  the  terminals 
and  conductors  after  the  test  of  26.3, 

NOTE  —  Soldering  of  the  strands  of  the  conductor,  the  use  of 
cable  lugs,  eyelets  or  similar  devices,  is  not  considered  to  meet 
the  requirement,  but  reshaping  of  the  conductor  before  its 
introduction  into  the  terminal  or  twisting  a  stranded  conductor 
to  consolidate  the  end  is  allowed. 


45 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


26.5  Terminals  for  Type  X  attachment  shall  be  located 
or  shielded  so  that  if  a  wire  of  a  stranded  conductor 
escapes  when  the  conductors  are  fitted,  there  is  no  risk 
of  accidental  connection  to  other  parts  that  could  result 
in  a  hazard. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
following  test. 

A  8  mm  length  of  insulation  is  removed  from  the  end 
of  a  flexible  conductor  having  a  nominal  cross- 
sectional  area  as  specified  in  Table  1 1 .  One  wire  of  the 
stranded  conductor  is  left  free  and  the  other  wires  are 
fully  inserted  and  clamped  in  the  terminal.  The  free 
wire  is  bent,  without  tearing  the  insulation  back,  in 
every  possible  direction  but  without  making  sharp 
bends  around  barriers. 

NOTE  —  The  test  is  also  applied  to  earthing  conductors. 

There  shall  be  no  contact  between  live  parts  and 
accesssible  metal  parts  and,  for  Class  II  constructions, 
between  live  parts  and  metal  parts  separated  from 
accessible  metal  parts  by  supplementary  insulation 

only. 

26.6  Terminals  for  Type  X  attachment  and  for 
connection  to  fixed  wiring  shall  allow  the  connection 
of  conductors  having  the  nominal  cross-sectional  areas 
shown  in  Table  13.  However,  if  a  specially  prepared 
cord  is  used,  the  terminals  need  only  be  suitable  for 
the  connection  of  that  cord. 

Table  13  Nominal  Cross-Sectional  Area  of 
Conductors 

(Clauses  ISA  2,  15.2,25.16,25.21  and  26.6) 


SI 

Rated  Current  of 

Nominal  Cross-Sectional  Area 

No. 

Appliance 

■  A 

mm^ 

Flexible  Cords 

Cable  for 

I 

Ixed  Wiring 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

i) 

<3 

0.5  and  0.75 

1  to  2.5 

ii) 

>3  and  <6 

0.75  and  1 

1  to  2.5 

iii) 

>6and<10 

1  and  1.5 

1  to  2.5 

iv) 

>10and<16 

1.5  and  2.5 

1.5  to  4 

V) 

>  1 6  and  <25 

2.5  and  4 

2.5  to  6 

vi) 

>25  and<32 

4  and  6 

4  to  10 

vii) 

>32  and  ^40 

6  and  10 

6  to  16 

viii) 

>40and<63 

10  and  16 

10  to  25 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection,  by  measurement 
and  by  fitting  cables  or  cords  of  the  smallest  and  largest 
cross-sectional  areas  specified. 

26.7  Terminals  for  Type  X  attachment  shall  be 
accessible  after  removal  of  a  cover  or  part  of  the 
enclosure. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

26.8  Terminals  for  the  connection  of  fixed  wiring. 


including  the  earthing  terminal,  shall  be  located  close 
to  each  other. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

26.9  Terminals  of  the  pillar  type  shall  be  constructed 
and  located  so  that  the  end  of  a  conductor  introduced 
into  the  hole  is  visible,  or  can  pass  beyond  the  threaded 
hole  for  a  distance  equal  to  half  the  nominal  diameter 
of  the  screw  but  at  least  2.5  mm. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

26.10  Terminals  with  screw  clamping  and  screwless 
terminals  shall  not  be  used  for  the  connection  of  the 
conductors  of  flat  twin  tinsel  cords  unless  the  ends  of 
the  conductors  are  fitted  with  means  suitable  for  use 
with  screw  terminals. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  applying 
a  pull  of  5  N  to  the  connection. 

After  the  test,  the  connection  shall  show  no  damage 
that  could  impair  compliance  with  this  standard. 

26.11  For  appliances  having  Type  Y  attachment  or 
Type  Z  attachment,  soldered,  welded,  crimped  or 
similar  connections  may  be  used  for  the  connection 
of  external  conductors.  For  Class  II  appliances,  the 
conductor  shall  be  positioned  or  fixed  so  that  reliance 
is  not  placed  upon  the  soldering,  crimping  or  welding 
alone  to  maintain  the  conductor  in  position.  However, 
these  methods  may  be  used  alone  if  barriers  are 
provided  so  that  clearances  and  creepage  distances 
between  live  parts  and  other  metal  parts  cannot  be 
reduced  below  the  values  specified  for  supplementary 
insulation,  if  the  conductor  becomes  free  at  the 
soldered  or  welded  joint  or  slips  out  of  the  crimped 
connection. 

NOTES 

1  Hooking  the  wire  into  a  hole  in  the  terminal  before  soldering 
is  considered  to  be  a  suitable  means  for  maintaining  the 
conductor  in  position,  other  than  that  of  a  tinsel  cord,  provided 
that  the  hole  is  not  unduly  large. 

2  A  fixing  provided  near  the  terminal  which  clamps  both  the 
insulation  and  the  conductor  of  flexible  cords  are  considered 
to  be  a  suitable  additional  fixing. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

27  PROVISION  FOR  EARTHING 

27.1  Accessible  metal  parts  of  Class  I  appliances  that 
may  become  live  in  the  event  of  an  insulation  fault, 
shall  be  permanently  and  reliably  connected  to  an 
earthing  terminal  within  the  appliance  or  to  the  earthing 
contact  of  the  appliance  inlet. 

Earthing  terminals  and  earthing  contacts  shall  not  be 
connected  to  the  neutral  terminal. 


46 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Class  II  appliances  and  Class  III  appliances  shall  have 
no  provision  for  earthing. 

Safety  extra-low  voltage  circuits  shall  not  be  earthed 
unless  they  are  protective  extra-low  voltage  circuits. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

NOTES 

1  If  accessible  metal  parts  are  screened  from  live  parts  by  metal 
parts  that  are  connected  to  the  earthing  terminal  or  to  the 
earthing  contact,  they  are  not  regarded  as  likely  to  become 
live  in  the  event  of  an  insulation  fault. 

2  Metal  parts  behind  a  decorative  cover  that  does  not  withstand 
the  test  of  21.1  are  considered  to  be  accessible  metal  parts. 

27.2  The  clamping  means  of  earthing  terminals  shall 
be  adequately  secured  against  accidental  loosening. 

NOTE  —  In  general,  the  constructions  commonly  used  for 
current-canying  tenninals,  other  than  some  terminals  of  the 
pillar  type,  provide  sufficient  resiliency  to  comply  with  this 
requirement.  For  other  constructions,  special  provisions,  such 
as  the  use  of  an  adequately  resilient  part  that  is  not  likely  to  be 

removed  inadvertently,  may  be  necessary. 

Terminals  for  the  connection  of  external  equipotential 
bonding  conductors  shall  allow  the  connection  of 
conductors  having  nominal  cross-sectional  areas  of 
2,5  mm^  to  6  mm^  and  shall  not  be  used  to  provide 
earthing  continuity  between  different  parts  of  the 
appliance.  It  shall  not  be  possible  to  loosen  the 
conductors  without  the  aid  of  a  tool, 

NOTE  —  The  earthing  conductor  in  a  supply  cord  is  not 
considered  to  be  an  equipotential  bonding  conductor. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 

test. 

27.3  If  a  detachable  part  having  an  earth  connection  is 
plugged  into  another  part  of  the  appliance,  the  earth 
connection  shall  be  made  before  the  current-carrying 
connections  are  established.  The  current-carrying 
connections  shall  be  separated  before  the  earth 
connection  when  removing  the  part. 


For  appliances  with  supply  cords,  the  arrangement  of 
the  terminals,  or  the  length  of  the  conductors  between 
the  cord  anchorage  and  the  terminals,  shall  be  such 
that  the  current-carrying  conductors  become  taut  before 
the  earthing  conductor  if  the  cord  slips  out  of  the  cord 
anchorage. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

27.4  All  parts  of  the  earthing  terminal  intended  for  the 
connection  of  external  conductors  shall  be  such  that 
there  is  no  risk  of  corrosion  resulting  from  contact 
between  these  parts  and  the  copper  of  the  earthing 
conductor  or  any  other  metal  in  contact  with  these  parts. 

Parts  providing  earthing  continuity,  other  than  parts  of 
a  metal  frame  or  enclosure,  shall  be  of  metal  having 
adequate  resistance  to  corrosion.  If  these  parts  are  of 
steel,  they  shall  be  provided  at  the  essential  areas  with 
an  electroplated  coating  having  a  thickness  of  at  least 
5  lam. 

NOTES 

1  Parts  of  copper  or  copper  alloys  containing  at  least  58  percent 
copper  for  parts  that  are  worked  cold,  and  at  least  50  percent 
copper  for  other  parts,  and  parts  of  stainless  steel  containing 
at  least  13  percent  chrome  are  considered  to  be  sufficiently 
resistant  to  corrosion. 

2  The  essential  areas  of  steel  parts  are,  in  particular,  those  liable 
to  transmit  a  fault  current.  In  evaluating  such  areas,  the 
thickness  of  the  coating  in  relation  to  the  shape  of  the  part  has 
to  be  taken  into  account.  In  case  of  doubt,  the  thickness  of  the 
coating  is  measured  as  described. 

Parts  of  coated  or  uncoated  steel  that  are  only  intended  to 
provide  or  to  transmit  contact  pressure  shall  be  adequately 
protected  against  rusting. 

3  Examples  of  parts  providing  earthing  continuity  and  parts 
that  are  only  intended  to  provide  or  to  transmit  contact  pressure 
arc  shown  in  Fig.  11. 

4  Parts  subjected  to  a  treatment  such  as  chromate  conversion 
coating  arc  in  general  not  considered  to  be  adequately  protected 
against  corrosion,  but  they  may  be  used  to  provide  or  to  transmit 
contact  pressure. 


^^^ 


Key 


.2 


.^  — ^  1 


1\ 


222Z23 


1  —  Part  providing  earthing  continuity. 

2  —  Part  providing  or  transmitting  contact  pressure. 


Fig.  1 1  An  Example  of  Parts  of  an  Earthing  Terminal 


47 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


If  the  body  of  the  earthing  terminal  is  apart  of  a  frame 
or  enclosure  of  aluminium  or  aluminium  alloy, 
precautions  shall  be  taken  to  avoid  the  risk  of  corrosion 
resulting  from  contact  between  copper  and  aluminium 
or  its  alloys. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 
measurement. 

27.5  The  connection  between  the  earthing  terminal  or 
earthing  contact  and  earthed  metal  parts  shall  have  low 
resistance. 

If  the  clearances  of  basic  insulation  in  a  protective 
extra-low  voltage  circuit  are  based  on  the  rated  voltage 
of  the  appliance,  this  requirement  does  not  apply  to 
connections  providing  earthing  continuity  in  the 
protective  extra-low  voltage  circuit. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  following  test. 

A  current  derived  from  a  source  having  a  no-load 
voltage  not  exceeding  1 2  V  (ac  or  Ac)  and  equal  to  1 .5 
times  rated  current  of  the  appliance  or  25  A,  whichever 
is  higher,  is  passed  between  the  earthing  terminal  or 
earthing  contact  and  each  of  the  accessible  metal  parts 
in  turn. 

The  voltage  drop  between  the  earthing  terminal  of  the 
appliance  or  the  earthing  contact  of  the  appliance  inlet 
and  the  accessible  metal  part  is  measured.  The 
resistance  calculated  from  the  current  and  this  voltage 
drop  shall  not  exceed  0.1  Q. 

NOTES 

1  In  case  of  doubt,  the  test  is  carried  out  until  steady  conditions 
have  been  established. 

2  The  resistance  of  the  supply  cord  is  not  included  in  the 
measurement. 

3  Care  is  to  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  contact  resistance 
between  the  tip  of  the  measuring  probe  and  the  metal  part  under 
test  does  not  influence  the  test  results. 

27.6  The  printed  conductors  of  printed  circuit  boards 
shall  not  be  used  to  provide  earthing  continuity  in  hand- 
held appliances.  They  may  be  used  to  provide  earthing 
continuity  in  other  appliances  if: 

a)  at  least  two  tracks  are  used  with  independent 
soldering  points  and  the  appliance  complies 
with  27.5  for  each  circuit;  and 

b)  the  material  of  the  printed  circuit  board 
complies  with  IS  5921  (Part  6)  or  IS  5921 
(Part  7). 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
relevant  tests. 

28  SCREWS  AND  CONNECTIONS 

28.1  Fixings,  the  failure  of  which  may  impair 
compliance  with  this  standard,  electrical  connections 
and  connections  providing  earthing  continuity  shall 


withstand  the  mechanical  stresses  occurring  in  normal 
use. 

Screws  used  for  these  purposes  shall  not  be  of  metal 
which  is  soft  or  liable  to  creep,  such  as  zinc  or 
aluminium.  If  they  are  of  insulating  material,  they  shall 
have  a  nominal  diameter  of  at  least  3  mm  and  they 
shall  not  be  used  for  any  electrical  connections  or 
connections  providing  earthing  continuity. 

Screws  used  for  electrical  connections  or  for 
connections  providing  earthing  continuity  shall  screw 
into  metal. 

Screws  shall  not  be  of  insulating  material  if  their 
replacement  by  a  metal  screw  could  impair 
supplementary  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 
Screws  that  may  be  removed  when  replacing  a  supply 
cord  having  a  Type  X  attachment  or  when  undertaking 
user  maintenance  shall  not  be  of  insulating  material  if 
their  replacement  by  a  metal  screw  could  impair  basic 
insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  the 
following  test. 

Screws  and  nuts  are  tested  if  they  are: 

a)  used  for  electrical  connections; 

b)  used  for  connections  providing  earthing 
continuity,  unless  at  least  two  screws  or  nuts 
are  used;  and 

c)  likely  to  be  tightened 

1)  during  user  maintenance, 

2)  when  replacing  a  supply  cord  having  a 
Type  X  attachment,  and 

3)  during  installation. 

The  screws  or  nuts  are  tightened  and  loosened  without 
jerking: 

a)  10  times  for  screws  in  engagement  with  a 
thread  of  insulating  material;  and 

b)  5  times  for  nuts  and  other  screws. 

Screws  in  engagement  with  a  thread  of  insulating 
material  are  completely  removed  and  reinserted  each 
time. 

When  testing  terminal  screws  and  nuts,  a  cable  or 
flexible  cord  of  the  largest  cross-sectional  area 
specified  in  Table  13  is  placed  in  the  terminal.  It  is 
repositioned  before  each  tightening. 

The  test  is  carried  out  by  means  of  a  suitable 
screwdriver,  spanner  or  key  and  by  applying  a  torque 
as  shown  in  Table  14. 

Column  I  is  applicable  for  metal  screws  without  heads 
if  the  screw  does  not  protrude  from  the  hole  when 
tightened. 


48 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


Column  II  is  applicable: 

a)  for  other  metal  screws  and  for  nuts;  and 

b)  for  screws  of  insulating  material 

1)  having  a  hexagonal  head  with  the 
dimension  across  flats  exceeding  the 
overall  thread  diameter: 

2)  with  a  cylindrical  head  and  a  socket  for  a 
key,  the  socket  having  a  cross-corner 
dimension  exceeding  the  overall  thread 
diameter;  and 

3)  with  a  head  having  a  slot  or  cross-slots, 
the  length  of  which  exceeds  1.5  times  the 
overall  thread  diameter. 

Column  III  is  applicable  for  other  screws  of  insulating 
material. 

Table  14  Torque  for  Testing  Screws  and  Nuts 

{Clauses  16.3, 25.16  ^?nJ  28.1) 


SI 
No. 

Nominal  Diameter  of 

Screw  (Outer  Thread 

Diameter) 

mm 

I 

Torque 

n 

II! 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

i) 

<2.8 

0.2 

0.4 

0.4 

ii) 

>  2.8  and  <  3,0 

0.25 

0.5 

0.5 

iii) 

>  3.0  and  <3.2 

0.3 

0.6 

0.5 

iv) 

>  3.2  and  <3.6 

0.4 

0.8 

0.6 

V) 

>  3.6  and  <4.1 

0.7 

1.2 

0.6 

vi) 

>4.1  and  <  4.7 

0.8 

1.8 

0.9 

vii) 

>  3.7  and  <  5.3 

0.8 

2.0 

l.O 

viii) 

>5.3 

— 

2.5 

1.25 

No  damage  impairing  the  further  use  of  the  fixings  or 
connections  shall  occur. 

28.2  Electrical  connections  and  connections  providing 
earthing  continuity  shall  be  constructed  so  that  contact 
pressure  is  not  transmitted  through  insulating  material  that 
is  liable  to  shrink  or  to  distort  unless  there  is  sufficient 
resiliency  in  the  metallic  parts  to  compensate  for  any 
possible  shrinkage  or  distortion  of  the  insulating  material. 

NOTE  —  Ceramic  material  is  not  liable  to  shrink  or  to  distort. 

This  requirement  does  not  apply  to  electrical  connections 
in  circuits  carrying  a  current  not  exceeding  0.5  A. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

28.3  Space-threaded  (sheet  metal)  screws  shall  only 
be  used  for  electrical  connections  if  they  clamp  the 
parts  together. 

Thread-cutting  (self-tapping)  screws  shall  only  be  used 
for  electrical  connections  if  they  generate  a  full  form 
standard  machine  screw  thread.  Such  screws  shall  not 
be  used  if  diey  are  likely  to  be  operated  by  the  user  or 
installer  unless  the  thread  is  formed  by  a  swaging  action. 


Thread-cutting  and  space-threaded  screws  may  be  used 
in  connections  providing  earthing  continuity  provided 
it  is  unnecessary  to  disturb  the  connection  in  normal 
use  and  at  least  two  screws  are  used  for  each 
connection. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection. 

28.4  Screws  and  nuts  that  make  a  mechanical 
connection  between  different  parts  of  the  appliance 
shall  be  secured  against  loosening,  if  they  also  make 
electrical  connections  or  connections  providing 
earthing  continuity. 

NOTES 

1  This  requirement  does  not  apply  to  screws  in  the  earthing 
circuit  if  at  least  two  screws  are  used  for  the  connection  or  if 
an  alternative  earthing  circuit  is  provided. 

2  Spring  washers,  lock  washers  and  crown  type  locks  as  part 
of  the  screw  head  are  means  that  may  provide  satisfactory 
security. 

3  Sealing  compound  that  softens  on  heating  provides 
satisfactory  security  only  for  screw  connections  not  subject  to 
torsion  in  normal  use. 

Rivets  used  for  electrical  connections  or  for  connections 
providing  earthing  continuity  shall  be  secured  against 
loosening  if  these  connections  are  subject  to  torsion  in  normal 
use. 

4  This  requirement  does  not  imply  that  more  than  one  rivet  is 
necessary  for  providing  earthing  continuity. 

5  A  non-circular  shank  or  an  appropriate  notch  may  be 
sufficient. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by  manual 
test. 

29  CLEARANCES,  CREEPAGE  DISTANCES 
AND  SOLID  INSULATION 

Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  the  clearances, 
creepage  distances  and  solid  insulation  are  adequate 
to  withstand  the  electrical  stresses  to  which  the 
appliance  is  liable  to  be  subjected. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  requirements  and  tests 

of  29.1  to  29.3. 

If  coatings  are  used  on  printed  circuit  boards  to  protect 
the  microenvironment  (Type  A  coating)  or  to  provide 
basic  insulation  (Type  B  coating),  Annex  J  applies.  The 
microenvironment  is  pollution  degree  1  under  Type  A 
coating.  There  are  no  creepage  distance  or  clearance 
requirements  under  Type  B  coating. 

NOTES 

1  The  requirements  and  tests  are  based  on  IS  15382  (Part  1) 
from  which  further  information  can  be  obtained. 

2  The  assessment  of  clearances,  creepage  distances  and  solid 
insulation  has  to  be  carried  out  separately. 

29.1  Clearances  shall  not  be  less  than  the  values  specified 
in  Table  16,  taking  into  account  the  rated  impulse  voltage 
for  the  overvoltage  categories  of  Table  15,  unless,  for 
basic  insulation  and  functional  insulation,  they  comply 


49 


18  302-1:2008 


with  the  impulse  voltage  test  of  14.  However,  if  the 
construction  is  such  that  the  distances  could  be  affected 
by  wear,  by  distortion,  by  movement  of  the  parts  or 
during  assembly,  the  clearances  for  rated  impulse 
voltages  of  1  500  V  and  above  are  increased  by  0.5  mm 
and  the  impulse  voltage  test  is  not  applicable. 

The  impulse  voltage  test  is  not  applicable  when  the 
microenvironment  is  pollution  degree  3. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  constructions  for  which  the  test  may  be 
applicable  are  those  having  rigid  parts  or  parts  located  by 
mouldings. 

Examples  of  constructions  in  which  distances  are  likely 
to  be  affected  are  those  involving  soldering,  snap-on 
and  screw  terminals  and  clearances  from  motor 
windings. 

Appliances  are  in  overvoltage  category  II. 

NOTE  —  Annex  K  gives  information  regarding  overvoltage 
categories. 

Table  15  Rated  Impulse  Voltage 

(Clauses  14,  24.3,  29.12,  29.1.5  and  L-l) 


SI 
No. 

Rated  Vo!tag« 
V 

Rated  Impulse  V( 

V 
Overvoltage  CaU 

milage 
;goiy 

\ 

]1 

111 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

i) 

<50 

330 

500 

800 

ii) 

>50  and  < 

150 

800 

1  500 

2  500 

iii) 

>150and<300 

\  500 

2  500 

4  000 

NOTES 

1  For  multi-phase  appliances,  the  line  to  neutral  or  line  to  e;irth  volt:jge  is 
used  for  rated  voltage. 

2  The  values  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  appliance  will  not 
generate  higher  overvoUages  than  those  specified. 

If  higher  overvoltages  are  generated,  the  clearances  have  to  be  increased 
accordingly. 


Table  16  Minimum  Clearances 

(Clauses  29.1,  29.1.1,  29.1.2,  29.1.3,  29.1.4,  29. 
and  292A) 


SI  No. 

Rated  Impulse  Voltage 

Minimum  Clearance'^ 

V 

Mm 

(0 

(2) 

(3) 

i) 

330 

0.5^^-'^ 

ii) 

500 

0.5 '^^'^ 

iii) 

800 

0.5  ^^-^^ 

iv) 

1  500 

0.5^' 

V) 

2  500 

1.5 

vi) 

4  000 

3.0 

vii) 

6  000 

5.5 

vlii) 

8  000 

8.0 

ix) 

10  000 

11.0 

The  distances  specified  apply  only  to  clearances  in  air. 

The  smaller  clearances  specified  in  IS  15382(Part  1)  have  not  been 

adopted  for  practical  reasons,  such  as  mass-production  tolerances. 

This  value  is  increased  to  0.8  mm  for  pollution  degree  3. 


Compliance  is  checked  by  inspection  and  by 

measurement. 

Parts,  such  as  hexagonal  nuts  that  can  be  tightened  to 
different  positions  during  assembly,  and  movable  parts, 
are  placed  in  the  most  unfavourable  position. 

A  force  is  applied  to  bare  conductors,  other  than  those 
of  heating  elements,  and  accessible  surfaces  to  try  to 
reduce  clearances  when  making  the  measurement.  The 
force  is: 

a)  2  N,  for  bare  conductors;  and 

b)  30  N,  for  accessible  surfaces. 

The  force  is  applied  by  means  of  test  probe  B  of 
IS  1401,  Apertures  are  assumed  to  be  covered  by  a 
piece  of  flat  metal. 

NOTES 

1  The  way  in  which  clearances  are  measured  is  specified  in 
IS  15382  (Part  1). 

2  The  procedure  for  assessing  clearances  is  given  in  Annex  L. 

29.1.1  The  clearances  of  basic  insulation  shall  be 
sufficient  to  withstand  the  overvoltages  likely  to  occur 
during  use,  taking  into  account  the  rated  impulse 
voltage.  The  values  of  Table  16  are  applicable. 

NOTE  —  The  overvoltages  niay  be  derived  from  external 
sources  or  due  to  switching. 

The  clearance  at  the  terminals  of  tubular  sheathed 
heating  elements  may  be  reduced  to  1.0  mm  if  the 
microenvironment  is  pollution  degree  1. 

Lacquered  conductors  of  windings  are  considered  to 
be  bare  conductors. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.1.2  Clearances  of  supplementary  insulation  shall 
be  not  less  than  those  specified  for  basic  insulation  in 
Table  16. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.1.3  Clearances  of  reinforced  insulation  shall  be  not 
less  than  those  specified  for  basic  insulation  in  Table  16, 
but  using  the  next  higher  step  for  rated  impulse  voltage 

as  a  reference. 

NOTE  —  For  double  insulation,  when  there  is  no  intermediate 
conductive  part  between  the  basic  insulation  and  supplementary 
insulation,  clearances  are  measured  between  live  parts  and  the 
accessible  surface,  and  the  insulation  system  is  treated  as 
reinforced  insulation  as  shown  in  Fig.  12. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.1.4  For  functional  insulation,  the  values  of  Table  16 
are  applicable.  However,  clearances  are  not  specified 
if  the  appliance  complies  with  19  with  the  funcdonal 
insulation  short-circuited.  Lacquered  conductors  of 
windings  are  considered  to  be  bare  conductors. 


50 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Key 


1  —  Accessible  unearthed  metal  part 

2  —  Enclosure 

3  —  Accessible  earthed  metal  part 

4  ~  Inaccessible  unearthed  metal  part 


D^ir 


Solid  insulation 


The  live  parts  L,  and  Lg  are  separated  from  each  other  and  partially  surrounded  by  a  plastic  enclosure  containing 
apertures,  partially  by  air  and  are  in  contact  with  solid  insulation.  A  piece  of  inaccessible  metal  is  incorporated 
inside  the  construction.  There  are  two  metal  covers,  one  of  which  is  earthed. 


Clearance 
L,A 
L,D 
L,F 

DE 

FG 

L,K 

L,J 

L,\ 

L,C 

NOTE  —  if  the  clearances  L^D  or  L^F  meet  the  clearance  requirements  for  reinforced  insulation,  the  clearances  0£  or  FG  of 
supplementary  insulation  are  not  measured. 

Fig.  12  Exampixs  of  Clearances 


Type  of  insulation 
Basic  insulation 


Functional  insulation 
Supplementary  insulation 

Reinforced  insulation 


However,  clearances  at  crossover  points  are  not 
measured. 

The  clearance  between  surfaces  of  PTC  heating 
elements  may  be  reduced  to  1  mm. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement  and  by  a  test, 

i  r  necessary. 

29.1.5  For  appliances  having  higher  working  voltages 


than  rated  voltage,  for  example  on  the  secondary  side 
of  a  step-up  transformer,  or  if  there  is  a  resonant  voltage, 
the  voltage  used  for  determining  clearances  from 
Table  16  shall  be  the  sum  of  the  rated  impulse  voltage 
and  the  difference  between  the  peak  value  of  the 
working  voltage  and  the  peak  value  of  the  rated  voltage. 

NOTES 

1  Clearances  for  intermediate  values  of  Table  16  may  be 
determined  by  interpolation. 


51 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


2  if  the  voltage  for  determining  clearance  is  higher  than 
10000  V.  the  case  A  values  for  clearances  stated  in  Table  2  of 
IS  15382  (Part  1)  are  applicable. 

U  the  secondary  winding  of  a  step-down  transformer  is  earthed, 
or  if  there  is  an  earthed  screen  between  the  primary  and 
secondary  windings,  clearances  of  basic  insulation  on  the 
secondary  side  shall  be  not  less  than  those  specified  in  Table  16, 
but  using  the  next  lower  step  for  rated  impulse  voltage  as  a 
reference. 

3  The  use  of  an  isolating  transformer  without  an  earthed 
protective  screen  or  earthed  secondary  does  not  allow  a 
reduction  in  the  rated  impulse  voltage. 

For  circuits  supplied  with  a  voltage  lower  than  rated 
voltage,  for  example,  on  the  secondary  side  of  a 
transformer,  clearances  of  functional  insulation  are 
based  on  the  working  voltage,  which  is  used  as  the 
rated  voltage  in  Table  15. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.2  Appliances  shall  be  constructed  so  that  creepage 
distances  are  not  less  than  those  appropriate  for  the 
working  voltage,  taking  into  account  the  material  group 
and  the  pollution  degree. 

^JOTE  —  The  working  voltage  for  parts  connected  to  the  neutral 
are  the  same  as  for  parts  connected  to  the  phase. 

Pollution  degree  2  applies  unless: 

a)  precautions  have  been  taken  to  protect  the 
insulation,  in  which  case  pollution  degree  1 
applies;  and 

b)  the  insulation  is  subjected  to  conductive 
pollution,  in  which  case  pollution  degree  3 
applies. 

NOTE  —  An  explanation  of  pollution  degree  is  given  in 
Annex  M. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

NOTE  —  The  way  in  which  creepage  distances  are  measured 
is  specified  in  IS  15382  (Part  1). 

Parts  such  as  hexagonal  nuts  that  can  be  tightened  to 
different  positions  during  assembly,  and  movable  parts, 
are  placed  in  the  most  unfavourable  position, 

A  force  is  applied  to  bare  conductors,  other  than  those 
of  heating  elements,  and  accessible  surfaces  to  try  to 
reduce  creepage  distances  when  making  the 
measurement.  The  force  is: 

a)  2  N,  for  bare  conductors;  and 

b)  30  N,  for  accessible  surfaces. 

The  force  is  applied  by  means  of  test  probe  B  of 
IS  1401. 

The  relationship  between  the  material  group  and 
the  comparative  tracking  index  (CTI)  values,  as  given 
in  2.7.1.3  of  IS  15382  (Part  1),  is  as  follows: 


material  group  II 
material  group  Ilia 
material  group  Illb 


400  <  CTI  <  600 
175  <  CTI  <  400 
100  <  CTI  <  175 


material  group  I 


600  <  CTI 


These  CTI  values  are  obtained  in  accordance  with 
IS  2824  using  solution  A.  If  the  CTI  value  of  the 
material  is  unknown,  a  proof  tracking  index  (PTI)  test 
in  accordance  with  Annex  N  is  carried  out  at  the  CTI 
values  specified,  in  order  to  establish  the  material 
group. 

NOTES 

1  The  test  for  comparative  tracking  index  (CTI)  in  accordance 
with  IS  2824  is  designed  to  compare  the  performance  of  various 
insulating  materials  under  test  conditions,  namely  drops  of  an 
aqueous  contaminant  falling  on  a  horizontal  surface  leading 
to  electrolytic  conduction.  It  gives  a  qualitative  comparison 
but  in  the  case  of  insulating  materials  having  a  tendency  to 
form  tracks  it  can  also  give  a  quantitative  comparison,  namely 
the  comparative  tracking  index. 

2  The  procedure  for  assessing  creepage  distances  is  given  in 
Annex  L. 

29.2.1  Creepage  distances  of  basic  insulation  shall  not 
be  less  than  those  specified  in  Table  17. 

Except  for  pollution  degree  I ,  if  the  test  of  14  has  been 
used  to  check  a  particular  clearance,  the  corresponding 
creepage  distance  shall  not  be  less  than  the  minimum 
dimension  specified  for  the  clearance  of  Table  1 6. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.2.2  Creepage  distances  of  supplementary  insulation 
shall  be  at  least  those  specified  for  basic  insulation  in 
Table  17. 

NOTE  —  Notes  1  and  2  of  Table  17  do  not  apply. 
Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.2.3  Creepage  distances  of  reinforced  insulation  shall 
be  at  least  double  those  specified  for  basic  insulation 
in  Table  17. 

NOTE  —  Notes  I  and  2  of  Table  17  do  not  apply. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.2.4  Creepage  distances  of  functional  insulation  shall 
be  not  less  than  those  specified  in  Table  1 8.  However, 
creepage  distances  may  be  reduced  if  the  appliance 
complies  with  19  with  the  functional  insulation  short- 
circuited. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  measurement. 

29.3  Supplementary  insulation  and  reinforced 
insulation  shall  have  adequate  thickness,  or  have  a 
sufficient  number  of  layers,  to  withstand  the  electrical 
stresses  that  can  be  expected  during  the  use  of  the 
appliance. 

Compliance  is  checked  by: 

a)     measurement,  in  accordance  with  29.3.1,  or  by 


52 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Table  17  Minimum  Creepage  Distances  for  Basic  Insulation 

(Clauses  29.2. 1 ,  29.2.2  and  29.2.3) 


SI  No. 

Worki 

ng  Vo 

V 

Itage 

Creepage  Distance 

mm 

Pollution  Degree 

I 

2 

3 

Material  Group 

Material  Group 

T" 

11 

IHa/lll^ 

T" 

11 

uwuii 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

i) 

<50 

0.2 

0.6 

0.9 

1,2 

1.5 

1.7 

1.9'> 

ii) 

>50 

and 

<125 

0.3 

0.8 

1.1 

1.5 

1.9 

2.1 

2,4 

iii) 

>12S 

and 

<250 

0.6 

13 

1,8 

2.5 

3.2 

3.6 

4,0 

iv) 

>250 

and 

^400 

1.0 

2.0 

2.8 

4.0 

5.0 

5.6 

6.3 

V) 

>400 

and 

<500 

1.3 

2.5 

3,6 

5.0 

6.3 

7.1 

8.0 

vi) 

>500 

and 

<800 

1.8 

3.2 

4,5 

6.3 

8,0 

9.0 

10.0 

vii) 

>800 

and 

<1  000 

2.4 

4.0 

5,6 

8.0 

10. 0 

11.0 

12.5 

viii) 

>1  000 

and 

^1  250 

3.2 

5.0 

7  1 

10.0 

12,5 

14.0 

16.0 

ix) 

>1  250 

and 

<1  600 

4.2 

6.3 

9.0 

12.5 

16.0 

18.0 

20.0 

^) 

>l  600 

and 

<2  000 

5.6 

8.0 

n.o 

16.0 

20.0 

22.0 

25.0 

xi) 

>2  000 

and 

^2  500 

7.5 

10.0 

140 

20.0 

25.0 

28.0 

32.0 

xii) 

>2  500 

and 

<3  200 

10. 0 

12.5 

18.0 

25.0 

32.0 

36.0 

40.0 

xiii)  >3  200  and  ^4  000  12.5  16.0  22,0  32.0  40,0  45,0  50.0 

xiv)  >4  000  and  <5  000  16.0  20,0  28.0  40.0  50.0  56.0  63.0 

XV)  >5  000  and  ^6  300  20.0  25.0  36.0  50.0  63.0  71.0  S0,0 

KVi)  >6  300  and  ^8  000  25.0  32.0  45.0  63.0  80.0  90.0  100.0 

Kvii)  >8  000  and  ^10  000  32.0  40.0  56.0  80.0  100.0  IIO.O  125.0 

xviii)  >10  000  and  <12  500  40.0  50.0  71.0  lOO.O  125.0  140.0  160.0 

NOTES 

1  Lacquered  conductors  of  windings  are  considered  to  be  bare  conductors,  but  creepage  distances  need  not  be  greater  than  the  associated  clearance 
specified  in  Table  16  taking  into  account  29.1.1. 

2  For  glass,  ceramics  and  other  inorganic  insulating  materials  that  do  not  track,  creepage  distances  need  not  be  greater  than  the  associated  clearance. 

3  Except  for  circuits  on  the  secondary  side  of  an  isolating  transfonner,  the  working  voltage  is  considered  to  be  not  less  than  the  rated  voltage  of  the  appliance. 


'*  Material  group  Illb  is  allowed  if  the  working  voltage  does  not  exceed  50  V, 


Table  18  Minimum  Creepage  Distances  for  Functional  Insulation 

(Clauses  29 2 A  andL-2) 


SI  No. 

Working  Voltage 

V 

Creepage  Distance 

mm 
Pollution  Degree 

^ — 
1 

2 

3 

Material  Group 
^I              11          Illa/lilb 

Material  Group 

^I 

11              lIIa/lTib 

(3) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4)             (5)              (6) 

(7) 

(8)                  (9) 

^50      0.2  0.6  0.8  \A  1.4  1.6  1 .8  ^ 

i)          >50     and       <125      0.3  0.7  1.0  1.4  1.8  2.0  2.2 

ii)         >I25     and       <250      0.4  1.0  1.4  2.0  2.5  2.8  '3.2 

iii)         >250     and      <400*^      0.8  1.6  2,2  3,2  4.0  4.5  5.0 

iv)         >400     and       <500      1,0  2.0  2,8  4.0  5.0  5.6  6.3 

v)         >500    and       <800      1.8  3.2  4.5  6.3  8.0  9.0  10.0 

vi)         >800     and      <1  000      2.4  4.0  5.6  8.0  10.0  II.O  12.5 

vli)        >1  000     and      <1  250      3,2  5  0  7.1  10.0  12.5  14.0  16.0 

viii)        >1  250     and      <1  600      4.2  6.3  9,0  12.5  16.0  18.0  20.0 

ix)        >1  600    and     <2  000      5.6  8.0  11,0  16.0  20.0  22.0  25.0 

X)        >2  000    and     <2  500      7.5  10.0  14.0  20.0  25.0  28.0  32.0 

xi)        >2  500     and      <3  200      10.0  12.5  18  0  25.0  32.0  36.0  40.0 

xii)        >3  200     and      <4  000     12.5  16.0  22,0  32.0  40.0  45.0  50.0 

xiii)                   >4  000           and             <5  000             16.0  20.0  28.0  40.0  50.0  56.0  63.0 

xiv)                   >5  000           and             <6  300             20.0  25.0  36  0  50.0  63.0  71.0  80.0 

XV)                   >6  300           and              <8  000             25.0  32.0  45.0  63.0  80.0  90.0  100.0 

xvi)                   >8  000           and           <10  000             32.0  40.0  56.0  80.0  100.0  110.0  125.0 

xvii)                 >10  000           and            <12  500             40.0  50,0  71,0  100,0  125.0  140.0  160.0 

NOTES 

1  For  PTC  heating  elements,  the  creepage  distances  over  the  surface  of  the  PTC  material  need  not  be  greater  than  the  associated  clearance  for  working 
voltages  less  than  250  V  and  for  pollution  degrees  1  and  2.  However,  the  creepage  distances  between  tenninations  are  those  specified  in  the  table. 

2  For  glass,  ceramics  and  other  inorganic  insulating  materials  that  do  not  track,  creepage  distances  need  not  be  greater  than  the  associated  clearance. 

53 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


b)  an  electric  strength  test  in  accordance  with 
29.3.2,  if  the  insulation  consists  of  more  than 
one  separate  layer,  other  than  natural  mica  or 
similar  flakey  material,  or  by 

c)  an  assessment  of  the  thermal  quality  of  the 
material  combined  with  an  electric  strength 
test,  in  accordance  with  29.3.3. 

29.3.1  The  thickness  of  the  insulation  shall  be  at  least: 

a)  1  mm  for  supplementary  insulation;  and 

b)  2  mm  for  reinforced  insulation. 

29.3.2  Each  layer  of  material  shall  withstand  the 
electric  strength  test  of  16.3  for  supplementary 
insulation.  Supplementary  insulation  shall  consist  of 
at  least  2  layers  of  material  and  reinforced  insulation 
of  at  least  3  layers. 

29.3.3  The  insulation  is  subjected  to  the  dry  heat  test 
Bb  of  IS  9000  (Part  3/Sec  1)  for  48  h  at  a  temperature 
of  50  K  in  excess  of  the  maximum  temperature  rise 
measured  during  the  test  of  19.  At  the  end  of  the  period, 
the  insulation  is  subjected  to  the  electric  strength  test 
of  16.3  at  the  conditioning  temperature  and  also  after 
it  has  cooled  down  to  room  temperature. 

If  the  temperature  rise  of  the  insulation  measured 
during  the  tests  of  19  does  not  exceed  the  value 
specified  in  Table  3,  the  test  of  IS  9000  (Part  3/Sec  1) 
is  not  carried  out, 

30  RESISTANCE  TO  HEAT  AND  FIRE 

30.1  External  parts  of  non-metallic  material,  parts  of 
insulating  material  supporting  live  parts  including 
connections,  and  parts  of  thermoplastic  material 
providing  supplementary  insulation  or  reinforced 
insulation,  shall  be  sufficiently  resistant  to  heat  if  their 
deterioration  could  cause  the  appliance  to  fail  to  comply 
with  this  standard. 


This  requirement  does  not  apply  to  the  insulation  or 
sheath  of  flexible  cords  or  internal  wiring. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  subjecting  the  relevant  part 
to  the  ball  pressure  test  as  shown  in  Fig.  13. 

The  test  is  carried  out  at  a  temperature  of  40  ±  2°C 
plus  the  maximum  temperature  rise  determined  during 
the  test  of  11,  but  it  shall  be  at  least: 

a)  75  ±  2  ''C,  for  external  parts;  and 

b)  125  +  2  °C,  for  parts  supporting  live  parts. 

However,  for  parts  of  thermoplastic  material  providing 
supplementary  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation,  the 
test  is  carried  out  at  a  temperature  of  27  ±  2°C  plus  the 
maximum  temperature  rise  determined  during  the  tests 
of  19,  if  this  is  higher.  The  temperature  rises  of  19.4 
are  not  taken  into  account  provided  that  the  test  is 
terminated  by  the  operation  of  a  non-self-resetting 
protective  device  and  it  is  necessary  to  remove  a  cover 
or  use  a  tool  to  reset  it. 

NOTES 

1  For  coil  formers,  only  those  parts  that  support  or  retain 
terniinals  in  position  are  subjected  to  the  test. 

2  The  test  is  not  carried  out  on  parts  of  ceramic  material. 

3  The  selection  and  sequence  of  tests  for  resistance  to  heat  are 
shown  in  Fig.  O-l. 

30.2  Parts  of  non-metallic  material  shall  be  resistant 
to  ignition  and  spread  of  fire. 

This  requirement  does  not  apply  to  decorative  trims, 
knobs  and  other  parts  unlikely  to  be  ignited  or  to 
propagate  flames  that  originate  inside  the  appliance. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  test  of  30.2.1.  In 
addition: 

a)  for  attended  appliances,  30.2.2  is  applicable; 
and 

b)  for    unattended    appliances,    30.2.3    is 
applicable. 


SPHERICAL 


TEST   SAMPLE 


Fig.  13  Ball  Pressure  Test 

54 


IS  302-1  :2008 


For  the  base  material  of  printed  circuit  boards, 
compliance  is  checked  by  the  test  of  30.2.4. 

The  tests  are  carried  out  on  parts  of  non-metallic 
material  that  have  been  removed  from  the  appliance. 
When  the  glow-wire  test  is  carried  out,  they  are  placed 
in  the  same  orientation  as  they  would  be  in  normal 

use. 

These  tests  are  not  carried  out  on  the  insulation  of  wires. 

NOTE  —  The  selection  and  sequence  of  tests  for  resistance  to 
fire  is  shown  in  Fig.  0-2. 

30.2.1  Parts  of  non-metallic  material  are  subjected  to 
the  glow- wire  test  of  IS  1 1000  (Part  2/Sec  1),  which  is 
carried  out  at  550  °C. 

The  glow-wire  test  is  not  carried  out  on  parts  of  material 
classified  at  least  HB40,  provided  that  the  test  sample 
was  no  thicker  than  the  relevant  part. 

Parts  for  which  the  glow-wire  test  cannot  be  carried 
out,  such  as  those  made  of  soft  or  foamy  material,  shall 
meet  the  requirements  specified  in  IS  1 1239  (Part  12) 
for  category  HBF  material,  the  test  sample  being  no 
thicker  than  the  relevant  part. 

30.2.2  For  appliances  that  are  operated  while  attended, 
parts  ofinsulating  material  supporting  current-carrying 
connections,  and  parts  of  insulating  material  within  a 
distance  of  3  mm  of  such  connections,  are  subjected 
to  the  glow- wire  test  of  IS  1 1000  (Part  2/Sec  1)  that  is 
carried  out  at: 

a)  750  °C,  for  connections  that  carry  a  current 
exceeding  0.5  A  during  normal  operation;  and 

b)  650  ^C,  for  other  connections, 

NOTES 

1  Contacts  in  components  such  as  switch  contacts  are 
considered  to  be  connections. 

2  The  tip  of  the  glow-wire  should  be  applied  to  the  part  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  connection. 

This  test  is  not  applicable  to, 

a)  parts  supporting  welded  connections; 

b)  parts  supporting  connections  in  low-power  circuits 
described  in  19.11.1; 

c)  soldered  connections  on  printed  circuit  boards; 

d)  connections  on  small  components  on  printed  circuit 
boards; 

e)  parts  within  3  mm  of  any  of  these  connections; 
0    hand-held  appliances; 

g)   appliances  that  have  to  be  kept  switched  on  by  hand  or 

foot;  and 
h)   appliances  that  are  continuously  loaded  by  hand. 

3  Examples  of  small  components  are  diodes,  transistors, 
resistors,  inductors,  integrated  circuits  and  capacitors  not 
directly  connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

30.2.3  Appliances  that  are  operated  while  unattended 
are  tested  as  specified  in  30.2.3.1  and  30.2.3.2. 
However,  the  tests  are  not  applicable  to:   * 


a)  parts  supporting  welded  connections; 

b)  parts  supporting  connections  in  low-power 
circuits  described  in  19.11.1; 

c)  soldered  connections  on  printed  circuit 
boards; 

d)  connections  on  small  components  that  are 
mounted  on  printed  circuit  boards;  and 

e)  parts  within  3  mm  of  any  of  these  connections. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  small  components  are  diodes, 
transistors,  resistors,  inductors,  integrated  circuits  and 
capacitors  not  directly  connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

30.2.3.1  Parts  of  insulating  material  supporting 
connections  that  carry  a  current  exceeding  0.2  A  during 
normal  operation,  and  parts  of  insulating  material 
within  a  distance  of  3  mm  of  such  connections,  shall 
have  a  glow- wire  flammability  index  of  at  least  850*^C, 
the  test  sample  being  no  thicker  than  the  relevant  part. 

30.23.2  Parts  ofinsulating  material  supporting  current- 
carrying  connections,  and  parts  of  insulating  material 
within  a  distance  of  3  mm  of  such  connections,  are 
subjected  to  the  glow-wire  test  of  IS  1 1000  (Part  2/ 
Sec  1),  However,  the  glow- wire  test  is  not  carried  out 
on  parts  of  material  classified  as  having  a  glow-wire 
ignition  temperature  of  at  least: 

a)  775°C,  for  connections  which  carry  a  current 
exceeding  0.2  A  during  normal  operation; 

b)  675'^C,  for  other  connections;  and 

c)  provided  that  the  test  sample  was  no  thicker 
than  the  relevant  part. 

When  the  glow-wire  test  of  IS  1 1000  (Part  2/Sec  1)  is 
carried  out,  the  temperatures  are: 

a)  750°C,  for  connections  which  carry  a  current 
exceeding  0.2  A  during  normal  operation;  and 

b)  650°C,  for  other  connections. 

NOTES 

1  Contacts  in  components  such  as  switch  contacts  are 
considered  to  be  connections. 

2  The  tip  of  the  glow-wire  is  applied  to  the  part  in  the  vicinify 

of  the  connection. 

If  parts  withstand  the  glow- wire  test  of  IS  1 1000 
(Part  2/Sec  1),  but  during  the  test,  produce  a  flame 
that  persists  for  longer  than  2  s,  then  these  parts  and 
adjacent  parts  are  further  tested  as  follows.  Parts 
above  the  connection  within  the  envelope  of  a 
vertical  cylinder  having  a  diameter  of  20  mm  and  a 
height  of  50  mm  are  subjected  to  the  needle-flame 
test  of  Annex  E.  However,  parts  shielded  by  a  barrier 
that  meets  the  needle-flame  test  of  Annex  E  are  not 
tested. 

The  needle-flame  test  is  not  carried  out  on  parts  of 
material  classified  as  V-0  or  V- 1 ,  provided  that  the  test 
sample  was  no  thicker  than  the  relevant  part. 


55 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


30.2.4  The  base  material  of  printed  circuit  boards  is 
subjected  to  the  needle-flame  test  of  Annex  E.  The 
flame  is  applied  to  the  edge  of  the  board  where  the 
heat  sink  effect  is  lowest  when  the  board  is  positioned 
as  m  normal  use. 

NOTE  —  The  test  may  be  carried  out  on  a  printed  circuit  board 
on  which  components  are  mounted.  However,  ignition  of  a 
component  is  disregarded. 

The  test  is  not  carried  out: 

a)  on  printed  circuit  boards  of  low-power  circuits 
described  in  19.11.1; 

b)  on  the  printed  circuit  boards  in: 

1 )  a  metal  enclosure  that  confines  flames  or 
burning  droplets; 

2)  hand-held  appliances; 

3)  appliances  that  have  to  be  kept  switched 
on  by  hand  or  foot; 


4)     appliances  that  are  continuously  loaded 
by  hand; and 
c)     if  the  material  is  classified  as  V-0,  provided 
that  the  test  sample  was  no  thicker  than  the 
printed  circuit  board. 

31  RESISTANCE  TO  RUSTING 

Ferrous  parts,  the  rusting  of  which  might  cause  the 
appliance  to  fail  to  comply  with  this  standard,  shall  be 
adequately  protected  against  rusting. 

NOTE  —  Tests  are  specified  in  Part  2  of  this  standard  when 
necessary. 

32  RADIATION,  TOXICITY  AND  SIMILAR 
HAZARDS 

Appliances  shall  not  emit  harmful  radiation  or  present 
a  toxic  or  similar  hazard. 

NOTE  —  Tests  are  specified  in  Part  2  of  this  standard  when 
necessary. 


ANNEX A 

(Clause  5.1) 

ROUTINE  TEST 


A-0  INTRODUCTION 

Routine  tests  are  intended  to  be  carried  out  by  the 
manufacturer  on  each  appliance  to  detect  a  production 
variation  that  could  impair  safety.  They  are  normally 
carried  out  on  the  complete  appliance  after  assembly 
but  the  manufacturer  may  perform  the  tests  at  an 
appropriate  stage  during  production,  provided  that  later 
manufacturing  processes  do  not  affect  the  results. 

NOTE  —  Components  are  not  subjected  to  these  tests  if  they 
have  been  previously  subjected  to  routine  tests  during  their 
manufacture. 

The  manufacturer  may  use  a  different  routine  test 
procedure  provided  that  the  level  of  safety  is  equivalent 
to  that  provided  by  the  tests  specified  in  this  Annex. 

These  tests  are  the  minimum  considered  necessary  to 
cover  essential  safety  aspects.  It  is  the  manufacturer's 
responsibility  to  decide  if  additional  routine  tests  are 
necessary.  It  may  be  determined  from  engineering 
considerations  that  some  of  the  tests  are  impracticable 
or  inappropriate  and  therefore  need  not  be  carried  out. 

U  a  product  fails  any  of  the  tests,  it  is  to  be  retested 
after  rework  or  adjustment. 


A-1  EARTH  CONTINUITY  TEST 

A  current  of  at  least  1 0  A,  derived  from  a  source  having 
a  no-load  voltage  not  exceeding  12  V  (ac  or  dc),  is 
passed  between  each  of  the  accessible  earthed  metal 
parts  and: 

a)  for  Class  I  appliances  intended  to  be 
permanently  connected  to  fixed  wiring,  the 
earthing  terminal; 

b)  for  other  Class  I  appliances: 

1 )  the  earthing  pin  or  earthing  contact  of  the 
plug;  and 

2)  the  earthing  pin  of  the  appliance  inlet. 

The  voltage  drop  is  measured  and  the  resistance  is 
calculated  and  shall  not  exceed: 

a)  for  appliances  having  a  supply  cord,  0,2  Q, 
or  0, 1  Q  plus  the  resistance  of  the  supply  cord; 
and 

b)  for  other  appliances,  0, 1  12. 

NOTES 

1  The  test  is  only  carried  out  for  the  duration  necessary  to 

enable  the  voltage  drop  to  be  measured. 


56 


2  Care  is  to  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  contact  resistance 
between  the  lip  of  the  measuring  probe  and  the  metal  part  under 
test  does  not  influence  the  test  results. 

A.2  ELECTRIC  STRENGTH  TEST 

The  insulation  of  the  appliance  is  subjected  to  a  voltage 
of  substantially  sinusoidal  waveform  having  a 
frequency  of  approximately  50  Hz  for  1  s.  The  value 
of  the  test  voltage  and  the  points  of  application  are 
shov^n  in  Table  19. 

No  breakdown  shall  occur.  Breakdown  is  assumed  to 
occur  when  the  current  in  the  test  circuit  exceeds  5  mA, 
However,  this  limit  may  be  increased  up  to  30  mA  for 
appliances  with  a  high  leakage  current. 

NOTES 

1  The  circuit  used  for  the  test  incorporates  a  current  sensing 


IS  302-1  :  2008 

device  that  trips  when  the  current  exceeds  the  limit. 

2  The  high  voltage  transformer  is  to  be  capable  of  maintaining 
the  specified  voltage  at  the  limiting  current. 

3  Instead  of  being  subjected  to  an  ac  voltage,  the  insulation 
may  be  subjected  to  a  dc  voltage  of  1.5  times  the  value  shown 
in  the  table.  An  ac  voltage  having  a  frequency  up  to  5  Hz  is 
considered  to  be  a  dc  voltage. 

A-3  FUNCTIONAL  TEST 

The  correct  functioning  of  an  appliance  is  checked  by 
inspection  or  by  an  appropriate  test  if  the  incorrect 
connection  or  adjustment  of  components  has  safety 
implications. 

NOTE  —  Examples  are  verification  of  the  correct  direction  of 
motor  rotation  and  the  appropriate  operation  of  interlock 
switches.  This  does  not  require  testing  of  thermal  controls  or 
protective  devices. 


Table  19  Test  Voltages 

{Clause  A-2) 


SlIVo. 


Points  of  Application 


Test  Voltage 

V 


Class  I  Appliances  and  Class  II 

Appliances 

Rated  Voltage 


(1) 


(2) 


<150  V 
(3) 


>I50  V 

(4) 


Class  III 
Appliances 


(5) 


Between  live  parts  and  accessible  metal 
parts  separated  from  live  parts  by: 

a)  basic  insulation  only 

I) 

b)  double  or  reinforced  insulation 


800 
2  000 


1  000 

2  500 


400 


NOTE  —  It  may  be  necessary  for  the  appliance  to  be  in  operation  during  the  test  to  ensure  that  the  test  voltage  is  applied  to  all  relevant  insulation,  for 
example,  heating  elements  controlled  by  a  relay. 


*  For  Class  01  appliances  and  Class  1  appliances,  this  test  need  not  be  carried  out  on  parts  of  Class  II  construction  if  the  test  is  considered  to  be  inappropriate. 


ANNEX  B 

(Clause  5,17) 

APPLIANCES  POWERED  BY  RECHARGEABLE  BATTERIES 


The  following  modifications  to  this  standard  are 
applicable  for  appliances  powered  by  batteries  that  are 
recharged  in  the  appliance. 

NOTE  —  This  Annex  does  not  apply  to  battery  chargers. 

3  TERMINOLOGY 

3.1.9  Normal  Operation 

Operation  of  the  appliance  under  the  following 
conditions: 

a)  the  appliance,  supplied  by  its  fully  charged 
battery,  is  operated  as  specified  in  the  relevant 
Part  2  of  this  standard; 

b)  the  battery  is  charged,  the  battery  being 
initially  discharged  to  such  an  extent  that  the 
appliance  cannot  operate; 


c)  if  possible,  the  appliance  is  supplied  from  the 
supply  mains  through  its  battery  charger,  the 
battery  being  initially  discharged  to  such  an 
extent  that  the  appliance  cannot  operate.  The 
appliance  is  operated  as  specified  in  the 
relevant  Part  2  of  this  standard;  and 

d)  if  the  appliance  incorporates  inductive 
coupling  between  two  parts  that  are 
detachable  from  each  other,  the  appliance  is 
supplied  from  the  supply  mains  with  the 
detachable  part  removed. 


3.6.2 


NOTE  —  If  a  part  has  to  be  removed  in  order  to  discard  the 
battery  before  scrapping  the  appliance,  this  part  is  not 
considered  to  be  detachable  even  if  the  instructions  state  that 
it  is  to  be  removed. 


57 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


5  GENERAL  CONDITIONS  FOR  THE  TESTS 

5.101  When  appliances  are  supplied  from  the  supply 
mains,  they  are  tested  as  specified  for  motor-operated 
appliances. 

7  MARKING  AND  INSTRUCTIONS 

7.1  The  battery  compartment  of  appliances 
incorporating  batteries  that  are  intended  to  be  replaced 
by  the  user  shall  be  marked  with  the  battery  voltage 
and  the  polarity  of  the  terminals. 

NOTES 

1  If  colours  are  used,  the  positive  terminal  is  to  be  identified  in 
red  and  the  negative  terminal  in  black. 

2  Colour  is  not  to  be  used  as  the  only  indication  of  polarity. 

7.12  The  instructions  shall  give  information  regarding 
charging. 

The  instructions  for  appliances  incorporating  batteries 
that  are  intended  to  be  replaced  by  the  user  shall  include 
the  following: 

a)  the  type  reference  of  the  battery; 

b)  the  orientation  of  the  battery  with  regard  to 
polarity; 

c)  the  method  of  replacing  batteries; 

d)  details  regarding  safe  disposal  of  used 
batteries; 

e)  warning  against  using  non-rechargeable 
batteries;  and 

0     how  to  deal  with  leaking  batteries. 

The  instructions  for  appliances  incorporating  a  battery 
that  contains  materials  that  are  hazardous  to  the 
environment  shall  give  details  on  how  to  remove  the 
battery  and  shall  state  that: 

a)  the  battery  must  be  removed  from  the 
appliance  before  it  is  scrapped; 

b)  the  appliance  must  be  disconnected  from  the 
supply  mains  when  removing  the  battery;  and 

c)  the  battery  is  to  be  disposed  of  safely. 

7.15  Markings,  other  than  those  associated  with  the 
battery,  shall  be  placed  on  the  part  of  the  appliance 
that  is  connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

8  PROTECTION  AGAINST  ACCESS  TO  LIVE 
PARTS 

8.2  Appliances  having  batteries  that  according  to  the 
instructions  may  be  replaced  by  the  user  need  only 
have  basic  insulation  between  live  parts  and  the  inner 
surface  of  the  battery  compartment.  If  the  appliance 
can  be  operated  without  the  batteries,  double  insulation 
or  reinforced  insulation  is  required. 


11  HEATING 

11,7  The  battery  is  charged  for  the  period  stated  in  the 
instructions  or  for  24  h,  whichever  is  longer, 

19  ABNORMAL  OPERATION 

19.1  Appliances  are  also  subjected  to  the  tests 
of  19.101,  19.102,  and  19.103. 

19.10  Not  applicable. 

19.101  Appliances  are  supplied  at  rated  voltage  for 
1 68  h,  the  battery  being  continually  charged  during  this 
period. 

19.102  For  appliances  having  batteries  that  can  be 
removed  without  the  aid  of  a  tool,  and  having  terminals 
that  can  be  short-circuited  by  a  thin  straight  bar,  the 
terminals  of  the  battery  are  short-circuited,  the  battery 
being  fully  charged. 

19.103  Appliances  having  batteries  that  are  replaceable 
by  the  user^^e  supplied  at  rated  voltage  and  operated 
under  norntal  operation  but  with  the  battery  removed 
or  in  any  position  allowed  by  the  construction. 

21  MECHANICAL  STRENGTH 

21.101  Appliances  having  pins  for  insertion  into 
socket-outlets  shall  have  adequate  mechanical  strength. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  subjecting  the  part  of  the 
appliance  incorporating  the  pins  to  the  free  fall  test, 
procedure  2,  of  IS  9000  (Part  7/Sec  4). 

The  number  of  falls  is: 

a)  100,  if  the  mass  of  the  part  does  not  exceed 
250  g;  and 

b)  50,  if  the  mass  of  the  part  exceeds  250  g. 

After  the  test,  the  requirements  of  8.1,  15.1.1,  16.3 
and  29  shall  be  met. 

22  CONSTRUCTION 

22.3 

NOTE  —  Appliances  having  pins  for  insertion  into  socket- 
outlets  are  tested  as  fully  assembled  as  possible. 

25  SUPPLY  CONNECTION  AND  EXTERNAL 
FLEXIBLE  CORDS 

25.13  An  additional  lining  or  bushing  is  not  necessary 
for  interconnection  cords  operating  at  safety  extra-low 
voltage. 

30  RESISTANCE  TO  HEAT  AND  FIRE 

30.2  For  parts  of  the  appliance  that  are  connected  to 
the  supply  mains  during  the  charging  period,  30.2.3 
applies.  For  other  parts,  30,2.2  applies. 


58 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


ANNEX  C 

(Clauses  5.2  and  1 1.8) 

AGEING  TEST  ON  MOTORS 


C-1  This  Annex  is  applicable  when  there  is  doubt  with 
regard  to  the  temperature  classification  of  the  insulation 
of  a  motor  winding,  for  example: 

a)  if  the  temperature  rise  of  the  motor  winding 
exceeds  the  values  specified  in  Table  3; 

b)  when  well-known  insulating  materials  are 
used  in  an  unconventional  way; 

c)  when  combinations  of  materials  of  different 
temperature  classes  are  used  at  a  temperature 
higher  than  that  allowed  for  the  lowest  class; 
and 

d)  when  materials  are  used  for  which  sufficient 
experience  is  not  available,  for  instance  in 
motors  having  integral  core  insulation. 

This  test  is  carried  out  on  six  samples  of  the  motor. 

The  rotor  of  each  motor  is  locked  and  a  current  is  passed 
individually  through  the  rotor  winding  and  the  stator 
winding,  this  current  being  such  that  the  temperature 
of  the  relevant  winding  is  equal  to  the  maximum 
temperature  rise  measured  during  the  test  of  II, 
increased  by  25  K.  This  temperature  is  further 
increased  by  one  of  the  values  chosen  from  Table  20. 


The  corresponding  total  time  during  which  the  current 
is  passed  is  indicated  in  the  table. 

The  total  time  is  divided  into  four  equal  periods,  each 
being  followed  by  a  period  of  48  h  during  which  the 
motor  is  subjected  to  the  humidity  test  of  15.3.  After 
the  final  humidity  test,  the  insulation  shall  withstand 
the  electric  strength  test  of  16.3,  but  with  the  test  voltage 
reduced  to  50  percent  of  the  value  specified. 

After  each  of  the  four  periods  and  before  the  subsequent 
humidity  test,  the  leakage  current  of  the  insulating 
system  is  measured  as  specified  in  13.2,  any  component 
not  forming  part  of  the  insulation  system  under  test 
being  disconnected  before  the  measurement  is  made. 

The  leakage  current  shall  not  exceed  0.5  mA. 

Failure  of  only  one  of  the  six  motors  during  the  first  of 
the  four  periods  of  the  test  is  ignored. 

If  one  of  the  six  motors  fails  during  the  second,  third 
or  fourth  period  of  the  test,  the  remaining  five  motors 
are  subjected  to  a  fifth  period  followed  by  the  humidity 
test  and  the  electric  strength  test. 

The  remaining  five  motors  shall  complete  the  test. 


Table  20  Test  Conditions 

(Clause  C-1) 


SI  No. 

(1) 

Temperature  Increase 
K 

(2) 

i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 

NOTE  —  The  temperature 

increase 

chosen 

0±3 
10±3 
20  ±3 
30  +  3 
is  selected  by  the  manufacturer. 

Total  Time 

h 

(3) 


P  ' 
0.5  p 
0.25  p 
0A25p 


'^p  is  8  000  unless  otherwise  specified  in  Part  2  of  this  standard. 


59 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


ANNEX  D 

(Clauses  5.2  andlAAA) 

THERMAL  MOTOR  PROTECTORS 


D-1  This  Annex  is  applicable  to  appliances  having 
motors  that  incorporate  thermal  motor  protectors. 

The  appliance  is  supplied  at  rated  voltage  with  the  rotor 
of  the  motor  locked. 

The  duration  of  the  test  is  as  follows: 

a)  motors  having  self-resetting  thermal  motor 
protectors  are  operated  for  300  cycles  or  for 
72  h,  whichever  occurs  first,  unless  they  are 
likely  to  be  permanently  subjected  to  the 
supply  voltage  in  which  case  the  duration  is 
432  h;  and 


b)  motors  having  non-self-resetting  thermal 
motor  protectors  are  operated  for  30  cycles, 
the  thermal  motor  protector  being  reset  as 
soon  as  possible  after  each  operation,  but  in 
not  less  than  30  s; 

During  the  test,  temperatures  shall  not  exceed  the 
values  specified  in  19.7  and  the  appliance  shall  comply 
with  19.13. 

NOTE  —  This  test  may  be  carried  out  on  a  separate  appliance. 


ANNEX  E 

{Clauses  19.11,  30.2.3.2  anrf  30.2.4) 

NEEDLE  FLAME  TEST 


The  needle  flame  test  is  carried  out  in  accordance  with 
IS  11000(Part  2/Sec  2)  with  the  following 
modifications. 

5  SEVERITIES 

Replacement: 

The  duration  of  application  of  the  test  flame  is 
30  s  ±  1  s. 

8  TEST  PROCEDURE 

8.2  Modification: 

The  specimen  is  arranged  so  that  the  flame  can  be 
applied  to  a  vertical  or  horizontal  edge  as  shown  in  the 
examples  of  Fig.  1. 


8.4  Modification: 

The  first  paragraph  does  not  apply. 

Addition: 

If  possible,  the  flame  is  applied  at  least  10  mm  from  a 
comer. 

8.5  Replacement: 

The  test  is  carried  out  on  one  specimen.  If  the  specimen 
does  not  withstand  the  test,  the  test  may  be  repeated 
on  two  further  specimens,  both  of  which  shall  then 
withstand  the  test. 

10  EVALUATION  OF  TEST  RESULTS 

The  duration  of  burning  (/J  shall  not  exceed  30  s. 
However,  for  printed  circuit  boards,  it  shall  not  exceed 
15  s. 


60 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


Capacitors  likely  to  be  permanently  subjected  to  the 
supply  voltage,  and  used  for  radio  interference 
suppression  or  for  voltage  dividing,  shall  comply  with 
the  following  clauses  of  ISQC  302400  :  1994,  as 
modified  below. 

SECTION  ONE  —  GENERAL 

1.5  Terminology 

1.5.3  This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 

Class  X  capacitors  are  tested  according  to  sub-class 
X2. 

1.5.4  This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 

1.6  Marking 

Items  (a)  and  (b)  of  this  sub-clause  are  applicable. 

SECTION  THREE  —  QUALITY  ASSESSMENT 
PROCEDURES 

3.4  Approval  Testing 

3.4.3.2  Tests 

Table  II  is  applicable  as  follows: 

a)  group  0;  sub-clauses  4.1,  4.2.1  and  4.2.5; 

b)  group  lA:  sub-clause  4.1,1; 

c)  group  2:  sub-clause  4.12; 

d)  group  3:  sub-clauses  4.13  and  4.14; 
c)  group  6:  sub-clause  4,17;  and 

f)  group  7:  sub-clause  4,18. 

SECTION  FOUR  —  TEST  AND  MEASUREMENT 
PROCEDURES 

4.1  Visual  Examination  and  Check  of  Dimensions 

This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 


ANNEX  F 

{Clause  lA A  A) 
CAPACITORS 

4.2  Electrical  Test 

4.2,1  This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 

4.2.5  This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 


4.2,5,2  Only  Table  IX  is  applicable.  The  values  for  lest 
A  apply;  however,  for  capacitors  in  heating  appliances 
the  values  for  test  B  or  test  C  apply. 

4.12  Damp  Heat,  Steady  State 

This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 

NOTE  —  Only  insulation  resistance  and  voltage  proof  are 
checked  {see  Table  Xlll). 

4.13  Impulse  Voltage 

This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 

4.14  Endurance 

Sub-clauses  4.14.1,  4.14.3,  4,14.4  and  4.14.7  are 

applicable. 

AAAH  Addition 

NOTE  —  Only  insulation  resistance  and  voltage  proof  are 
checked  {see  Table  XIV)  together  with  a  visual  examination  to 
ensure  that  there  is  no  visible  damage. 

4.17  Passive  Flammability  Test 

This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 

4.18  Active  Flammability  Test 

This  sub-clause  is  applicable. 


61 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ANNEX  G 

(Clauses  5.2  and  24.1.2) 

SAFETY  ISOLATING  TRANSFORMERS 


The  following  modifications  to  this  standard  are 
applicable  for  safety  isolating  transformers. 

7  MARKING  AND  INSTRUCTIONS 

7.1  Transformers  for  specific  use  shall  be  marked  with: 

a)  name,  trade-mark  or  identification  mark  of  the 
manufacturer  or  responsible  vendor; 

b)  model  or  type  reference. 

NOTE  —  The  definition  of  transformers  for  specific  use  is  given 
in  IS/IEC  61558-1. 

17        OVERLOAD        PROTECTION        OF 
TRANSFORMERS  AND  ASSOCIATED  CIRCUITS 

Fail-safe  transformers  shall  comply  with  15.5  of 


IS/IEC  61558-1. 

NOTE  —  This  test  is  carried  out  on  three  transformers. 

22  CONSTRUCTION 

19.1  and  19.1.2  of  IS/IEC  61558-2-6  are  applicable. 

29  CLEARANCES,  CREEPAGE  DISTANCES 
AND  SOLID  INSULATION 

29.1, 29.2  and  29.3 

The  distances  specified  in  items  2a,  2c  and  3  in  Table  13 
of  IS/IEC  61558-1  apply. 

NOTE  —  The  values  stated  for  pollution  degree  2  is  applicable. 


ANNE5^  H 

(Clauses  52,  11.8  an^  24. 1.3) 

SWITCHES 


Switches  shall  comply  with  the  following  clauses  of 
IS/IEC  61058,  as  modified  below. 

The  tests  of  IS/IEC  61058  are  carried  out  under  the 
conditions  occurring  in  the  appliance. 

Before  being  tested,  switches  are  operated  20  times 
without  load. 

8  MARKING  AND  DOCUMENTATION 

Switches  are  not  required  to  be  marked.  However,  a 
switch  that  can  be  tested  separately  from  the  apphance 
shall  be  marked  with  the  manufacturer's  name  or  trade- 
mark and  the  type  reference. 

13  MECHANISM 

NOTE  —  The  tests  may  be  carried  out  on  a  separate  sample. 

15  INSULATION  RESISTANCE  AND 
DIELECTRIC  STRENGTH 

15.1  is  not  applicable. 

15.2  is  not  applicable. 

15.3  is  applicable  for  full  disconnection  and  micro- 
disconnection. 

NOTE  —  This  test  is  carried  out  immediately  after  the 
humidity  test  of  15.3. 

17  ENDURANCE 

Compliance  is  checked  on  three  separate  appliances 
or  switches. 


For  17,2.4.4,  the  number  of  cycles  of  actuation 
declared  according  to  7.1.4  is  10  000  unless  otherwise 
specified  in  24.1.3  of  the  relevant  Part  2  of  this 
standard. 

Switches  intended  for  operation  under  no  load  and 
which  can  be  operated  only  with  the  aid  of  a  tool  is  not 
subjected  to  the  tests.  This  applies  also  for  such 
switches  operated  by  hand  that  are  interlocked  so  that 
they  cannot  be  operated  under  load.  However,  switches 
without  this  interlock  are  subjected  to  the  test  of 
17.2.4.4  for  100  cycles  of  operation. 

17.2.2  and  17.2.5.2  are  not  applicable.  The  ambient 
temperature  during  the  test  is  that  occurring  in  the 
appliance  during  the  test  of  11,  as  specified  in 
footnote  2  of  Table  3. 

At  the  end  of  the  tests,  the  temperature  rise  of  the 
terminals  shall  not  have  increased  by  more  than  30  K 
above  the  temperature  rise  measured  in  11. 

20  CLEARANCES,  CREEPAGE  DISTANCES, 
SOLID  INSULATION  AND  COATINGS  OF 
RIGID  PRINTED  BOARD  ASSEMBLIES 

This  clause  is  applicable  to  clearances  and  creepage 
distances  for  functional  insulation,  across  full 
disconnection  and  micro-disconnection,  as  stated  in 
Table  24, 


62 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ANNEX  I 

(Clauses  24,6) 

MOTORS  HAVING  BASIC  INSULATION  THAT  IS  INADEQUATE  FOR  THE  RATED 

VOLTAGE  OF  THE  APPLIANCE 


The  following  modifications  to  this  standard  are 
applicable  for  motors  having  basic  insulation  that  is 
inadequate  for  the  rated  voltage  of  the  appliance. 

8  PROTECTION  AGAINST  ACCESS  TO  LIVE 
PARTS 

8.1 

NOTE  —  Metal  parts  of  the  motor  are  considered  to  be  bare 
live  parts. 

11  HEATING 

11.3  The  temperature  rise  of  the  body  of  the  motor  is 
determined  instead  of  the  temperature  rise  of  the 

windings. 

11.8  The  temperature  rise  of  the  body  of  the  motor, 
where  it  is  in  contact  with  insulating  material,  shall 
not  exceed  the  values  shown  in  Table  3  for  the  relevant 

insulating  material. 

16  LEAKAGE  CURRENT  AND  ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 

16.3  The  insulation  between  live  parts  of  the  motor 
and  its  other  metal  parts  is  not  subjected  to  this 

test. 


19  ABNORMAL  OPERATION 

19.1  The  tests  of  19,7  to  19.9  are  not  carried  out. 

Appliances  are  also  subjected  to  the  test  of  19.101. 

19.101  The  appliance  is  operated  at  rated  voltage  with 
each  of  the  following  fault  conditions: 

a)  short  circuit  of  the  terminals  of  the  motor, 
including  any  capacitor  incorporated  in  the 
motor  circuit; 

b)  short  circuit  of  each  diode  of  the  rectifier; 

c)  open  circuit  of  the  supply  to  the  motor;  and 

d)  open  circuit  of  any  parallel  resistor,  the  motor 
being  in  operation. 

Only  one  fault  is  simulated  at  a  time,  the  tests  being 
carried  out  consecutively. 

NOTE  —  The  faults  are  simulated  as  shown  in  Fig  I-l . 

22  COi^STRUCTION 

22.101  For  Class  I  appliances  incorporating  a  motor 
supplied  by  a  rectifier  circuit,  the  dc  circuit  shall  be 
insulated  from  accessible  parts  of  the  appliance  by 
double  insulation  or  reinforced  insulation. 

Compliance  is  checked  by  the  tests  specified  for  double 
insulation  and  reinforced  insulation. 


Key 


Parallel  circuit 

□    original  connection  Short-circuit 

A  —  short-circuit  of  the  terminals  of  the  motor 
B  —  short-circuit  of  a  diode 
C —  open  circuit  of  the  supply  to  the  motor 
D —  open  circuit  of  the  parallel  resistor 

Fig.  I'l  Simulation  of  Faults 


Series  circuit 


□      Open  circuit 


63 


IS  302-1 :  2008 


ANNEX  J 

{Clause  29) 

COATED  PRINTED  CIRCUIT  BOARDS 


The  testing  of  protective  coalings  of  printed  circuit 
boards  is  carried  out  in  accordance  with  IS  15382 
(Part  3)  with  the  following  modifications, 

6.6  Climatic  Sequence 

When  production  samples  are  used,  three  samples  of 
the  printed  circuit  board  are  tested. 

6.6.1  Cold 

The  test  is  carried  out  at  -  25  °C. 


6.6.3  Rapid  Change  of  Temperature 

Severity  1  is  specified. 

6.8.6  Partial  Discharge  Extinction  Voltage 

Type  A  coatings  are  not  subjected  to  a  partial  discharge 

test. 

NOTE  —  Partial  discharges  do  not  normally  occur  at  voltages 
lower  than  700  V  peak. 

6.9  Additional  Tests 

This  sub-clause  is  not  applicable. 


ANNEX  K 

{Clauses  29 A  and  L-l) 

OVERVOLTAGE  CATEGORIES 


The  following  information  on  overvohage  categories 
is  extracted  from  IS  15382  (Part  1). 

Overvoltage  category  is  a  numeral  defining  a  transient 
overvoltage  condition. 

Equipment  of  overvoltage  category  IV  is  for  use  at  the 
origin  of  the  installation. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  such  equipment  are  electricity  meters 
and  primary  overcurrent  protection  equipment. 

Equipment  of  overvoltage  category  III  is  equipment 
in  fixed  installations  and  for  cases  where  the  reliability 
and  the  availability  of  the  equipment  are  subject  to 
special  requirements. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  such  equipment  are  switches  in  the  fixed 
installation  and  equipment  for  industrial  use  with  permanent 
connection  to  the  fixed  installation. 


Equipment  of  overvoltage  category  II  is  energy 
consuming  equipment  to  be  supplied  from  the  fixed 
installation. 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  such  equipment  are  appliances,  portable 
tools  and  other  household  and  similar  loads. 

If  such  equipment  is  subjected  to  special  requirements 
with  regard  to  reliability  and  availability,  overvoltage 
category  III  applies. 

Equipment  of  overvoltage  category  I  is  equipment  for 
connection  to  circuits  in  which  measures  are  taken  to 
limit  transient  overvoltages  to  an  appropriately  low 
level. 

NOTE  —  Examples  are  protected  electronic  circuits. 


64 


IS  302-1  :  2008 

ANNEX  L 

{Clauses  29 A  and  29.2) 

GUIDANCE  FOR  THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  CLEARANCES  AND  CREEPAGE  DISTANCES 


L-1  When  measuring  clearances,  the  following  applies. 

The  rated  voltage  and  overvoltage  category  are 
determined  {see  Annex  K). 


NOTE 

II. 


In  general,  appliances  are  in  overvoltage  category 


The  rated  impulse  voltage  is  determined  from  Table  1 5 . 

If  pollution  degree  3  is  applicable,  the  clearances  for 
basic  insulation  and  functional  insulation  are  measured 
and  compared  with  the  minimum  values  specified  in 
Table  16.  For  other  cases,  the  impulse  voltage  test  may 
be  carried  out  if  the  rigidity  requirements  of  29.1  are 
met,  otherwise  the  values  specified  in  Table  16  apply. 

Clearances  of  supplementary  insulation  and  reinforced 
insulation  are  measured  and  compared  with  the 
minimum  values  specified  in  Table  16. 

Sequence  of  test  for  the  determination  of  clearances 
are  given  in  Fig.  L-1. 

L-2  When  measuring  creepage  distances,  the  following 
applies. 


The  working  voltage,  pollution  degree  and  material 
group  are  determined. 

The  creepage  distances  of  basic  insulation  and 
supplementary  insulation  are  measured  and  compared 
with  the  minimum  values  specified  in  Table  17.  A 
particular  creepage  distance  is  then  compared  with  the 
corresponding  clearance  of  Table  16  and  enlarged  if 
necessary  in  order  not  to  be  less  than  the  clearance. 
For  pollution  degree  1,  the  reduced  clearance  based 
on  the  impulse  voltage  test  can  be  used.  However,  the 
creepage  distance  can  not  be  less  than  the  values  of 
Table  17, 

The  creepage  distances  of  functional  insulation  are 
measured  and  compared  with  the  minimum  values 
specified  In  Table  18. 

The  creepage  distances  of  reinforced  insulation  are 
measured  and  compared  with  twice  the  minimum 
values  specified  in  Table  17. 

Sequence  of  test  for  the  determination  of  creepage 
distances  are  given  in  Fig.  L-2. 


Basic  &  functional 

insulation 

(rigid  parts) 


Rated  voltage 


Overvoltage 
category 


Rated  impulse 
voltage 

(Table  15) 


No 


Class  [,  II,  III 
appliances 


Impulse 
voltage  test 
(Clause  14) 


L 


Pollution  degree  3 
applicable 


Class  0,01 
appliances 


Minimum 
clearance 
(Table  16) 


Yes 


Minimum 
clearance 
(Table  16) 


Terminals  of  tubular 

sheathed  heating  elements 

(pollution  degree  I) 


Clearance 


Fig.  L-1  Sequence  for  the  Determination  of  Clearances 

65 


IS  302-1  :2008 


Working 
voltage 


Material 
group 


Basic  insulation 
(Table  17) 


Supplementary 
insulation 
(Table  17) 


Impulse  voltage 
test  on  clearance 


Clearance 
from  Table  1  i 


Pollution 
degree  2,  3 


Pollution 
degree  1 


Clearance 
from  Table  16 


Pollution 
degree 


Functional 
insulation 
(Table  18) 


I 

Reinforced 

insulation 

(29.2.4) 


Creepage 

distance 


Fig.  L-2  Sequence  for  the  Determination  of  Creepage  Distances 


66 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ANNEX  M 
(Clause  292) 

POLLUTION  DEGREE 


The  following  information  on  pollution  degrees  is 
extracted  from  IS  15382  (Part  1). 

Pollution 

The  microenvironment  determines  the  effect  of 
pollution  on  the  insulation.  The  macroenvironment, 
however,  has  to  be  taken  into  account  when  considering 
the  microenvironment. 

Means  may  be  provided  to  reduce  pollution  at  the 
insulation  under  consideration  by  effective  use  of 
enclosures,  encapsulation  or  hermetic  seahng.  Such 
means  to  reduce  pollution  may  not  be  effective  when 
the  equipment  is  subjected  to  condensation  or  if  in 
normal  use,  it  generates  pollutants  itself. 

Small  clearances  can  be  bridged  completely  by  solid 
particles,  dust  and  water  and  therefore  minimum 
clearances  are  specified  where  pollution  may  be  present 
in  the  microenvironment. 

NOTES 

1  Pollution  will  become  conductive  in  the  presence  of  humidity. 
Pollution  caused  by  contaminated  water,  soot,  metal  or  carbon 
dust  is  inherently  conductive. 

2  Conductive  pollution  by  ionized  gases  and  metallic 


depositions  occur  only  in  specific  instances,  for  example  in 
arc  chambers  of  switchgear  or  controlgear  and  is  not  covered 
by  IS  15382  (Part  I). 

Degrees  of  Pollution  in  the  Microenvironment 

For  the  purpose  of  evaluating  creepage  distances,  the 
following  four  degrees  of  pollution  in  the 
microenvironment  are  established: 

a)  pollution  degree  1 :  no  pollution  or  only  dry, 
non-conductive  pollution  occurs.  The 
pollution  has  no  influence; 

b)  pollution  degree  2;  only  non-conductive 
pollution  occurs,  except  that  occasionally  a 
temporary  conductivity  caused  by 
condensation  is  to  be  expected; 

c)  pollution  degree  3:  conductive  pollution 
occurs  or  dry  non-conductive  pollution  occurs 
that  becomes  conductive  dno^  to  condensation 
that  IS  to  be  expected;  and 

d)  pollution  degree  4:  the  pollution  generates 
persistent  conductivity  caused  by  conductive 
dust  or  by  rain  or  snow. 

NOTE  —  Pollution  degree  4  is  not  applicable  to  appliances. 


ANNEX  N 

{Clause  29.2) 

PROOF  TRACKING  INDEX  TEST 


The  proof  tracking  test  is  carried  out  in  accordance 
with  IS  2824  with  the  following  modifications. 

7  TEST  APPARATUS 
7.3  Test  Solutions 

Test  solution  A  is  used. 

10  DETERMINATION  OF  PROOF  TRACKING 
INDEX  (PTI) 

10,1  Procedure 

Modification: 

The  proof  voltage  is  100  V,  175  V,  400  V  or  600  V,  as 

appropriate. 


The  last  paragraph  of  Clause  3  applies. 

The  test  is  carried  out  on  five  specimens. 

In  case  of  doubt,  a  material  is  considered  to  have  a  PTI 
of  the  specified  value  if  it  withstands  the  test  at  a  voltage 
equal  to  the  proof  voltage  reduced  by  25  V,  the  number 
of  drops  being  increased  to  100. 

10.2  Report 

Addition: 

The  report  shall  state  if  the  PTI  value  was  based  on  a 
test  using  100  drops  with  a  test  voltage  of  (PTI-25) 
V. 


67 


IS  302-1  :  2008 

ANNEX  O 

{Clause  30) 

SELECTION  AND  SEQUENCE  OF  THE  TESTS  FOR  RESISTANCE  TO  HEAT  AND  FIRE 


Externa!  parts  of 

non-metallic 

materia! 


Thermop!astic  materia! 
forming  supp!ementary 

insulation  or  reinforced 
insulation 


Insulating  materia! 

supporting  live 

parts 


Otlier  parts 


Bal!  pressure  test  at  tlie  !iig!ier 

of 

40  °C  +  Ar  in  clause  U, 

25  ^C  +  Ar  in  clause  19* 


No  tests 


Ball  pressure  test 

at  the  tiiglier  of 

75  °C, 

40  °C  + Ar 
in  clause  U 


Ball  pressure  test 

at  the  highest  of 

75  °C, 

40  °C  +  ^T 

in  clause  11, 

25  °C  +  i\T 

in  clause  19* 


Ball  pressure  test 

at  the  higher  of 

125  °C, 

40  °C  +  ^T 

in  clause  11 


Ball  pressure  test 

at  the.  highest  of 

125  °C, 

40  °C  +  AT' 

in  clause  11, 

25  ^C  +  A7' 

in  clause  19* 


*AT  is  not  taken  into  account  if  the  test  of  19,4  is  terminated  by  the  operation  of  a  non-self-resetting  protective  device  requiring  the 
use  of  a  tool  or  removal  of  a  cover  to  reset  it. 

Fig.  0-1  Tests  for  Resistance  to  Heat 


68 


Insulation  of 
connections 
earning  >0,2  A  in 
unattended 
appliances 


Insulation  of 

connections 

carrying  <0.2  A 

in  unattended 

appliances 


Material  to  have 
a  GWFI  of  at 
least  850  °C 


0^ 


Material  to  have  a 

GWIT  of  at  least 

775  ^C 


Glow-wire  test  at 

750  °C 


Insulation  of 

connections 

carrying  >0.5  A 

in  attended 

appliances 


Insulation  of 

connections 

carrying  <0.5  A 

in  attended 

appliances 


Glow-wire 
test  at 
750  °C 


Other  parts  in 
attended  and 
unattended 
appliances  and 
all  parts  of  hand- 
held and  similar 
appliances 


Glow-wire 
test  at 

650  °C 


Glow-wire  test  at 
650  °C 


Material  to  have  a 
GWIT  of  at  least 

675  °C 


PCB  base 

material  with 

>  low-power 

circuits  in 

other  than 

hand-held  and 

similar 

appliances 


Glow-wire 
test  at 
550 '^'C 


Material  to 
be  HB40  or 

HBFas 
appropriate 


Glow-wire 
withstand 


Decorative 
trims,  knobs, 

etc. 


No  tests 


Needle-flame  test 


Material  to  be  at 
least  V-0 


Glow-wire 

withstand  with 

ignition 


Glow-wire 

withstand 

without  ignition 


Needle-flame  test  on 
surrounding  parts 


Surrounding  parts  to 
beat  least  V-1 


Fig.  0-2  Tests  for  Resistance  to  Fire 


o 


O 

o 

00 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ANNEX  P 

(Clause  5.14) 

GUIDANCE  FOR  THE  APPLICATION  OF  THIS  STANDARD  TO  APPLIANCES  USED  IN  WARM 

DAMP  EQUABLE  CLIMATES 


The  following  modifications  to  this  standard  are 
applicable  for  Class  I  appliances  having  a  rated  voltage 
exceeding  1 50  V,  that  are  intended  to  be  used  in  a  warm 
damp  equable  climate  and  that  are  marked  WDaE  and 
if  they  are  liable  to  be  connected  to  a  supply  mains 
that  excludes  the  protective  earthing  conductor  due  to 
deficiencies  in  the  fixed  wiring  system. 

NOTE  —  Warm  damp  equable  climates  are  characterized  by 
high  humidity  and  high  ambient  temperatures  with  little 

variation. 

5  GENERAL  CONDITIONS  FOR  THE  TESTS 

5.7  The  ambient  temperature  for  the  tests  of  11  and  13 
is40"f,°C. 

7  MARKING  AND  INSTRUCTIONS 

7.1  The  appliance  shall  be  marked  with  the  letters 
WDaE. 

7,12  The  instructions  shall  state  that  the  appliance  is 
to  be  supplied  through  a  residual  current  device  (RCD) 
having  a  rated  residual  operating  current  not  exceeding 
30  mA. 

The  instructions  shall  state  the  substance  of  the 
following: 


"This  apphance  is  considered  to  be  suitable  for  use 
in  countries  having  a  warm  damp  equable  climate. 
It  may  also  be  used  in  other  countries." 

11  HEATING 

11.8  The  values  of  Table  3  are  reduced  by  15  K. 

13  LEAKAGE  CURRENT  AND  ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH  AT  OPERATING  TEMPERATURE 

13.2  The  leakage  current  for  Class  I  appliances  shall 
not  exceed  210  |j A. 

15  MOISTURE  RESISTANCE 

15.3  The  value  of  r  is  37  °C. 

16  LEAKAGE  CURRENT  AND  ELECTRIC 
STRENGTH 

16.2  The  leakage  current  for  Class  I  appliances  shall 
not  exceed  210  jjA. 

19  ABNORMAL  OPERATION 

19.13  The  leakage  current  test  of  16.2  is  applied  in 
addition  to  the  electric  strength  test  of  16.3. 


70 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ANNEX  Q 

(Clause  19.11) 

SEQUENCE  OF  TESTS  FOR  THE  EVALUATION  OF  ELECTRONIC  CIRCUITS 


No 


Appliances  having 
electronic  circuits 


Appliance  tested  for  19.U.4 

with 

switch  in  off-position 

or  stand-by  mode 


Appliance  tested  for 
19.2  to  19.10 


a)  to  0  fault  in  19.11.2  and 

short-circuit 

of  low-power  circuit 


No 


Fail 


No  further 
test 


Yes 


No  further 
test 


No 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


SEQUENCE  OF  TESTS  FOR  THE  EVALUATION  OF  ELECTRONIC  CIRCUITS  -  {Concluded) 

, ^ y, 


Other  protective  device 

such  as  thermal  cut-out 

operates 


IS/IEC  60127  fuse  operates. 

an  intentionaliy  weak  part 

ruptures,  or  printed  circuit 

board  coiiducior  opens 


Protective  electronic 
circuit  operates 


Additional  evaluation 
according  to  19.1,  19.11 
or  19.12,  as  applicable 


Appliance  tested  for  19.2  to 

19.10  and  19.11.2  with  a  single 

fault  ofa)  to  Oof  19.1 1.2 

simulated  in  the  protective 

electronic  circuit 


Other  protective  device 

such  as  thermal  cut-out 

operates 


IS/lEC  60127  fuse  operates, 

an  Intentionally  weak  part 

ruptures,  or  printed  circuit 

board  conductor  opens 


Additional  evaluation 
according  to  19.1, 19.11 
or  19.12,  as  applicable 


Appliance  tested  for  19.11.4, 

under  other  conditions  of 

Clause  19  (except  19.2,  19.6 

and  19.11.3) 


Is  19.13  fulfdled?       ^>- 

YeTj 

Fail 

Is  software 
class  B  or  class 
^^^    used? 

\.. 

4o 

>-- 

Yes  J^ 

No  further 
test 

Is  software  evaluation^\^ 

Jo 

according  lo  Annex  K  ^^ 
■^..satisfactory?^^,....-'''''''''^ 

Y^^1p 

No  further 
test 

Fail 

72 


IS  302-1  :  2008 


ANNEX  R 

(Clause  22.46) 

SOFTWARE  EVALUATION 


Software  shall  be  evaluated  in  accordance  with  the 
loliowing  clauses  of  Annex  H  of  IS/IEC  60730-1  as 
modified  below. 

H-2  Definitions 

Only  definitions  H-2.16  to  H-2.20  are  applicable. 

H-7  Information 

Only  ibotnoles  12)  to  16)  and  18)  of  Table  7.2  are 
applicable. 

In  Footnote  15),  replace  *'the  requirements  of  17,  25, 
26  and  27  by  19.13  of  IS  302-1  and  replace  H-27  by 
19.11.2  of  IS  302-1". 

H- 11.12  Controls  using  Software 

All  of  the  sub-clauses  of  H-11.12  as  modified  below 
are  applicable,  except  H-11.12.6  and  H-11, 12,6.1 

which  are  not  applicable. 

In  the  second  paragraph,  replace  "required  in  items  66 
to  72  inclusive"  by  "referred  to  in  footnotes  1 2)  to  ]  6) 
and  18)  inclusive". 


H-11. 12.7  Delete  "and  identified  in  Table  7.2, 
requirement  68". 

H-11. 12.7.1  Replace  the  text  by  the  following: 

For  appliances  using  software  class  C  having  a  single 
channel  with  self-test  and  monitoring  structure,  the 
manufacturer  shall  provide  the  measures  necessary  to 
address  the  fault/errors  in  safety  related  segments  and 
data  indicated  in  Table  H-11,12.7.1. 

H-1 1.12.8  Replace  the  text  by  the  following: 

Software  fault/error  detection  shall  occur  before 
compliance  with  19.13  is  impaired. 

H-11. 12. 8.1  Replace  "result  in  the  response  declared 
in  Table  7.2,  requirement  72"  by  "occur  before 
compliance  with  19.13  is  impaired". 

H-11. 12.13  Replace  the  text  by  the  following: 

The  software  and  safety  related  hardware  under  its 
control  shall  initialize  and  terminate  before  compliance 
with  19.13  is  impaired. 


73 


iC()nti}uied  from  second  cover) 

25)  Annex  on  poHuticin  degree  added; 

26)  Annex  on  proof  tracking  index  added; 

27)  Annex  on  seleetion  and  sequence  of  (he  test  for  resistance  to  heat  and  fire  added; 

28)  Annex  on  guidance  for  the  application  of  this  standard  to  appHances  used  in  warm  Cimp  equable  climates 
added; and 

29)  Annex  on  sequence  of  tests  for  the  evaluation  of  electronic  circuits  added. 

il  has  been  assumed  in  the  formuhition  of  this  standard  that  the  execution  of  its  provisions  is  entrusted  to 
appropriately  qualified  and  experienced  persons. 

This  standard  recogm/es  the  accepted  level  of  protection  against  hazards  such  as  electrical,  mechanical,  thermal, 
lire  and  radiation  of  appliances  when  operated  as  in  ntirmal  use  faking  into  account  the  manufacturer's  instructions, 
h  also  covers  abnormal  situations  that  can  be  expected  in  practice. 

This  standard  takes  into  account  the  requirements  ol'  IS  732  :  1989  'Code  of  practice  for  electrical  wiring 
installations  (third  revisiony  as  far  as  possible  so  that  there  is  compatibility  with  the  wiring  rules  when  the 
appliance  is  connected  to  the  supply  mains. 

ir  the  functions  of  an  appliance  are  covered  by  different  parts  and  sections  of  IS  302,  the  relevant  part  and  section 
is  applied  to  each  function  separately,  as  far  as  is  reasonable.  If  applicable,  the  influence  of  one  function  on  the 
other  is  taken  into  account. 

NOTE  —  Throughout  this  standard,  wherever  the  word  Tart  2'  is  mentioned,  it  refers  to  the  relevant  part  of  IS  302. 

This  standard  is  a  product  family  standard  dealing  with  the  safety  of  appliances  and  takes  precedence  over 
horizontal  and  generic  standards  covering  the  same  subject. 

Application  of  this  standard,  as  far  as  is  reasonable,  may  be  considered  to  appliances  not  mentioned  in  Part  2  and 
to  appliances  designed  on  new  principles. 

An  appliance  thai  complies  with  the  text  of  this  standard  will  not  necessarily  be  considered  to  comply  with  the 
safety  principles  of  the  standard  if,  when  examined  and  tested,  it  is  found  to  have  other  features  which  impair  the 
level  of  safety  covered  by  these  requirements. 

An  appliance  employing  materials  or  having  forms  of  construction  differing  from  those  detailed  in  the  requirements 
of  this  standard  may  be  examined  and  tested  according  to  the  intent  of  the  requirements  and,  if  found  to  be 
substantially  equivalent,  may  be  considered  to  comply  with  the  standard. 

NOTH  —  Standards  dealing  with  non-safety  aspects  of  household  appliances  are: 
a)    Standards  concerning  methods  of  measuring  performance; 
h)   Standards  concerning  electromagnetic  emission;  and 
c)    Standards  concerning  electromagnetic  immunity. 

This  standard  is  based  on  lEC  60335-1(2006),  Ed  4.2  \Safety  of  household  and  similar  electrical  appliances  — 
Part  1:  General  requirements',  issued  by  the  International  Electrotechnical  Commission  with  following 
modifications. 

a)  Ambient  ttimperate  modified  due  to  temperate  climate; 

b)  Leakage  current  value  modified  due  to  temperate  climate;  and 

c)  Recommended  sampling  procedure  for  acceptance  test  incorporated. 

T1ie  earher  version  of  IS  302-1  :  1979  shall  be  valid  for  a  period  of  one  year  from  its  date  of  implementation.  It 
is  expected  that  by  this  period  all  the  Part  2's  shall  be  revised  in  line  with  revised  edition  of  this  standard. 

b^or  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules 
(or  rounding  off  numerical  values  {revised)' .  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value 
should  be  the  same  as  that  o^  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards  :  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  ETD  32  (5310) 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10  002 
Telephones  :  2323  0131,  2323  3375,  2323  9402 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central       :   Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110  002 

Eastern       :    1/14  C.LT.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  R  Road,  Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA700  054 

Northern    :   SCO  335-336,  Sector  34- A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 
Southern    :   C.LT.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI 600  1 13 


Western 


Branches 


Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI 400  093 


Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

r  2323  7617 
\  2323  3841 

r  2337  8499,  2337  8561 
L  2337  8626,  2337  9120 

/  260  3843 
\260  9285 

/  2254  1216,  2254  1442 
\  2254  2519,  2254  2315 

f  2832  9295,  2832  7858 
\  2832  7891,  2832  7892 


AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATI.  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Printed  by  Sunshine  Grapliics 


