**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3600-2 (1985) : Method of Testing Fusion Welded Joints 
and Weld Metal in Steely Part 2: Beam impact (charpy 
V-notch) test [MTD 11: Welding General] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-791-55052 : 669M4 : 620-178-748*22 



IS : 3600 ( Part 2 )- 1985 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 




METHOD OF 

TESTING FUSION WELDED JOINTS AND WELD 

METAL IN STEEL 

PART 2 BEAM IMPACT ( CHARPY V-NOTCH) TEST 

( Second Revision ) 



1. Scope — Prescribes Ihe metiiod of conducting the beam impact ( Charpy V-Notch ) test for welded 
material of thickness 6 mm and over in order to measure the fracture toughness in terms of beam 
impact V-notch energy when such energy is required to be evaluated at specified temperatures for 
weld metal, base metal and heat affected zone of welded joints. 

2. Definitions — For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 812-1957 'Glossary of 
terms relating to welding and cutting of metals* shall apply. 

3. Preparation of Test Specimens 

3.1 The number, location and orientation of the specimens and notches shall be as specified in the 
application standard. The normal orientation of the notch is as shown in Fig. 1. 



22^30 



,^.u„_. 



I 




T 



Iw, -yi 



90" 



1-^ 

90 
L 



It 



i 



ROOT RADIUS 
0-25 mm 

NOTCH DETAIL 



55- 



Lzrzjzi 



10 



W=10mm FOR STANDARD 
TEST SPECIMEN 



Ail dimensions in millimetres, 
FIG. 1 CHARPY V-NOTCH IMPACT TEST SPECIMEN 

3.2 The shape and dimensions of the standard test specimens shall be in accordance with Fig. 1. The 
tolerances of the dimensions and the method of preparation shall be as given in IS : 1757-1973 'Method 
for beam impact ( V-Notch ) on steel {flrst revision )\ The width W of the test piece with respect to 
weld and location of notch shall be as shown in Fig. 1. 

3.3 When the standard test piece cannot be obtained from the material, one of the subsidiary test 
pieces having width of 75 or 5 mm machined according to the dimensions and tolerances specified In 
IS : 1757-1973 may be used. 

4. Separation of Test Specimens — The method employed for the separation of the test specimens 
shall be such as to cause minimum deformation and minimum heating. The best method is usually by 
machining. If thermal cutting or other methods which could effect the cut surfaces are used, the cuts 
shall be made at a distance from the test specimen greater or equal to 8 mm but in any case sufficient 
according to the process used, not to induce alterations which could alter the test results. 



Adopted 14 February 1985 



January 1986, IS! 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 3600 ( Part 2 ) - 1985 

5. Heat TreatTnent — Test specimens shall be treated only If the welded part they represent is 
heat-treated, in which case they shall, where possible, be heat-treated together with the welded part 
before the test. Where this Is not possible, the specimens shall be heat-treated sepirately, the 
treatment and the rate of cooling being similar to that given to the part. 

6. Testing — The specimens shall be tested in accordance with IS : 1757-1973. 

7. Reporting of Results 

7.1 The following shall be reported for each specimen as results of the test: 

a) Dimension of test specimen, 

b) Location and orientation of the notch, 

c) Testing temperature ^C), 

d) The energy absorbed ( joules ) in accordance with IS : 1757-1973. 

e) Description of the appearance of the fracture surfaces and the type and location of any weld 
defect present. 

7.2 Because of the likely scatter of results, at least three specimens are normally used to assess the 
joint represented. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The standard was first published in 1966 and subsequently revised in 1973 covering various 
tests on fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. In view of the experience gained and in order 
to bring the test and test requirements in line with other international standards published so far, it 
has been decided to revise the standard in the following parts: 

Part 1 Cruciform fillet weld tensile test 

Part 2 Beam impact (Charpy V- notch ) test 

Part 3 Transverse tensile test on butt welds 

Part 4 Longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical weld metal test pieces on butt welds 

Part 5 Transverse root and face bend test on butt welds ( corresponding to ISO 5173-1981 ) 

Part 6 Transverse side bend test on butt welds ( corresponding to ISO 5177-1981 ) 

Part 7 Longitudinal root and face bend test on butt welds 

Part 8 Nick break test and fillet weld fracture test 

Part 9 Macro and micro examination. 

In this revision free-bend test has been deleted as the ductility of the weld zone is being 
assessed more and more by other bend tests. Special tests such as tests for the susceptibility to 
lamellar tearing, reheat cracking, brittle fracture and creep fatigue will be covered in separate 
standards. 

The main purpose of this standard is to recommend test procedures and test specimens that 
should be quoted or incorporated in engineering application standards that deal with welded 
constructions primarily for the qualification of welding procedures and operators. Wnere differences 
still exist between application standards, the methocteo f test given in this standard should be prefered. 

A general indication is given of the purpose served by the tests specified in this standard, but 
this standard does not indicate the choice of test method nor a particular application nor the number 
of specimens to be tested or the repeat tests to be allowed in event of failure. Such requirements 
are matters to be dealt vMith in the particular application standards where they exist or to be agreed 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 

It should be realized that variations in welding procedure and the preparation of test specimens 
can give rise to variations in the test results. 

In preparing this part of the standard assistance has been derived from, BS : 709-1983 
'Destructive testing fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel, issued by British Standards 
Institution. 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
valje, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordace with IS:2-1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values { revised )*. 



Printed at Arcee Press. New Delhi. India 



