is : 2571 - 1970
(Reaffirmed 2001 1996) ( Reaffirmed )

Indian

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LAYING IN-SITU CEMENT CONCRETE FLOORING (

First Revision )
1999

Sixth Reprint FEBRUARY

UDC

69.025.331.3

: 69.001.3

0 BUREAU
MANAK

Copyright 1971 INDIAN STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

OF
BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 7

November 1971

Is ; 2571.1970

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LAYING IN-SITU CEMENT CONCRETE FLOORING (

First Revision)
Refkesenting

Flooring and Plastering Sectional Committee, BDC 5
Chairman SHRI 0. P. &TAL Members National Rubber Manufacturers Ltd, Calcutta Da D. BANERJEE Da M. L. BHAWK ( Ahrmte ) National Test House, Calcutta ,$HRI A. K. BHATTACHARYYA J.,ALA G. C. DAS ( Affernnte) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRXS. K. BOSE MAJ D. D. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Arcoy Industries, Ahmedabad SHRI DINESH A. CHOK~HI SHRI RA;;~~L A. CHOKSHI ( Alternatf ) MECHANICAL Mmlstry of Railways DEPUTY ENGINEER, INTEGRAL COACH FACTORY,PERAMBUR DEY~TY DIRECTOR ( ARCH ), RESEARCH, DESIGNS ANDSTANORGANIZATION, DARDS LUCK NOW ( Alternate ) Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik DIRECTOR R~SEARCE~ OFFICER, MATERIAL TESTING DIVISION( Alternate ) The Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI P. K. DOCTOR Oxy-Chloride Flooring Products Ltd, Bombay SHRI N. HARXLAL Da PRANLALPATEL ( Alternate) Modern Tiles & MarbIe, New Delhi SHRI S. C. KAPOOR SHRI A. C. KA~OOR (Alternate) Burmah-Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of India SIXRIM. R. MALYA Ltd, Bombay DR B. S. B~ssr ( Ahnate ) Central Builders' Association, New Delhi SHRI HAZARI LAL MARWAH The Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta SHRI T. R. MEHANDRU Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR), Roorkee DR MOHAN RAI SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Ahmate) Coromandel Prodorite Pvt Ltd, Madras SHRI M. V. MURUGAPPAN SHRI R. SRINIVASAN ( Abemale ) ( Continued an page 2 )

DireFe;;r

General

of Posts & Telegraphs,

New

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

ISr2571-1970 (Continuedfrom
page 1 ) RePresenting Members India Linoleums Ltd, 24 Parganas ( West Bengal ) SHRI H. M. NANDKEOLYAR The Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI RAMAN M. PATEL SHRI J. M. SHROFF( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI 0. P. RATRA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI G. S. SAVKAR Bureau of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of Finance ) SHRI L. G. SELVAM SHRI T. M. VARUGHESE ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI G. C. SHARMA SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (PLAN- Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu NINOAND DESIGN CIRCLE) DEPUTYCHIEF ENGINEER ( BUILDINC? ) ( Altematc ) SU;PE~~JIN~ SuR~i3v0R OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SURVEYOR OF WORKS I TO SSW I ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI L. RAMACHANDRA RAO Deputy Director (Civ Engg ), IS1

IS:2571 -1970

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LAYING IN-SITU CEMENT CONCRETE FLOORING

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Instit.ution on 19 December 1970, after the draft finalized by the Flooring and Plasterin? Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In-situ cement cencrete flooring consists essentially of rich cement concrete, and pnssesses good wearing properties and facility of easy cleaning and maintenance which make it suitable for use in houses, offices, schools, hospitals and light industrial buildings. Depending upon the amount of loadmg and the degree of wear sesistance needed, the floor finish has to be laid in various thicknesses and a careful selection has to be made regarding mix proportions, panel srzes and number of layers. Also the laying operations have to ensure the proper bonding of the finish to the base or sub-floor. This code provides necessary guidance in the selection of materials and laying and finishing of cement concrete flooring for obtaining satisfactory performance. This standard which was first published in 1963 is now being revised taking into account the experience gained in the concrete flooring work for the past few years. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field This has been met by deriving assistance from B. S. in this country. CP204 : 1965 ZU-situ floor finishes, issued by the British Standards Institution. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, ex_ pressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the with IS : 2-1960*. rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified valie in this standard. ____.._._ .*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 3

lsr2!57l-1970 l.sGoPE
1.1 This standard covers laying and finishing of in-h cement concrete flooring for non-industrial and light industrial buildings. Heavy duty floors and acid and ~alkali resisting floor finishes are not dealt with in this standard. 2. TERMbiOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, 2.1 General T&s layer of concrete on which the cement concrete the following definitions shall apply.

2.1.i Base Cmcre& -.The topping is laid.

2.1.2 Luitance - A thin layer, consisting essentially of fine cement particles, which often forms a scum on the surface of freshly laid concrete. This layer may be formed by excessive surface trowelling of concrete immediately after it has-been laid. 2.13 Sub-bawcrete is laid. The prepared surface on ground on which surface of structural/suspended base confloor on

2.1.4 Sab-&ors - The prepared which the floor finish is laid. 2.2 Toolm ind Acceasoric?a

22.1 &reed Ships - Temporary narrow strips of wood or steel laid on the sub-base or base concrete or sub-floor to act as guides-for dividing the area to he paved into panels. 23.2 Scmd& BoardA straight-edged wooden scantling used for It is moved with a sawing action, the two ends floating a plane surface. ( if necessary ) resting on screed strips or guides set at the correct height. 23 site oper+onm the floor to a true and even surface by means

23.1 Scrteding -Bringing of screeding hoard. 3. NECESSARY

INFORMATION

3.1, For the efficiZnt planning and execution of the tiork, detailed information with regard to the following is necessary: a) Purpose for which the floor is to be used; b) Floor area to be covered;

IS : 2571-1970

4 4

Location and size of openings to be left out; Details of the sub-base Type of soil in the sub-base

and ducts, drainage

outlets,

if any,

or sub-floor; and any seepage'problem;

e>

f-1 Specific

requirements, if any, regarding the colour and appearance of the finished surface and of aggregates to he llsed; skirtings are required; be provided and in the floor finish.

Whether EC) h) Slope to

3.2 All the information stated in 3.1 shall be made available by the appropriate authority responsible for the construction of the whole building to those who are entrusted with the work of laying cement concrete floor finish before the work is started. Necessary drawings and instructions for preparatory work shall also be given where required. 3.3 Arrangements shall also be made for the proper exchange of information between those engaged in laying the floor finish and all others whose work will affect or will be affected. 4. MATERIALS

4.1 Cement IS: 269-1967* 4.2
Aggregates

Cement used for the floor finish work shall conform or to IS : 455-1967t or IS : 1489-1967$.

to

Aggregates for cement concrete flooring mix shall conform to the requirements of IS : 383-19635. The aggregate crushing value, when determined in accordance with IS : 2386 ( Part IV)-196311 shall not exceed 30 percent. 4.2.1.1 Coarse aggregate - The grading of graded coarse aggregate for cement concrete flooring mix shall be within the limits given in Table 1. The coarse aggregate shall generally be of the following sizes: a) Base concrete ( lean cement concretf! or lime concrete ) b) Cement concrete topping of thickness 40 mm and above c) Cement concrete topping thickness 25 mm
*Specification tSpecificajibn $Specification for ordinary, for portland for portland

4.2.1

Graded Graded Graded

from 40 mm and below from 16 mm and below from 12.5 mm and below
cement (w&d).

of

rapid-hardening blast-furnace pozzolana citicnt

and low heat portland ( revised).

slag cement (second r&ion ). from natural sources for concrete (reoi,rd).

&Specification for coarse and fine aggregates ( Second revision in 1970 ). llM&hods of test for aggregatu for concrete

: Part IV Mechanical proper&.

5

I9 1w71* 1970
d) Under-layer of cement conCrete topping in two layers
TABLE 1

Graded

from 12.5 mm and below

COARSE AGGBBGATE ( Chi.r~ 4.2.1.1 )

1s SIEM
DESIONA~ON mm 40 20 16 12'5 10 4'75 1.36 10 to 35 0 to 5 r--e4Omm 95 to 100 30 to 70

PERCENTAGEPASSING FOR GRADED AGQREGATE OF NOMNAL SIZE -h--------__ 20 mm 16 mm 12'5 mm 100 95 to 100 25 to 55 oto 10 100 90 to 100 30 to 70 oto10 100 90 to 100 40 to 85 0 to 10 -

4.2.1.2 Fine aggregateThe grading of fine aggregate for cement mncrete flooring mix shall be within the limits of one of the two zones given in Table 2. The fine aggregate shall be described as fine aggregate of the grading zone into which it falls.
TABLE IS SIEVE DESIGNATION C mm 10 4'75 2'36 1.18 600~micron 300-micron 150-micron 2 FINE AGGREGATE PERCENTAGEBY WEIGHT PASSINOIS Sravu -----.----~~_~_~ Grading Zone 1 Grading Zone 2 100 90-100 60-95 30-70 15-34 5-20 O-10 100 90-100 75-100 55-90 35-59 8-30 O-10

4.3 Water:Water used shall be clean and free from oil, acid, alkali, Generally potable water will be suitable. In organic or vegetable matter. case of doubt the quality of water should be analysed to ascertain conformity with 4.3 of IS : 456-l 964*.

*t&de of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( ~econd~visivn ). 6

ls: 2571-1970` 51 DESiGN CONSIDERATIONS 5.1 Types of Floor Finish and Thicknesses - The floor finish shall be laid according to any of the specifications given in Table 3, depending upon the expected load and wear on the floor and the fact whether the topping is to be laid monolithic with the base or separately on a set and hardened base. In either case special precautions are necessary to ensure good bond between the topping and the base.
5.1.1 Monolithic Floor Finish ( Finish Types I and IV) - In case of monolithic construction even a small thickness of topping is sufficient because of strength imparted to it by the b&se concrete and such type of finish is quite suitable as a moderately strong and economical floor finish ( finish Type I ) with good wearing quality. 5.1.1.1 On structural/suspended slabs, monolithic construction of floor finish (finish Type IV ) is fundamentally more reliable form of construction from the point of view of bond development and consequently better wearing properties but this type of construction presents difficulties in construction if a close surface tolerance is to be obtained; it is difficult Moreover as to obtain proper levels in the smaller thickness of topping. the finish in such type of construction will be completed much in advance of the remaining building work it is likely to be damaged or discoloured due to subsequent building operations; this can, however, be avoided tg some extent by covering the finished surface with a 75 mm thick layer of sand which can be removed after all the building operations are over and Further when the surface of monolithic topping floor is ready to be used. k damaged, its repairs cause difficulties as there is a risk of either the structural slab being weakened while picking up the surface for repairs, or the level of floor is likely to be raised to accommodate extra thickness required while repairing the surface with a fresh non-monolithic topping. Another disadvantage in this type of construction from practical point of view is that the time available on any day to the workmen for laying the finish monolithic with the structural slab is very much restricted. The advantage of monolithic topping is that the thickness required is less than in case of bonded finish thus reducing the materials and the load on the structure and the cost. This type of flooring can form a durable and economical floor finish provided the limitations given above are taken into account and suitably prQvided for. 5.1.2 Bonded Floor Finish ( Fink Tyfw II, III, V and VI) - In the case of bonded construction where floor finish is laid separately over a set and hardened base, the topping has to be laid to a greater thickness and the methods of laying have to be adjusted in such a way as to produce good bond between the topping and the base, failing which the difference in composition between the base and the topping and the change in temperature and moisture content will cause cracking, curling and 7

$912571- 1970
warping of the floor finish. The bond between the topping and the base in this type of construction can never be as perfect as in the case of monolithic construction and there may be slight lifting of floor finish at corners of different panels. In case of bonded floor finish laid on structural slabs, the greater thickness of topping also adds to the weight. of the structure. 5.1.2.1 The advantage of this type of construction is that, as the base concrete or structural floor is laid much in advance and topping is laid after all the building operations are over, there is no danger of surface of the floor finish being damaged or discoloured due to other building operations. Where this type of finish is laid on structural slabs a very close surface tolerance can be obtained and there is no dilficulty in in the finished floor surface obtaining proper levels and gradients because of greater thickness of topping. This type of finish is also suitable where floor finish is to be laid on old concrete or for repairing old floor finishes. 5.1.2.2 Where very dense and smooth surface is desired, the topping in this type of finish can be laid in two layers ( finish Types III and VI ). The under-layer consisting of a leaner mix is first laid separately on hardened base and the wearing layer of very stiff and richer mix, but of the thickness smaller than that of the under-layer is bonded to the green concrete of under-layer and finished smooth. 5.1.3 In case of bonded finish on structural slabs where it is not possible to obtain proper levels within the thickness of topping, a cushioning layer of about 50 to 75 mm thick lime concrete is laid and well Lime concrete layer may also hc compacted over the structural slab. necessary to obtain a level surface over structural floors other than that ot concrete or for embedding fixtures like pipes, etc. This will, however, add to the dead weight of the structure. 5.2 Mix Proportions - Mix proportions for the lo `se concrete and the topping for different types of floor finish shall 5e as specified in Table 3. NOTE - So far the practice had been to use. 1 : 2 : 4 cement concrete for topping for
bonded finish, but this mix is being increasingly replaced these days by 1 because it gives much better workability and finish.

: 21: 3& mix

5.3 Durability - Concrete floors possess good durability and resistance to abrasion and wear depending upon the following factors: a) Choice of aggregate Hard tough aggregate is essential for good durability as well as abrasion resistance. b) Water-cement ratio Provided the flooring is fully compacted, the lower the water-cement ratio the greater the durability and wear resistance; a lower watercement ratio compatible `with workability is, therefore, essential.

8

IS : 2571- 1970

c) Density of flooring

Durability is increased in accordance with the degree of density of finish, consequently the flooring shall be well compacted. The staining on the floor surface that may result from absorption of oils is reduced by increasing the density of floor finish. Adequate curing is very essential to ensure good wear resistance.

d) Curing

5.4 Resistance to Attack by Ckemical Reagents - Concrete flooring is slowly attacked by acids, vegetable oils, fats, sugar solutions and various other agents; prolonged exposure to these reagents will bring about gradual deterioration. 5.5 slipperiness - The slipperiness of concrete flooring depends mainly upon the surface treatment; when highly polished this type of floor finish is likely to be slippery. A trowel-finished floor is reasonably non-slip. Non-slip surfaces may be obtained by trowelling the floor surface or by providing non-slip inserts. 5.5.1 Floor finish over ramps, stairs and other simil.ar situations, specially if they are liable to get wet, shall be finished in chequered pattern to make them non-slip. 5.6 Surface Hardening Solutions - It is not necessary, generally, to apply any further treatment to the cement concrete floor topping but dusting may be reduced by the application of one of the surface hardening solutions of sodium silicate, magnesium silica-fluoride or zinc silica-fluoride or proprietary materials consisting mainly of one or more of these' compounds. These treatments are likely to need renewal at intervals of one year. Where proprietary materials are to be used, advice should be obtained from the manufacturers. The treatment may be given as described in Appendix A.
5.7 Size of Panels -Floor

finish shall be divided into suitable panels so as to reduce the risk of cracking. Size of the panel is governed by the thickness of floor finish, the type of construction ( monolrthic or bonded construction ), local conditions of temperature, humidity and the season in which flooring is laid. For floor finish laid in exposed situations or in hot and dry climates, the size of the panels shall be smaller as compared to the floor finish laid in less exposed situations or in cold and humid climates; the size of panels for integral floor finish can be larger than that of floor finish laid separately on the hardened base. Generally, no dimension of a panel shall exceed 4 m in case of floor finish laid monolithically with the base concrete and 2 m in case of floor finish laid separately on a hardened base; length of a panel shall not exceed 14 times its breadth. 9

TABLE TYPE

3

REco

SUB-BASE

(1)
I

(2)
l'horoughly consolidated ground covered with 100 to 150 mm well rammed ( preferably coarse ) sand 100 mm thick hard core of dell consolidated ary brick or stone aggregate blinded with MOORUM (disintegrated rock ) coarse sand, laYi over well rammed sand filling of 100 mm thick

SPECIFICATIONS FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF CONCRETE FLOOR FINISHESi ( Clorucs 5.1, 5.2, 5.9, 8.1, 8.2,8.2.4, 9.1,9.2 and 9.3 ) TOPPINO BASE CONCRETE L-c----TM r Mix Proportion Minimum Mix Proportion i En&E Thickness mm mm (6) (3) (4) (5) MMENDED
A. Concrete Flooring Laid Over Ground

ts

100

Cement concrete 1:4:8 (cement: fine aggregate : coarse ( stone aggregate of40 mm and below by volume ) do

20

Cement concrete 1 : 2 SeeFig. 1A. Cement concrete toppmg to 3 ( cement : stone shall be laid monoof size aggregate lithic with the base 4'75 mm and below concrete (see also by volume ) 5.1.1 and 8.1) In places such as gmconcrete Cement rages where wheel1:2:4 (cement: ed traffic comes into fine aggregate : Cocontact with the stone aggrearse flooring the sub-base gateofsize 12'5mm shall have a hard and below by VOcore over the well lume ) rammed sand filling. The cement concrete topping shall be laid monolithic with the base concrete (see Fig. 1B) concrete In the regions havCement ing expansive soils I:2 to 3(cement: like the black cotton stone aggregate of soil the sub-base size 4.75 mm and shall be laid as dubelow by volume ) cribed ( see Note ). The topping shall be laid monolithic with the base concrete ( ICC Fig. 1C )

IA

100

25

IB

Stone ballast ( 40 mm graded aggregates ) mixed with locally available yellow or red soil or soft MOORUMin 1 : 1 proportion shall be compacted to about 300 mm thickness and thosaturated roughly

100

do

20

T-3

REcoluMEND ED SPBU?'ICATZONSFOR DDWBRBNT TYPBS OF CBMBNT coBERBTB FLOOR lmulsms-CoRkl
I g??y&
mm (3) R. (4)

!?

bit

@NCnaTN

c Mu P&L7

,

TOPPINO *
Mix Proportion

Minimum Thicknau mm (5)

a

(6) Sl&a

(7)

Floor Topping Laid Over Stnsoturul/Suapendad 15

concrete Cement 1:2to3(cement: stone aggregate of size 4'75 mm and below by volume)

See Fig. 3. Cement concrete shall be Ia%: _ finished thic with the strucFor tural slab. purpose this topping shall the be laid immediately after the StNCtural concrete has enough stiffened (but is still green ) to allow for the workmen to tread over it by placing planks (see Ulso 5.1.1 and 9.1)

V

-

25

TopSee Fig. 4A. Cement concrete ping shall be laid 1 :2*:3f(cement: over the fine aggregate : co- directly _ specially prepared arse stone surface of set and gate ofsize 12aEZ hardened strucand below by votural slab ( see lume ) also 5.1.2 and 9.2 )

VI

-

Under-layer-mfyt 6 (cement : iin: aggregate : COarsC stone aggregate of size 12.5 mm and below by volume )
COllCRU!

SW Fig. 4B. Undcrlayer shall be laid directly over the specially prepared surface of set and StRlChardened tural slab. Wearing layer shall then be laid over the green surface of under-layer and monolifinished thic with it ( SM also 5.1.2 and 9.2 )

Wearing layer-15

M

`4

Wearing layer-cemcnt concrete 1:2 to 3 ( cement : stone of size aggregate 475 mm and below by volume ) See Fig. 5. Cushioning layer of lime concrete shall be laid over the pre surface of pared structural /suspended slab. Cement concrete topping shall be laid as for V or VI (see also 5.X.3 and 9.3). Lime concrete shall

VII

-

56 to 75

Lime concrete

same as for VorVI

Up : 2571.1970
BASE CONCRETE CEMENT CONCRETE TOPPING LAID MONOLITHICALLY WITH THE BASE CONCRETE

L SAND

F ILLING

1A WITHOUT

HARD

CORE

SUB-BASE

MAR0 CORE OF DRY BRICX OR STONE BALlAS BASE CONCRETE CEMENT CONCRETE TOPPING LAID

18 WITH
EMENT BASE CONCRETE

HARD

CORE

SUB-BASE

TOPPING 20

CONCRETE

%%%-E BALLAST VELLOW OR RED SOFT MOORUM

t4?i?6' SOIL

WITH OR

"

`lr ' e CONSOLIOATEO GROUND

1C SUB-BASE FOR HAVlNG EXPANSIVE

REGIONS SOIL

All dimenaiom in millimetrca.

Fro. 1

MONOLITHIC FLOORFINISH ( OVER GROUND ) 14

Br2S71-1970
WEARING LAYER OF CEMENT CONCRETE MIX 1:2 TO 3 FINISHED MONOLITHICALLY WllH UNDER-LAYER

L CONSOLlOAlEO GROUND -I
SAND FILLING BASE CONCRETE 2A Topplng Laid in Single FIG. 2 Layer SAND FILLING `1 BASE CONCRETE 2B Topping Laid in Two Layers

BONDED FLOOR FINISH OVER GROUND
CEMENT CONCRETE TOPPING FINISHED MONOLITHICALLY WITH THE STRUCTURAL SLAB

1 15mm

LSTRUCTURAL FIG.

SLAB

3

FLOOR FINISH LAID

MONOLITHICALLY WITH THE STRUCTURAL SL.AB
WEARING LAYER OF CEMENT CONCRETE MIX 1:2 TO 3 FINISHED MONOLITHICALLY WITH UNDER-LAYER m

L STRUCTURAL
4A Topping FIG. Laid In Single Layer

SLAB

J

hNDER-LAYER OF CEMENT CONCRETE MIX 1:3:6 4B Topping Laid in Two Layers

4

BONDED FLOOR FINISH OVER STRUCTURAL SLAB 15

ISt2571-1970
CEMENT CONCRETE TOPPING

LIME CONCRETE CUSHIONING LAYER

I- 25

LSTRUCTURAL

SLAB

5A

TOPPING

LAID

IN

SI?lGLE

LAYER

-CEMENT

CONCRETE

TOPPING

-UNDER-LAYER OF CEMENT CONCRETE

CUSHIONING

LAVER

58
FIG.

TOPPING

LAID

IN

TWO

LAYERS
CUSHIONING

All dimensions

in millimetrcs.

5

FLOOR FINISHON STRUCTURAL SLAB LAID OVER LAYER ix LYME CONCRETE 16

IS t 2571.1970 5.7.1 The joints

skirtings.

in the floor finish shall extend through the borders and If the skirting is laid monolithic with the flooring, a border

of about 300 mm width must be provided alround the floor. The width of border provided around the floor when the skirting is not monolithic with floor finish shall not exceed 450 mm. 5.7.2 Construction joints between bays placed over any joints in the base concrete. of the floor finish should be

5.8 Protection Agahst Dampness - The layer of sand provided under the base concrete will generally serve the purpose of damp-proofing required for ordinary floors under normal conditions. However, in more severe conditions, where it is expected that the dampness may find its way on the top of the floor in the course of usage of floor, a more effective damp-proof treatment shall be given underneath the floor by either of the methods given bdow: a) Laying the base concrete in two layers of thickness not less than 75 mm each and painting the top of the lower layer with two coats of hot bitumen of the industrial grade 85125 conforming to IS : 702-1961* applied at the rate of ,1*5 kg/m2. The surface of the lower layer shall be finished smooth while laying the concrete The bitumen shall be so that bitumen can be applied uniformly. applied after the concrete has set and is sufficiently hard. b) Sandwiching a waterproofing membrane, such as bituminous felt in the base concrete laid in two layers of thickness 75 mm each, The surface of the lower layer shall be finished smooth while laying the concrete so as to provide an even surface and thus prevent damage to the surface of waterproofing membrane. 5.8.1 Where. it is expected that the dampness may find its way from the surrounding walls,. the same shall also be effectively damp-proofed up to at least 150 mm above the level of the base or sub-floor, and the damp-proof treatment below the floor shall be extended over the walls. Basement floors shall be damp-proofed according to recommendations of IS : 16091966t. 5.8 Finish Over StairsThe mix for finish over stairs shall be the same as for topping specified in 5.1 ( see aho Table 3 ). Risers shall be finished with the minimum thic' ness necessary td give an even surface to the structural concrete. For this purpose, 6 mm thick mortar finish will generally be sufficient, but thickness up to 10 mm may be provided where Thickthe surface of the structural concrete is found to be very uneven. ness of the finish at treads shall be not less than 20 mm for monolithic finish, and not less than 40 mm for finish laid over the Ylardened concrete. -*Specification for industrial bitumen ( revised).

t&de of practice for laying damp-proof treatment using bitumen felts (first rruirien).
17

IS I 2571.1970 6. PROGRAMME

fi OF WORE IN RELATION TO FLOOR operations FINISH should

6.1 Before the flooring have been completed:

work is taken

up, the following

The completion a> services affecting

of all pieliminary operations, such as laying of the schedule of commencement and completion

W

of flooring; and Plastering all the inside walls, ceilings and outside walls, and fixing of door frames in place.. All heavy work in the room may be completed.

6.2 The sub-floor or base shall be finished to a reasonably true plane surface to a level which is lower than the level of the finished floor by the depth occupied by the thickness of the topping. The desired slope may be provided, where possible, in the base or sub-floor. 6.3 Before the floor finish work is started, all points or level for the finished surface shall be marked out. Wherever slope in finished floors is desired, points of level and outlets shall he correctly marked and outlet openings made beforehand. 7. PREPARATORY WORK

7.1 Handling and Storage of Materials - Clean and dry storage shall be provided at the site for all the materials. Cement shall not be stored in open. The materials shall be stored in accordance with IS: 48821967*. 7.2 Mixing of Materials

7.2.1 The aggregate and cement shall be thoroughly and efficiently mixed. Mixing shall be done using a mechanical mixer. Manual mixing may be permitted when Lhe quantity of concrete mixed is small. The concrete shall be as stiff as possible and the amount of water added shall be minimum necessary to give just sufficient plasticity for laying and compacting. For improving the workability of the mix, thorough mixing rather than addition of more water shall be resorted to. Thorough+nixing will improve the workability even for a very stiff mix and thus facilitate High water-cement ratio will increase the drying shrinkage hetter finish. and decrease the strength, water-tightness and abrasive resistance of the concrete. 7.2.2 The mix shall be used in the work within addition of water for its preparation. half-an-hour of the

*Recommendations on stacking and storage of construction materials at site. 18

IS t 2571- 197Q 8. LAYI'NG CONCRETE FLOORING ON GROUND with the Base Concrete

8.1 Floor Finish Laid Monolithically ( Finish Types I, IA and IS, Table 3 ) 8.1.1 that then than as a Preparation

?f Sub-base

8.1.1.1 The ground or earth filling shall be thoroughly compacted so there are no loose pockets left anywhere in the whole area. This shall bc covered with clean sand well consolidated to a thickness of not less 100 mm. Great cart is necessary in the preparation of the sub-base, settlement in the sub-base may cause the failure of the whole floor.

8.1.1.2 In situations, such as garrages where wheeled traffic comes into contact with the flooring, sub-base shall consist of well compacted sand layer of 100 mm thick and an additional 100 mm thick well compacted hard core of dry brick or stone ballast ( 40 mm size ) blinded with MOORUA4 ( disintegrated rock ) or coarse sand. 8.1.1.3 In the cast of expansive soils, like black cotton soil, stone ballast ( 40 mm graded aggregates ) mixed with locally available yellow or red soil or soft MOORUM in 1 : 1 proportion shall bc compacted to about 300 mm thickness and thoroughly saturated with water. This surface should bc further covered with another 200 mm thick layer of soft MOORUM or cinder or sand and compacted properly before laying the Special care is necessary in consolidation of the ground as base conr-ete. otherwise the settlement of sub-base may cause cracking of the whole floor. 8.1.2 Laying the BaseThe area to be paved shall be divided into This shall be suitable panels keeping in view the limits specified in 5.7. done by fixing screed strips, the depth of which shall be equal to the combined thickness of the base concrete and the topping. Before being laid in position the screed strip shall preferably be coated with a thick coat of lime wash so as to prevent them from sticking to the concrete deposited in the panels. 8.1.2.1 Before placing the base concrete, the sub-base shall be pro_ perly wetted. The concrete shall then be deposited between the screed tamped and the surface scrccded uniformly below the strips, thoroughly desired finished grade of flooring to accommodate the required thickness of Any slope desired in the floor finish shall be given in the base topping. The surface shall not be finished smooth but kept rough to concrete. provide adequacc- bond for the topping. 8.1.3 Laying the Toppiq - On the clean,. srecn surfat e of the base concrete, the topping shall be placed in posltlon as soon as possible but generally not later than tmw or three hours of laying the ba$e coucr(`te deprnding upon the temperature and the atmospheric collditions. 1'hC basz concrete at the time of laying the topping shall be still green but

19

'IS:2571 -1970
sufficiently firm on its surface. to enable the workmen to work over it by placing

planks

8.1.3.1 The concrete mix for the topping shall be deposited on the base concrete in the screecl strips already laid and thoroughly compacted Glass or aluminium strips may be provided for to the finished thickness. effective separation of panels and to provide straight edges and corners for The mix for the topping the panels where good workn-znship is required. shall bc stiff enough to prevent accumulation of any excess water or laitance on the surface. If water or laitance ri\es to the surface when consolidatin:: ( whit-II indicates that too much of water has been used in the preparation of co:l:~t~ ) the concrete should preferably be scraped and replaced by a fi-csll u:lx. If it is desired to absorb surplus water for any reason, it should IX mopped up; it should on no account be absorbed by spreading dry crmcnt. The toppi",g shall then be floated with a wooden float to rencler the surface even and after the surface is slightly hardened, it shall IX finished smooth as described in 8.1.3.2. 8.1.3.2 Finishiq the surface - r2fter the concrete has been fully compacted it shall bc finished by trowelling or floating. Finishing operations shall start shortly after the compaction of concrete and shall bc spread over the period of one to six hours depending upon the temperature and atmospheric conditiona. The surface shall be trowelled three times at intervals so as to produce a uniform and hard surface. The satisfactory resistance of floor to wear depends largely upon the care with which trowelling is carried out. The object of trowelling is to produce as hard and close knit a surface as possible. The time interval allowed between successive trowelling5 is every important. Immediately after laying only: just sufficient troweilili ,y shall be done to give a level surface. Excessive trowelling in the ca&sr stages shall bc avoided as this tends to work a layer rich in cement to tile surface. Sometime, after the first trowelling, the duration depcncliug upon the tcmpcrature, atmospheric conditions and the rate of set of cement u$ed, the surface shall be retrowelled to close any pores in the smfacc, a~1 to bring to surface and scrap off any excess water in concrete or laitance ( it shall not be trowelled back into the topping). The final trowclliua shall IX do:le well before the concrete has become too hard but at sucll a timr that considerable pressure is required to make any Trowelling of a rich mix of dry cement and fine impression on the surface. aggregate on to the surface shall not be permitted. 8.1.4 The base concrete and the topping shall be laid in alternate panels, the i:ltermcdiate panels being filled in after one to t\ro days dependin,? upon the temperature and atmospheric conditions. The screed strip? sholl!cl IX removed the next day after the concrete has been deposited in t!l;, panels and the e?ges of panels shall be examined for any honeycombing or undulation which, if found, shall be repaired straight and smooth by cement mortar. If the intermediate panels are not to be filled the next day the screed strips shall then be cleaned and put back 20

1St2571-1970
against the edges of panels till the concrete in the alternate panels is to be deposited. When the concrete is being deposited in the alternate panels When the concrete is being compacted the screed strips shall be removed. in new panels, care shall be taken to avoid damage to the panels already laid. If glass or aiuminium strips are provided for effective separation of panels the base concrete and the topping may be laid in all the panels simultaneously. 8.2 Floor Finish Laid Separately ( Finish Type II, Table 3 ) 8.2.1 Preparation of Sub-base - The cribed in 8.1.1.1,8.1.1.2 and 8.1.1.3. on Hardened Concrete Base as des-

sub-base

shall be prepared

8.2.2 Laying the Base Concrete - The base concrete may be deposited in the whole area at a stretch. Before placing the concrete the sub-base shall be properly wetted and rammed. The concrete shall then be deposited betlveen the forms, where necessary, thoroughly tamped and the surface finished level with the top edges of the forms. The surface of base concrete shall be left rough to provide adequate bond for the topping. Two or three hours after the concrete has been laid in position, the surfice shall be brushed_$th a hard brush to remove any scum or laitance and swept clean so that the coarse aggregate is exposed. 8.2.3 Laying the Topping-Bet&e the operation for laying the topping Started the surface of base concrete shall be thoroughly cleaned of all dirt, loose particles, caked mortar droppings, and laitance, if any, by scrubbing with coir or steel wire brush. Where the concrete has hardene,d so much that roughening of surface by wire brush is not possible, the entire surface shall be roughened by chipping or hacking. Before laying the topping, the surface shall b c soaked with water, at least for twelve hours and surplus water shall be removed by mopping immediately before the topping i5 laid in position.
1s

8.2.3.1 The scrzed strips sha!l be fixed over the base concrete dividing it into suitable panels as recommended in 5.6. The screed strips shall be so arranged that the joints, if any, in the base concrete shall coincide with Before placing the concrete mix for topping, the joints in the topping. neat cement slurry shall be thoroughly brushed into the prepared surface of the base concrete just ahead of the finish. The topping shall then be laid, very thoroughly tamped, struck off level and the furface floated with a woode:i float. The surface shall be tested with th? straight-edge and mason's spirit-level to detect any inequalities in the surface which, if any, shall be made .good immediately. The finish `shall bc laid in alternate panels as dcscrlbed in 8.1.4 for topping laid monolithic with the base concrete. 8.2.3.2 Finishing the surfke - The surface shall be fininshed as given in 8.1.3.2. 21

IS : 25711197Q 8.2.4 Laying the To#ting in Two Lawyers- Where the topping is t'o be l&d in two layers to obtain very smooth and dense finish ( see Finish Type III, Table 3 ), the sub-base, base concrete and under-layer of topping shall be laid as described in 8.2.1 to 8.2.3 with the exception that the surface of the concrete in the under-layer of topping shall not be finished smooth with a trowel but left rough after tamping it and levelling it with screed board. 8.2.4.1 The top 15 mm thick wearing layer of mix 1 : 2 to 3 cement concrete ( depending upon the quality of finish and abrasive resistance desired ) of consistency stiffer than that of under-layer concrete shall then be immediately laid over the rough but green surface of under-layer, and thoroughly tamped, struck off level, and the surface floated with wooden float. The surface shall then be tested with a straight-edge and mason's spirit-level to detect any undulation in the surface which, if any, shall be made good immediately. The surface shall then be finished smooth in accordance+ with 8.1.3.2. 9. LAYING FLOOR TOPPING ON SUSPENDED with SLABS the Structural/Sus-

9.1 Floor Topping Laid Monolithically pended Slab ( Finish Type IV, Table 3 )

9.1.1 The form-work for structural slab shall be erected to the finished thickness of floor finish. Structural, concrete shall be deposited in the. forms, thoroughly consolidated and surface finished below the top edge of the form to accommodate the required thickness of the topping_ `Any slope required in the floor finish shall be given in the structural concrete itself, and any laitance or scum shall be brushed away from thr surface of concrete when it is still green. The surface shall not be finished smooth but kept rough to provide an adequate bond for the topping. 4 9.1.2 On the green surface of the str&tural concrete, topping shall be placed in position immediately after the structural concrete has stiffened enough ( but is still plastic ) to allow for the workmen to tread over it by placing planks. Laitance and foreign matter, if any, shall hc removed before the topping is placed in position. The topping shall bc thoroughly campacted and screeded to the finished grade. The mix for the structural concrete as well as the topping shall be as stiff as possible consistent with workability so as to prevent accumulation of excess of water or laitance on the surface. The topping shall then be floated with a wooden float to render the surface even. After the surface is lightly hardened, it shall be finished in accordance with 8.1.3,2. 9.2 Floor Topping Laid Directly over the Hardened Suspended Slab ( Finish Types V and VI, Table 3 ) Structural/

9.2.1 Preparation of Surface of Structural/SusperzdedSIab - When the toppirlg is to be laid separately but directly over the structural slab without any 22

IS : 2571.1970

cukhionihg layer, the structural concrete, 3 to 4 hours after its laying in the forms, shall be thoroughly brushed with a coir or steel wire brush to
remove any scum or laitance and swept clean to expose the coarse aggregates and leave the surface rough. 9.2.2 Laying To#Gng -Before the operation of laying the topping is started the surface of structural slab shall be thoroughly cleaned of the dirt, loose particles, cake mortar droppings and laitance, if any, by scrubbing with coir or steel wire brush. Where the concrete has hardened so much that roughening of surface by wire brush is not possible, the entire surface shall be roughened by chipping or hacking. 9.2.3 The screed strips shall then be fixed over the structural slab dividing it into suitable panels as recommended in 5.7. Immediately before depositing the concrete for the topping, neat cement slurry shall be thoroughly brushed into the prepared surface of the structural slab, just ahead of the finish. The topping shall then be laid, thoroughly tamped, struck off level and surface floated with a wooden float. The surface shall then be tested with a straight-edge and mason's spirit-level to detect any inequalities and undulations in surface which, if any, shall be made good immediately, The finish shall be laid in alternate panels as described in 8.1.4 and other laying and finishing operations shall be done as in 8.2.3 and 8.2.4 depending upon whether the topping is to be laid in single or two layers. 9.3 Floor (Table3) Topping Laid oyer Cushioning Layer of Lime Concrete

9.3.1 Preparing the Sub-Joor- Before laying the lime concrete, the surface of sub-floor shall be thoroughly cleaned of dirt, loose particles and laitance ( in case of RCC slabs ) by scrubbing with steel wire brushes. The surface shall then be thoroughly cleaned and soaked with water overnight and surplus water `removed by mopping immediately before lime concrete is laid in position. On the clean damp surface of sub-floor, lime concrete shall then be evenly spread between forms, if necessary, thoroughly In the preparation and laying of lime concrete the tamped and levelied. relevant provisions of IS : 2541-1965* shall, as far as possible, be followed. 9.3.2 Laying the Top&kg - Before laying the topping, surface of lime concrete shall be thoroughly cleaned and prepared as recommended for base concrete in 8.2.2 and 8.2.3. Immediately before spreading the concrete for topping, the surface shall be brushed with a thin layer of neat cement slurry. The topping whether in single or two layers shall then be laid as given in 8.2.3 and 8.2.4. 10. FLOOR 10.1 risers FINgSH OVER STAIRS

concrete has set, the form-work for and landings shall be struck, laitance removed and the -*code of practice for use of lime concrete in buildings. of stairs 23

Risers- After the structural

IS : 2571~ 1970
surface of risers left rough to provide adequate bond for the finish. risers shall then be finished with 1 : 3 cement mortar ( see 5.9 ). 10.2 Treads - Finishing to landings and stair treads shall be carried as described for flooring in 9.1 and 9.2. The ovt

Il. CURING 11.1 Immediately after the flooring surface is finished it shall bc protected from rapid drying by erecting barriers against wind or draught and strong sunlight. As soon as the surface has hardened sufficiently to prevent damage to it, it shall be kept continuously moist for at least fifteen days by means of wet gunny bags, 50 mm thick layers of dxmp sancl spread over the surface or pooling water on the surface. During this period the flooring shall not be exposed to any traffic. Regular traffic on the floor should be allowed only after 28 days.
12. INSPECTION AND TESTING adhesion between topping and the base may be examined by tapping the surface \\ith the end of a rod or a hammer. A hollow sound indicates poor adhesion. 12.2 Loss of adhesion does not necessarily mean that the floor finish is unsuitable except when it is accompanied by visible curling ot' the edges of panels or cracks. Occasionally there is no lipping but the panel edges are noticeably higher than the centres of panels. In these circumstances the flooring may deflect and break under the loads likely to be imposed in use and must be considered unsuitable. Where the flooring is considered to be unsatisfactory, the topping concrete and any loo>e concrete in the base ,concrete shall be cut out and the b`ase concrete keyed suficiently to allow a sound renewal to be made. It is prcfcrabic a;ld \vill probably be necessary, owing to the possible loosening of adjacent work by vibration, to renew the whole of the panel or paltcls where such defects occur.

12.1 Adhesion to the Base or Sub-floor-The

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.6 )

A

SURFACE TREATMENT TO CEMENT CONCRETE FLOOR TOPPING A-l. CLEANING THE SURFACE

A-l.1 The top surface of the concrete should bc clean ant1 free from grease or oil to enable the hardening solutions to pcnctrate. Sweeping to 24

remove dust and dirt may be adequate only in some cases of new floors and additional cleaning may be necessary. The top surf&e shall be wetted with water and scrubbed with coir or steel wire brush and thoroughly cleaned by washing with clean water. The floor should be allowed to dry so that the hardening solution can be absorbed into the surface.
Ar2. TREATMENTS A-2.1 Sodium Silicate-Asolution containing one art by volume of sodium silicate and four to six parts of water shoulx be spread evenly over the concrete top surface with a mop or soft brush. Any excess material should be wiped off and the floor allowed to dry. After the floor has been washed with clean water, a second coat, containing one part of sodium silicate to three or four parts of water, should be applied, and this should be allowed. to dry similarly. A third coat may be applied after washing if the floor .isstill porous. After drying, the floor should be washed with hot clean water. Effective results are obtained if the treatment is appiied seven to ten days after the end of curing.

-The crystals of magnesium s&o-fluoride or of A-2.2 Silk-Fluoride zinc silica-fluoride should be dissolved in water at the rate of Cl g/cm* for the first coat and @2 g/cm' for subsequent coats. Three coats are usually applied at 24 hour intervals. .There IS no need to wash the top surface oi the floor between coats, but it is advisable to wash with clean water after the final treatment.
A-2.5 Dry&g OH rpd Surface Sealerm -Drying oils, either neat or thiied with turpentiue or white spirit, or surkce sealer+ may be applied to the top surf&e by brushing. Any excess should be wiped off about two hours tier applicatson. 112.4 Calcium chloride shall not be used with high ahunina cement.

25

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax :91113234062, 91113239399. 91113239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Central Laboratory: Plot No. 2019, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional Central Offices: 323 76 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95 Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 Telephone 8-77 00 32

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 `Eastern : l/l4 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA700054
Northern Southern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAl 600113 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001

550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96 54 11 37 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 26 23 05 6 21 17 52 51 71 32 36 35

$Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Kalaikathir Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada

- Tumkur Road,

Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001

Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI. Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR Buildings. 670 Avinashi Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Savitri Complex. 5-8-58C. Road, FARlDABAD 201001

Road, COEMBATORE 641037 121001

116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD

5315 Ward No 29. R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane. GUWAHATl 781003 L. N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Marg, C-Scheme, Nagar. KANPUR Station Road, HYDERABAD 208005 500001 E-52, Chitaranjan JAIPUR 302001

1171418 B. Sarvodaya

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor. Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 P. 0. Palayam, 695034 T. C. No. 14/1421. University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM NIT Building, Second Institution of Engineers

Floor. Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010

( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Approach, P. 0. Princep Street,

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072 tSales

27 10 85 Grant Road, MUMBAl 400007 309 65 28 222 39 71 Square,

Office is at Novelty Chambers.

*Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGiALORE 560002

Printed al New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

