INATA Ah IS 5436 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Bie Trea weee atk Agad HSH 
Guat & fee aer-satera test 
ft — ater cafe 


(TETI FATT ) 


Oil-Fired Rotary Dryers for Hot Mix 
Asphalt and Bituminous Macadam 
Plants — Method of Test 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2023 


anda Ash at 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR YAA, 9 TR Me TH AMT, AE Reet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


STS 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


The output of a hot mix asphalt plant or a bituminous macadam plant is often determined by the output of its dryer 
under certain defined conditions. A need has, therefore, been felt to formulate a standard laying down an accepted 
basis for measuring the performance of the dryer unit under standardized conditions. 


This standard was first published in 1969. This standard is being revised again to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. In this revision, the standard has been brought into the 
latest style and format of Indian Standards, and references of Indian Standards, wherever applicable have been 
updated. BIS certification marking clause has been modified to align with the revised Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 2016. 


This standard provides a method of testing oil-fired rotary dryers of both continuous and batch types under 
conditions of composition and temperature agreed to between the parties concerned. 


When the user does not lay down particular conditions, the recommended test conditions given in Annex A may 
be used to cover the production of dense asphaltic concrete and bituminous macadam. These recommendations 
also form a basis upon which a manufacturer can state the output of oil-fired rotary dryers. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex C. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 5436 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


OIL-FIRED ROTARY DRYERS FOR HOT MIX ASPHALT 
AND BITUMINOUS MACADAM PLANTS — 
METHOD OF TEST 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard lays down the method for 
testing oil-fired rotary aggregate dryers of both 
continuous and batch types, and for reporting the 
results as given in Annex B. 


1.2 Recommended test conditions corresponding to 
the requirements in the manufacture of dense 
asphaltic concrete and bituminous macadam are also 
included for use when special test conditions are not 
laid down, and as a basis upon which manufacturers 
may declare the output of dryers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions which 
through their reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard is encouraged to 
investigate the possibilities of applying the most 
recent editions of the standard listed below. 


IS No. Title 
IS 460 (Part 1): Test sieves — Specification: 
2020 Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves 


(fourth revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Conditions of Test — Before starting the test, 
the feed of the dryer shall be adjusted to the rated 
output of the plant and the following conditions of 
the test shall be approved: 


a) Type of aggregate to be used; 

b) Grading of aggregate; 

c) Moisture content in aggregate; 

d) Temperature at discharge; and 

e) Moisture content in aggregate after drying. 
3.1.1 Where special test conditions are not laid down 
the recommended conditions of the test given in 
Annex A may be adopted for dryers to be used in the 


manufacture of rolled asphalt, coated macadam or 
fine cold asphalt. 


3.2 Measurements Required — The following 
measurements shall be made: 


a) Output of aggregate in tonne per hour; 


b) Moisture content before and after drying; 

c) Temperature before and after drying; 

d) Grading of the aggregate before and after 
drying; and 

e) Fuel consumption in litres per hour and in 
litres per tonne of aggregate output. 


NOTE — The temperature and humidity of the air shall be 
recorded and an indication given of the speed of the wind. 


3.3 Duration of Test — The test period shall be at 
least 30 minutes. Immediately before the beginning 
of the test period the dryer shall be run under test 
conditions for at least 15 minutes, or for such longer 
time as may be required for stable conditions to be 
obtained. No variation in conditions shall be made 
during the period of the test except minor variations 
(made either manually or automatically) in burner 
settings to control the temperature. 


3.4 Consistency of Aggregate Feed — Means shall 
be provided to maintain a constant composition and 
constant rate of feed throughout the test period. The 
ratio of material passing and retained on a 2.36 mm 
IS Sieve should be accurately controlled. A constant 
feed shall be maintained until the last test results 
have been recorded. 


3.4.1 In testing batch dryers the time cycle shall be 
constant throughout the period of the test. 


4 TEST PROCEDURE 
4.1 Output 


4.1.1 The output shall normally be measured at the 
outlet of the dryer. Where practicable the entire 
quantity of aggregate dried during the test period 
shall be discharged as directly as possible into tared 
vehicles and weighed on an approved weighbridge. 


4.1.2 When the test is carried out in the course of 
normal production or on large continuous dryers, 
where it is not convenient to weigh the whole output 
at least six measurements shall be made, taking the 
discharge for short periods only, at regular intervals. 
A tared container should be moved into position to 
catch the whole flow, or the flow diverted to such a 
container, for a period which can be accurately 
timed by a stop watch (for example, 10 set to 30 set 
according to the capacity of the dryer being tested). 
The rate of flow in tonnes per hour shall be 
calculated from the weight of the aggregate in the 
container. 


IS 5436 : 2023 


4.2 Determination of Moisture Content 


4.2.1 At least six samples of the aggregate shall be 
taken at approximately even intervals throughout the 
test period from both the feed and the discharge ends 
of the dryer. Where possible, quantities of about 
25 kg shall be taken by catching the whole flow in a 
container inserted into the stream of material. Each 
of these batches shall be reduced on a sample splitter 
or ‘quartered’ to give a final sample of about 4.5 kg 
which shall be put into a suitable previously 
weighed container, for subsequent determination of 
the moisture content. Where possible, the sample 
and container shall be weighed immediately to 
obtain the weight of the sample and its moisture. 
Care shall be taken to minimize the loss of moisture, 
particularly from warm material, during the 
sampling procedure. If immediate weighing is not 
possible, then an air-tight container shall be used, 
such as a lever lid tin, and this container and its 
contents shall be weighed before unsealing. A 
balance capable of weighing up to 7 kg readable and 
accurate to 1.0 g shall be used. 


4.2.2 The sample should be thoroughly dried either 
in a well-ventilated oven at 105 °C to 110 °C for 
24 hours, or by heating over a burner in an open tray, 
with constant stirring, for 30 minutes after all visible 
evidence of moisture has disappeared. This method 
of drying should be repeated on the first sample to 
ensure that no further loss of weight occurs. 


4.2.3 The moisture content of the sample is the 
difference between the initial and final dried weight 
expressed as a percentage of the final weight. 


4.2.4 If the system of feeding the dryer is such that 
the above method of sampling would not give 
reasonably representative samples of mixed 
constituents at the feed end, then separate sets of 
samples shall be taken from each constituent of the 
feed, their moisture contents measured 
independently, and the average moisture content 
calculated from the ratios of the various constituents 
used in the mixed feed material. 


4.2.4.1 This ratio may have to be estimated from the 
grading as referred to under 4.4. 


4.3 Temperature Measurement 


4.3.1 The thermometer used shall preferably be a 
metallic thermometer having a range appropriate to 
the temperature of the materials, say 0 °C to 100 °C 
for the feed materials, and 0 °C to 260 °C for the 
discharge, and their thermal capacity should not 
exceed that of a mercury-in-glass thermometer of 
about 6 mm diameter. 


4.3.2 Feed Temperature 


When the feed is from open stock piles, two or three 
readings of input temperature (measured by 
inserting a thermometer deeply into the heap) will 


be adequate. If there is reason to expect variations in 
feed temperature, for example, when feeding from 
bulk storage bins of pre-dried material, then samples 
should be taken by the same method and of the same 
frequency as given in 4.3.2 for the outlet 
temperature determination. 


4.3.3 Outlet Temperature 


4.3.3.1 Temperature measurements shall be made on 
the aggregate, leaving the dryer at regular intervals 
during the period of the test, so that at least six 
results are obtained during the period of the test. The 
samples shall be taken by inserting a lagged 
container into the stream of aggregate, leaving the 
dryer so as to catch the whole flow for a period 
sufficient to collect about 9 kg to 13.5 kg of material. 
A lid shall be placed on the lagged container and the 
aggregate inside shall be mixed gently at intervals 
for five minutes to allow the temperature of the 
different particle sizes to even out; the temperature 
shall then be determined. A can (of diameter 4 to 
6 times the maximum size of the aggregate and 
depth equal to twice the diameter) may be used on 
asphaltic materials where the sand content is greater 
than 50 percent. 

NOTE — Before taking the first sample, the container 

should be brought to temperature by taking a few trial 

samples before the start of the test period. 


4.3.3.2 The thermometer used for the discharge 
temperature should be kept in some of the hot 
materials of each batch till the following batch is 
ready. 


4.4 Grading of Aggregate 


4.4.1 During the process of quartering the batches 
referred to in 4.2, a sufficient quantity shall be 
retained from each batch for drying and sieving in 
accordance with IS 460 (Part 1). The sample dried 
for determination of moisture content, if and of 
adequate size, may be used for this grading. 


4.4.1.1 If two or more constituents of the aggregate 
are fed in sequence through the same feed hopper, 
samples taken as described in 4.2 may not be 
representative of the mixed feed materials. In such 
cases, accurate sieve analysis of the feed cannot be 
made. An approximation should be made by taking 
sets of samples, each set comprising a sample of 
each constituent of the feed as brought to the feed 
hopper. 


4.4.1.2 These samples should be graded separately 
and the composite grading obtained by combining 
the results in the proportions of each constituent 
used in the feed. If this result is not in reasonable 
agreement with the grading of the discharged 
materials, then combinations of different 
proportions of the constituent grading’s should be 
tried, until ratios are found which give a composite 
grading as close as possible to that of the discharged 


materials. The proportions so found shall be taken as 
those of the feed material for the purposes of 
estimation of the moisture content in 4.2. 


4.5 Oil Consumption 


4.5.1 The total quantity of oil used during the test 
period shall be measured to an accuracy of 
+ 2.5 percent. Where possible, a small service fuel 
tank mounted on a scale, or so connected that it can 
be weighed or measured accurately by dipping at the 
beginning and end of the test period, should be used, 
and the quantity of oil burned calculated from the 
difference in readings. 


4.5.2 Alternatively, the oil level in the main tank 
should be measured at the beginning and end of the 
period. The duration should be such that the change 
of level is at least 40 mm and the measurement 
should be made to an accuracy of 51 mm. If a change 
of level as indicated is not achieved, a service tank 
shall be fitted. All other conditions affecting the 


IS 5436 : 2023 


level shall be the same at the beginning and end of 
the period. If the tank is of such a shape that the 
surface area of the oil can be accurately measured, 
and does not vary appreciably between the two 
levels, then the quantity can be calculated from the 
change of level. 


4.5.2.1 If the tank shape is irregular, the quantity 
shall be measured indirectly. When the burners are 
off, the level shall be restored to the initial position. 
Oil shall then be drawn off into separate containers, 
in which it can be measured until the level in the tank 
falls to the lower test level. The quantity drawn off 
shall be taken as the consumption during the test. In 
some circumstances, it may be more convenient to 
add a measured quantity of oil to raise the level in 
the tank from the lower to the higher test level. 


4.5.3 The oil consumption shall be expressed in 
litres per hour, and in litres per tonne of aggregate 
dried, the type, calorific value and specific gravity 
of oil used being specified. 


IS 5436 : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword and Clause 3.1.1) 


RECOMMENDED CONDITIONS OF TEST (FOR USE WHEN SPECIAL CONDITIONS ARE NOT 


LAID DOWN) 


A-1 RECOMMENDED CONDITIONS OF TEST 


When special conditions of test are not laid down, use of the conditions given in Table 1 are recommended to 
cover the production of rolled asphalt, coated macadam, and fine cold asphalt. 


Table 1 Recommended Conditions of Test 


(Clause A-1) 


Feed: DENSE ASPHALTIC CONCRETE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 
a) Type of Crushed rock or gravel Crushed rock or gravel 
aggregate 

b) Grading IS Sieve Percentage | Tolerance IS Sieve Percentage | Tolerance 

Designation | passing by percent Designation | passing by percent 
weight weight 

20 mm 100 +5 40 mm 100 +5 
12.5 mm 90 +5 25 mm 85 +5 
10 mm 80 +5 20 mm 68 +5 
4.75 mm 60 +5 10 mm 37.5 +5 
2.36 mm 42.5 2 4.75 mm 20 +5 
600 micron 23.5 +2 2.36 mm 12.5 +2 
300 micron 18 +2 75 micron 2 +2 
150 micron 12 +2 
75 micron 7 +2 


c) Temperature 


Not less than 5 °C 


Not less than 5 °C 


d) Moisture 5 percent to 6 percent by weight (of dry | 5 percent to 6 percent by weight (of dry 
content materials) materials) 
Discharge: 


a) Temperature 


175 °C to 200 °C 


Damp condition not more than 80 °C 
Wet condition not more than” 110 °C 


b) Moisture 
content 


Not more than 0.25 percent by weight 
(of dry materials) 


Not more than 0.25 percent by weight 
(of dry materials) 


D Should material originally in a wet condition be required to have an outlet temperature less than 110 °C , then a cooling unit or other special 
method would be required. 


IS 5436 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 1.1) 


B-1 TYPICAL FORM FOR RECORDING RESULTS OF TEST ON OIL-FIRED ROTARY DRYER 


Dryer by (manufacturer’s NAME).......... cc eeeeeecseeeeeseceeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeees 
Type of dryer (batch or CONntINUOUS)...........:ceeeeceeeeeeecesceeeeeeeeeeeeseeeee 
a): Wen othe Gr yer sss csc fezescaceecs tag a E actus fee ERE 
b) Length of flame eraen n cntduca see teteats tart fetes 
c) Type of liming. e som aaa Gon eat E R 
Main duty: 
Preparation of aggregates for : Dense asphaltic concrete 
Bituminous macadam 
Special conditions (give details) 
Rated output with damp/wet feed............... tonne per hour 


Test Conditions: 


Air temperature 0.0.0... eee °C Humidity 0.00.00... 

Wind conditions (if dryer tested in the open) ...........ecceeeseeeeceseeeecesceeecesceeeeeseeneeeneeees 

Type of aggregate (trade group). ...........:ceeseeseeseeseeeseceeeeseceeeeseenees 

Approximate grading of aggregate (to IS: oo eeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeeee or give percentage passing main sieves 
Fine aggregate/coarse aggregate ratio (for asphalt dryer). ................ 

If coupled to dust collector, state type ...........c:ceesceseeseeseeeeeereeneeeee 

Position of burner in use (where alternative positions are available)......... 


Test Records: 


Start of test run wo... elec ecceeeeeseeseeeeeees OUTS emeena e tele min 

Bnd, Of teSt N He E D SEa EEPE E EE RE EE eek ee eased etapa eet hours......... aan min 
Approximate time running before start of test............... 0. cesses ROUFS. 0... cece eee eeeeeeeeeees MIN 
Duration of test run ooo... ceeceeseeeeeeeee MD d 


Feed materials, average temperature...........eeeseeessseeeseeeerereestsessteresteristestrtesterrsrentesterrereeterenreses °C 

Time each charge is dryer (batch dryers) ..........:ccscecscceseesecesceecesceseceseeeeeneeceeeaeeseecaeesaeeaeenaeeaees min 
Approximate time of passage of material (continuous dryers). .........:eeccescesseescesceesceseeeseeseecseceneeseenees min 
Angle of inclination to horizontal............cceccecceescesceeseeeeeeeeneeneeenes ° 

Speed. of diyete fei epi ete Mies a ee ea Re A ae ee rev/min 


Feed Materials 


Sample No. 1 2 3 4|5 | 6 


Time taken — minimum from start 


Temperature °C 


Moisture content percentage of dry weight 


Grading: Percentage retained/passing 


IS Sieve: 


40 mm 

25 mm 

20 mm 
12.5 mm 
10 mm 
4.75 mm 
2.36 mm 
600 micron 
300 micron 
150 micron 
75 micron 


IS 5436 : 2023 


Type of thermometer used for feed material 


Method of sampling and taking temperature 


Discharged Materials 


Sample No. 


Time taken — minimum from start 


Temperature °C 


Moisture content percentage of dry weight 


Grading: Percentage retained/passing 
IS Sieve: 
40 mm 

25 mm 

20 mm 
12.5 mm 
10 mm 
4.75 mm 
2.36 mm 
600 micron 
300 micron 
150 micron 
75 micron 


Type of thermometer used for discharge material 


Method of sampling and taking temperature 


Average feed temperature... cc eesesceecsseeeeeeeeecseceeeeeseeneeeeeees °C 
Average discharge temperature... cc ececsesseseesecreeeeeeeseeeeeeeeaees °C 
Average rise in temperature 0... eee ecesseeeeeeceececeeeeecneceeeseeneens °C 
Average moisture content in feed... cece eeeeseeeeeeteeereeees percent 
Average moisture content in discharge.............::c:ceseseeeees percent 
Average reduction in moisture content............:ccceceeseseereeee percent 
Total output during test run ......... eee TONNE eno an kg 
Method of estimating OUtDUL...........e eee eceecesceesceeseceeeeseeteeeeeereesees 
Rate per Noute ienen tonie ereen aeea kg 
Calorific value of fuel used............... kilocalories/kg (or kilocalories/litre) 
Specific gravity of fuel USCC... ee eeeeseereetecteceeeseeeeceeeeeeeeeaees 
Fuel burned during test run............ceeeeceseeeecereeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeee litre 
Fuel consumption per Nour...........ccccceecessceescesseceececeeeeeseeeenees litre 
Fuel consumption per tonne of aggregate ..........:eseeeeseeeeeeeeeeees litre 


IS 5436 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Ajax Engineering Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Ammann Apollo India Private Limited, Jagudan, 
Gujarat 


Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 


B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 


Builders Association of India, Mumbai 


Caterpillar India Private Limited, Chennai 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defense, New Delhi 


Epiroc Mining India Limited, Nashik 


Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Faridabad 


Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers 


Association, New Delhi 
IRCON International Limited, New Delhi 
Jaypee India Limited, Kolkata 


John Deere India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


BRIG. RAJNEESH BHATNAGAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI K. K. VYASAS (Alternate) 


SYED MOHAMMED RIAZ NAWAZ 
SHRI JORLIN P. V. (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANJUNATH D. JAGGAL (Alternate II) 
SHRI KRISHNA KISHORE (Alternate IID) 


SHRI GIRISH DIXIT 
SHRI ASHISH PATEL (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANAN RAJPURA (Alternate II) 
SHRI PRASAD DAYAL (Alternate III) 
SHRI GEETESH MAKADIA (Alternate IV) 
SHRI ARPAN PATEL (Alternate V) 
SHRI KARTIK TRIVEDI (Alternate VI) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. D. BHOSALE 
SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. G. SAKTHIKUMAR 


SHRI K. REJI JOSE 
SHRI RAMESH VISHWANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DILIP KUMAR JHA 
SHRI KRISHNAJI SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SUVIR SINGH 
DR BANTI A. GEDAM (Alternate) 


COL AMIT BHARDWAJ 


CoL RAVI LOGANATHAN 
LT COL S. TALEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATESAN BASHYAM 
SHRI MUTTANNA JAPANNAVAR (Alternate) 


SHRI FAIZ AHMAD 
SHRI ASHOK CHAUHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI LAXMI CHAND TYAGI (Alternate II) 


SHRI K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI RANDHIR GUPTA 
SHRI S. K. RAY (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA 
SHRI RAHUL KUMAR TEOTIA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
SHRI RAJ ANAND (Alternate) 


IS 5436 : 2023 


Organization 


Larsen and Toubro Construction Limited, Karnataka 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


Schwing Stetter (India) Private Limited, New Delhi 


Volvo Construction Equipments India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Wirtgen India Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (Flat no. 3052, Prestige 
Shantiniketan, Whitefield Main Road, Bengaluru) 


In Personal Capacity (D-24, Amar Colony, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GURUPRASAD S. R. 
SHRI DHANAJI HARIBA MANGUDE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KESHAVA 
SHRI M. SURESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. SHARMA 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 

SHRI SAURABH BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJEEV SHALIA 

SHRI VARADHARAJAN R. (Alternate) 


SHRI V. R. SAI PRASAD POLIPALLI 
SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 
SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. MAHAJAN 


SHRI SATENDER KUMAR 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL 
ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (20313). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


