IS 3967 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


FRÅ HAF 
Fa [ae 
(SIT FRAT) 
Indian Standard 
CUTCH — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 59.140.10 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 3 


Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


Cutch is obtained primarily from aqueous extract of the heartwood of a common Indian tree KHAIR, Acacia 
catechu (Linn) Willd., fam. Leguminosae. The other two species commercially exploited are Acacia Chundra 
(Roxb) Willd., and Acacia catechuoides Benth. This extract, when properly concentrated and cooled, deposits a 
crystalline substance chemically characterized as ‘catechin’. On separation of this crystalline deposit, commonly 
known as KATTHA, and drying out the residual water soluble extract, a dark rusty-brown to blackish-red mass, 
rich in catechu-tannic acid, known as ‘cutch’ or ‘dark catechu’, is obtained as a valuable by-product. Besides 
catechu-tannic acid, cutch contains non-tans, insolubles, moisture and gummy matter. 


Cutch is used as a mordant in dyeing leather and as retanning material, alone or blended with other tanning 
materials. It is also used for dyeing and treating of fishing nets to impart them long life and for treating ropes and 
fabrics, which are liable to come in contact with sea and other waters, such as sailing ropes, sails, tents, canvas for 
travelling goods and mail bags. Cutch is also used in the manufacture of stencil and printers ink, in oil well drilling 
operations for reducing the viscosity of drilling mud and for descaling of deposits in boilers. Being a powerful 
astringent, cutch, prepared in accordance with pharmaceutical requirements, may be used in the same way as 
gambier. 


This standard was originally published in 1967 and revised in 1975. In this revision, the requirement on 
pentachlorophenol (PCP) has been introduced keeping in view of the demand for eco-friendly inputs from the 
leather industry. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3967 : 2013 


Indian Standard 
CUTCH — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for cutch used for non- 
edible purposes, mainly in tanning hides and skins, in 
oil well drilling and for descaling boiler deposits. 


1.1.1 This standard does not cover the water-soluble 
tanning materials, obtained by extracting the leaves, 
young twigs and bark of several varieties of mangrove 
tree, and know in the trade as ‘mangrove cutch’. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


1640 : 2007 Glossary of terms relating to hides, 


skins and leather (first revision) 


5466 : 1969 Methods of test for vegetable tanning 
materials 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 1640 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Acicular — Needle-shaped. This term is generally 
used for describing crystals or particles in powder form. 


3.2 Analytical Strength Solution — A solution of 
0.4 + 0.025 percent tannin content. 


3.3 Cutch — Solid mass obtained by drying the water- 
soluble extract, left over after crystallizing out the 
catechin-rich portion known as KATTHA from the 
cooled total extractives obtained from the heartwood 
of Acacia catechu Willd., Acacia chundra Willd. or 
Acacia catechuoides Benth., fam. Leguminosae. 


3.4 Insolubles — The difference between the 
percentages of total dry residue and total solubles 
present. 


3.5 Magma — Particles suspended in water to form 
viscous Opaque mixture which may settle out on 
standing. 


3.6 Optically Clear Solution — A solution in which a 
bright object, such as an electric lamp filament is clearly 
visible through a 5 cm thick layer of the solution and in 
which 1 cm thick layer of the solution in a breaker 
placed on black glass or black paper appears black and 
not opalescent when viewed from above in good light. 


4 REQUIREMENT 


4.1 Manufacture 


The material shall be made from the aqueous extract 
of heardwood of Acacia catechu Willd., Acacia 
chundra Willd. or Acacia catechuoides Benth., fam 
Leguminosae, after the separation of catechin-rich 
portion as commercial KATTHA and drying out the 
residual water-soluble matter. 


4.2 Description 


4.2.1 The material shall be obtained as blocks, slabs or 
tablets of regular shape. 


4.2.2 The external surface of the material shall be of 
dull rusty-brown to blackish-red colour. When the 
material is broken by hand, the fractured inside surfaces 
shall be clean and glossy. Small air holes may appear 
at the broken surfaces. 


4.3 Solubility 


The material shall be partially soluble in cold water 
giving a brown magma and shall be completely soluble 
in boiling water. 


4.4 Identification 


The analytical strength soluble of the material shall give 
a dark green colour with a one percent solution of ferric 
ammonium sulphate, changing to purple on making it 
slightly alkaline with sodium hydroxide. 


4.5 When examine microscopically, the material shall 
be almost free from minute acicular crystals 
characteristic of catechin. 


4.6 The material shall also comply with the requirement 
s given in Table 1, when tested according to the referred 
methods of IS 5466. 


4.7 Keeping Quality 


The material, when stored under normal conditions and 


IS 3967 : 2013 


in original wrapped containers, shall continue to satisfy 
the characteristics prescribed in Table 1 for aminimum 
period of six months from the date of packing by the 
manufacturers. 

NOTE — Suitable precautions shall be taken during storage to 


protect the material from high humidity and temperature. 


Table 1 Requirements For Cutch 
(Clause 4.6) 


SI Characteristic Require- Method of Test, 


No. ment Ref to Clause 
of IS 5466 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Tannins”, percent by mass, Min 60 10 
ii) Non-tannins”, percent by mass, 34 9 
Max 
iii) Moisture, percent by mass, Max 14 6 
iv) Insolubles”, percent by mass, Max 1.7 11 
v) Iron”, mg per 100g, Max 5 14 
vi) Copper, mg per 100 g, Max 5 15 
vii) Colour?: 13 
a) Red, Max 8 - 
b) Yellow/red, Min 1.2 - 
viii) pH of analytical strength 4.0 12 
solution, Min 
vii) PCP content”, mg/kg, Max 5 16 


D Calculated on moisture-free basis. 
2 These characteristics shall be tested only when the material is re- 
quired for tanning and dyeing of leather. 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 


5.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier, the net mass of the material, packed 
in wooden cases wrapped in gunny cloth, shall be 
50 kg. each. 


NOTE — Generally, the material shall be in the form of blocks 
weighing 50 kg, slabs of 3 kg or tablets of 1 or 0.5 kg, or in 
pulverized form. 


5.2 Marking 
The packages shall be marked with the following 


information: 


a) Name of the material; 
b) Net mass of the material; 


c) Manufacturer’s name or recognized 
trade-mark, if any, or both; and 


d) Date of packing. 
5.2.1 BIS Certification Marking 
The packages may also be marked with Standard Mark. 


5.2.1.1 The use of the Standard mark is governed by 
the provision of Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


6 SAMPLING 


6.1 Preparation of Test Samples 


Representative test samples of the material shall be 
prepared as prescribed in Annex A and their conformity 
to the requirements to this standard shall be judged as 
prescribed in 5.3. 


6.2 Number of Tests 


6.2.1 Test for the determination of tannins, non-tannins, 
moisture and insolubles shall be conducted on each of 
the individual samples. 


6.2.2 Tests for the determination of all other 
characteristics specified shall be conducted on the 
composite sample. 


6.3 Criteria for Conformity 


The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of the specifications, if all the test results 
on individual as well as the composite samples meet 
the relevant stipulations for the different characteristics. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.1) 


A-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


A-1.1 Lot 


The material offered for inspection at on time shall 
constitute a lot. 


A-1.1.1 Samples shall be tested for each lot for 


ascertaining conformity of the material to the 
requirements of this specification. 


A-1.2 The number (n) of packages to be chosen from a 
lot shall depend on the number of packages in the lot 
(N) and shall be in accordance with Table 2. 


A-1.3 These packages shall be chosen at random from 


the lot. To ensure the randomness of selection, arandom 
number table as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier shall be used. In case such a table is not 
available, the following procedure shall be adopted. 


Arrange all the packages in the lot in a systematic 
manner and starting from any package, count them as 
1,2, 3, etc. up to rand so on, where r is equal to integral 
part of the value of N/n. Every r“ container thus counted 
shall be withdrawn until the requisite number of 
packages is obtained to give the samples for the test. 


Table 2 Number of Packages to be 
Selected for Sampling 
(Clause A-1.2) 


SI No. No. of Packages No. of Packages 
in the Lot to be Chosen 

N n 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) 3-15 3 
ii) 16 - 40 4 
iii) 41-65 5 
iv) 66 - 110 7 
v) 111 and above 10 


A-2 DRAWING OF SAMPLES 


A-2.1 For taking out the material from the container, 
the latter shall be opened and, by means of a suitable 
hammer, break a wedge-shaped piece of solid extract 
from the mass so that, as nearly as possible, a 
proportionate amount from the centre and side of the 
container is taken. These wedge-shaped pieces should 
be about the same size and mass of at least 500 g. The 
cutch sampled as above shall be collected on a large 
sheet of clean, brown paper, broken up into pieces not 
larger than 10 mm in diameter, well-mixed to form a 
composite sample and quartered down until only 
sufficient quantity remains for filing the three wide- 


IS 3967 : 2013 


mouthed clean, dry sample bottles with not less than 
300 g of the cutch. 


NOTE — Samples of cutch for analysis should not be put in 
sacks or paper containers; they should be put in clean glass 
bottles only and so sealed that they do not lose or gain moisture. 
The samples shall not be ground, since this would lead to loss 
in moisture content. 


A-2.2 One set of these composite samples representing 
the n containers selected shall be marked for the 
purchaser, another for the supplier and the third for 
being used as a referee sample. 


A-2.3 The remaining portion of the material from each 
container shall be divided into three equal parts, each 
forming an individual sample. One set of individual 
samples representing the n containers selected shall 
be marked for the purchaser, another for the supplier 
and the third for being used as a referee sample. 


A-2.4 All the individual and composite samples shall 
be immediately transferred to separate containers, 
sealed airtight and labelled with full identification 
particulars, such as manufacturer’s name or trade-mark, 
date of packing of the material, batch number (if 
available), date of sampling and sampler”s name. 


NOTE — The time taken from the opening of original 
containers to the sealing of samples shall be as short as possible, 
care being taken to protect the sample from moisture and other 
adventitious contamination. 


A-2.5 The referee test samples consisting of a 
composite sample and a set of n individual samples 
shall bear the seal of both the purchaser and the 
supplier. They shall be kept at a place agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier to be used in case of 
any dispute between the two. 


A-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 
Grind the samples as described in 4.2 of IS 5466. 


IS 3967 : 2013 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Leather, Tanning Materials and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 17 


Organization 
Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


A. V. Thomas Leather & Allied Products Pvt Ltd, Chennai 


All India Skins & Hide Tanners and Merchants Association, Chennai 


BASF India Ltd, Mumbai 


Bata India Ltd, Hatidah 


Central Footwear Training Institute, Agra 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi 


College of Leather Technology, Kolkata 


Consumer Federation of India, New Delhi 


Council for Leather Exports, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), Kanpur 


Footwear Design & Development Institute, Noida 


Harman Sales Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Finished Leather Manufacturers & Exporters Association, 
Chennai 


Indian Footwear Component Manufacturers Association, Kolkata 
Indian Leather Products Association, Kolkata 


Indian Leather Technologists Association, Kolkata 

Indian Shoe Federation, Chennai 

Indofil Chemicals Co Ltd, Mumbai 

International Institute of Saddlery Technology and Export Management, 
Kanpur 

Italab Private Ltd, Chennai 

Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Mumbai 

Kings International Ltd, Kanpur 

Leather Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Liberty Footwear, Karnal 


Ministry of Commerce, New Delhi 


National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad 


Representative(s) 
Director (Chairman) 


SHRI HABIB HUSSAIN 
Sur K. MANIVANNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI Monan M. SREENIVAS 
Suri S. MOHAMMED Hassan (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. CHAUDHARI 
Dr. S. A. NADGOUDA (Alternate) 


Dr SUDHIR Kumar Das 


Suri S. N. GANGULY 
SHRI S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr C. MURALIDHARAN 


SHRI T. VENUGOPAL 
Suri AJAY AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr BUDDHADEV CHATTOPADHYAY 
PROF Swaran Kumar Basu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. M. HAsHIM 
Dr ZACKRIA Sarr (Alternate) 


Suri G. C. KANNAUJIA 
Suri S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri B. S. KATIYAR 
SHRI NAVENDU SHEKHAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. K. RAZDAN 
SHRI JEEVAN RAZDAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAFEEQUE AHMED 
Suri V. P. NAIMMUR RAHMAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI M. SALAHUDDIN Bart (Alternate II) 


SHRI MANI ALMAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ARNAB JHA 
Dr GAUTAM MUKHERIEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH SUBRAMANIAM 
Suri ÅBHUIT SETH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. JHA 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. A. ETIAPPAN 
Suri J. J. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VIJAYA KUMAR 
Suri R. LAWRENCE (Alternate) 


Suri TAJ ALAM 
Suri G. S. Kumaran (Alternate) 


SHRI VADUVUR T. SRIKANTH 
SHRI SANJEEV MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ADESH GUPTA 
Suri S. S. LAHIRI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SHEKHAR CHATTERJEE 


Organization 


IS 3967 : 2013 


Representative(s) 


National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi Suri E. SIVASAKTHI 


Office of the Development Commissioner, MSME, New Delhi Suri S. K. Basu 


Planning Commission, New Delhi 
Robinson Sports, New Delhi 
SGS India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Sports Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 
TALTEIA, Chennai 


Tata International Limited, Dewas 


Suri R. K. Kapoor (Alternate) 
Dr S. C. LAHIRI 
Suri S. S. JOLLY 


SHRI P. VENKATESAN 
Ms Monika SHARMA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VADIVELU 


Suri O. K. KauL 
Suri R. G. BHIRUD (Alternate) 


The Leather Forum Calcutta for Research and Development, SHRI SANJOY DASGUPTA 


Kolkata 


Vishnu Chemicals, Chennai 


BIS Directorate General 


SHRI PRASANTO BHATTACHARJEE (Alternate) 


Dr P. G. PRADHAN 
Suri C. P. C. KAMALAKAR Rao (Alternate) 


Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri E. DEVENDAR 
Scientist ‘F’ and Head (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 17 (1644). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


