IS

12720:2004

Indian Standard

CRITERIA FOR STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF SPILLWAY TRAINING WALLS AND DIVIDE WALLS
( Second Revision)

ICS 93.16

@ BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

IN DIAN

STANDARDS
MARC

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

October

2004

Price Group

4

Spillways Including Energy Dissipators

Sectional Committee, WRD 10

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. The provision of downstream training wall is made to guide the flow from the spillway into the down stream channel and to retain the draft earth envelope in some cases. Upstream training walls are sometimes provided to retain earth dam faces where wrap around is not provided or partially provided and to guide the flow towards the spillway. The structural design of the training walls and divide walls therefore assumes importance. Divide wal Is are provided to separate bays having different type of energy dissipation arrangement or to separate bays having the same type of energy dissipation arrangement but with different parameters/levels, etc, kept from geological/other consideration or to allow for unsymmetrical operation of spillway gates in order to minimize cross/return flows, eddies, etc. Also divide walls are provided to separate out the power house, silt excluders, etc, located adjacent to the spillway. Sometimes low or submerged divide walls are also provided to effect economy. Walls of approach channels, spillway glacis and energy dissipators maybe masonry/concrete gravity, reinforced concrete cantilever or relatively thin concrete anchored wall/lining placed against steep rock surfaces anchored to the rock by steel dowel bars grouted into drill holes in the rock. Where the strata above foundation at the ends/sides of the spillway consists of earth or poor rock, the walls should be masonry/concrete gravity walls. Where suitable rock is available from the general ground level, the side walls may be in the form of a thin concrete lining. Sometimes combination of gravity section and concrete lined walls are used. In some special cases where the channels or stilling basins are narrow, it may be economical to design the walls and the channel or basin floor as an integral reinforced concrete U-frame. This standard was first published in 1989. First revision was undertaken in 1993 to incorporate the latest practices being followed in the field. The important changes effected in this revision were as follows: a) Modifications in design loading conditions, computation of forces and stability criteria,

b) Reference to IS 11772:1986 `Guidelines for design of drainage arrangements of energy dissipators and training walls of spillways' was given for drainage arrangement of training and divide walls. `Code of practice for plain and reinforced c) Reference to 1S 456:2000 given for design of stem and base slab of divide walls, and concrete (third revision)' was

d) The computation of stresses and design of anchorages based on one of the method were covered in a special publication SP 55: 1993 `Design aid for anc~orages for spillway piers, training walls and divide walls'. This revi@n is being taken up on the basis of comments received from the users and to incorporate the latest practices being followed in the field. Modifications have been made with regard to design loading conditions and the forces to be considered in the design of training walls. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 1S 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 12720:2004

Indian Standard

CRITERIA FOR STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF SPILLWAY TRAINING WALLS AND DIVIDE WALLS ( Second Revision)
1 SCOPE This standard lays down the criteria for structural design of upstream and downstream training walls and divide walls. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions, which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 456:2000 1893 (Part 1) :
2000

a short seepage path to the downstream side of the control section. The top width of the training wall should be kept 1.5 m, minimum with the arrangement of steps and railings to serve as walkway during inspection. For the downstream walls of spillway glacis and energy dissipators, free draining backfill with drainage arrangements should be provided to reduce seepage pressures. 3.1.2 Anchored Walls

Title Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (~hird revision) Criteria for earthquake resistant design of structures: Part 1 General provisions and buildings (jl@ revision) Criteria for design of solid gravity dams @-sr revision) Criteria for hydraulic design of bucket type energy dissipators (first revision) Guidelines for design of drainage arrangements of energy dissipators and training wails of spillways AND DIVIDE WALLS

For concrete anchored walls the rock is excavated to a stable slope, normally 0.5 (H) to 1 (V) or otherwise depending upon the geology of the site and then concrete of required thickness (minimum 300 mm) is laid against to this slope. The concrete should be anchored adequately into the rock by dowel bars grouted in holes drilled into the rock. A careful investigation of the rock should be made before designing the anchorage system. The anchorage and the concrete should be able to withstand the probable hydrostatic head in the rock or residual hydrostatic head if adequate drain hoIes are provided therein (see Fig. 1). 3.1.3 Combination of Gravity and Anchored Walls

6512:1984 7365:1985

11722:1986

In cases where partly overburden and partly rock faces are met with, the section of the wall should be a concrete anchored wall in the lower rock face portion and gravity wall above in the overburden portion. This type of combination wodld be economical in such cases (see Fig. 2). 3.1.4 Cantilever/Counterjort Walls

3 TRAINING

3.1 Training Walls 3.1.1 Gravity Walls Gravity walls for spillway approach channel and energy dissipators generally retain backfill or dam embankment fill against their back side. For approach walls not retaining a dam embankment, pervious backfill with drainage may be economical and desirable to reduce loading under empty or drawdown conditions, but the drainage system should not create 1

Cantilever/counterfort walls may also be provided as training walls depending upon the height of the wall. 3.2 Divide Walls The divide walls are normally provided in line with the crest piers so as to have minimum disturbance in the flow. As far as possible, the walls should be constructed in reinforced cement concrete so that section is thin and offers minimum obstruction to the flow. The divide wall need not be taken too high but may be kept slightly above the maximum tail water

IS 12720:2004 WATER DRAIN ~

y TEMPERATURE REINFORCEMENT

STABLE

SLOPE

-- ..

.. +100mm DRAIN PIPE

--'.-

- a

----'->=

----j

y

+75mm
.

DRAIN HOLE

`

z'CONSTRUCTION
JOINT
FIG. 1 TYPICAL ANCHORED WALL

level in the energy dissipator when clear separation of the flows is required. Sometimes submerged walls are also provided which provide a clear separation of flows at lower discharges and would be submerged at However, the extent of higher discharges. submergence of the wall should be decided by carrying out the model studies. The length of the divide wall should normally be kept up to the downstream end of the energy dissipator or as may be required based on model studies. Divide walls can also help in provision of coffer dam to facilitate dewatering and repairs of spillway aprordbucket, etC. 3.3 The drainage arrangements for training and divide walls should be kept according to IS 11722. 4 DESIGN OF TRAINING 4.1 Forres The following forces should be considered design of training walls: in the WALLS

a) b)

c) d) e) f) g)

h)

Dead load; Reservoir and tail water pressure and hydrodynamic load due to flow, wherever applicable; Wave pressure, if significant; Uplift pressure; Earthquake force; Earth pressure; Hydrostatic pressure on embankment/backfill/rock face due to ground water or seepage, etc; and Live load or surcharge due to earthmoving machinery and other equipment.

4.2 Design Loading Conditions 4.2.1 In all cases loading selected for design of walls for spillway approach channel and energy dissipators should include the most severe load combinations anticipated. Typical loadhg conditions to be used for the upstream and the downstream' masonry or concrete training walls have been described in 4.2.2 and 4.2.3. The design loading conditions for the anchored walls 2

IS 12720
EARTH EMBANKMENT=

2004

+100mm WEEP STAGGERED

HOLES GRADED FILTER

. ----GRADE . .

MASONARY CONCRETE GRAVITY W i LL

.

ANCHORED

WALL

-:

ANCHORS CONSTRUCTION JOINT

FIG.

NOTE -- Drainage gallery to be suitably located, if planned. 2 TYPICAL SECTION OF GRAVITY AND ANCHORED WALL obtained from the criteria given in IS 7365 or based on model studies. 4.2.2 4.2.2.1 a) b) c) 4.2.2.2 Upstream Training Wall Normal loading condition Water in the reservoir up to the full reservoir level, including wave forces, if significant; The backfill submerged up to the same level; and Full uplift pressure. Severe loading condition above but with earthquake

have been described in 4.2.1.1. Hydraulic model studies are generally necessary for estimating the total water pressure due to static and hydrodynamic loads (pressure fluctuations artd/or centrifugal action, etc) and their associated frequencies on the training walls and divide walls. 4.2.1.1 The anchored walls should be designed for the sudden drawdown condition considering (a) hydrostatic pressure on rock face due to groundwater or seepage etc, (b) water up to minimum tail water level on river side, unless the rock behind the wall is drained by an adequate system of drain holes extending deeper than anchorage system in which case it may be designed considering partial drainage effect and anchorage provided for balance pressure (see Fig. 1). The foundation level, that is, bottom of the anchored walls should be provided up to the level

Loading as in 4.2.2.1 effect/wave forces. 4.2.2.3 a)

Sudden drawdown condition Earthfill/embankment reservoir level. submerged up to the full

3

IS 12720:2004 b) c) 4.2.2.4 a) b) c) Minimum drawdown level on the reservoir side, and Corresponding full uplift pressure. Spillwcryfunctioning loading condition 4.3 Computation 4.3.1 Dead Load The dead load to be considered comprises of the weight of the masonry and/or concrete plus the weight of the backfill. For the preliminary design, the unit weight of concrete and masonry may be taken as 23.50 kN/m3 and 22.5 kN/m3 respectively. The weight of backfill should be according to type of the backfill resting over the wall slopes and the conditions of the backfill such as moist, saturated or submerged depending upon water level/phreatic line on backfill side. The unit weight of water should be taken as 9.81 kN/m3 (see IS 6512). 4.3.2 Reservoir and Tail Water Pressure and Hydrodynamic Load Due to Flow Wherever Applicable 4.3.2.1 Reservoir and tailwater load For the upstream training wall linear distribution of the static water pressure acting normal to the face of wall should be considered. Wave forces should also be considered for the upper part of the wall. For the downstream training wall, the larger of the hydrostatic and the hydrodynamic loads, including centrifugal force where applicable, should be considered. 4.3.2.2 Water pressure in still water of Forces

Water in the reservoir up to maximum water level, The backfill submerged up to the same level, and Corresponding full uplift pressure. Training Wall

4.2.3 Downstream 4.2.3.1 a) b)

Normal loading condition Minimum TWL/No water on the river side, Earth pressure and hydrostatic pressure on embankmentibackfilllrock face due to grot.rnd water or seepage (drains effective), and Full uplift varying uniformly from corresponding water head in the backfill side to zero on the river side. Severe loading condition

c)

4.2.3.2

Loading as in 4.2.3.1 but with earthquake effect. 4.2.3.3 Sudden applicable)
a)

drawdown

condition

(wherever

b) c)

Earth pressure and hydrostatic pressure on embankment/backfill/rock face due to ground water or seepage (drains clogged), Water up to minimum tail water level on river side (drains clogged), and Full uplift varying uniformly from corresponding water head in the backfill side to minimum on the river side. Spillway functioning loading condition

The intensity of pressure in still or slowly moving water varies directly with the depth. This pressure is expressed as: p = yWh The total horizontal force on a unit length of a vertical wall will be: F = 112yWh2, and The moment will be: M = 1/6ywh3 where yW = unit weight of water in kN/m3, and h = depth of water in m.

4.2.3.4 a)

b)

c)

Earth pressure and hydrostatic pressure on embankment/backfill/rock face due to ground water or seepage (drains effective), The hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads due to the flow in the energy dissipator. In case of flip buckets, the hydrostatic load should also include centrifugal force in addition to depth of water `dl', and Full uplift varying uniformly from corresponding water head in the backfdl side to the depth (all) on the river side.

4.3.2.3 Water pressure in a steeply inclined stream on the spillway glacis In a stream flowing down a steeply inclined slope, the pressure pattern is modified from the static condition. The water, which is supported on a spillway slope, has a negligible shearing value. Therefore, the floor supports only the normal component of the weight of the water and this produces the pressures on the floor and on the sidewalls. The overturning force at the floor and on the base of the side wall for a unit length measured along the glacis is expressed as: F = 1/2ywh2cos et

Unless drainage galleries are provided.
NOTES 1 Due to intense turbulence of flow in the energy dissipator, the ensuing turbulence and surges may produce hydrodynamic forces which may be far in excess of the normal hydraulic loading. These hydrodynamic forces exerted on training wall would have considerably wide band of frequency, It should be ensured that the natural frequency of training wall is not in the neighbourhood of the predominant frequency of the force exerted to avoid resonance (see 5.3.2). 2 Passive pressures or earth pressure at rest, as applicable from the backfill may be considered in thk condkion which may, however, be limited to the hydrostatic and hydro-dynamic Iodds.

4

IS 12720:2004

and the overturning

moment as: M = 1/6ywh3cos ct

4.3.5 Earth Pressure

where Y. h a= = unit weight of water, = depth of water normal to the floor, and floor angle with horizontal in degree.

The earth pressure should be considered in accordance with IS 1893. 4.4 Stability Criteria for Downstream Training Walls Upstream and

4.4.1 The maximum foundation pressure should not exceed the safe bearing capacity of the foundation. 4.4.2 The compressive strength of concrete/masonry should be in accordance with IS 6512. 4.4.3 No tensile stress should be permitted in the normal loading condition. Nominal tensile stresses may, however, be permitted in other loading conditions and their permissible values should not exceed the values given in Table 1. Table 1 Values of Permissible Tensile Stress in Concrete and Masonry s] No. Loading Condition
f Permissible Tensile Stress For Concrete (4) Nil 0.02 fc 0.02 fc 0.02 fc \

However, for calculating reinforcement steel in vertical direction, the bending moment qer unit horizontal length should be taken as M/cos ct and shear force per unit horizontal length as F/cos U. 4.3.2.4 Water pressure in a deflected stream

If a flowing stream is deflected by a curving vane, such as a vertical curve in a flip bucket at the bottom of a spillway, the water pressure is increased by centrifugal force. This increase in pressure maybe evaluated by:

where Pc Y. d, r= ~= = increase in pressure, = unit weight of water, = depth of flow entering bucket, radius of bucket, and acceleration due to gravity.

Va = actual velocity of flow entering bucket,

For Masonry (1) (2) (3) Nil O Normal loading condkion ii) Severe loading condition 0.01 fc iii) Sudden drawdown condition 0.01 fc iv) Spillway functioning condition 0.01 fc where fc is the cube compressive masonry.

strength of concrete/mortar

for

The maximum and minimum centrifugal pressure in a bucket occur at the lowest and highest points of the bucket respectively. The approximate bucket pressure and the maximum side wall pressures are obtained by adding the computed centrifugal pressure to the hydrostatic pressure at the section under consideration. The total horizontal force on the unit length of the wall due to centrifugal pressure will be: Fc = l/2P, and moment M. = l/6pc d? 4.3.2.5 Hydrodynamic forces dl

4.4.4

Criteria for Design Against Sliding

The factor of safety against sliding maybe calculated in accordance with IS 6512 on the basis of partial factor of safety in respect of friction (Fe) and partial factor of safety in respect of cohesion (FJ as given below. The factor of safety against sliding should not be less than 1.0. Loading Condition Normal Severe Sudden drawdown Spillway functioning Fm 1.5 1.2 1.2 1.2 F. 3.6 2.4 2.4 2.4

The hydrodynamic in 5.3.2. 4.3.3

forces to be considered are given

4.4.5 The reinforcement for cantilever/counterfort walk+ should be designed in. accordance with IS 456. 5 DESIGN 5.1 Forces The following forces should design of divide walls: a) b) c) d) be considered in the OF DIVIDE WALLS

Upliji Pressure

The upIift pressure should be assumed to act over 100 percent of the base area. The uplift should be assumed to vary uniformly along the base width of the wall. It may be safe to assume that uplift pressures are not affected by an earthquake. 4.3.4 Earthquake Forces be considered in

The earthquake forces should accordance with IS 1893.

Dead load, Water pressure including hydrodynamic sure, Uplift pressure, and Earthquake force.

pres-

5

IS 12720:2004
5.2 Design Loading Conditions
H=
b=

height of the wall, in m; base width of the gravity wall or thickness of the cantilever wall, in m; and factor which is a function of geometry.

5.2.1 The divide walls should be designed following loading conditions. 5.2.1.1 a)

for the
F=

Unsymmetricals pillwayo perationcondition Hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads due to the unsymmetrical flow in the energy dissipator. In the case of flip buckets the hydrostatic load should also include centrifugal force in addition to depth of water, and Corresponding full uplift. Spillway not discharging condition

For gravity walls up to 30 m in height, F = 0.001394 s/m may be used. For fixed-free cantilever wa!ls up to 30 m in height and with b/H not exceeding 0.50, F = 0.0021 S/m, maybe used. 5.4 Stability Criteria for Divide Wall The divide wall should be designed to withstand the overturning moments for the conditions given in 5.2. The maximum foundation pressure should not exceed the safe bearing capacity of the foundation. 5.5 Design of the Reinforcement Slab of Divide Walls for Stem and Base

b) 5.2.1.2 a) b) c) d)

Water up to minimum tail water level on one side, No water on the other side assuming it to be dewatered, Corresponding full uplift, and Earthquake forces. of Forces

5.5.1 The reinforcement for stem and base slab should be designed according to IS 456. In case the wall is founded on sound rock, the base slab may be alternatively designed as given in 6. 6 ANCHORAGES When the training/divide walls are resting on a concrete block laid over sound rock, stresses will be induced in the concrete block and the rock below the concrete due to loading on the wall. The diffusion of stresses into the base block is of considerable importance for determination of depth of anchorages of reinforcing bars. P. = r~ H2 Pew = 213 C. H2 tx~

5.3 Computation

5.3.1 The dead load, uplift pressure and earthquake forces should be calculated as given in 4.3. 5.3.2 Estimation of Hydrodynamic Pressures

For estimation of hydrodynamic pressures on account of turbulence and surges, model studies are desirable. However, till these forces are ascertained from model tests criteria given below may be followed for estimation for the forces for preliminary design in case a stilling basin arrangement is provided: a) Assume depth of water on one side of wall equivalent to maximum depth (H) occurring after the hydraulic jump has taken place; Assume a rectangular water pressure distribution due to water load on the flow side of the wall; Assume Westergaard's Parabola to further account for the hydrodynamic effects of surges using an acceleration factor of 0.15 g (see Fig. 3). In a seismic area, earthquake loads may govern over surge loads; and Proportion the divide wall such that the natural period of vibration of the wall is less than 0.2 s.
NOTE -- The natural period of vibration for either a gravity or fixed-free cantilever wall maybe found by the following approximate formula: Ts=Fxg where

c. =
1-0.72

8.0143
2

A 304.8T [)

b)

where Y. = unit weight of water in kN/m3, H= depth of water in m, T= ah earthquake ins. foundation vibration period

c)

d)

= horizontal acceleration coefficient (to be taken as 0.15 g for design calculation), with a

Pw = total horizontal water pressure rectangular distribution in kN/m,

Pew = additional water pressure in kN/m, and

Ce =

factor in kN/m3.

NOTE -- If the value of T is not available, C, may be taken as 8.2 kN/m3.

6

IS 12720:2004

.

RD'S A

FIG. 3 WATER PRESSUREINDIVIDEWALL

7

IS 12720:2004

ANNEX

A

( Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION WRD 10

Spillways Including Energy Dissipators Sectional Committee, Organization
Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar Bhakra Beas Management Board, Narrgal Township Bodhi Water Resources Department, Bhopal Central Design Organization, Gandhinagar Central Water & Power Research Station, Ptme Centml Water Commission, New Delhi

Representative(s)
SHRIN. B. DESAt (chairman) SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER EXECUTtVEENGINEER (Ahernare) SHRIJ. K. TtWARt SHRtR. K. CHACHONDIA (Ahemate) SUPERINTENDtNO ~GtNEER SHrttP. B. DEOLALIKAR SHRIMATI V. V. BHOSEKAR(Alternate) DIRECTOR (CMDD-N & W) DIRECTOR (SSD & C) (Alternate) SHRIV. K. KAPUR SHRIP. K. SANGHI (Alternate)

Consulting Engineering Services (I) Ltd, New Delhi Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara Hindus(an Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai Indian Association of Hydrologists, New Delhl Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Irri@ion & Water Ways D~rectorate, Govemrnent of West Bengal, Distt Darjeeling Irrigation Department, Government of Orissa, Bhubaneshwar irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Irrigation Department, Government of Uttaranchal, Roorkee Irrigation Department, Government of Kamataka, Karnataka Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasfrik Jaipmkash Industries Ltd, New Delhi Nathpa Jhakri Power Corporation, Shimla

Srsttt V.S. BRAHMABHAIT
RESEARCH OFFICER (Afternafe) SHRIR. G. VARTAK SHRIK. R. VISHWANATFt (Alternate) SHRt~tTAM SINOH DIRECTOR (WRTDC) DR NAYAN SHARMA(Alternate) CHIEF ENGINEER SUPERINTENDING ENGtNEER (DAMS) (Ahernafe) &JPERINTENDtNO ENGINEER EXECUTtVEENGtNEER (Alternate) CHIEF ENGINEER (D& R) DIRECTOR (HEAD WORKS) (Afremate) CHIEF ENGINEER (RSDD) DIRECTOR SPILLWAY(RSDD) (Alternate) CHIEF ENGINEER & DIRCTOR SUPERINTENDING ~GtNEER (Alternate) DtRECrOrt SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER(MD) EXECUTtVEENGtNEER(MD-5) (Ahemute) SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRINARENDRA SINGH(Alternate) SHRIR. S. CHAUHAN SHRIV. K. VERMA (Alternate)

Na[ional Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, Faridabad Sarchir Sarowtr Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar Wapcos (India) Ltd, New Delhi BIS Directorate General

Strra S. C. MITTAL
SHRISANTOSH KUMAR(Ahemafe) SHRIG. L. JAVA SHRIS. J. DESAI (Aftemate) SHRIS. R. NAttAYANAN SHRI A. P. CHOUDHARY (Alternate) SHRIS. S. SETHI, Dlreetor& Head (WRD)

[Representing Director General (Ex-o@icio)] Member Secretary
SHRIMATI ROSY DHAWAN

Joint Director (WRD), BIS

8

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BI S is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BI S has the copyright of all its publications. No pan without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), Review of Indian Standards of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of of these publications may be reproduced in any form not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to BIS.

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `J31S Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. WRD

10 (323).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 website : www.bis.org.in Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Central Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,233'78561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHAT1. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

