( Reaffirmed 2002 )

X3 : 8884 - 1978

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC BELLS AND CAtL `SYSTEM
Code of Practice for Power Installation and Maintenance Committee, ETDC 20
Representing Central Electricity Karnataka Authority, New Delhi

Sectional

Chairman
SHRI

K.S.

SUBRAHMANYAM

Members SHRI B. C. ALVA SHRI T. N. R. RAO ( Blternafe ) SHRI M. D. BHALERAO DIRECTOROF RESEARCH(dlternatc SHRI V. S. BHATIA SHRI M. A. NOORUDIN( &era& SHRI K. K. BOSE Electricity Board, Bangalore Board, Bombay

)

Maharashtra State Electricity ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay The Calcutta Calcutta Electric

Supply

Corporation

Ltd,

SHRI A. CHATTERJEE( Alternate ) The Federation of Electricity Undertakings of India SHRI K. V. CHAUBAL Bombay SHRI K. S. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Engineering Construction Corporation Ltd, Bombay SHRI RANES RAY CHAUDHURY SHRI L. E. D'CRUZ (Alternate) i CHIEF ELECTRICAL ENGINEER. Railway Board ( Ministrv of Railwavs I , NORTHERNRAILWAY JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELECTRICAL IV, RDSO ) ( Allcrnate ) Electrical Engineer to the Government of MahaSHRI B. L. DESHPANDE rashtra, Bombay Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI DEVENDER NATH SHRI I. C. JOSEPH( .-llternate ) Jpoti Ltd, Vadodara SHRI K. K. GUPTA SHRI K. `CL'.DHAR~~ADHIKARI ( Alfernnte) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of SHRI MOHAW~EDH~wxn Tamil Nadu, Madras ELECTRICALINSPECTOR TECRNI~AL, GOVT OF TAWL Nx~u ( Alternate ) Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. D. JAIZ~ Central Public 1l'orks Department, New Delhi SHRI V. A. KRISHNAZ~URTHY
SURVEYOR (ELECTRICAL OF WORKS

)-I ( &~nate

)

( Continuedon page 2 ) @I Copyrlghf STANDARDS 1979 INSTITUTION Copyrighr Acf ( XIV of 1957) and

INDIAN This publication is protected

under the Indian

reproduction in whole or ID part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8884 - 1978

Members
SHRI

Representing

Tariff Advisory Committee ( Insurance Association of India), Bombay SHRI S. N. BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi MEMBER ( HYDRO ELECTRIC) DIRECTOR ( HED-1 ) ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI M. L. MITTAL SHRI R. C. NANDERKAR( Alternate I ) SHRI V. B. BHATIA ( Alternate II ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI K. N. NADGIR SHRI R. S. KUNWAR ( Alternate ) Kcrala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum SHRI K. SUDHAKARANNAIR SHRI R. ANANTHASUBRAMONIA IYER ( Alternate ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI K. NARAYANASWAMY SHRI S. PADMANABHAN ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI V. V. PARANJPE SHRI R. C. BAJPAI ( Alternate ) The Fact Engineering and Design Organization, SHRI K. P. R. PILL.41 Udyogamandal ( Kerala ) SHRI C. R. R. MENON (Alternate) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI I. C. SANGER SHRI P. S. SAWHNEY ( Alternate ) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of SHRI SARDUL SINGH Punjab, Patiala
SENIOR

S. V. MARFATIA

ELECTRICALINSPECTOR (Alternate ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. G. SHANMUKHAPPA SHRI A. N. SRIVATHSA ( Alternate) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of DR T. C. SIDHAN Kerala, Trivandrum Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. N. THADANI SHRI M. K. DAS ( Alternate) The Bombay Electric Supply and Transport UnderSHRI D. M. VATCHA taking, Bombay &RI B. M. SAMANT ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o@cio Member ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) Secretaries SHRI R. C. JAIN Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1 SHRI K. GANESH Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

ASSISTANT TO THE CHIEF

2

IS : 8884- 1978

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC BELLS AND CALL SYSTEM
0.
Indian Institution on 21 Practice for Power been approved by

FOREWORD

0.1 This

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards August 1978, after the draft finalized by the Code of Installation and Maintenance Sectional Committee had the Elcctrotechnical Division Council.

0.2 Call bells and buzzers are commonly used in private dwellings, hotels, schools, offices, factories, etc. The requirements and methods of tests for electrically operated call bells and buzzers for indoor use are covered in detail in IS : 2268-1966*. 0.3 This code is intended to serve as a guide and provides information on the insrallation of electric bells and indicator call system ( including time bells) in various types of buildings with a view to ensuring reliable operation, persunal safety against electric shock and safety against the Bells and buzzers that are to be effects of excessive temperature and fire. with used outdoor, such as on-board ships, involves special practices regard to their installation, methods of protection against sevcrc atmospheric conditions, etc, and guidelines on these do not form part of this code.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers installation of electric bells and buzzers covered in IS : 2268-1966* and indicator call system ( including time bells ), in hospitals, official buildings, educational hotels, private dwellings, installations and factories.
1.2 Bells associated with fire alarms, burglar alarms and call system using loudspeakers as sound distributing system arc excluded from the scope of this code. 2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose
*Specification

of t!Gs standard _

the following

definitions

shall apply.

for electric call bells and buzzers for indoor use (rcuissd).

3

IS : 8884 - 1978 2.1 Electric Bell - A signalling device in which so as to strike a gong, bell, pipe, strip, etc. a hammer is actuated

2.2 BuzzerA signalling device similar to an electric bell but without a hammer or gong, and serving to produce sound by the vibration of an armature. 2.3 Annunciator - It is a device attached to an electric bell or other signal system in which a shutter falling or lamp lighting in one of a series of windows in a frame, discloses the number of station calling. 2.4 Relay ( Including Gas-Operated Relay ) - A device designed to produce sudden predetermined changes in one or more physical systems on the appearance of certain conditions in the physical system controlling it. NOTE 1 -In case of a gas-operated relay, the cause of the response is considered indirectly electrical. NOTE 2 -The term `relay' includes all the accessories, such as intermediate transformers, rectifiers, resistors, etc, when used as integral part of the protective equipment conforming to the respective standards. 3. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

3.1 The initial and final requirements for the building should be ascertained as accurately as possible by consultation between the purchaser, architect or the consultant and the contractor. 3.2 Information may also be obtained at an early services such as internal electrical installations. 3.3 On showing stage regarding other

the basis of information collected, plans should be prepared the following: a> Details of installation proposed; required for central apparatus. The location b) The accommodation of the central apparatus, distribution points, etc, should -be agreed between the parties concerned and accommodation reserved at an early stage; and c> Details on the chases, ducts and conduits, etc, required for the The cabling plan should be agreed in collaboration wiring. with those responsible for other services to enable the architect to specify the required ducts, chases, steeves, etc, before building operations begin.

4. EQUIPMENT

AND

MATERIALS

4.1 Bells and Buzzers - These shall conform to IS : 2268-1966* and if wooden bases are used, the component parts should be rigidly held together independently of the base, so that they are unaffected by any warping. *Specification for electric call bells and buzzers for indoor use ( mised). 4

IS : 8884 - 1978 Bells and buzzers which have make and break contact should be provided with means for adjusting the contact gap and pressure and means for locking the adjustment. Bells and buzzers for outdoor the environmental conditions. I use shall be suitably protected against

4.2 Bell Push Switches -They shall be of robust construction. Terminals shall be of adequate size and should be so arranged that the Any loosening of a terminal screw does not disturb the contact assembly. flexible cords attached to them should be covered with hard wearing braid. These shall conform to IS : 3854-1966" and IS : 4949-1968f. 4.2.1 4.2.2 suitably 4.2.3 These may be of the wall, table situations, surface or pendent type. be

In esposed protected.

type of bell push switches should material.

Bell push switches

shall be made of insulating

4.3 Contact Points - The material of contact points should be such that it gives long service without becoming pitted or corroded. 4.4 Cables and Wires -- The cables used shall conform to IS : 434-1964$ or IS : 694-1977s for the installation of the system. The size of cable should not be less than 1.5 mm2. The wiring shall be done in accordance with IS : 732- 196311. 4.5 Relays -Relays where used shall be robust and totally enclosed in The relays should conform to IS : 3637-19667. These suitable boxes. may be required for the following situations: a) Where
operating b) c) For For

mains-operated
at a voltage a call call

device
not indication indication

is to
at

be

controlled
point

by

a circuit
and

exceeding

24 V, a distant or points, is reset.

repeating maintaining~a -

until

an indicator

*Specification tspecification

for switches for domestic and similar purposes. for Z-amp switches for domestic and similar purposes.

$Specification for rubber-insulated cables : Part I With copper conductors ( r~uised). Part II With aluminium conductors (revised ). @pecification
1 100 v.

for

PVC

insulated

cables wiring

for

working

voltages (system

up to and including not exceeding

IlCode of practice 650 volts ) ( revised ). PSpecification

for electrical

installations

voltage

for gas-operated

relays.

5

IS : 8884 - 1978 4.6 Indicators types: a) The indicators when used may be one of the following where sound of bell is and noisy locations, such for small installations

Lamp Ty$e-This type is preferable, undesirable, for example, in hospitals as forges, mills, etc. Pendulum Type - This type having up to 20 call points.

b)

is suitable

c) Flag Tvpe - A more positive indication is given by use of indicators which remain in the indicating position until they are restored by attendant, either mechanically or electrically. 5. PLANNING AND DESIGN OF CALL SYSTEM

5.1 General - The type of building, the facilities desired and the size of installation are important factors in determining the most suitable system. If the system installed is capable of extension, provision should be made so that additional wiring and apparatus can be installed with the minimum disturbance to the original installation. 5.2 LocationThe location of equipment and apparatus should be so chosen as to ensure efficient operation and ease of maintenance, keeping in view aesthetic considerations to secure freedom from damage due to unauthorized interference. 5.3 Simple Call Bell System

system is suitable for dwellings and small offices 5.3.1 General -This aud provides means whereby service staff may be called to a particular A bell push switch or similar device is fitted at position by the caller. each such position and some form of visua;l indicator for each position is installed at a convenient point, which may be in the service room or kitchen together with a bell or buzzer to direct attention to the call. This visual-cum-audible indicator/bell panel is termed as annunciator. Figure 1 i!lustratcs the simple call bell system. 5.4 Multiple Call System

system is suitable for use in large hotels and 5.4.1 General -This similar locations where the call points are too numerous for convenient indication on a single indicator board or panel. Bell ~push switches are fitted as described-in 4.2 at each call point, but the circuits are grouped, for example, in corridor or floor groups, and each group gives an indication in the central room. Individual signals on the corridor or floor concerned are provided to indicate the origins of the calls. Group Figure 2 illustrates indicators may also be fitted if desired on each floor. the multiple call system. 6

IS : 8884 - 1978

SUPPLY FIG. 1

SIMPLE ELECTRIC

CALL BELL SYSTEM

5.4.2 Layout - It should be decided by local conditions such as building layout and staff, and may involve a complete scheme for the whole building or separate schemes for each floor. 5.4.3 Indicators - The number of indicators in each with the size and type of installation ( see also 4.6). 5.5 panel shall vary

Time Bell System

5.5 .l General - In factories, schools, etc, a system may be installed to give a `start work' or `stop work' signal or to give the times for changes of periods. Such systems normally employ one or two bell push switches or other switches in parallel and a number of electric bells suitably placed which are also in parallel.
5.5.2 Time electric bell systems installed in workshop and factories are liable to much rough USC, hence robust construction is necessary, Such time bell system should preferably be operated directfrom the mains, but if desired may be supplied from the transformer. 5.5.3 Bell Push Switches position for a predetermined 5.5.4 Bell push switches which time may also be installed construction remain in ( see 4.2 ).

`ON

'

Bells and Buzzers -Robust

is particularly

necessary.

5.5.5 Automatic Time Sjstenz -Automatic system associated with either mechanical or electric clock may be installed and set to give predetermined signals at fixed times. 7

IS I 8884 - 1978
BELL PUSH SWITCHE BELL PUSH

BELL PUSH SWITCHES

INDICATOR I Ih..I' SUPPLY z

CE'NTRAL SWITCHROOM FLOOR INDICATOR

WITH

FIG.

2

MULTIPLE

CALL SYSTEM

5.6

Hospital

Call

System

5.6.1 Where call system is provided in hospital in accordance with 4.5 of IS : 7733-1975*, a gentle press of the bell push switch or the pull at pull switch should operate the lights and other signal lamps and bell push switch or pull switch should bc so located as to bc easily accessible to patient. There is a door light in corridor over the room door of the patient who has placed a call. This signals to nurse/attendant, he/she attends the patient and cancels the call at the bed side by resetting the control. The calling place ( station ) is the only place where the signal can be cancelled so that the nurse/attendant shall visit the patient to erase the signal. Only those signals operated by that station are extinguished by the cancellation of the call.
*Code of practice for electrical wiring installations in hospitals.

8

I!3 : 8884 - 1978 The other lights called pilot lights are placed at intersections of hall ways, on kitc!rens and other suitable places. These pilot lights show when a call is registered from any room in corridor, the lights can be seen from an intersecting corridor. Tl le nurse/attendant in the intersecting corridor goes to the intersection of two corridors and the door lights over the room doors indicate which patient is calling. 5.6.2 A softened signal can also be connected in the circuit use and disconnected at will by the attendant/nurse. 5.6.3 Audible signals may be in the form of a bell or buzzer lightly toned and placed near the nurse/attendant. 5.7 Power Supply for night muffled or

5.7.1 Voltage of System Su@ly - The system may be operated at the normal main voltage, if the wiring and apparatus are suitably designed and insulated for this voltage and suitably earthed. It is preferable for the control circuit to be operated at a voltage not exceeding 24 V. 5.7.2 AC Mains SUJ!& Through Transformers -This is the most extenThis system is reliable and gives good service with sively used system. little maintenance. It may be used in the following ways: a) Simple bell call system -A simple call system uses one transformer which should be installed in consumer's supply control or near the indicator panel. Where only a single bell is needed, it may be more to use a bell incorporating its own transformer. convenient

b) Multiple call system - The rating of transformers and the number needed may depend on the system adopted. The transformer rating should be chooscn having regard to ultimate capacity of the system or section, which is to be served. The location of transformer should be decided in light of general layout. only. 5.7.3 Dry Batteries - These arc suitable for small installations These are preferred to secondary batteries due to ease in installation and The location should be dry and cool and as near as maintenance. practicable to indicator. 5.7.4 Secondary Batteries - These are suitable for any size of system but Two batteries should be provldcd with require regular attention. arrangementsfor charging one while the other is in use. Enclosed type batteries fumes to a minimum. should be preferably in order to reduce the

9

IS t 8884 - 1978

6. INSTALLATION 6.1 General 6.1.1 Detailed installation instructions shall be provided for all factory assembled units, particular attention being given to connections of multicircuit wiring. Such instructions should, where possible, be packed with the equipment. The wiring terminals of all circuits shall be clearly marked for identification purposes.
6.1.2 As much assembly and wiring of equipment and apparatus as possible should bz carried out in the factory, to reduce installation work to a minimum. 6.1.3 To avoid damage and deterioration, equipment should not be delivered until installation can proceed. may be delivered earlier, for use as required, provided accommodation has been arranged. 6.1.4 Careful attention should be given during for the provision of chases, ducts, cable holes, etc. 6.1.5 Wiring at late stage of the progress of account future and apparatus Other material suitable storage operations

the building

in ducts, conduits, chases and like should be carried out building work although conduit should be laid along with building work. The design of installation should take into possible extension and maintenance problems.

6.1.6 To avoid and minimize the amount of alternation, the installation shall be examined by a competent person, while work is going on. 6.2 Cables and Wires by the nature of the

6.2.1 The choice of cables and wires is dctcrmincd installation and supply voltage of the call system. 6.2.2 The wiring shall be done in accordance

with IS : 732-1963*.

6.2.3 Where a multi-core cable is necessary, as in multiple call system, the number of wires in the cable should provide for additional circuits to allow for eventual extensions of the system. 6.3 Earthing

6.3.1 Where the equipment of the system are working 011 mains voltage, proper earthing should be provided in accordance with IS : 3043-19667. All the accessible metallic parts of the system should be earthed adequately.
*Code of practice for electrical wiring installations (systems voltage not ekeeding 650 V ) ( revised ). tCode of practice for earthing.

10

IS : 8884 - 1978 7. INSPECTION AND TESTING

7.1 The complete installation of the system shall be examined, to ensure that the work done is in accordance with specification for the materials, components and equipment.
7.2 An electrical and functional test of the installation should be made to ensure that it shall give satisfactory service under the extremes of working When work is an extension of an conditions likely to be experienced. existing installation the latter should be thoroughly tested to ensure that it shall function satisfactorily in conjunction with the new equipment. 7.3 Secondary batteries should be given a test discharge to ensure that they are of the capacity specified. Routine inspection of such an installation should be carried out at regular intervals. 8.

MAINTENANCE
complete circuit diagrams of equipment adequate instructions on its use and The rating of the fuses should be installation should be carried out at case of systems employing secondary

8.1 On completion

of installation, should be supplied together with operation to facilitate maintenance. stated. Routine inspection of the regular intervals particularly in batteries.

11

INDIAN ON CODES IS : 732-1963 900-1965 1866-1961 1885 (Part 1885 [ Part 1886-1967 2032 ( Part 2274-1963 2309-1969 2.551-1963 3043-1966 3072-1975 3106-1966 3914-1967 4648-l 968 5124-1969 5216-1969 5578-1970 5613 (Part 5613 (Part 5613 (Part 5613 (Part 5728-1970 5908-1970 5987-1970 7689-1974 7733-1975 7752 ( Part 7987-1976 8061-197G 8437-1977 8884-1978

STANDARDS

OF PRACTICE

FOR POWER

INSTALLATION

AND MAINTENANCE

Code of practice for electrical wiring installations ( system voltage not exceeding 650 volts ) ( reuised ) Code of practice for installation~and maintenance of induction motors ( revised) Code of practice for maintenance of insulating oil XXX )-1971 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part XXX Overhead transmission and distribution of electrical energy XXXVII l-1974 Electrotechnical vocabularv : Part XXXVII Tariffs for electricity Code of practice for installation and maintenance of transfbrmers (Jirst r&ion ) Xl )-1970 Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology : Part XI Electrical installation in buildings Code of practice for electrical wiring installations (system voltage exceeding 650 volts 1 Code of Gractice for the protection of buildings and allied structures against lightning (jirst revision ) Danger notice plates Code of practice for earthing Code of practice for installation and maintenance of switchgear (,first revision ) Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of fuses (voltage not exceeding 650 volts ) Code of practice for selection ofac induction motor starters ( voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts ) Guide for electrical layout in residential buildings Code of practice for installation and maintenance of ac induction motor starters ( voltage not exceeding 1 000 volts ) Guide for safety procrdures and practices in clrctricnl work Guide for markmg of insulated conductors I/Set 1 )-1970 Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance of overhead polver lines : Part I Lines up to and including 11 kV, Section 1 Design of I/Set 2 )-19il Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance overhead power lines : Part I Lines up to and mcluding 11 hV, Section 2 Instnllation and maintenance [I/Set 1 )-1956 Code oE practice for design, installation and maintenance of overhead po\ver lines :, Part II Lines above 11 kV and up to and including ^^^.__ ^ ._ ZZU kV, bectlon I lleslgn II/Set 2 )-197G Code of practice for design, installation and maintenance of overhead polver lines : Part II Lines above 11 kV up to aqd including 220 kV, Section 2 Installation and maintenance Guide for short circuit calculations Method of measurement of electrical installation in buildings Code of practice for selection of switches ( voltage not cxcceding 1 000 V ) Guide for Ihe control of undcsirnble static electricity Code of practice for eicctricnl wiring installation in hospitals I )-1975 Guide for improvement of power factor in consumer installation: Part I Low and medium supply voltages Guide for selection of high voltage circuit-breakers Code of practice for design installation and maintenance of srrvice lines Guide on effects of currents passing through human body Code ofpractice for the installation of electric bells and call system

