Waa Wah IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


san pà aen Ural at 
adem — maia 


at 7 Med! sneha 


Requirements for Good 
Agricultural Practices — 
IndiaGAP 


Part 7 Poultry Base 


ICS 65.020.01 


© BIS 2018 


did AH sl 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF “ad, 9 “egter pi om, ae fereit-110002 
well dbe MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
WWW. Dis org. In  www.standardsbis.in 


March 2018 Price Group 10 


Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee, FAD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 7) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council 


Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of farm produce in the country. Concerns about food 
safety and quality, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also gained importance. Thus, it is 
desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of farm produce covering horticulture, 
floriculture, food grains, aquaculture, livestock, poultry, etc. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the 
quality of production practices requiring minute attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and 
distribution. 


There are different systems and standards available for control measures for processing of food meant for human 
consumption and feeds for animals producing food for human consumption. The areas where appropriate control 
measures need to be strengthened are farms producing raw material such as food grains, fruits and vegetables, 
floriculture produce, aquaculture produce, livestock products etc. to ensure sustained supply of produce of the 
desirable quality. 


Although grade standards on size, shape, colour and local preferences are available for most of the agricultural 
produce marketed and consumed in India, their quality in terms of maturity standards, residues of pesticides and 
other contaminants, microbial loads, etc. have not been adequately covered. Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) 
have a bearing on these parameters. In other words, a farm producing raw material for direct consumption or for 
further processing and following GAP would have an advantage in terms of safety and quality over the other 
farms. Thus, these practices would add value to the produce. 


In India, agricultural practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices 
and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade 
in the agricultural products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards to 
facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. 


Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good agricultural practices, traceability, etc, through 
appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: 

a) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level, 

b) Build up culture for good agricultural practices by the farmers, 

c) Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes 


d) Increased awareness among the farmers as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of 
good quality and safe food, 


e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain, 

f) Improvement in the environment as well as soil fertility 

g) Worker safety and welfare. 

h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce, and 
j) Overcoming the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs). 


With this in view, this Indian Standard has been formulated to standardize Poultry Based Agricultural Practices in 
India, keeping in mind the best of international practices and suiting the needs of the Indian farmer. 


This standard is published in nine parts. The other parts in the series are: 


Part 1 Crop base 
Part2 Fruit and vegetable base 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


REOUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AGRICULTURAL 
PRACTICES — INDIAGAP 


PART 7 POULTRY BASE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 7) covers the control points and 
compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the 
producers (individual producers and/or members of a 
producer group) of Poultry. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Good Agriculture Practices — Practices that 
address environmental, economic and social 
sustainability for on-farm processes, and result in safe 
and quality food and non-food agricultural products. 


2.2 Applicant producer/producer group — 
Individual/organization that has applied for certification 
to IndiaGAP certification body. 


2.3 Hazard — A biological, chemical, physical agent 
in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an 
adverse health effect. 


2.4 Individual Producer — A person/organization 
legally responsible for on farm production, who retains 
ownership of all the produce covered in the IndiaGAP 
licence. 


2.5 Inspection — An examination of all agricultural 
practices in order to verify compliance to requirements 
specified in this standard. 


2.6 Water, Potable — Water which does not contain 
objectionable pollution, contamination, minerals, or 
infection, and is considered satisfactory for domestic 
consumption. 


2.7 Record — Document showing objective evidence 
of the tasks performed and results achieved. 


2.8 Self-Inspection — Internal inspection of the 
registered product carried out by the grower on his/her 
farm using Control Points and Compliance Criteria. 


2.9 Traceability — The ability to trace the history, 
use or location of a product (that is, the origin of 
materials and parts, processes applied to the product, 
or its distribution and placement after delivery) by 
means of a record. 


2.10 Worker — Any person on the farm that has been 
contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm owners 
and managers. 


2.11 Producer Group — A recognized group of 
producers applying for certification with an internal 
procedure and internal control of all the members 
registered to the IndiaGAP requirements, which and 
complying the requirements as specified in this standard. 


2.12 Field — Separate unit of land within a farm. 


2.13 Farm — A farm is an agricultural production unit 
or group of agricultural production units; covered by 
same operational procedures, farm management. 


2.14 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
activity takes place including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


2.15 Customer — A customer is anyone who 
purchases products or services from a supplier. 


2.16 Certification — All actions leading to the 
issuance of an IndiaGAP licence. 


2.17 Waste — Any materials unused and rejected as 
worthless or unwanted 


2.18 Pullet — refers to the female chicken, which has 
not reached its laying age or period. 


2.19 Fumigant — Volatile liquid or gas to kill insects, 
nematodes, fungi, bacteria, seeds, roots, rhizomes, or 
entire plants. 


2.20 Dubbing — refers to trimming of wattle/comb 
through electro-cautering of male breeders to reduce 
further injury due to pecking and fighting. 


2.21 Broiler — A meat type chicken raised for 
marketing at an early age. 


2.22 Standard Operating Procedure — A written 
document which details an operation, analysis, or action 
whose mechanisms are prescribed thoroughly and 
which is commonly accepted as the method for 
performing certain routine or repetitive tasks. 


2.23 Poultry — Domesticated birds kept primarily for 
meat and eggs i.e., chicken, duck, goose, turkey, guinea 
fowl, quail, pigeon and emu. 


3 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE 
CRITERIA 


3.1 Control points and compliance criteria required to 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


be followed by the applicant producer (individual 
producer and/or member of a producer group) as well 
as by the Certification Body for independent 
verification of the agricultural practices that have gone 
into the production of the produce are given in Annex 
A. In addition, the applicant producer (individual 
producer and/or member of a producer group) shall 
demonstrate compliance with all applicable statutory 
and regulatory requirements. 


3.2 In addition to 3.1, the applicant producer (individual 
producer and/or member of a producer group) shall 
demonstrate compliance with Control Points and 
Compliance Criteria laid down in ‘Indian Standard — 
Requirements for Good Agricultural Practices — 
IndiaGAP Part 6 Livestock Base’. 


3.3 These criteria are marked as ‘Major’ or ‘Minor’ or 
‘Reco’. The criteria marked as ‘Major’ have a definite 
effect on the safety and quality of the produce and shall, 
therefore, be complied with, or shall give adequate 
assurance about the safety and quality of the produce. 
The criteria marked as ‘Minor’, though have a bearing 
on quality, are those which, if implemented, would 
provide an advantage to the assessment for IndiaGAP 
certification. The criteria marked as ‘Reco’, are those, 


which though may not have direct bearing on safety 
and quality of produce but may have other benefits to 
the producer and are recommended for implementation 
and are advisory in nature. 


3.4 For the purpose of verification, a grading pattern 
given below shall be followed for grant of IndiaGAP 
licence: 


Category of | Compliance of | Compliance of 
Licence Major Minor 
Requirements ` Requirements 
IndiaGAP — A 100 percent 90 percent 
IndiaGAP — B 100 percent 80 percent 
IndiaGAP — C 100 percent 75 percent 


4 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


BIS IndiaGAP certification shall be as prescribed under 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. The 
details of the conditions under which the licence may 
be granted to producer (individual producer and/or 
member of a producer group) may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.1) 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE CRITERIA 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
A-1 STOCK SOURCING 
A-1.1 Records of Major |All live poultry entering al|Movement records and 
traceability and Production Establishment shall|certificates of conformity. 
Sourcing from be traceable and sourced solely 
Approved Farms from other Production 
only, with Details Establishments certified against 
of Movement the IndiaGAP Poultry Standard. 
There shall be a record kept of 
arrival date, the name of the 
haulier, and the production 
establishment from which they 
are dispatched. 
A-1.2 Dealing with the |Major |Exceptions arising to thel|Exceptions arising from time to 
Exceptions to the requirements in 1 shall be dealt|time are dealt with on a case-by- 
Above with adequately. case basis as per instructions 
from and in consultation with 
IndiaGAP Certification Body. 
This may include the need to 
import poultry of special 
genotype, the need to re 
populate, use of Production 
Establishments with high-health 
breeding stock from other 
uncertified Production 
Establishments, or in any other 
exceptional case. 
A-2 BREEDING (PARENT) STOCK (Not applicable, if no breeding) 
A-2.1 Use of Moulting |Reco. Moulting should not be induced. Visual assessment of moulting 
Practices, if any (Since moulting is a _ severe|not being practiced or workers 
interference with the health of|to demonstrate awareness at 
the birds, it should not belinterview. 
administered) 
A-2.2 SOP and Work Minor |Egg collection workers shall|Written work instructions 
Instructions for sanitise their hands prior to|available. 
Hygienic handling eggs and between 
Handling of Eggs handling floor eggs and nest 
eggs. 
A-2.3 Identification and |Minor |The eggs, which are found to be|Cracked, defective or dirty eggs 
Disposal of cracked, defective or dirty shall|must be separated from clean 
Unusable and be identified and rejected. Floor |eggs. Visual assessment or 
Dirty Eggs eggs shall be placed in separate | workers to demonstrate 
trays and labelled. awareness at interview. 
A-2.4 Egg Collection Minor | Eggs shall be collected at a set} Visual assessment or workers to 
Frequency frequency (Eggs must be/demonstrate awareness at 
collected at the following interview. 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 

minimum frequencies: Rollaway 

systems — once per day. Other 

systems 3 times per day. Floor 

eggs 3 times per day.) 

A-2.5 Procedure for Major |All eggs selected for hatching] Visual assessment or workers to 
Storage of Eggs shall be placed in clean dry trays | demonstrate awareness at 
for Hatching and and placed into suitable storage interview. Records of room 
Records of Sto- rooms as soon as | temperature available. 
rage Temperature possible.(Storage room 

temperature must not exceed 
23°C. Record of storage room 
temperature must be available). 

A-2.6 Marking/Coding |Major |Hatching eggs shall be marked | Visual assessment or workers to 
of Eggs for in accordance with local|demonstrate awareness at 
Hatching as Per legislation where defined, or|interview. Marking of hatching 
Statutory Require- with a code that refers back toJeggs done as per statutory 
ments the breeding farm. requirements. 

A-2.7 Marking and Major |Each trolley shall be marked] Visual assessment or workers to 
Coding of Each with the breeder farm and the|demonstrate awareness at 
Hatching Trolley date laid. interview. Marking of hatching 

trolley done as per statutory 
requirements. 

A-2.8 Maintenance of |Major |Egg collection records shall be}Comprehensive records of egg 
Comprehensive complete and maintained | collection available. 

Records of Egg properly. (Written records 

Collection include: 1. Quantities recovered; 
2. Quantity of floor eggs; 
3. Rejected egg count). 

A-2.9 Testing and Major |Breeding flocks shall bel|Records of results on salmonella 
Monitoring for monitored for Salmonella in/testing available and appropriate 
Salmonellosis as accordance with the International |action plan for exigencies 
per International regulation requirements. (Egglavailable and implemented, as 
Practices supplies must cease immediately | when required. 

if either S. enteritidis or S. 
typhimurium is ` positively 
confirmed in a flock. All/Records of test results and any 
unhatched eggs shall belaction plan implemented. 
recovered, destroyed and 
disposed off appropriately. A 
slaughter programme shall be 
implemented for the affected 
unit. Records shall be kept of all 
Salmonella tests for all 
hatcheries and carried out by an 
ISO 17025 accredited laboratory. 
A-2.10 Certification of Minor |All outgoing eggs, from breeder|Certificate and declaration of 


Eggs for Myco- 
plasma gallise- 
pticum and Myco- 
plasma synovia 
Free Microbes 


flocks shall be certified to be 
Mycoplasma gallisepticum and 
Mycoplasma synovia free and 
status declared accordingly. 


status available. 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
A-3 HATCHERY (Not applicable, if no Hatchery) 
A-3.1 General 
A-3.1.1 Availability of App- |Major |A hatchery site plan shall be)Appropriate hatchery site plan 
roved Site-Plan of drawn up and kept readily|available. 
Hatchery available. (Hatchery site plan 
must contain the following 
information: 
1. Location of Keys and access 
points; 
2. Location of first aid kits and 
fire extinguishers; 
3. Water sources for fire figh- 
ting purposes). 
A-3.1.2 Maintenance of Major |Floors ceilings and walls shall| Visual assessment. 
Housing be in good condition and 
hygienically managed. 
A-3.1.3 Availability of Minor |Site-dedicated protective clo-|Dedicated clothing must be 
Dedicated Clothing thing shall be supplied to all|available for all workers. 
for Workers, for workers. 
Each Site 
A-3.1.4 Measures for Major |An appropriate system shall be} Visual assessment or workers to 
Preventing Entry of in existence to deny access to|demonstrate awareness at 
Extraneous pets or other animals in the|interview. 
Animals and Birds hatchery. 
A-3.1.5 Cleanliness of Reco Auxiliary buildings, toilets, | Visual assessment or workers to 
Ancillary Buildings offices, stores and “break”|demonstrate awareness at 
rooms should be kept clean and | interview. 
tidy. 
A-3.1.6 Hygienic Major |Drains in production areas shall | Visual assessment or workers to 
Maintenance of be accessible and cleanable and |demonstrate awareness at 
Drains in maintained in hygienic | interview. 
Production Lines conditions. 
A-3.1.7 Documented Res- |Minor |The hatchery shall appoint|Record of named appointees 
ponsibilities of responsible persons for thelavailable. 
Different following areas: 
Specialists 1. Health & Safety Officer. 
2. Site First Aider. Cum Chick 
Welfare Officer 
3. A poultry specialist vet 
A-3.1.8 Procurement of Major |All eggs shall be sourced from | Certificate of conformity for the 
Certified S. ente- hatcheries that are able to/breeding unit available. (Eggs 
ridis and S. typhi- demonstrate that all supplying|from flocks infected with S. 
murium Free Eggs farms are Salmonella entiridis|enteridis or S. typhimurium must 
for Hatching and S. typhimurium free. not be admitted into the 
hatchery. Test results or certi- 
ficate demonstrating the salmo- 
nella free status must be 
available). 
A-3.1.9 Availability of Major | Hatcheries shall be monitored for} Records of test results and app- 
Records Assuring Salmonella in accordance with the |ropriate action plan available 
Salmonella Free international regulation require-|and implemented, as and when 
Hatchery and ments. All unhatched eggs shall|required. (Egg supplies must 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
Disposal of be recovered, destroyed and|cease immediately if either S. 
Unsuitable disposed off appropriately.|enteritidis or S. typhimurium is 
Unhatched Eggs Records shall be kept of all|positively confirmed in a flock). 
Salmonella tests for all hatcheries 
and carried out by an ISO 17025 
accredited laboratory. 
A-3.1.10 | Availability of Minor |All incoming eggs from breeder|Certificate and declaration of 
Records Assuring flocks which are certified shall |status available. 
Mycoplasma be Mycoplasma gallisepticum 
Gallisepticum Free free and a declaration to this 
Eggs and Declara- effect shall be available. 
tion to this Effect 
A-3.1.11 |Availability of Reco All incoming eggs from breeder| Certificate and declaration of 
Records Assuring flocks, which are certified |status available. 
Mycoplasma Syno- should be Mycoplasma synovia 
via free Eggs and free and a declaration to this 
Declaration to this effect should be available. 
Effect 
A-3.1.12 — | System for Trig- Minor |Alarms shall be responded to|Record of all responses. 
gering Alarm and within 15 minutes. Incubation | (Written procedure for response 
Response Time in system shall have an alarm for to alarm. Where an alarm is 
case of Changes in high and low temperatures and|triggered the time, date and 
Hatching Tempera- mains failure. response must be recorded). 
tures 
A-3.1.13 | Availability and Major |One-way product flow shall be| Visual assessment or workers to 
Implementation of maintained from egg receipt to|demonstrate awareness at 
SOP for one Way chick dispatch. interview. 
Product Flow 
A-3.1.14 ` | Availability of Posi- | Reco Incoming air should be filtered.) Visual assessment. 
tive air flow in the A positive airflow from eggs to 
Hatchery chicks should be maintained. 
A-3.1.15 | Availability and Major __| Differentiation shall be maintai-| Written procedure available and 
Implementation of ned between “clean” and “dirty” |Clean and Unclean operations 
SOP for Separating areas. separated. Areas clearly marked 
Clean And Un- with availability of dedicated 
clean Operations clothing. (Workers must be 
aware of these requirements and 
be provided with dedicated 
protective clothing and footwear 
which must be changed when 
moving from dirty to clean 
areas. Equipment must be 
segregated between “clean” and 
“dirty” areas. 
A-3.1.16 | Records of Saniti- |Minor |All eggs shall be fumigated or" Records of fumigation and 
sation of Eggs sanitised prior to setting and|sanitisation parameters available 
Prior to Setting in records kept for each batch. 
the Trays 
A-3.1.17 | Availability of Easy |Major |Incubation hatcher and setter|Easy to clean and functional 
to Clean and Func- equipment shall be easy to|hatchery equipment available. 
tional Hatchery clean, in good working order 
Equipment and sealed to the floor. 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
A-3.1.18 | Availability of Major |Hatcheries shall have a/Dedicated egg storage and 
Dedicated Egg dedicated egg store and alincubation rooms available. 
Storage and designated incubation room. 
Incubation Rooms 
A-3.1.19 ` | Availability of Major |Eggs shall be stored in an/Eggs are stored in an 
Environmentally environmentally controlled | environmentally controlled 
Controlled Egg (temperature and humidity) |(temperature and humidity) 
Storage Room store room. store room. 
A-3.2 Chick Welfare 
A-3.2.1 Availability and Minor |Chicks shall be handled in a Written welfare standard 
Implementation of compassionate and positive (available and reviewed 
SOP for Chick manner and a documented |annually. Chick Welfare Officer 
Welfare as per welfare assessment carried out. | appointed. 
Animal Ethics 
Requirements 
A-3.2.2 Availability and Minor |Hatchery waste and unviable| Visual assessment and workers 
Implementation of chicks shall be identified and|knowledge demonstrated on 
SOP for Disposal humanely culled. interview. 
of Hatchery Waste 
and Unviable 
Chicks 
A-3.2.3 Availability of Minor | Automation and conveyors shall | Visual assessment and workers 
Chick Friendly not cause injury to chicks. knowledge demonstrated on 
Conveyors and interview. 
Automated Systems Visual assessment of equipment. 
A-3.2.4 Loading of Chicks |Major |Chicks shall be loaded into|Visual assessment. Written 
in Clean Dry and clean, dry and sanitised chick|protocol that chick boxes are 
Hygienic Boxes boxes. cleaned, dried and sanitised after 
every delivery. 
A-3.2.5 Stocking Rate in Minor | Space allowance in chick boxes | Stocking rate calculated per box. 
Chick Boxes shall be not less than 19 cm? per] Visual assessment and workers 
chick. knowledge demonstrated on 
interview. 
A-3.2.6 Availability of Minor [Chick holding areas shall be|Temperature and light 
Temperature and temperature controlled and |controlled holding area for 
Light Controlled monitored. Facilities to reduce|chicks available, record of 
Holding Area for light shall be available. temperature and light reduction 
Chicks facilities available. 
A-3.3 Records and Identification 
A-3.3.1 Traceability of Major |Hatching eggs shall be|Required traceability records 
Eggs and identifiable at all times. available. 
Availability of (Traceability records must be 
Records of available including the 
Traceability at all following information: 
Times 1. Farm of origin, 
2. Date of lay. Floor eggs shall be 
labelled and stored separately). 
A-3.3.2 Availability of Major `" Hatcheries shall retain | Production records available. 
Appropriate production records for each|(These include the following: 


Production Records 


for each 


consignment of eggs. 


1. Farm of origin 
2. Date of lay 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
Consignment 3. Date of collection and 
vehicle identity 
4. Setting date 
5. Setter number 
6. Transfer date 
7. Hatcher number 
8. Chick and cull numbers 
(hatchability) 
9. Transport records 
10. Placement details). 
A-3.4 Dispatch 
A-3.4.1 Specification of Minor |Eggs shall be collected and (The vehicles must be fitted with 
Vehicles chicks shall be delivered 'in|fans, heating system, 
Transporting purpose built vehicles. temperature recording system 
Eggs/Chicks and other specifications 
available. (The vehicle must be 
equipped with a load-locking 
system, a tail-lift and be easily 
cleaned. Vehicles should also 
have a means of communication 
in case of emergency. 
A-3.4.2 Availability and Minor ` | There shall be written protocol for | Written programme available for 
Implementation of cleansing eggs/chicks carrying | cleaning and sanitizing vehicles. 
SOP for Sanitising vehicles. (Complete vehicles must be 
Eggs/Chicks cleaned between loads and the 
Carrying Vehicles exterior must be cleaned daily). 
A-3.4.3 Availability of Reco Loading areas shall be level, well Availability of level, well drained 
Level, well Drained drained and hygienically | and hygienic loading area. 
and Hygienic Areas managed. 
A-3.5 Provisions for Chicks 
A-3.5.1 Availability and Minor |An SOP shall be available for|SOP available for receiving day 
Implementation of receiving day old chicks. Chicks |old chicks which are placed in a 
SOP for Preheating shall be placed into a pre-heated | shed with a minimum temperature 
the Shed for shed immediately on arrival andjof 30°C. A record of shed 
Receiving Day Old their behaviour monitored closely|temperature before chicks are 
Chicks on arrival at the rearing site. placed in the shed is available. 
A-3.5.2 Availability of Minor |Where necessary, a trained|Training record of stockmen for 
Trained Manpower competent stockman shall carry|carrying out humane slaughter of 
for Humane out humane slaughter of chicks.|unviable chicks. Visual assess- 
Disposal of Unviable Chicks shall be inspected after|ment and knowledge demonstra- 
Chicks culling to ensure death. ted on interview. 
A-3.5.3 Availability and Minor |An acceptable method of humane |SOP for humane slaughter of 
Implementation of slaughter for chicks shall be used | unviable chicks available. 
SOP for Humane (the acceptable method of humane 
Slaughter of slaughter for chicks is neck 
Unviable Chicks dislocation). 
A-4 FEED AND WATER 
A-4.1 Availability and |Major The feeder space allowance used|SOP for Feeder Space allowance 
implementation of for all poultry accommodation | available and implemented. (Feed 
SOP for Feeder shall be sufficient to allow birds | space allowance per 100 birds are 


Space allowance 


access to food without undue 
competition. In particular are all 


as follows: Broilers pan feeders: 1 
linear meter, or 5 cm per bird; 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
birds shall be able to access|length feeding bin 4 cm/bird; 
sufficient food to meet their|circular feeding bin: 1 cm/bird. 
nutritional needs and maintain| Broilers chain feeders: 0.75 linear 
them in good condition. meter. For breeding birds: 10 
cm/bird, or 5 cm per bird when 
using pan feeders. Floor feeding 
is acceptable). 
A-4.2 Availability and Major Sufficient drinking points and|Sufficient drinking points and 
Implementation of water flow rate shall be provided | water flow rate provided to allow 
SOP for Watering to allow birds, access to water at|birds free access to water at any 
Space any time. time, available. (Water equipment 
Requirements must be supplied in at least the 
Allowance following quantities: Bells: 1 bell 
per 150 birds; 1 bell per 100 for 
breeding birds. Nipples and cups: 
1 per 10 to 20 birds depending on 
manufacturer’s recommendations, 
water pressure and flow rate, and 
at least 20 cm apart, if caged bree- 
ding birds, hens must have access 
to at least 2 drinking points). 
A-4.3 Availability of Minor The drinker design and positio-|Minimal evidence of water spil- 
Appropriate ning shall ensure that spillage of|lage. Visual assessment and wor- 
Water Drinkers water onto the litter is minimized. |kers knowledge demonstrated on 
interview. . 
A-4.4 Availability and |Reco The design and operation of all| SOP for water drinkers and 
Implementation of feeder and drinker facilities|feeders as part of Veterinary 
SOP for Water should be reviewed by (el Health Plan, available. (The 
Drinkers and attending veterinary surgeon |following factors affecting the 
Feeders as part of within the Veterinary Health|feeding space and drinking 
Veterinary Health Plan. water point allowance must be 
Plan considered when reviewing 
these facilities: 

1. design of feeders and 
drinkers. 

2. weight of the bird at 
slaughter. 

3. duration of the daily dark 
and light period. 

4. feeding pattern (i.e. ad- 
libitum, restricted or meal 
time feeding). 

5. effect on litter management. 

6. effect on ease of inspection. 

7. manufacturers’ recommenda- 
tions). 

A-4.5 Birds Friendly Major The feeders and drinkers shall|Birds friendly feeders and 
Feeders and be designated and positioned in|drinkers available. (Birds should 
Drinkers such a way that all birds have not have to travel more than 4 
ready and easy access to food|meters for feeders, 3 meters for 
and water. water anywhere in the house to 
reach food or water). 
A-4.6 Provision of Major Production establishments, not|Potable water is available to all 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
Potable Water to utilizing water from mains|the birds. Water analysis is 
the Birds supply shall provide evidence|carried out annually to include 
that the water supply to the/total cell count, which must not 
poultry is clean, potable and |exceed level of 100.000 cfu/ml. 
does not constitute any hazard|Chemical analysis must cover 
to the health of the birds or the |pH (should be between 4 and 9), 
safety of the meat or eggs from |Ca (max 20D), Fe (max. 2,5 
them. mg/l), Nitrites (max. 1,0 mg/l) 
and Mn (max. 2,0 mg/l). Not 
applicable where main supply 
used. 

A-4.7 Records of Minor The water supply shall conform Records of annual analysis of 

Potability of to the quality of water intended | water available. 
Water for human consumption 

A-4.8 Availability of Major |All poultry shall have} Visual assessment of birds and 
Hygienic Supply continuous access to  an/water supply. Record of regular 
System for Supply adequate supply of clean, fresh cleaning of tanks and pipes 
of Potable Water drinking water. Attention shall|available. 
to the Birds as per be given to the cleanliness of 
Human Supply intermediate tanks and pipes 
Standards bringing water from the main 

supply to the point of access. 

A-4.9 Availability of Minor |Are water meters connected foi Records of daily consumption 
Adequate System all birds’ drinking systems and |kept and evidence of corrective 
for Recording of records made of daily consum- |action, if any, provided. 

Daily Water ption? Is corrective action taken 
Consumption by where normal drinking patterns 
Birds are disrupted? 

A-4.10 Evidence of Major Over head tanks shall be/Record of the regular cleaning 
Cleanliness of covered and ` hygienically |of over head tanks available. 
Overhead Tanks managed. 

A-4.11 Availability and |Reco Feed ingredients or mixed|A sample of each batch of feed 
Implementation of samples should be retained delivered is retained on farm or 
SOP for at the feed mill (where the 
Preservation of operation is fully integrated) for 
Feed Samples a 3 month period after the birds 
from each Batch of have been dispatched. 

Feed Received by 
the Farm 

A-5 HOUSED POULTRY (NOT APPLICABLE IF NO HOUSED POULTRY) 

A-5.1 Building 

A-5.1.1 Availability and Major |An SOP for construction of|SOP for construction of housing 
Implementation of housing for the birds shall be|for the birds available. (The 
SOP for available and the poultry houses |poultry housing must comply 
Construction of shall comply with the basic|with the following: 

Housing for the requirements. 1. The roof and ceiling must be 
Birds in good condition, 
waterproof and easily 
cleanable. 
2. Floors must be well drained, 
safe, comfortable and 
hygienically managed. 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 

3. Walls must be waterproof, 
draught-proof and vermin- 
proof. 

4. Houses must be insulated? 

NOTE — In hot climates, buildings 

with mesh/net walls are acceptable, 

provided rat control is maintained). 

A-5.1.2 Quality of the Major |The floor surface shall be made | Defined in the Control Point and 
Construction of concrete or asphalt and shall|confirmed by visual assessment. 
Material and Level be above the outside ground 
of Floor of the level. 
Poultry House 

A-5.1.3 Sealing of Joints on |Reco The roof, ceiling and walls|Defined in the Control Point and 
Roofs, Walls, should have sealed joints. |confirmed by visual assessment. 
Ceilings and Floors Asphalt floors should be sealed. 

A-5.1.4 Availability of Reco The farmer should take|Record of independent expert 
Records of Expert independent expert advice on|advice on design of new 
Advice for the design of facilities of all| facilities available. Not 
Construction of New new controlled (enclosed)|applicable only if no new 
Housing Facilities poultry houses, or when existing | housing. 

houses are being refurbished. 

A-5.1.5 Display of Key Minor |The key points relating to|The key points displayed. 
Points for Welfare welfare shall be recorded and |(These include: 
of Birds at reviewed regularly (at least|1. Total floor area available to 
Appropriate annually) by the farmer and) the birds; 
Prominent Places attending veterinary surgeon for|2. Number of birds in relation 
in the Poultry all accommodation and shall be] to weight allowed in each 
House Premises displayed at or near to the} house to comply with the 

entrance to each building, maximum permitted stocking 
density; 

3. Numbers of birds in relation 
to the feeding space and 
drinker provision; 

4. Operating temperature 
(including alarm ranges); 

5. Feed type and bin 
identification; 

6. Daily lighting regime). 

A-5.2 Stocking Density 
A-5.2.1 Display of Records |Minor |All poultry accommodation] Visual assessment and written 
of Stocking Density shall provide sufficient space to | stocking density calculations for 
in Front of Each allow unrestricted access of|each building displayed. 
Shed and people to stock for the purposes 
Availability of of inspection and removal of 
Sufficient sick or injured birds. 
Movement Space 
for Birds as well as 
the Handlers 
A-5.2.2 Availability of Major |All birds shall have sufficient} Visual assessment. 
Space for Birds as space to enable them without 
per Stocking difficulty to: 1. Have freedom of 
Density movement 2. Stand normally 3. 


11 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 

Turn around 4. Stretch their 

wings 5. Perch 6. Sit without 

interface with other birds. 

A-5.2.3 Is Stocking Density | Major |The maximum stocking density | Written calculation of stocking 
as per International for broilers shall be adhered to|rates available. 
Regulations according to the applicable Inter- 

national regulations throughout 
the production cycle. 

A-5.2.4 Adherence of Major |The maximum stocking density | Written calculation of stocking 
Stocking Density on for breeder flocks shall be adhe-|rates available. 
the Ground as Per red to according to the applicable 
International international regulations. 

Norms 

A-5.2.5 Adherence of Major |The maximum stocking density | Written calculation of stocking 
Stocking Density on for Pullets shall be adhered to rates available. 
the Ground for according to the applicable 
Pullets as per international regulations. 

International 
Norms 

A-5.2.6 Availability of Minor |A recording system that will|Written records of stocking 
Records Showing demonstrate compliance with|density that monitor maximum 
Compliance to the maximum stocking density | stocking densities at the end of 
Stocking Density shall be available for each|the growing period. unless 

poultry house. The system shall | hatchery. 
enable farmers to identify and 

take appropriate preventive 
measures in those poultry 

houses for which growth rates 

indicate the maximum stocking 

density will be exceeded 
(Thinning is not prohibited). 

A-5.3 Ventilation and Temperature Control 

A-5.3.1 Availability and Minor |The production establishment|Written policy statements 
Implementation of shall have a written | demonstrated as being 
SOP for Ventilation implemented ventilation plan|implemented. Demonstration of 
and Quality of Air detailing air quality parameters, | computer controlled system as 
in the Poultry airflow speed, temperature and evidence is acceptable. unless 
House backup systems, unless nol|no mechanical ventilation used. 

mechanical ventilation is used. 

A-5.3.2 Appropriateness of | Major |The temperature and rate of|Visual assessment and workers 
Housing ventilation of the accommo-|awareness of the requirements. 
Temperature and dation shall be appropriate to 
Ventilation Rate the housing system and to the 

age, weight and physiological 
state of the birds. 

A-5.3.3 Availability and Reco The ventilation system should |SOP for prevention of aerial 
Implementation of be designed to maintain aerial |contaminants affecting human 
SOP for Aerial contaminants below the |health available. (Aerial conta- 
Contaminants recommendations of the relevant|minants should be below the 
Affecting Human competent authority in the|following recommendations: 
Health country of production for long|1. Ammonia 20 ppm; 


term exposure (8 hours/day) to 


2. Carbon dioxide 5000 ppm; 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
humans. 3. S.Carbon monoxide 50 ppm; 

4. Hydrogen sulphide 10 ppm; 
5. Inhalable dust 10 mg/m’). 
Records of test results and 
action plans to meet targets 
available. 

A-5.3.4 Appropriate Minor |The air quality shall be managed| Air contaminants managed to 
Management of Air to ensure that aerial |maintain air quality. Implement 
Contaminants contaminants do not reach alaction plans where aerial 

level which is noticeably |contamination unacceptable. 
unpleasant to a human observer. | Not applicable only where there 
are no problems with air quality. 

A-5.3.5 Dependability of | |Minor |All automatically ventilated|Records of temperature on a 
Automated houses shall be designed and|daily basis show requirements 
Temperature managed to cope with a|met. 

Control System to temperature lift of 3°C, that is 
Maintain Optimal prevent the bird heat raising the 
Temperature as per house temperature by more than 
SOP 3°C above the outside tempera- 
ture (normal ambient tempera- 
tures range —5°C to + 45°C ), 

A-5.3.6 Records Showing |Minor |Farmers shall make provisions|Temperature records on a daily 
Daily Temperatures to protect poultry from heat|basis to demonstrate that poultry 
and Implementation stress for summer conditions. |are protected from heat stress. 
of Measures to This may include lowering the 
Reduce Heat Stress stocking density, increasing the 

ventilation rate or cooling by 
use of roof sprinklers. 

A-5.3.7 Availability and Minor |Each site shall have a policy|Written/verbal policy available 
Implementation of (written/verbal) for the}and workers demonstrate on 
SOP for Dealing recognition of, and procedures|interview how to apply the 
with the Heat or to be followed in the event of policy. 

Cold Stress heat or cold stress. All stock 
persons shall be familiar with 
and apply the contents of this 
policy. 

A-5.3.8 Availability of Reco Units should have access to|Record of weather reports and 
Weather Forecast copies of weather reports tojaction plans in extreme 
Records for Dealing allow for planning for extremes | conditions available. 
with the Extreme in temperature. 

Temperatures 

A-5.3.9 Availability of Major |The maximum and minimum|Record of daily temperatures 

Records Showing temperatures shall be measured available and presented to 
Minimum and regularly within all automati-|veterinary surgeon. 
Maximum cally ventilated houses and 
Temperatures and recorded on a daily basis. These 
their Daily Review records shall be available to be 
and Authentication reviewed by the attending vete- 
by the Attending rinary surgeon within the VHP. 

Vet 

A-5.3.10 | Availability of Reco Air quality parameters (for|Air quality parameters recorded 
Records Showing example ammonia, carbon|weekly with sampling timing 
Air Quality dioxide, carbon monoxide)|and available to veterinary 


13 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
Parameters and should be measured and|surgeon. 
their Daily Review recorded on a weekly basis, 
and Authentication defining sampling timing, that is 
by the Attending midday, night time, etc. These 
Vet records should be available to 
be reviewed by the attending 
veterinary surgeon within the 
VHP. 

A-5.4 Light 

A-5.4.1 Availability and Major |All birds reared in artificial light | Defined in Control Point. Visual 
Implementation of shall be provided with a period|assessment. Not applicable only 
SOP for Photo and of darkness of at least four|where birds are provided with 
Dark Periods hours in every 24h. natural light. 

A-5.4.2 Uniformity of Light |Minor ` | Lighting shall be uniform within|There are no differences in the 
Inside each Poultry the same poultry house. light levels within a poultry 
House house. Visual assessment. 

A-5.4.3 Availability of Reco Lighting patterns for each/Records of light levels made 
Records Showing house should be recorded and|available to veterinary surgeon. 
Light Levels and available for review by the 
their Daily Review attending veterinary surgeon. 
and Authentication 
by the Attending 
Vet 

A-5.4.4 Design of the Minor |The lighting system in poultry} 10 lux for Broiler chickens and 
Lighting System in accommodation shall be|for Breeding hens is the 
the Poultry House designed and maintained in order | minimum light intensity for a 
as per Approved to give the minimum  light|minimum of eight hours in 
SOP intensity for a minimum of eight|every 24 h. Evidence of light 

hours in every 24 h. (Minimum|metering records and an 
light intensity of 10lux is/automated system to switch the 
essential for broilers andjlights on and off. Not 
breeding hens for a minimum of|applicable in case of naturally 
eight hours in every 24 h). lighting. 

A-5.4.5 Lighting Levels to |Minor |Light levels below  these|Farmer must be able to explain 
be Reduced only in minimum levels (see 5.4.4) may|why lighting has been lowered, 
Consultation with be required to minimise|and have sought the agreement 
the Attending Vet abnormal behaviour. Where this|with the Veterinary Surgeon for 

is necessary, the attending|the development of the action 
veterinary surgeon shall be|plan, which can be either verbal 
informed and an action plan|or written. Not applicable where 
agreed between the farmer and lighting levels are maintained. 
attending veterinary surgeon to 

address the problem. The action 

plan shall also consider 

measures other than lower light 

levels (for example environ- 

mental enrichment) to reduce 

abnormal behaviours. 

A-5.4.6 Availability of Reco Light levels above the minimum | Lighting facility above the 
Lighting Levels levels should be available. minimum levels available. 
above the Minimum (Light levels above the mini- 
Levels mum levels improve welfare 
Recommended and activity in birds). 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

A-5.4.7 Availability of Reco The lighting system should be|Visual evidence on inspection. 
Sufficient Light for capable of providing 100 lux for] Not applicable if naturally 
Cleaning cleaning purposes. lighting. 

A-5.5 Litter 

A-5.5.1 Maintenance of Major |All poultry (except caged|Litter should be dry and friable. 
Deep Litter for breeding poultry) shall be kept], unless no litter is used or caged 
Proper Resting of on or have access at all times to | breeders. 

Birds well maintained litter or to a 
well-drained area for resting. 

A-5.5.2 Condition of the Major ` Where litter is used, it shall be:|Defined in Control Point. Not 
Litter 1. of a suitable material and|applicable only, if no litter used. 

particle size; 2. Managed to 
maintain it in a dry, friable 
condition; 3. of a sufficient 
depth for dilution of faeces 
(minimum 2 cms); 4. allow 
birds to dust bathe; 5. be topped 
up daily, if necessary, with fresh 
litter. 

A-5.5.3 Maintenance of Major |Litter shall be removed from de-| Records of housing cleansing or 
Records of populated housing promptly and|disposal must be retained to be 
Removal of Litter disposed off appropriately.|verified. Not applicable only 
from Depopulated Records of housing cleansing or|where no litter is used. 

House disposal shall be retained. 

A-5.5.4 Certified Source of | Reco Material used for litter should|Litter supplier’s certificate of 
Hygienic Material be sourced from  reputable|conformity or supplier audit to 
for the Litter suppliers only, or straw/wood|demonstrate hygienic litter. Not 

shavings from own farm. applicable if no litter used. 

A-5.5.5 Treatment of Litter |Major |If litter is re-used, it shall be|Evidence of treatment in the 
in Case of Re-use treated and tested free of|case of re-use of litter available 

microbiological risks. and it has been declared to be 
free from microbiological risks. 

A-5.5.6 Awareness inthe |Minor |All stock people shall be)Workers to demonstrate 
Staff about Proper familiar with the proper/knowledge of proper litter 
Litter Management management of poultry litter. management. Not applicable 

only if no litter used. 

A-6 OUTDOOR POULTRY (not applicable for no outdoor poultry) 

A-6.1 Availability of Minor |The indoor stocking density,|Compliance with appropriate 
Written Procedu- stocking rate at range, access to|legislation for respective free 
res for Indoor range, feed composition, |range systems. Not applicable, if 
Stocking Density, pophole size and minimum age |no outdoor poultry. 


Stocking Rate at 
Range, Access to 
Range, Feed Com- 
position, Pophole 
Size and 
Minimum Age of 
Slaughter for 
Free-Range 
Systems 


of slaughter for free-range 
systems shall comply with the 
appropriate legislation. 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
A-6.2 Security of free Minor |The outdoors in free-range|Defined in Control Point. Not 
range area systems shall be 1. designed and | applicable, if no outdoor 
managed in ways which ensure|poultry. 
that the area around each house 
does not become poached 2. 
consist of pasture mainly 
covered by vegetation. 
A-6.3 Availability of Dry|Minor |Birds with access to range shall|Defined in Control Point. Not 
Areas in the have access to well-drained |applicable, if no outdoor 
Range for Resting areas for resting whilst outside | poultry. 
of the Birds the building. 
A-6.4 Availability of Minor |Where birds are kept in free} Poultry house is to be provided 
Sufficient Pop range systems, there shall be|with popholes of a combined 
Holes for Ready sufficient popholes appropria-|length at least equal to 4 m per 
Access to the tely distributed around the|100 m? surface of the house. 
Range building to ensure that all birds|Not applicable, if no outdoor 
have ready access to range. poultry. 
A-6.5 Ensuring Minor |Birds kept in free range systems | Workers to demonstrate 
Accessability to shall have access to range for a| knowledge of requirement. Not 
Free Range for a minimum of eight hours each|applicable, if no outdoor 
Sufficient Period day except when the natural |poultry. 
Each Day daylight period is less. All 
popholes shall be normally 
open for this time, except when 
this is precluded by inclement 
weather conditions. 
A-6.6 Availability of Minor |For free range systems in/Shaded area for 10 percent of 
Sufficient Shady summer conditions, a shaded|the flock. Written calculation. 
Place for Resting area shall be accessible which|Not applicable, if no outdoor 
of the Birds has sufficient space that the|poultry. 
During hot chickens do not have to crowd 
Weather, to together (thereby risking further 
Prevent heat stress). 
Overcrowding 
A-6.7 Protection of birds|Minor |Birds kept in free-range systems |Electric fence for foxes and 
from predators shall be suitably protected from|similar and other suitable 
while on the range predators. systems. Not applicable, if no 
outdoor poultry. 
A-7 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT 
A-7.1 Availability of Minor |All automatic equipment sball Record of the daily checking of 
Records of Daily be thoroughly inspected by al|eguipment available along with 
Check up and stock-person, or other |evidence of prompt repair of 
Repairs, if competent person, not less than |defects or other appropriate 
Required, in the once each day to check that|measures. (Automatic equip- 
case of all there is no defect in it. ment means automated or 
Automatic mechanical equipment, the 
Equipment failure of which will cause the 


livestock to suffer unnecessary 
distress unless the failure is 
rectified or other provision is 
made for the care of livestock. 
Where a defect is found in the 
automatic equipment (whether 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
on inspection of the equipment 
in accordance with this 
paragraph or at any time): 
a) The defect shall be rectified 
forthwith, or 
b) if this is impracticable, such 
measures shall be taken and 
maintained until the defect is 
rectified as are required to 
safeguard the birds from 
suffering unnecessary pain 
or unnecessary distress as a 
result of the defect. 
Not applicable only where no 
automatic equipment. 
A-7.2 Availability of Minor | Where the automatic equipment|Record of weekly testing and 
Records of includes a ventilation system,|evidence of contingency plans 
Regular the system shall contain: in the event of failure available. 
Maintenance/ a) alarm which will givel(Any alarm system as described 
Repairs of All adequate warning of thelabove must be tested by a 
Automatic failure of that system to|/stockperson or other competent 
Equipment, function properly (which |person not less that once every 
Including will operate even if the|seven days in order to check 
Ventilation principal electricity supply to|that there is no defect in it. If a 
System, to keep it has failed) and fault is found on being tested or 
them Defect Free b) Additional equipment or|inspected in accordance with 
means of ventilation (whe-|this paragraph, it shall be 
ther automatic or not) which, |rectified forthwith). Not 
in the event of such a failure|applicable only where there is 
of the ventilation system, |no automated ventilation 
will provide adequate | equipment. 
ventilation so as to prevent 
the birds from suffering 
unnecessary distress as a 
result of the failure. 
A-13 Availability of Minor |Alarm systems shall be checked Records of daily checks 
Records of Daily daily and a record kept of|available. Not applicable, if no 
Checking of checks. alarms. 
Alarm Systems 
A-7.4 Availability of Major |There shall be an electricity |Defined in Control Point. Not 
Alarm System for mains failure alarm on all farms |applicable only if no controlled 
Failure of with controlled environment | environment buildings. 
Electricity in the buildings. 
Case of 
Environmentally 
Controlled 
Buildings 
A-8 POULTRY HEALTH 
A-8.1 Withdrawal Period 
A-8.1.1 Procedure for Major |Non-slaughter poultry which|Cross-reference between 
Identification of have received medication and |movement records of non- 
Birds Sold During require a withdrawal period, and|slaughter poultry and medicines 


17 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 

Withdrawal Period which are to be sold within that records, copy of written 
withdrawal period, shall be statement detailing the treatment 
accompanied by a written|sent to the purchaser. unless it is 
statement of the treatment to be |a breeding flock. 
sent to the purchaser with the 
poultry. All such poultry shall 
be clearly identified. 

A-8.2 Medicinal Treatment 
A-8.2.1 Training and Minor |Workers shall be able to|Demonstration of knowledge of 

Awareness of demonstrate upon audit that they |poultry health via a recognised 

Handlers in know the signs of good and ill|certificate of training, or via in- 

Broadly Identifying health in poultry. house training or workers to 

the Health demonstrate this knowledge on 

Problems of Birds interview. 

A-8.2.2 Awareness of Minor |In the case of ill health, if the] Workers to demonstrate on 

Workers about the workers are not able to take interview who is authorised to 

Procedure to effective action, specialist|obtain veterinary advice and 

Obtain the veterinary or other expert|under what circumstances. 

Veterinary Aid in advice shall be obtained as soon 

Case of as possible. 

Emergencies and 

Availability of 

Specialist 

Veterinarian 

A-8.2.3 Cleanliness and Major | Equipment used for|Cleanliness of medication 

Maintenance of metering/administering measuring equipment must be 

Medication medication shall be kept clean|verified. Visual assessment 

Metering and well maintained. acceptable. 

Equipment 

A-8.3 Veterinary Health Plan (VHP) 
A-8.3.1 Records of Regular | Major | Veterinary visits shall be made|Records of routine veterinary 

Visits of the at a frequency corresponding to|visits by specified surgeon or 

Veterinarian for all the enterprise type. practice. Frequency visits: 

Important broilers: 2 times per cycle; 

Operations of the breeding stock: 1 time per cycle; 

Poultry Farming hatchery | per batch 

A-8.3.2 Availability of Major |The veterinary health plan shall | Written veterinary health plan 

Veterinary Health identify health or welfarelavailable. (It must address: 

Plan Identifying problems if they are thought or|1. Health problems associated 

Various Health and known to exist on the unit. with transmissible agents that 

Welfare Problems may affect food safety 

of the Birds 2. Lameness in broiler chickens 

3. Abnormal behavioural 
activities (such as feather 
pecking or cannibalism) 4. 
External and internal parasitic 
infections. 

A-8.3.3 Availability of Major | Production establishments | Records of regular monitoring 

Procedure and producing broiler chickens shall of lameness recording the 

System for demonstrate that lameness is|number of birds with Bristol 

Monitoring the monitored during the later|Gait Score 3 or above (or visual 

Lameness in the stages of production. estimate score) must be 


18 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

Mature Birds available. The veterinary health 
plan must set an action plan to 
minimise the number of birds in 
this category. 

A-8.4 Zoonoses Monitoring 

A-8.4.1 Procedure for Major |Swabs following a sampling|Record of laboratory results 
Monitoring of protocol shall be taken for|completed. Test TVC - APC at 
Environmental environmental bacteria and/30°C for 48 hrs: Acceptable: 
Hygiene and cultured in a laboratory/<5 x 104 per gram; 
Availability of approved by the relevant|Unacceptable: >5%x 105 per 
Records of competent authority. gram. Escherichia Coli: 
Microbiological Acceptable: <50 per gram; 
Tests Unacceptable: >1% 102 per 

gram. Frequency must be 
annual, or more frequent, 
depending on the results. 

A-8.4.2 Procedure for Major Broiler flocks shall be tested|Record of laboratory tests for 
Monitoring of between 21-28 days  for|salmonella (Salmonella 
Salmonella Cases Salmonella, or for slowerlenteritidis and Salmonella 
and Availability of growing flocks, 10 to 14 days|typhimurium) in the case of 
Records of before the anticipated date of |broiler flocks available before 
Microbiological slaughter. Tests shall be carried | the first thinning. 
Tests out in an ISO 17025 accredited | Campylobacter control 

laboratory. procedures must also be in 
place, according to International 
Regulations. Not applicable 
only if not broiler flock. 

A-8.4.3 Procedure for Major |Confirmed infected flocks hall Records to demonstrate written 
Passing the Report be sent for slaughter at the endjinformation is passed to 
on Infected Birds to of the processing plants’ kill|slaughter process to ensure 
the Slaughter programme. infected flocks killed last unless 
House to Plan their breeding birds. 

Slaughter at the 

End of 

Slaughtering 

Process 

A-8.4.4 Procedure and Major |Where a flock is confirmed as|Records to demonstrate appro- 
Availability of Salmonella infected, there shall|priate cleaning and disinfectant 
Records for be an appropriate written|procedure after depopulation. 
Adequate cleaning and ` disinfection|Not applicable where no 
Disinfection for procedure to be implemented to |salmonella infection. 
Salmonella on ensure eradication of the 
Depopulation pathogen once depopulation is 

complete. 

A-8.4.5 Availability of Reco Subsequent flocks should not be | Records demonstrate the site is 
Records to Prove brought on site until the site is|salmonella negative prior to re- 
Induction of New confirmed Salmonella free. stocking. Not applicable where 
Flocks on no salmonella infection. 
Salmonella Free 
Sites only 

A-9 HYGIENE AND PEST CONTROL 

A-9.1 Procedure and Minor |All individual houses shall|Records to demonstrate last 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
Records of “all in operate an “all in-all out” system] birds out, first birds in. 
— all out” System for chickens so that birds are in 
of Rearing the same age group. (Important: 
thinning is not prohibited). 
A-9.2 Procedure and Major |Bird accommodation shall be/Records of detailed cleaning of 
Records of thoroughly cleaned and |each house available and 
Cleaning and disinfected in accordance with a|cleanliness demonstrated. 
Disinfection on written cleansing policy (Cleaning procedures for house 
Emptying of the whenever it is emptied. furniture, water tanks and bulk 
Poultry House feed bins must be included in 
the policy which must also 
detail the type and dilution rate 
of disinfectant to be used. 
Equipment must also be 
thoroughly cleaned and 
disinfected after operation and 
before storage. Evidence to 
show that cleaning procedures 
are effective must be provided). 
A-9.3 No evidence of Major |Farm cats, dogs or domestic pets | Visual assessment of the 
Stray Animals in shall be excluded from  all|exclusion of cats and dogs. 
Poultry House poultry accommodation. 
A-9.4 Availability of Minor | Workers shall not keep or have|Documentary evidence that 
Records Showing contact with other poultry or any | workers are informed that they 
No Worker is in other avian species. may not keep poultry on their 
Contact with own account. 
Poultry in any 
Other Farm or 
Own House 
A-9.5 Availability of Major |The production establishment|A written policy for the control 
Written Policy for shall have a written policy forjof visitors, vehicles and 


the Control of 
Visitors, Vehicles 
and Materials on 
to the 
Establishment 


the control of visitors, vehicles 
and materials on to the 
establishment. 


materials on to the establishment 

available. (It should cover: 

1. provision of protective 
clothing and footwear for 
visitors; 

2.a record of all visitors, 
vehicles and material 
Supplies entering the 
Establishment; 

3. provision of disinfectant and 
other precautions to prevent 
the introduction of disease; 


4. clearly visible signed 
restricted areas and points of 
danger; 


5. the number of ‘Poultry-free 
days’ required before the 
Production ` Establishment 
may be entered; 

6. assessment of veterinary 
health risk associated with 
entry onto the Production 
Establishment of people, 


20 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 
vehicles and other equipment, 
and of feed, bedding and other 
material supplies, and the 
devising of appropriate 
precautions within the context 
of the VHP; 

7. appropriate management of 
hygiene at the point of exit 
of birds from the Production 
Establishment, is available. 

A-9.6 Availability of Major There shall be implementation | Records of all visitors, vehicles, 
Records Showing of the policy. and material supplies entering 
Entry of all exist. Visual assessment of 
Visitors, Vehicles, protective clothing, signs to 
and Material designate restricted areas and 
Supplies points of danger, etc. 
A-9.7 Procedure and Major ` "Hand washing facilities and: Hand washing facilities as 
Availability of toilets shall be available on-site|defined must be available at 
Facilities for consisting of a basin with hot|each site. Written instruc- 
Proper Washing water, anti-bacterial soap and|tion/display must be available 
of Hands and disposable towels. All workers|/to workers and visitors requi- 
Toilets etc, before and visitors have the provision |ring them to wash hands. 
and after Visiting to wash or sanitise hands prior 
Poultry House and to entering poultry houses and 
Handling Dead after leaving poultry houses. 
Birds Hands shall also be washed 
after dead bird handling, before 
and after meals and after visits 
to the toilet. 
A-9.8 Procedure for Minor ` Foot brush/disinfectant or|Visual assessment of foot 
Footwear Barrier barrier footwear systems shall |brush/disinfectant footwear 
System and use of be provided at workers access (batter systems. (Evidence of 
Appropriate points to each building as well |disinfectants are approved by 
Concentrations of as at the entrances to equip-|competent authority. Foot dips 
Disinfectants for ment, litter and egg store.|are discouraged). 
Ensuring Hygienic Disinfectants approved by the 
Entry to Various relevant competent authority in 
Buildings the country shall be used in 
accordance with specified 
concentrations. Solutions shall 
be replaced on a prescribed 
basis and recorded. Footwear 
shall be cleaned by all workers 
and visitors before entrance into 
a building and after leaving a 
building. 
A-9.9 Cleanliness and Reco Farm vehicles should be|Evidence of adequate clean- 
Disinfection of maintained in a clean condition.|liness of vehicles on site and 
Vehicles Entering Provision should be made for|facilities to disinfect vehicles 
or Leaving the vehicles entering or leaving the | entering or leaving the site. 
Site/Facilities site to be disinfected 
A-9.10 Smoking only in  |Major | Smoking shall not be permitted|Designated smoking areas 
Marked in any building containing birds | marked. 


21 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
Designated Areas or eggs but shall be restricted to 
designated areas. 
A-9.11 Availability of Major |Detailed records of animal pest|Records of pest control 
Records of Pest control inspections and |inspections and follow up 
Control Measures, necessary actions taken shall be action plan(s) available. (The 
their Inspections kept. farmer can have his own 
and Evidence of records. Inspections must take 
In-house place whenever evidence of 
Capability to pests present. In case of vermin 
Handle must have a contact number or 
Vermins/Pests evidence of in-house capability 
to control pests). unless 
extensive situation with no 
buildings on farm. 
A-10 HANDLING 
A-10.1 Procedure for Minor |If beak trimming is carried out}SOP for Beak trimming is 
Beak Trimming, if on farm, there shall be written|available. (It is permitted on 
Practiced and its justification and evidence of|those units where injurious 
Inclusion in the correct procedures employed. |behaviour is a problem. No 
Veterinary Health more than one third of the upper 
Plan (VHP) mandible must be removed. 
Beak trimming must only be 
carried out before the birds 
reach 21 days of age. The 
continued justification for beak 
trimming, the method used and 
alternate management control 
measures must be considered 
and regularly reviewed within 
the VHP). Visual assessment of 
birds and veterinary health plans 
as evidence. Not applicable only 
if beak trimming not carried out. 
A-10.2 Procedure for Minor | Any other mutilation of poultry|SOP and Veterinary health plan 
Handling any shall also be justified andJavailable. Not applicable if no 
Other Mutilation regularly reviewed within the|mutilations. 
of Birds under the VHP. 
VHP, if necessary 
A-10.3 Prohibition of Reco Dubbing (in male chicks),|Defined in Control Point. Not 
Practice of Dub- despurring, declawing and toe|applicable if not practiced. 
bing, Despurring removal in broiler breeders 
and Declawing should not be carried out. 
A-10.4 Prohibition of Beak | Reco Beak trimming of female broiler|Defined in Control Point. Not 
Trimming in Female breeders should not permitted? applicable if not practiced. 
Broiler Breeders 
A-11 RESIDUE MONITORING 
A-11.1 Procedure to Major |Routine residue sampling results | Results communicated back to the 
Handle and and the resulting actions shall be farmer that are in excess of MRLs 
Properly kept on farm. must be acted upon according to 
Communicate the an action plan. 
Results of Residue 
Sampling Reports 


22 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
to the Farmer 
A-11.2 Procedure to Major |If a sample is found to contain|A report from the veterinary 
Handle MRL residue of a prohibited substance|surgeon must be available. The 
Reports and or the Maximum Residue level|matter must be investigated by 
Investigation by the (MRL) exceeds, the farmer and the veterinary surgeon within 2 
Competent Vet in the veterinary surgeon for the|days of the test result and a report 
Case of Excess production establishment shall be (be submitted to the certification 
MRLs informed. body. Not applicable where no 
positives above the MRL. 
A-12 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES 
A-12.1 Availability of Minor |An emergency power supply |Defined in the Control Point. 
Emergency Power source shall be available for 
Supply Source for emergency ventilation systems. 
Emergency 
Ventilation 
Systems 
A-12.2 Availability of Minor |The emergency power supply or|Record of tests and equipment 
Records of emergency ventilation system |available (These are to be in 
Monthly Testing of shall be tested monthly and|working order). Not applicable, if 
Emergency Power records kept of these tests. not practiced. 
Supply Source for 
Emergency 
Ventilation 
Systems 
A-13 INSPECTION 
A-13.1 Evidence of Minor |Workers on the production| Recognised training certificate or 
Training of Staff in establishment shall be able to|jrecord of internal training, or 
Humane Handling demonstrate competence in |interview/visual evidence. 
of Birds handling poultry in a positive and 
compassionate manner. Restraints 
shall be carried out with due care 
and attention to the welfare of the 
birds. 
A-13.2 Twice Daily Major |Birds and the facilities on which |Records of inspection available 
Inspection of all birds depend, shall be inspected a | and workers knowledge 
Facilities and minimum of twice daily. At least} demonstrated at interview. 
Availability of one of these inspections shall be 
Records of such sufficiently thorough to identify 
Inspections any bird which has died or is 
showing signs of sickness or 
injury. In order to ensure this 
inspection is thorough, the 
stockman shall walk within 
approximately 3 metres of every 
bird. Records of fallen stock shall 
show that checking is done twice 
daily. 
A-13.3 Removal and Minor |The birds shall not have difficulty|Such Birds removed promptly 
Humane Culling of in reaching food and water, and | from the flock. 
Too Weak and shall be removed promptly from 
Incapacitated Birds the flock and culled humanely. 


23 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

A-14 WORKERS 

A-14.1 Availability of Major |The production establishment|Record of internal or external 

Records of shall provide evidence that its training and experience to show 
Appropriate workers are competent in the|competence at inspection 
Training of the following areas: available. 
Staff to Handle 1. Safe use of medicines. 
Routine Health 2. Poultry handling and care. 
Problems and to 3. Poultry health and welfare 
Administer (including recognition of 
Medicines to the disease and abnormal beha- 
Birds viours). 

4. Knowledge of how to deal 
with problems in areas covered 
by the Standards Manual. 

5. When and from whom to 
seek further help. 

A-14.2 Recognition of Minor |Workers normally responsible | Record of training available. 
Lameness in Birds for the inspection of poultry on 
by the Staff a daily basis shall be trained to 
Through recognise all lame broiler 
Appropriate chickens with Bristol gait score 
Training 3 or above (or local equivalent). 

A-14.3 Evidence that Minor |When automatic equipment, | Workers knowledge 
Staff is Competent which could affect animal|demonstrated on interview or a 
to Operate welfare, is installed ,stock|training record. Not applicable 
Automatic persons shall be able to: where no automatic equipment. 
Equipment for the 1. Demonstrate an ability to 
Welfare of the operate the equipment. 

Birds 2. Demonstrate the ability to 
carry out routine maintenance. 

3. Recognise common signs of 
malfunction. 

14.4 Name of the Key |Major |An individual responsible Tor" Record of named person with 
Person the management of Production |responsibility available. 
Responsible for and for delivery of the 
Management of reguirements for food safety, 

Production and animal welfare and product 
for Delivery of the wholesomeness shall be 
Requirements for identified in the Standard and 
Food Safety, named in the manual for the 
Animal Welfare purposes of audit. 

and Product 

Wholesomeness, 

with Charter of 

Duties 

A-15 HUMANE SLAUGHTER OF CASUALTY POULTRY 

A-15.1 Competence of Major |When humane slaughter is|Workers to demonstrate 
Person Carrying necessary in order to prevent|knowledge and competence in 
out Humane further suffering it shall be|/the humane slaughter in the 
Slaughter of carried out promptly by alinterview and by practical 
Birds, When competent person. demonstration. 

Reguired 
A-15.2 Humane Minor |All birds that on inspection have | Visual assessment and 


24 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 

No. 

Slaughter of Birds a Bristol gait score of 4 or 5 (or|farmer/workers demonstrate the 
Showing Bristol legal requirement) shall be|daily removal of all birds with a 
Gait Score of >3 humanely slaughtered immedia-| Bristol Gate Score of 4 or 5 and 
tely. above and their humane slaugh- 

ter. unless laying hens. 

A-16 DISPATCH AND TRANSPORTATION 

A-16.1 Stress Free Minor |Poultry shall be dispatched from|Observation of workers know- 
Environment the production establishment in a ledge and action as evidence. 
During Dispatch of calm, clean and rested condition. 

Birds and Evidence 
that Birds have 
been Properly 
Rested Before 
Dispatch 

A-16.2 Availability of Minor |All workers involved in (he Record of written instructions and 
Written catching and transportation of training available. 

Instructions for birds shall be adequately trained, 
Catching and competent and shall have 
Transportation of received written instructions of 
Birds their duties. 

A-16.3 Evidence of Minor |A nominated member of (he Record of nominated supervisor 

Nomination of a catching team shall be responsible | available. 
Supervisor for for supervising the loading of 
Catching and birds into the transport vehicle. 

Loading of Birds 

A-16.4 Communication of |Minor |The records of catching injuries)Record of catching injuries and 
Slaughter House made available to the farmer,|evidence of these being reported 
Records of where monitored within the|to the catching team. Abnormal 
Catching Injuries slaughterhouse, shall be made/high levels of catching injuries 
to the Farmer and available for inspection. must be reported to the catching 
the Catching Team team. 

A-16.5 Withdrawal of Minor | No bird shall be deprived of feed| Workers knowledge demonstrated 
Feed and Water for more than twelve hours and |on interview. 

Before Slaughter water for more than one hour 
prior to loading for slaughter. 

A-16.6 Availability of Minor |The lighting levels shall bel|Workers knowledge demonstrated 
Adequate Light adjusted during catching to|on interview. , unless catching 
during Catching to minimise fear reactions in the|team provided by the transport 
Minimize Fear birds. company. 

Reaction 

A-16.7 Procedure for Minor | Catching curtains shall be fitted to | Defined in Control Point , unless 
Using of Catching the main doors. catching team provided by the 
Curtains for transport company. 

Catching of Birds 

A-16.8 Disposal of Birds |Minor |Birds which are unfit for transport | Defined in Control Point. 
Unfit for Transport or dead ,shall not be transported 
or Dead and shall be promptly euthenised 

and properly disposed off. 

A-16.9 Record of Actual {Minor | Birds shall not be lifted or carried | Record of the manager/stockman 
Method of Lifting by the head, neck, wing or tail. signing of the birds for 
of Birds for transportation. 

Loading 


25 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


Sl Item Level IndiaGAP Requirements Compliance Criteria 
No. 
A-16.10 Availability of Minor |A level well-drained loading area | Defined in Control Point. 
Level Well- shall be available for the loading 
drained, Clean and and unloading of birds, chicks and 
Hygienic Loading eggs. It shall be clean, tidy and 
and Unloading hygienically managed. 
Area for Birds, 
Chicks and Eggs 
A-16.11 Presence of Minor |The manager or stockman|Defined in Control Point. 
Responsible Staff responsible for the birds shall be 
During Depopula- present at depopulation, and 
tion and Loading to ensure the flock is fit to travel. 
Ensure that Flock 


is Fit to Travel 


26 


IS 15930 (Part 7) : 2018 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
INDIAN STANDARDS WHICH FACILITATE IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS STANDARD 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 

1982 : 1971 Code of practice for ante-mortem 8182 : 1976 Code of hygienic conditions for 
and post-mortem inspection of processed meat products 
meat animals (first revision) 8895 : 1978 Guidelines for handling, storage 

2491 : 2013 Food Hygiene — General and transport of slaughter house 
principles — Code of Practice by-products 
(third revision) 9854 : 1981 Code of construction of milk 

2732 : 1985 Code of practice for poultry delivery vans 
housing (second revision) 9863 : 1992 Nutrient requirements for poultry 

2733 : 1985 Code of practice for sheep and (first revision) 
goats housing (first revision) 11786 : 1986 Recommendations for cattle 

2981 : 1964 Layout plan for dairy laboratories housing for an average farmer 

5238 : 2001 Transport of poultry — Code of 11799: 1986 Recommendations for cattle 
practice (second revision) housing in rural areas (first 

5253 : 1969 Guidelines for cleaning and revision) 
sterilizing dairy equipment 11942 : 1986 Recommendations for 

5284 : 1969 Recommendations for community GAUSHALAS and other organized 
milking shed milk producers 

6027 : 1970 Recommendations for farm cattle 12237 : 1987 Recommendations for loose 
housing for large dairy farms housing systems for animals 

6558 : 1972 Code of practice for cold storage 14904 : 2007 Transport of livestock — Code of 
of shell eggs practice (first revision) 

6559 : 1972 Code of practice for ante-mortem 15000 : 2013 Hazard analysis and critical 
and post-mortem inspection for control point (HACCP) — 
poultry Requirement for any organization 

6692 : 1972 Method of milk recording of cattle in the food chain 

7005 : 1973 Code of hygienic conditions for  IS/ISO 22000: Food safety management 
production, processing transpor- 2005 systems — Requirements for any 
tation and distribution of milk organization in the food chain 

7049 : 1973 Code for handling, processing, IS/ISO TS 22003: Food safety management systems 
quality evaluation and storage of 2007 — Requirements for bodies 
poultry providing audit and certification 

7607 Code of practice for keeping dairy of food safety management 
accounts: systems 

(Part 1) : 1975 Primary milk collection units IS/ISO TS 22004: Food safety management 
(Part 2) : 1975 Market milk plants 2005 systems — Guidance on the 


(Part 3) : 1975 


Products plants 


21 


application of ISO 22000 : 2005 


(Continued from second cover) 


Part3 Combinable crop base 

Part4 Tea base 

Part 5 Coffee base 

Part 6 Livestock base 

Part 8 Cattle and sheep base 

Part 9 Dairy base 
In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the draft document prepared by 
Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA). 


NOTE — The standards given in Annex B may be read to facilitate the implementation of this standard and are for guidance purpose. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 22 (2198). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


