**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 1783-2 (1988) : Drums, large, fixed ends. Part 2 Grade B 
drums [MTD 32: Metal Containers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC fi?i-7flH-i34 ^®^°"'^ "^P*"'"* ^^'^^ ^°^^ IS : 1783 (Part 2) '- 19B8 • 

UDC 621 788 134 (Including Amendment Na1) (Reaffirmed 2605) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DRUMS, LARGE. FIXED ENDS 

PART 2 GRADE B DRUMS 

( Third Revision ) 



E 
E 
o 
o 

3 

w 

w 

E 

3 



e 

E 
o 
u 

"ci 

c 
o 

o 

0) 
0") 



o 



1. Scope— This standard covers the requirements for Grade B mild steel drums of 200 litre 
nominal capacity with fixed ends with the following types of construction: 

a) Type 1 — Drums of sheet thickness 1*25 mm for body and ends/.v^th end seam of double 
seam construction; and 

b) Type 2 — Drums of sheet thickness 1 -00 mm for body and ends, with end seam of spiral 
seam 'triple seam construction. <- 

2. Terminojogy — For the purpose of this standard, the definitions giv(^ in IS : 1394-1984 
'Glossary of^'terms relating to metal containers ( third revision )', shall apply. 

3. Capacity — The minimum gross capacity of the drums measured with wpter at ambient 

temperature shall be 210 litres. 

4. Dimensions — The drums of Type 1 and Type 2 construction shall have dimensions as given 

in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 respectively. 

5. Material — Body and ends of the drum shall be made from mild steel sheet conforming to 
Grade '0' of IS : 513-1986 'Specification for cold rolled low carbon steel sheets and strips ( third 
revision )'. The nominal thickness of steel sheets for body and ends of the drum shall be 1-25 mm 
for Type 1 drums and 1 00 mm for Type 2 drums. 

5.1 The sheets and blanks may be phosphatized by any, of the recognized processes, if required 
by the purchaser. 

6. Construction — The sheets shall be blanked and formed to shape. The blanks shall be free 
from cracks, dents, pittings, rust and other defects. 

6.1 The body shall be continuously resistance welded so as to provide air-tight joint, 

6.2 Double Seam Construction For Type 1 Drums — The top and bottom ends shall be double 
secerned to the body, using a'^eaming compound resistant to the product to be packed. The details 
of double seam construction are shown in Fig. 1. 

6.3 Spiral Seam Triple Seam Construction for Type 2 Drums — The top and bottom ends shall be 
seamed to the body as shown in Fig. 2. The seam shall have rolled 7-layers of sheet with the 
seaming compound forming a core at the joint of body and end sheets. The seaming compound 
forming the core shall be flexible and chemically resistant to the product to be pocked. 

6.4 Drums shall be provided with two rolling beeds or hoops, expanded or rolled in the drum 
body, located as shown in Fig. 1 and 2. 

6.5 Type 2 drums shall be provided with strengthening corrugations on the bpdy having at least 
4 mm depth measured from crest to trough, 4 numbers on each side, located sy.mmetrically be- 
tween the end seams and the rolling hoops as shown in Fig. 2. 

6.6 Rectification — Any leakage observed at the welded seam and double seam during leakage 
test ( 8.1 ), may be rectified by manual welding. 

6.7 Closures - The drums shall be fitted either with one screwed closure of 50 mm or with two 
screwed closures ■— one of 50 mm and the other of 20 mm as desired by the purchaser. The 
position of the screwed closure shall be as shown in Fig. 1 and 2. Screwed closures shall be con- 
forming to IS : 1784-1984 'Specification for screwed closures for drums ( second revision ) . 

7. Finish — The drums shall be in clean condition, the inside being free from all traces of rust 

and foreign matter. 



Adopted 30 March 1988 



©July 1988. BIS I Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



l8:1783.(Part2)-1988 



843i:3 




SEAMING 
\,COMPOUND 




DETAIL AT A 
+^ (DOUBLE SEAM) 



ROLLING 
HOOP 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 DRUM WITH DOUBLE SEAM 

7.1 The inside and outside surfaces of each drum shall be treated as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 

8. Tests 

8.1 Leakage Test— Each drum shall be tested for leakage at air pressure of 50 kPa ( 5 kgf/cm2 ) 
with the seams under water or covered with soap solution. The drums shall not show any sign 
of leakage or drop in the test pressure when observed for at least 10 seconds. 

8.2 Drop Test — One drum from each lot of 2 000 Type 2 drums shall be subjected to drop test 
as detailed in 8.2.1 to 8.2.3. 



AMENDME^^^ NO. 1 OCTOBER 2000 

TO 

IS 1783 ( PART 2 ) : 1988 SPECIFICATION FOR DRUMS, 

LARGE, FIXED ENDS 

PART 2 GRADE B DRUMS 

(Third Revision) 

( Page X clause 8.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

Each drum shall be tested for leakage by either of the nnethods: 

At air pressure of 50 kpa (0.5 kgVcm^) with seams under water or cos/ered 
under soap sdutfon. The drum shall not show any sign of leakage or drop in 
the test pressure wtien obseived for at least 1 sec. 

OR 

Using special equipment fill the drum with helium, thereafter putting the drum in 
an air-tight chamber, creating a high vacuum in the annular space t^etween the 
inner wall of the chamber and outer surface of the drum and thereafter testing 
for leakage in the drum by checking for presence of helium in the annular space 
using Mass Spectrometer. 

OR 

Using special equipmert put ttie drum in an air-tight chamt)er creating a Ngh 
vacuum in the annular space between the inner walls of the chamber and outer 
surface of the drum and thereafter testing for leakage in the drum by observirtg 
for any drop in the differential pressure between inside of the drum and outskie 
of the drum.* 

( Page 4, claie^e 10.1 ) — Substinite the following for the existing clause: 

Each drum shall be marked legi)ly and indelibly with the folkjwing partkxilars by 
enrdbosssrig with raised rnarkings or screen prkting on the bottom: 

e^ IrKicatingtfie source of tiiernanufactijrer, 

b) Grade arid type of the drum, and 

c) Any other irtformatkin as required by the purchaser.' 
(MTD32) 



1—85 BIS/ND/07 



IS: 1783 (Part 2) -1988 



843±3 




SEAMING 

COMPOUND 

CORE 



DETAIL AT A 
(SPIRAL SEAM) 



35min 



ROLLING 
HOOP 



35mJn 



H 



DETAIL AT B 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
PIG. 2 DRUM WITH SPIRAL SEAM 



8.2.1 Fill the drum to 98 percent of its gross capacity with water at ambient temperature and 
close it properly. Suspend the drum with the diagonal in the vertical position and raise it to a 
height so that the lowest point on the drum is 1*25 m clear off the horizontal striking test surface. 
The striking surface shall be horizontally plain concrete floor or a steel plate at least 40 mm thick. 
The drum shall be dropped in such a way that it strikes the floor at the bottom rim, at its junction 
with the side seam. The same drum shall again be dropped so that it strikes the floor at the top 
rim at Its junction with the side seam. 

8.2.2 The drum shall be examined for any leakage of water after the test. Any leakage of water 
shall indicate failure of the drum in the test. 

8.2.3 If the sample tested above fails, two more drums from the same lot shall be subjected to 
the same test and if any of two samples fails again, the lot shall be deemed to have failed in the 
test. 

3 



IS: 1783 (Part2)- 1988 

8.3 Hydraulic Pressure Test -— One sample from each lot of 2 000 Type 2 drums shall be selected 
and subjected to hydraulic pressure test as detailed ia 8.3.1 and 8.3.2. 

8.3«1 The drum shall be subjected to a gradually applied, hydraulic pressure of 100 kPa 
( 1 kgf/cm^ ). This pressure shall be maintained for at least 5 minutes and any leakage of water 
or drop in the pressure shall indicate failure of the drum in the test. 

8.3.2 If one sample tested above fails in the test, two more samples from the same lot shall be 
taken and subjected to the hydraulic pressure test as detailed in 8.3.1. If any of the sample fails 
again, the lot shall be deemed to have failed in the test. 

9. Sampling 

9.1 Representative samples of the drums for tests regarding dimensions, capacity, construction, 
finish, air leakage, shall be drawn as prescribed in IS : 3259-1966 'Methods of sampling of metal 
containers , 

10. Marking 

10.1 Each drum shall be marked with the following particulars by embossing on the bottom end 
or the head with raised markings: 

a) Name or trade«mark of the manufacturer, 

b) Grade and typo of the drum and 

c) Any othsr information as required by the purchaser. 

10.2 Standard Marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1961 and subsequently revised in 1974. In its second 
revision in 1 983, it was split into three parts to cover Grade A, Grade B and Grade C drums sepa- 
rately in Part 1, 2 and 3, respectively. With the development of spiral seam construction which 
provides a stronger seam joint so as to withstand any drop caused during the handling and 
transportation of drums, it has been possible to reduce the thickness of the body and ends to 
VOO mm from 1 25 mm. These drums have been introduced as alternative to the conventional 
double seam drums and have, therefore, been included under the same Grade B as Type 2. Since 
the performance of Type 2 drums is mainly dependent upon the construction of end seam, drop 
test and hydraulic pressure test ( 8.2 and 8.3 ) have been specified to ensure their proper perfor- 
mance in our conditions of transportation and handling. 

The use of Grade A drums is recommended for petroleum products and other hazardous 
chemicals with flash point below 24''C and Grade B drums are commonly used for lubricating oils 
and other non- hazardous chemicals whereas Grade C drums had been introduced on experimental 
basis for powder, semi-solid products and non-hazardous chemicals for which handling condittons 
are not very severe. 



PRINTED BY THE OENfiRAL MANAGER GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NASHIK 



