INRI AAF IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


UMATA HIT IEA sardi + 
Tat cit cht ugat 
UAT 3 ASA AR Sra Vetter 
Sarai TH ehr ferfer 
( FERT FRIEAT ) 


Methods of Sampling of Petroleum 
and its Products 


Part 3 Method of Sampling of 
Semi-Solid and Solid Petroleum Products 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 75.100; 75.140 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2021 Price Group 4 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional Committee, 
PCD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and Lubricants Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


This standard was initially a part of IS 1447 : 1966 which was subsequently revised and issued into four parts. 
First revision of this standard was published in 1992. 


The other parts in this series are as follows: 


Part1 Manual sampling 
Part2 Liquefied petroleum gases — Method of sampling (LPG) 


Part4 Sampling of petroleum coke for laboratory analysis 


Sampling of petroleum and its products is done for one or more of the following purposes: 


a) For securing representative quantities from a part or from the whole of a quantity of material required for 
visual or laboratory examination or for preservation for records. Examination may be required to be made 
for determining physical and chemical characteristics in order to ensure: 

1) The average quality of the whole material, and 
2) The extent of variation of qualities in different portions of the whole materials. 

b) For determining the density and temperature of the material for the purpose of calculating the mass of a 
known volume of liquid or the volume of known mass. 

It need not be emphasized that the most careful work in the laboratory or any quantity measurement may be 
rendered useless if the samples, upon which such work is based, are not truly representative. 

In order to implement the detailed provisions given in this sampling procedure, personnel should have the 
necessary experience and skill. At all times scrupulous attention shall be given to detail. The methods covered in 
this standard shall be supplemented by judgement, skill and experience. 

This second revision was taken up as a result of the review of the standard by the concerned Technical Committee. 
In the preparation of this revision, considerable assistance has been obtained from the joint publication 
ISO 3170 : 2004 ‘Petroleum liquids — Manual sampling’, ASTM D 4057 ‘Standard practice for manual 
sampling of petroleum and petroleum products’ and API Designation: Manual of Petroleum Measurement 
Standards (MPMS) (Chapter 8.1) issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials (USA) and Petroleum 
Measurements Tables. In this revision, editorial modifications and updation of references were carried out. 


Further details on the label, like the container data for information of sample type, tested by; and tests to be 
conducted, were included. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF SAMPLING OF PETROLEUM 
AND ITS PRODUCTS 


PART 3 METHOD OF SAMPLING OF SEMI-SOLID AND 
SOLID PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) prescribes methods for 
obtaining representative samples of semi-solid and 
solid petroleum and its products for purpose of test or 
examination. 
WARNING — The use of this document can involve 
hazardous materials, operations and equipment. This 
Standard does not purport to address all of the safety 
problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of 
users of this document to take appropriate measures to ensure 
the safety and health of personnel prior to the application 
of the standard, and to determine the applicability of 
regulatory limitations and any other restrictions for this 
purpose. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of these 
standards. 


IS No. 
436 (Part 2) : 1965 


Title 


Methods of sampling of coal 
and coke: Part 2 Sampling of 
coke 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Boring Sample — A sample obtained by collecting 
the chips made by boring holes with a ship auger from 
top to bottom of the material contained in a barrel, case, 
bag or cake. 


3.2 Garb Sample — A sample obtained by collecting 
loose solids in equal quantities from each part or 
package or a shipment and in sufficient amount to be 
characteristic of all sizes and components. 


3.3 Grease Sample — A sample obtained by scooping 
or dipping a quantity of soft or semi-liquid material, 
such as grease from a package in such a manner that the 
material on the scoop or dipper is representative of the 
material in the package. 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 Sample Containers 


Sample containers shall be of glass, plastic bottles or 
metal covered bottles or cans depending on the material 
to be handled. The container shall be wide mouthed 
with low necks for easy filling and decanting. The size 
of such containers will vary depending on the purpose 
for which sampling is being done. 


4.2 Cleaning Procedures 


All sample containers shall be absolutely clean and 
free of water, dirt, lint, washing compounds, naphtha 
or other solvents rust or oil. Before using the container, 
rinse it with petroleum hydrocarbon solvent or naphtha 
of similar volatility. Dry either by passing an amount 
of clean warm air through the container or by placing it 
in a hot dust-free cabinet at 40 °C or higher. When dry, 
stopper or cap the container immediately. 


4.3 Sampling Apparatus 


Sampling apparatus is described in detail in each of 
the specific sampling procedure. Sampling apparatus 
shall be clean, dry and free of all substances that might 
contaminate the materials. 


5 PRECAUTIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS 


5.1 It is not possible to give directions for sampling, 
explicit enough to cover all cases. They shall be 
supplemented by judgement, skill and sampling 
experience particularly in regard to the type of samples 
to be taken. Extreme care and good judgement are 
necessary to ensure samples which represent general 
character and average condition of the material. 


5.2 In addition to these general precautions, there 
are special precautions which shall be observed in 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


sampling for certain tests. Some ofthese are covered in 
this standard, while the others are given in the relevant 
methods of test. 


5.3 A sample shall not include material other than that 
to be sampled and shall not be altered, for example, by 
evaporation of volatile constituents or by oxidation in 
the process of sampling, storing or transportation. 


5.4 Samples shall be taken by, or under the immediate 
supervision of a person of judgement, skill and 
experience in sampling. 


5.5 The sampling apparatus and sample containers shall 
be dry and free from any contaminating substance. 


5.6 During sampling operations, the material being 
sampled shall be protected as far as possible from the 
effects of wind and weather and the sample containers 
shall be closed immediately after the sample has been 
taken. 


5.7 The operator engaged in sampling shall have clean 
hands, free from any material (unless it be the material 
being sampled). Clean gloves may be worn, but only 
when essential to protect the operator from health or 
other hazards. 


5.8 Labelling Sample Container 


Label the container immediately after a sample is 
obtained. Include the following information: 


a) Date and time; 
b) Name ofthe sample; 


c) Name or number and owner of the vessel or 
container; 


d) Brand and grade of material; 

e) Reference or identification number; 

f) Sample type; 

g) Collected by; 

h) Tests to be conducted; and 

j) Any other information necessary to be given. 


6 PRECAUTIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS 
6.1 Boring Sampling 


6.1.1 Application 


The boring sampling procedure is applicable for 
sampling waxes and soft solids in barrels, cases, bags 


or cakes when they cannot be melted and sampled as 
liquids. 


6.1.2 Apparatus 
6.1.2.1 Ship auger 


Use a ship auger 19 mm in diameter similar to that 
shown in Fig. | and of sufficient length to pass through 
the material to be sampled. 


6.1.2.2 Sample container 


Use clean, wide mouth metal containers, glass jars with 
covers. 


6.1.3 Procedure 


Remove the heads or covers of barrels and cases. Open 
bags and wrappings of cakes. Remove any dirt, sticks, 
string or other foreign substances from the surfaces of 
the material. Bore three test holes through the body 
of the material — one at the centre, the other two 
half-way between the centre and edge of package on 
right and left sides respectively. If any foreign matter is 
removed from the interior, of the material during boring 
operation include it as part of the borings. Put the three 
sets of borings in individual sample containers, label 
and deliver them to the laboratory. 


6.1.4 Laboratory Inspection 


If there are any visible differences in the samples, 
examine and test each set of boring at the laboratory 
otherwise combine the three sets of borings into one 
sample. If sub-division of the borings is desired, chill 
pulverize (if necessary), mix, and quarter the borings 
until reduced to desired amount. 


6.2 Garb Sampling 
6.2.1 Application 


The garb sampling procedure is applicable for sampling 
all lumpy solids in bins, bunkers, freight cars, barrels, 
bags, boxes and conveyors. It is particularly applicable 
for the collection of green petroleum coke samples from 
railroad cars and for the preparation of such samples for 
laboratory analysis. 


6.2.2 Place of Sampling 


Petroleum coke may be sampled while being loaded 
into railroad cars from piles or after being loaded into 
railroad cars from coking drums. 


DUD OOOO Da 


Fic. 1 SHIP AUGER 


6.2.3 Apparatus 


6.2.3.1 Sample container 
A polyethylene pail of approximately 9.5 | capacity. 


6.2.3.2 Scoop 


Stainless steel or aluminium of size no. 2. 
6.2.4 Procedure 
6.2.4.1 Sampling 


Lumpy and granulated solids are usually heterogeneous 
and therefore are difficult to sample accurately. It is 
preferable to take samples during the unloading of 
trucks or during transit of the material by conveyors. 
From material in transit, obtain number of portions at 
frequent and regular intervals and combine them. 


6.2.4.2 When sampling from wagons, use one of the 
following procedures: 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


a) Being loaded from a pile — Take a full scoop of 
sample at each of the five sampling points shown 
in Fig. 2 and deposit in the polyethylene pail. 
Cover the sample and deliver to the laboratory. 
Each sampling point shall be located equidistant 
from the sides of the railroad car. 


b 


wm 


Wagons after direct loading from coking drums — 
At any five of the sampling points shown in Fig. 3 
take a full scoop of coke from about 0.3 m below 
the surface and deposit it in the polyethylene pail. 
Cover the sample and deliver to the laboratory 


6.2.4.3 When sampling from conveyors, take one scoop 
for each 8 to 10 tons of coke transported. These samples 
may be handled separately, or made composite after all 
samples representing the lot have been taken. 


6.2.4.4 When sampling from bags, barrels, or boxes, 
obtain portions from a number of packages selected at 
random as shown in Table 1 or in accordance with the 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 


a—— L=length of car 


| 


H = height of car 


Fic. 2 LOCATION OF SAMPLING POINTS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS OF CARA 


L = length of car — 


W = width of car 


Fic. 3 LOCATION OF SAMPLING POINTS FROM EXPOSED SURFACE OF CARA 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 1 Minimum Number of Packages to be 
Selected for Sampling 


( Clause 6.2.4.4 ) 


SINo. No of Packages in a Lot No of Packages to be 
Sampled 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 1 to3 All 
ii) 4 to 64 4 
iii) 65 to 125 5 
iv) 126 to 216 6 
v) 217 to 343 7 
vi) 344 to 512 8 
vii) 513 to 729 9 
viii) 730 to 1 000 10 
ix) 1 001 to 1 331 11 
x) 1332 to 1 728 12 
xi) 1729 to 2 197 13 
xii) 2 198 to 2 744 14 
xiii) 2 745 to 3 375 15 
xiv) 3 376 to 4 096 16 
xv) 4 097 to 4 913 17 
xvi) 4 914 to 5 832 18 
xvii) 5 833 to 6 859 19 
xviii) 6 960 to over 20 


6.2.4.5 Quartering 


Carefully mix the sample and reduce it in size to 
a convenient laboratory sample by the quartering 
procedure as given in IS 436 (Part 2). Perform the 
quartering operation on a hard, clean surface, free from 
cracks, and protected from rain, snow, wind and sun. 
Avoid contamination with cinders, sand, chips from the 
floor, or any other material. Protect the sample from 
loss or gain of moisture or dust. Mix and spread the 
sample in a circular layer, and divide it into quadrants 
to form a representative reduced sample. If this sample 
is still too large for laboratory purposes, repeat the 
quartering operation. In this manner, the sample will 
finally be reduced to a representative, suitable size for 
laboratory purposes. Label and deliver the sample to 
the laboratory in suitable container. 


6.3 Grease Sampling 
6.3.1 Application 


This method covers practices for obtaining samples 
representative of production lots or shipments of 
lubricating greases, or of soft waxes or soft bitumens 
similar to grease in consistency. The procedure is 
necessarily quite general to cover the wide variety of 
conditions encountered and may require modification 
to meet individual specification. 


6.3.2 Inspection 


If the material is a lubricating grease and inspection is 
made at the manufacturing plant, take samples from the 
finished shipping containers of each production batch 
or lot. Never take grease samples directly from grease 
kettle, cooling pans, tanks, or processing equipment. 
Do not sample the grease until it has cooled to 
temperature not more than 9.0 °C above that of the air 
surrounding the containers and until it has been in the 
finished containers for at least 12 h. When the containers 
for a production batch of grease are of different sizes, 
treat the grease in each size of container as a separate lot. 
When inspection is made at the place of delivery, obtain 
a sample from each shipment, if a shipment consists 
of containers from more than one production batch 
(lot numbers), sample each such batch separately. 


6.3.2.1 If the material being inspected is of grease-like 
consistency, but is not actually a lubricating grease, 
but some mixture of heavy hydrocarbons such as 
micro-crystalline waxes or soft bitumens, it will be 
permissible to take samples from pans, tanks, or other 
processing equipment, as well as from containers of the 
finished product. The grease sampling method shall be 
applicable to such stocks only if for some reason it is 
not possible to apply heat and convert the material into 
a true liquid. 


6.3.3 Sample Size 


Select containers at random from each lot or shipment 
to give the desired quantity specified in Table 2. 


6.3.4 Procedure 


6.3.4.1 Inspection 


Examine the opened containers to determine whether 
the grease nearest the outer surfaces of the container 
with that in the centre, at least 15 cm below the top 
surface, for texture and consistency. When more than 
one container of a lot or shipment is opened, also 
compare the grease in the respective containers. 


6.3.4.2 Sampling 


If no marked difference in the grease is found, take 
one portion from the approximately centre and at least 
7.5 cm below the surface of each opened container, in 
sufficient quantity to provide a composite sample of the 
desired quantity (see Table 2). Withdraw portions with 
a clean scoop, large spoon or spatula and place them 
in a clean container. Very soft, semi-fluid greases may 
be sampled by dipping with a 0.45 kg or 1 kg can or 
suitable dipper. If any marked difference in the grease, 
two separate samples of about 0.45 kg or 1 kg each one 
from the top surface adjacent to the wall, and the other 
from the centre of marked variation are noted between 
different containers of a lot or shipment, take separate 
samples of about 0.45 kg or 1 kg from each container. 


When more than one sample of a batch or shipment is 
taken because of lack of uniformity, send them to the 
laboratory as separate samples. 


6.3.4.3 Handling samples 


If more than one portion is required to represent a 
lot or shipment of grease softer than 175 penetration, 
prepare a composite sample by mixing equal portions 
thoroughly. Use a large spoon or spatula in a clean 
container. Avoid vigorous mixing or working of air into 
the grease. As grease samples become partially ‘worked’ 
in being removed from containers, the procedure is not 
suitable for obtaining samples of grease softer than 
175 penetration on which ‘unworked’ penetration is to 
be determined. For grease having a penetration less than 
175, cut samples from the container with a knife in the 
form of blocks about 15 x 15 x 5 cm. If required, make 
unworked penetration tests on blocks as procured, and 
other inspection tests on grease cut from the blocks. 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


Table 2 Size of Grease Samples 


( Clause 6.3.3 ) 


SI Container Lot or Minimum 
No. Shipment Sample 
a) 2 (3) (4) 

i) Tubes or packages, All Enough units for 
less than 0.45 kg a 4.5 kg or 10 kg 
or 1 kg sample 

ii) 0.45 kg 1 kg cans All Three cans 

iii) 5 or 10 kg cans All One can 
iv) Larger than 10 kg Less than 1 to 2 kg from one 
10 000 kg or more containers 
v) Larger than 10 kg 10 000 to 1 to 3 kg from two 
50 000 kg or more containers 
vi) Larger than 10 kg More than 1 to 3 kg from 
50 000 kg three or more 
containers 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Methods of Sampling and Test for Petroleum, its Products, Gaseous Fuels and 
Lubricants Sectional Committee, PCD 01 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Air Headquarters, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers 
Association, Mumbai 


Bharat Oman Refineries Limited, Bina 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Castrol India Limited, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology, Bhuwaneshwar 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


CSIR-Central Institute for Mining and Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality 


Assurance, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
Elico Limited, Hyderabad 
GAIL (India) Limited, Noida 
Gulf Oil Lubricants India Limited, Silvasa 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
HPCL Mittal Energy Limited, Noida 
Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited-Refineries and 
Pipelines Division, New Delhi 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Lubrizol India Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr ANJAN Ray (Chairman) 


WG Cwpr S. A. TAWAB 
WG CmDR D. ANANDRAJ Roy (Alternate) 


Pror G. M. Rao 


SHRI ANAND PRATAP RAGHAV 
SHRI B. SRIDHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI C. SHANMUGANATHAN 
Suri R. SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMAN RAI 


Dr Smita MOHANTY 


Dr T. A. SREENIVASA RAO 


SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN 
Dr V. SELVAVATHI (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. SINGH 
Suri S. R. K. Rao (Alternate I) 
Suri S. Dutta (Alternate II) 


SHRI SANTOSH NAMDEO INGOLE 
Suri C. B. PANDEY 


SHRI N. Raju 
Suri T. V. Suiva K. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. KASHYAP 
Dr Susanta MAHANTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 


SHRI MADHUSUDAN 
SHRI ELECHERAN KUMAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI SHITANSHU Pati (Alternate 11) 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI SATYABRATA BANDYOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI V. KAGDIYAL 
Dr S. K. Masumpar (Alternate) 


Dr ASHUTOSH MISHRA 
SHRI SHASHI PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. D. DUSANE 
Suri G. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARAD TARSODE 


Organization 


Mangalore Refinery and Petro Chemical Limited, 
Mangalore 


Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Nayara Energy Limited, Mumbai 


Numaligarh Refinery Limited, Golaghat 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Oil India Limited, Duliajan 


Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, 
New Delhi 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 
New Delhi 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 

BIS Director General 


IS 1447 (Part 3) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SHALINA KUMAR 
SHRI YOGEESHA (Alternate I) 
Suri R. M. PRAKASH (Alternate ID 


SHRI RAJESH SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI SONAM GUPTA (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. NASKAR 
Suri P. K. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Suri Duras M. GONDALIA 
SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR (Alternate I) 
Suri HarsaL Moni (Alternate II) 


SHRI ANJAN KALITA 
SHRI SOBHAN KONWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR JAIN 
SHRIMATI LEENA Jonn (Alternate I) 
Suri DINESH S. R. ReDDY KAKUTURI (Alternate ID) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI ANIL MEGHANI 
Suri Noor KHAN (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. BANGWAL 


SHRI PRAMOD MALL 
SHRI SHAMBHU THAKUR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri N. K. BANSAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T. 
Scientist “E”, PCD, BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 01 (15115). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


