( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Ildian , Standard
ELE~ROTECHlitCAL
PART 62 Section 15

VOCABULARY
Languages

DATA PROCESSING Programming

Basic Standards an Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, LTDC 1
*
Chairman Representfag

PROPS. SAMPATH .
Members

Indian Institute

of Technology, Kaapur

DR K. CHANDM SHRl %. A. CHl!TN
DIRECTOR

JO$~~;IREC$R STANDARDS Jornr

National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi Department of Electronics, New Delhi Dspar+qt of S&We and Technoloof, New Wlhi Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow

SHIU 0. P. KIiusriu wo $ia 8.5. mpzAL
tkJN ba

-( s-eT )/T&u.8( &mw?t~ 1

DWOR

STAND=

All III& Radio, New Delhi YWahoif Dafence, DTD k P ( AIR ), New ----

K. Ni SAIIpATa KUMAS

Posts aad Telegraphs Department, New Delhi Institution of Electronics and Telecommunica. tion Engineers, New Delhi
MAJ GBN J. S. AHLUWACIA ( Alternate )Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI B. S. RAO SHRI P. C. NAGPAL ( Alternate ) Vice Chairman, Electronics and Telecom. , LT-GEN D. SWAROOP ' municstion Division Council, IS1 Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio hfetnber ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics ) ( Secretary ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1987 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( ContinuedfiompWe 1 )

Computers, Business M&chines and Calculators Sectional Committee, LTDC 24
Chairman Dn N.
SESILWIRI

Representing Department of Electronics, New Delhi

Members DR K. SUBIUMANIAN ( AIternatc tb Shri N. Seshagiri ) Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd. SHRIR. P. AHUJA New Delhi SHRI C. K. BAPI~AJU State Bank of India,. Bombay Bharat Heavy Electrrcals Ltd, New Delhi SHRIS. K. BHATIA SHRI PVS CHELLAPATHI RAO ( Alternote ) Kerala State Electronics Development CarDR VIJAYP. BHAIXAR poration Ltd, Trivandrum DR S. N. S. RAIE~EKRAN ( Alternate ) DR C. R. CHAKRAVARTHY Ministry of Defence R & D ) SHRI K. N. DHEER Indian Airlines, New b elhi Electronics Trade and Technol SHRIHHWAR DUTr Develop= ment Corporation Ltd, New % lhi SHRIDEEPAK GUPTA Tata Electric Companies, Bombay SHRI R. M. NAIR ( Altertwtc ) Da A. LAHIRI Depart;;;t of Science and Technology, New Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay Development Commissioner ( Small Scale Industries ), New Delhi SHRIM. RAMAKRISHNAN ( Alternutc ) Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi ~Ac"~~ Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI`S. i. N. MURPHY Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. S. PBRINANAYAOM~ ( Alternate ). SERI 8. .K. P-BY Intcrn~trrl Computers Indian 1Mfra Ltd,
SHRI

SHRIN. LAKSHMANAN P. P. MALHOTRA

SHRIIi. Dnr ( Alternate ) SERI G. R~~OHUKUMAR I
SHRIC.

The De.3e.gzih

and General Mills Co Ltd,

SARI A. N. PAWAR ( Alternate ) S. RAMCXANDMN Reserve Bank of India, Bombay DR J. Gor%r.~RAQ Blcctronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad DR V. K. RA~~NDMN PSI Data Systems Pvt Ltd, Bangalore ' &-In1 V. L. &3EIPANDE(~k?rIIde) PRO? R. SADANANDA Computer Society of India, Bombay SI-JRI K. L. GARO( Alternate ) Smu AarrrsSEN Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta Sriar UV~H P. SHAH ORG Systems, Vadodara SHRIP. K. SRIDHARAN ( Afternote ) SHRIM. SHANKRAL~N~AM Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi ( Continued on pugu I1 ) . .

2

Indian Standard
PART 52 Section 15 DATA PROCESSING Programming Languages

*..

ELECTROTEtiHNICAL VOCABULARY

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 52/Set 15 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, in consultation with Computers Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunications Division Council. 0.2 Electronic data processing is utilized for numerous exchanges and analysis of information of both intellectual and material nature. Application of electronic data processing becomes difficult, either because of-the great variety of terms used in various fields to express the same concept, orbecause of the absence of or the imprecision df useful coucepts. To overcome these barriers, this standard has been formulated. 0.3 This etaudard is ane of the series of Indian Standards on data processing vocabulary constituting Part 52 of the Electrotechnical Vocabulary. 0.4 Prime importance has been given to simplicity and clarity of the definitions so that it may be understood by all. It may, therefore, be felt that some definitions do not cover all the cases and exceptions. 0.5 Assistance has been derived in preparing this standard from Draft International Standard ISO/DIS 2382/l 5 `Data processing -Vocabulary - Part 15 Programming languages' prepared by the International Orgynization for Standardization (HO).

1. SCOPE . 1.1This standard (Part 52/Set 15) covers terms related to programming
languages used with computers. 2. GENERAL-ORJRCTS

2.1 Lesicd Umitp+rriaril Token - A language
convention, a

construction represents an elemental unit of meaning.

that,

by

18 :1885 ( Part 52/Set 15 ) - 1986
Examples: A literal, such as `G25'; separator, such as a semicolon. 2.2 Identifier a keyword, such as PRINT; and a

A lexical unit that names a language object.

Examples : The names of variables, arrays, records, etc. NOTE- An identifier usually consists of a letter optionally followed by letters,
digits or other characters.

2.3 Keyword - A lexical unit that, in certain context!, some language construction. NOTE- A keyword normally has the form of an identifier. 2.4 Reserved Word -

characterizes

A keyword that may not be used as an identifier.

NOTE- In ADA all keywords are reserved words; FORTRAN has no,rcrervcd words. 23 Literal - A lexical unit that directly represents a value. Examples: 14 represents the -integer fourteen, `APRIL' represents the string of character APRIL, 3.0005E2 represents the number 300.05. 2.6 Statement - A language construction that represents a set of declarations or a step in a sequence of actions. NOTEI - In some programming languiges, for example. FORTRAN, a distinction is made between executablsaml non-executable statements. Non32- Insome programmi& laqquages, for example, PL/l, a distinction is made betwe~~~de&rations and stateapcnts. I_ constructed by sequencing 2.1 Compotmd Statement - A Hatement statemlntn. Non- Most eften the statements are gtou& together by some syntactic deGce. 2.8 Block - A compound statement that coincides with the scope 9f at least one of the declarations contained within-it. NOTE- A block' may albo specify storage allocation or segment programs for other putpores. a9 l&dale/Program Unit - A language construction that consists of procedures or data declarations and that can also interact with other such constructions. Examples: In ADA a package; in FORTRAN, a program unit; in PL/l, an external procedure. 4

IS : 1885 ( Part 52/Set 15 ) - 19g6 2.10 Encapsulated Type Example: A module representing an abstract data type.

A stack processing module.
NOTE - An encapsulated type hides the representation permits operations on them by other modules. of its values but

2.11 Program - A logical assembly of one, or more than one, interrelated modules. 2.12 Comment - A language construction for the inclusion ' of text in a program and having no impact on the execution of the program.
NOTE. - Comments are used to explain certain aspects of the program.

2.13 Environment Description - A language c'onsttuction for the description of features that are not part of a program but are relevant to its execution. E;)(amples:

Machine characteristics, special prop&ties of files, interfaces w#ith: other programs. 3, GENERAL PROPERTIES AND MECHANISMS
3.1 Declaration - The mechanism for establishing a language object.
N~TB- A declaration normally involves attaching an identifier, and allocating attribrrtes, to the lantiage object concerned.

3.2 Defaolt - Pertaining to an attribute, value, or option that is assumed when none is explicity specified. 3.3 Implicit Declaration - A declaration, caused by the occurrence of an identifier and in which the attributes are determined by default. 3.4 Built-in/Predefined - Pertaining to a language object declared by the definition of the programming language.
Examples; The build-in function SIN in PL/l, the predefined data type INTEGER in ADA. 3.5 Scope - That portion of a program within which the declaration applies.
NOTES- `The scope of an identifier' is often used as a synonym scope of its declaration'. for `the

that

is

- A language object may not be referable throughout its scope since it m?y% &dden by the declaration of the same identifier in an inner block.

I$% : 1sgs ( Part ~Z/See 15 ) - l9g6
31 Local*- With respect to a block, qualifies a language object having a scope contained in that block. 3.7 Global - With respect to a block, qualifiesa language object having a .scope extending beyond that block but contained within an ehcompassing block.

3.8 External - Qualifies a language object having a scope errtending %yond one module.
! Example:

The entry names of a module are external. 3.9 Static - Qualifies properties that can be established before the execution of a program.
Example:

The length of a fixed-length variable is static. 3.10 Dynamic - Qualifies properties during the execution of a program.
Example:

that can
.

only

be e&B&d

The length of a varying length data object is dynamic. 3.11 Lifetime - Of a language object, that portion of the execution time.during which the object exists. 3;12 Befcrrenee - A language construction, such as an identifier, designating a declared language object. 3:13 Qlul&8tioo - A mecbanis,m for referencing a component of a language object by means of a reference to the object and an identifier d8clMed for the component.
ExampI&
I Used for referencing record components ( B. of A in COBOL ), members of a library, language objects .in a module. 3.14 Uniform Referencing - A property of a programming laagrrage such that two or more language. constructions for referencing are Of the same form.

Examples:

Language constructions for name qualification and indirect references; language constructions for subscripting and actual parameters.
4. DATA OBJECTS 4.1 Variable - A language object that may take different values, one at time.
NOTE- The values of a variable are usually restricted to a certain data type. 6

IS : 1885 ( Part 52/Set 15 ) - 1986, 42 Constant - A language object that takes only oue specific value.. 4.3 Aggregate - A structured collection of variables or constants

forming a data type. 4.4 Array - An aggregate that consists of data objects, with identical attributes, each of which may be uniquely referenced by subscripting. 4.5 Record - An aggregate consisting of data objects which usually have identifiers attached to them. 46 Variant Part - A part of a record whose data objects are defined in alternative ways.
NOTEBoth the number and composition of data objects can vary.

4.7 Ana ( ia a Programming Language ) - A space together with a mechanism for inserting data objects into it, and for accessing and for, deleting data objects from it. 4.8 Parameter/Dummy Argment - R liw~guageobject,.~hoae identifkr appear in an entry of a procedure, that is associated with the corresponding actual parameter specified by the procedure call for every execution of the procedure. 4.9 Actual Parameter/Argument - A language object that appears in a procedure call and that is associated with the corresponding formal parameter for use in the execution of the procedure. 5. PR$`&
51 Type -

A@JbMEcH;ApJI1stiS. RELATRD TO DATA A set of values>together with a set of permitted operations.

5.2 Picture - A language construction that describes a data type by means of a model character string literal. 5.3 Format - A language construction that specifies the representation, in character form, of data objects on a file. 5.4 Subscripting - A mechanism for referencing an array element by means of an array reference and one or more expressions that, when evaluated, denote the position of the element.
NOTEThis term also applies to the,use of the mechanism.

5.5 Indirect Referencing - A mechanism for referencing via a data object whose value points to the referenced language object.
NOTE 1 This term also applies to the use of the mechanism. NATE 2 - The referencing may be done along a chain of data objects in which each data object, except the last, points to the next, the last data object poiniing. to the ref$renced language object. `I]

IS : 1885 ( Part 52/Set IS ) - 1986

5.6 Data Flow - The transfer of data between constants, variab!es and files accomplished by the execution of statements, procedures, modules or programs. 5.7 Assignment aggregate. A mechanism to give a value to a variable or to an

NOTE- This term also applies to the use of the mechanism. 5.8 Assignment by Name - An assignment of a record value to a record variable pertaining only to those components with the same identifier.

5.9 Iaitialize - To give a value to a data object at the beginning of its lifetime. 5.10 Automatic Storage Allocation - A mechanism for allocating space to data objects only for the duration of the execution &their scope.
NOTE- Autqnatic storage allocation is one form of dynamic allocation; another form ir program controlled storage allocation. stam

5.11 Assumed-Size Aggregate - An aggregate formal parameter that takes some or all of its subscript ranges from a corresponding actual parameter. 5.12 Ad&tables-Size Aggregate - An aggregate formal parameter with some or all of its subscript ranges dynamic. 5.13 Editing - Transforming values to the representations specified by a given format. 6. PROCESSING OBJECTS 6.1 Expression - A language construction for computing one or more operands.
Noncalls, etc. Operands may be literals,

a value from
fun&m

identifiers, array refereiws,

6.2 Procedure - A block, with or without parameters, whose execution is invoked by means of a procedure call. 6.3 Function - A procedure that, when executed, yields a value and whose procedure call may be used as an operand in an expression.
Examples :

The function SIN yields value SIN X when called part of the program.
8

A procedure that can be executed concurrently with the calling part of the prograti. 6.5 Critical Section - In an asynchronous procedure, a part that cannot be executed simultaneously with a certain part of another asynchronous procedure. NOTE - Tbst part of the other asynchronous procedure is also a critical 6.4 Asynchronous Procedare section.

6.6 Label,,1 A language construction naming a statement and including an identifier. I

7. P-i dPERTIES AND MECHANISMS RELATED TO PROCESSING /, 8JECTS C:i Execution Sequence - The order of the execution of statements and _" parts of statements of a program. 7.2 Control Flow - An abstraction of all possible paths the execution sequence may take through a program.
NOTE - The control flow can `be represented by a control flow graph.

7.3 Unconditional Statement - A statement specifying only one possible execution sequence. 7.4 Conditional Construction - A language construction specifying several different execution sequences.
Examples: A CASE statement, an IF statement,

a tionditional expression in that specifies an

ALCiOL. 7.5 Loop Constmctioa - A language iteration in the execution sequence.
Examples;

construction

FORTRAN DO, ALGOLFOR, WHILE. 7.6 Call - A language construction procedure.

COBOL PERFORM,

PL/l DO

for invoking the execution of a

NOTE- A procedure call usually includes an entry name and possible actual parameters.

7.7 Entry - A language construction within a procedure, a start of the execution sequences of the procedure.

designating

-A procedure may have more than one entry; each entry usually NOTE includes an identifier! called the entry name and possible formal parameters.

7.8 Parameter Assaciation - The association of formal parameters with the corresponding actual parameters that are specified by a procedure call. 9

iS :

1885( Prrt52/Sec

15 ) - 1986

7.9 Return - A language construction within a procedure designating an end of the execution sequences in the procedure. NOTE- Usually the execution sequence continues from the calling point. 7.10 Side Effect - Any external effect caused by function procedure other than that of yielding the result k 7.11 Branch Coaatruction - A language construction spec between Uifferent execution sequences by means of label r 7.12 Exception - A special situation which may arise duri which is considered abnormal, which may cause a deviat which facilities normal execution sequence and for programming language to define, raise, recognize, ignore and handle A 2 Examples: (ON-) condition in PL/l, exception in ADA. 7.13 Precedence - A rule for the order of the application of operators within an expression. 7.14 Conversion - The transformation between values which represent the same datum but belong to different data types. `NOTE- Information may be lost due to conversion since accuracy of data representation varies among different data types. 7.15 Activation - The representation invocation of that ,procedure. of a procedure created by the * execution of a lue.

\

i

7.16 Connection - A mechanism that enables interaction among modules, particularly procedure calls to asynchronous procedures. Examples: In FCtRTRAM 3les ,are connected to mod&a.

10

( Continuedfrom

page 2 ) Representing

Members SHRI V. R. UNNIRAMAN

Tcleco~;tmication
)

Research

Centre,

New

SARI K. M. VI~WANATI~AN SHR~S. DEVARAJAN (Alternate SBRI N. SRINIVISAN. Director ( Electronics )

Hindustan Teleprinters

Ltd, Madras

Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$&50 Member )

Secretary SHRI A. S. RAWAT

Deputy Director ( Electronics ), IS1 Programming
Convener
DR R.

Languages

Subcommittee,

LTCD

24 : 2

SADANANDA
Members

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi Indian National . Scientific PoCUmCntdiOB Centre. New Delhi Mini&y of Defenco ( DRDO ) Ltd,

SHRI A. M. ARORA
DR C. R. CHAKRAVARTHY SHRI E. THOMAN ( Alternote )

SHRI T. ESWAR PROPD. V. Jo0

of India Electronics Corporation Hyderabad Rrdian Institute of Technology, Bombay Police Computer Centrs. Bangalore _Softek Pvt Ltd, New Delhi

SHRI HEMAIW KUMAR( Alternure 1

SHRI V. K. RAVINDRAN
SHRI

P. SADANANDAN

DR R. VASUDEVAN

SHRI S. K. SINGHAL

PSI Data Systems Pvt Ltd. Bangalore National Centre for Software Development and Computing Techniques. Bombay Tata Consultancy Services, Bombay Defence Research and Development Orgauimtion, New Delhi

11

Is : 1885 ( SIvt St/See 15 ) - MS6 INDEX
This index has been prepared in accordance with IS : 1275-1976+. Index numbers are clause numbers.
A

Activation 7.15 Actual parameter 4.9 Adjustable-size aggregate 5.12 Aggregate 4.3 Adjustable-size 5.12 Assumed-size 5. I 1 ~~~;i$on, Automatic storage 5.10 Arguguz; 44':

Description, Environment dummy argument 4.8 Dynamic 3.10 E Editing 5.13 Effect, Side 7.10 Encapsuiated type 2.10 z%%ent Exce&t;"12 Bl&ess&.l i lw. contfof 7.2 `.Dttta 5.6 Format 5.3 Rmction 6.3 G . p, :-

2.13

description 2.13 .i

Array 4.4 ' Assigomeat 5.7 by namo 5.9 Association, Parameter 7.8 A!mumt&sb amrogatet 5.M. Asynchronous procedun 4.4 Automatic storage&ocWon 5.10 B Block 2.8 Branch c&structhm Built-in 3.4 7.11
C

Global 3.7 I ldontifier 2.2 Implicit declaration 3.3 Indirect referencing 54 Initialize 5.9 K Keyword 2.3 L Label 6.6 Lexical unit 2.1 token 2.1 Lifetime 3.11 F;l;;;$5 Loop construction 7.5

Call 7.6 Comment 2.12 Compound statement 2.7 Conditional construction 7.4 Connection 7.16 Constant 4.2 Construction 7.11 Branch 7.11 Conditional 7.4 LOOP 7.5 Control flow 7.2 Conversion 7.14 Critical section 6.5 D Data flow 5.6 type 5.1 Declaration 3.1 Implicit 3.3 Default 3.2

*Rules for making alphabetical indexes ( firsr revision ). 12

M

S

Module 2.9
N

Section, critical $5 gru;> execution 7.1 Side effect 7.10 Statement 2.7 Compound 2.6 Unconditional 7.3 Static 3.9 Storage allocation, Automatic 5.10 Subscripting 5.4 T gzj iexical2.1 2.10 U

Name assignment by 5.8 P Parameter 4.8 Actual 4.9 Association 7.8 Part 4.6 variant 4.6 Picture 5.2 Precedence 7.13 Predefined 3.4 Procedure 6.2 Asynchronous 6.4 Prog;;;:. 11

,

Bnakulated

Q
Qualiecation 3.13 R Record 4.5 Reference 3.12 Referencing Jndirect 5.5 Uniform 3.14 RetLe;Spgword . 2.4

-Unconditional statement 7.3 &h&ommf~s.l4 Lexiifd 2.1 Program 2.9
V
r

Variable 4.1 Variant part 4.6 W Word, Reserved 2.4

I3

M'I'ER~~I'?&

$YS'i'EMUF UNITS ( SI UNITS )

Base Units
Quuntity Length
MMS

Unit metre kilogram, second ampere kelvin candela mole
Unit

Symbol

m kg
S

Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance SupplementaryUnits
Quantity

A K cd mol
, L

`.

Symbol

Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Quantity

radian &radian

rad sr

units
Unft

n

Symbol N

Definition

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

1N 1J 1w 1T 1s 1v

= 1 kg.m/s* = 1 N.m = 1 J/s = 1 Wb/ms = 1 A/V = I W/A

J W
Wb

1 Wb= 1V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s(s-1)

T HZ S V Pa

1 Pa = 1 N/m*

