IS 1~868 : 1~996 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian

Standard

ANODIC

COATINGS ON ALUMINIUM SPECIFICATION
(Third Revision)

AND

ITS ALLOYS -

ICS 2.5.220.30;77.120.10

0 BIS 1996

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI I 10002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARC

December

1996

Price

Group 3

Metallic

and Non-metallic

Finishes

Sectional

Committee.

MTD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Third prevision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Metallic and Non-metallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. This Standard was first published in 1961 and subsequently this standard, the committee desired to revise this standard International Standards. In this revision a) Scope following changes have been made: revised in 1968 and 1982. While reviewing and various clauses have been aligned with

of the standard clause

has been widened. has been revised guidelines on grades incorporating of Aluminium definition suitable of additional for anodizing fifteen has

b) The existing terms. c) A new clause been added.

on terminology general

providing

d) A new clause on `Surface Texture' of aluminium

surface prior to anodizing

has also been incorporated.

No one coating can satisfy all the requirements of this standard since individually the requirements may he incompatible with each other. A list of information which should he provided along with the inquiry and order is given in 7. It is in particular, essential that the purchaser states the clauses which are relevant, and specifying in each case the grade number of the agreed standard of performance desired. Merely asking for anodizing to IS 1868 without this information is insufficient. In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IS0 7599: 1983, `Anodizing of aluminium and its alloy-General specification for anodic oxide coatings on aluminium', issued by the International Organization for Standardization. For the purpose value, observed with IS 2 : 1960 in the rounded of deciding whether a particular requirements of this standard is complied with, the final of calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 1868 : 1996

Indian Standard ANODIC COATINGS ON ALUMINWM ITS ALLOYS - SPECIFICATION (Third Revision)
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down general specification for anodic oxide coatings on aluminium. It defines the characteristic properties of anodic oxide coatings on aluminium, lists methods of test for checking the characteristic properties, specifies minimum performance requirements, gives information on the grades of aluminium suitable for anodizing and describes the importance of pretreatment to ensure the required appearance or texture of the finished work. 1.2 This standard does not cover `hard anodized' coatings for engineering purpose, for which abrasion and wear resistance are the primary characteristics. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are necessary adjuncts to this standard. 3 SUPPLY OF MATERIAL coloured oxide coating during the anodizing itself on specific aluminium alloys. .4.5 Electrolytic Colouring process

AND

The colouring of an anodic oxide coating by the electrolytic deposition of metals or metal oxide in the porous structure. 4.6 Bright Anodized Aluminium

Anodized aluminium with a high specular reflectance as the primary characteristic. 4.7 Protective Anodizing

Anodizing where protection against corrosion or wear is the primary characteristics and appearance is secondary or of no importance. 4.8 Decorative Anodizing

The general requirements relating to the supply of material shall be as laid down in IS 1387:1993. 4 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in IS 3554:1966 as well as the following shall apply. 4.1 Anodized Aluminium

Anodizing where a decorative finish with a uniform or asthetically pleasing appearance is the primary characteristic. 4.9 Architectural Anodizing

Anodizing to produce an architectural finish to be used in permanent, exterior and static situations where both appearance and long life are important. 4.10 Sealing A hydration treatment of anodic oxide coatings on aluminium applied after anodizing to reduce porosity and/or the absorption capacity of the coating. 4.11 Significant Surface

Alumiminium with an anodic coating, produced by an electrolytic oxidation process in which the surface of aluminium is converted to a coating, generally an oxide, having protective, decorative or functional properties. 4.2 Ciear Anodized Aluminium colourless, translucent

Aluminium with a substantially anodic oxide coating. 4.3 Colour Anodized

The part of the article covered or to be covered by the coating and for which the coating is essential for serviceability and/or appearance.
NOTE-When necessary the significant surface is to he agreed upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser and is to be indicated on the drawings or by providing smtably marked sample.

Aluminium coating that is

Aluminium with an anodic oxide coloured by absorptive dyes. 4.4 Integral Colour Anodizing

4.12 Measuring

Area surface over which a single

Anodizing of aluminium using an appropriate (usually organic acid-based) electrolyte which produces 1

The area of the significant measurement is made.

IS 1868

: 1996 methods is defined Only some of the properties will be significant in any particular application. The anodizer shall be notified of either the end use or of the specific properties required. Some properties (for example specular reflectance) are only obtainable by the use of special alloys, and some properties may be mutually incompatiable with others. The following information, where appropriate, be provided with the inquiry and order: should

Measuring area for the various as following: a) b) c) d) For analytical method which the coating

the area over

is removed;

For the anodic dissolution method - the area enclosed by the sealing ring of the cell; For the microsectional method - the place at which a single measurement is made; and For non-destructive methods - the probe area or the area included in the reading.
Reference Area

4.13

4 Thickness (see 9) b) Quality of sealing (see
of single

10)

The area within which a specified number measurements are required to be made. 4.14
Local Thickness

c>
4 0 g) W 3 k)
7.2

Colour

and appearance resistance resistance to crazing

(sc~e 11)

Corrosion Resistance Fastness Electrical Continuity Sampling

(see 12) (see 13) deformation (see 16) (see 17), and (see 14)

e) Abrasion

The mean of the thickness measurements, of which a specified number is made within a reference area. 4.15 Minimum Local Thickness at any point

to light (see 15) properties breakdown potential

Light reflection

of the coating (see 18) Procedure

The lowest value of the coating thickness on the significant surface. 4.16 Maximum Local Thickness

The highest value of the coating ~point on the significant surface. 4.17
Average Thickness

thickness

at any

Sampling procedure shall he as agreed to between the anodiser and the purchaser. For sampling plan IS 2500 (Part 1) :I992 may be referred. 8 TEST PIECES

Either the value obtained by analytical methods, or the mean value of a specified number of local thickness measurements that are evenly distributed over the significant surface. 4.18 Impregnation

8.1 Wherever practicable, test pieces shall be the production component. Howcvcr, if by agreement, special pieces are prepared for convenience as referee or acceptance test, they shall be made of the same material as the production batch they represent, and shall be anodized by the same process and at the same time. 8.2
Acceptance Tests

A treatment carried out after anodizing in order to plug the pores of the anodic oxidation coating, but not involving hydrothermal sealing. 5 GRADES OF ALUMINIUM FOR ANODIZING

Acceptance tests shall be as agreed between the anodizer and the customer. However following acceptance tests can be adopted by the users:

a>Colour
c>
4
Quality

and appearance; (see 9); of sealing ~by marking coating, test if required

b) Thickness
General guidance on anodising of different categories of aluminium is given in Annex B. 6 SURFACE TEXTURE of surface texture is

(see IS 5523 : 1983); and Continuity of anodising (see IS 5523 : 1983).

General guidance on detailes given in Annex C.

In case of any change in raw material, manufacturing method and operational conditions, all the tests as given in this standard shall be carried out. 9 THICKNESS 9.1 Anodic oxide coatings are graded by their thickness and are denoted by the grade numbers shown in Table 1. The thickness of anodic coatings shall not be less than specified in Table 1 for the appropriate grade. 2

7 INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN INQUIRY AND ORDER

WITH

THE

7.1 The following is a list of the characteristic properties of anodic oxide coatings that may be required to be specified and measured, or otherwise agreed upon.

IS 1868 : 1996 9.2 Measurement of Thickness in IS 5523 : 1983. 10.2.3 For severe service (for example outdoors), adequacy of sealing shall be tested by the sulphur dioxide humidity test as specified in IS 5523 : 1983. 11 APPEARANCE (see IS 6012:1992). AND COLOUR

Thic-kness measurements shall be carried out by one or more of the following methods: a) b) c) Microsection Stripping Eddy current method, and method

method,

9.2.1 In case of dispute, the Microsection method shall be the referee method for coatings Grade AC 1.5 and higher thicknesses and stripping method shall be used for thinner coatings (Grade AC 10, AC 5, AC 2.5) and for coatings on wire. 9.2.2 Thickness measurements shail be made on the significant surfaces and sharp edges should be avoided, but no measurements shall be made within 5 mm of the areas of anodic contact, nor in the immediate neighbourhood of an edge. 10 QUALITY 10.1 General The quality of sealing is of great importance and sealing is always essential, whether stated or not, except where an unsealed coating is expressly requested. 10.2 Assessment of Qutility of Sealing OF SEALING

Anodized articles shall be free from visible 11.1 defects on the significant surface(s) when viewed from an agreed distance. If important to be customer, the position and maximum size(s) of the contact mark(s) shall be agreed between the anodizer and the customer. 11.2 The colour, surface texture, and their tolerances, shall be agreed between the anodizer and the customer. If required for matching purposes, the acceptable limits of variation shall be defined by agreed samples. The surface of anodized aluminium has the property of double reflection from the surface of the base metal. Therefore, when matching colour samples, they shall be held in the same plane and viewed as near to normal as is practicable, the direction of working being always the same. A diffuse source of illumination shall be placed behind the viewer. 11.3 Unless otherwise agreed, the colours shall be compared in diffuse daylight from a northern aspect north of the equator and from a southern aspect south of equator. If the coloured coatings are to be used in the service in artificial light, this lighting shall bc used for colour comparison. Coating

10.2.1 If test pieces are submitted, these shall measure not less than 75 x 50 mm (see 8.1). 10.2.2 sealing For mild environments (for example indoors), shall be tested by the marking test as given Table 1 Minimum

Thickness of Anodic (Cluuse 9. I)

;; lxle

Minimum

Local

Applicution

Thickness in Micrometer
(

I1

(3) 20 For permanent installations, deterioration maintenance. ofsurface

(4) out doors and where little or no are tolerated.evcn with mmimtnn

A(`25

appearance

AC-15

15

12

For outdoor

architectural

rise, for indoor applications used for

in

arduous conditions and for graphic application defence XTVKCSand professional equipment.
A(-Io IO

8

May be used for outdoor in special applicationa whcrc cleaning&very frequent(forexam~~le, dccora~lve rim for vehicles) and also for cel-cain other indoor applications like refrigerator parts.

5

4 2

Generally

used for indoor applications

23 NOTES

For some reflectors and as a base for paint.

1 All grades may be produced in electrolytes based primarily on sulphuric or oxalic acid. With most chromic acid elelctrolytes. only thinner coatings are obtainable. Barrier layer anodic coatings used in capacitors as dielectrics produced in boric acid electrolytes are not included in the table. 2 3 For control Minimum purposes, Average thickness may be determined by addy current method or by breakdown voltage test.

thickness

shall be the average

of five measurements

as specified

in IS 5523

: I993

3

IS 1868 : 1996 11.4 The agreed colour samples a dry place in the dark. shall be stored in 16 -LIGHT REFLECTION PROPERTIES

16.1 General The following measured: characteristic properties may be

11.5 Standard colour panels as supplied by the user may be used for acceptance of processed colour parts subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. Colour matching shall, be carried out by the day light in a room with northern aspect. The agreed sample colour penels are to be stored in a dark and dry place. 12 CORROSION RESISTANCE

a) Total reflectance (or total retlectivity) b) Specular reflectance for surfaces with high gloss at 45" at 30' at 20' for surface with medium

If required by the customer, the anodic oxide coating shall be tested for resistance to corrosion by, for example, the AAS test as given in IS 6910 : 1985 or the CASS test as given in IS 5528 : 1985. The choice of method and period of exposure shall be as agreed to between the anodizer and the customer. 13 ABRASION RESISTANCE

c) Specular reflectance or low gloss at 60" at 85" at 45" reflectance

d) Diffused

If required by the customer, the abrasion resistance of the anodic oxide coating shall be tested using a method as agreed between the anodizer and the customer. The performance requirements shall be agreed ~between the anodizer and the customer in accordance with the relevant provisions of IS 5523 : 1983. 14 RESISTANCE DEFORMATION TO CRAZING BY

These properties can be determined using a variety of optical instruments, which differ in degree of sophistication, cost and the type of surface for which they are designed. These differences relate to the illumination system, the angle of the incident light, the angle at which the reflected light is measured and the geometry of the light collecting system. The properties are not, therefore, completely independent of the instrument used for measurement. Several of the properties require the provision of very flat surfaces and measurements can only be carried out on special test pieces. The customer, wherever necessary, shall inform the anodizer of the properties to be measured. They shall also agree upon on the instrument as well as the method of testing. Bright finishes with a high specular gloss can however be obtained only by the use of special grades of aluminium. 17 ELECTRICAL BREAKDOWN POTENTIAL

If required by the customer, the resistance to crazing by deformation of the anodic oxide coating shall be tested in accordance with the relevant provisions of IS 5523 : 1983 and/or the performance requirements shall be as agreed to between the anodizer and the costomer. 15 FASTNESS 15.1 General TO LIGHT

For evaluating exterior colour fastness, only outdoor exposure under conditions comparable to actual service USC is acceptable. Accelerated testing is suitable only as a quality control test of coloured anodic oxide coatings where the. fastness of the colouring medium has already been established by outdoor exposure tests. The light fastness of colour anodized aluminium depends upon the method of colouring and the colouring medium used, and only a limited range of coloured finishes may be suitable in any particular application. Advise in this regard should be sought from the anodizer. 15.2 Fastness to Light

If required, the electrical breakdown potential of the anodic oxide coating shall be determined by the method specified in IS 69!0 : 1985. The acceptable breakdown potential shall, however, be agreed between the anodizer and the customer. 18 CONTINUITY COATINGS OF THE ANODIZE

An accelerated method of testing the fastness of coloured anodic oxide coatings to light is specified in IS 5523 : 1983. When tested, the performance of colour anodized aluminium in terms of Fastness rating number shall be: a) 5 Mire for interior application. b) 9 Min for exterior application. 4

If required, the continuity of the anodic oxide coating shall be determined by the method specified in IS 8375 : 1877. This test shall, however, be applicable only to coatings of thickness less than 5 micrometer. The requirements for continuity shall, however, be as agreed to between the anodizer and the customer. 19 MARKING The anodized articles shall be marked legibly and indelibly with grade of the coating and the name or trade-mark of the manufacturer.

IS 1868 : 1996

ANNEX ,A (Clause 2)
LIST
IS

OF REFERRED

INDIAN IS No.

STANDARDS Title anodized aluminium coating by copper accelerated acetic acid salt spray (CASS) test (first revision)

No.

Title General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials (second revision) inspection tables: Part 1 sampling plans indexed quality level (AQL) inspection (second relating to

1387 : 1993

Sampling 2500 (Part 1) : 1992 Attribute

6012: 1992

by acceptable for lot-by-lot revision) 3554 : 1966 5523 : 1983

Method for measurement of coating thickness by eddy current Anodized automobile aluminium use for

665 1: 1972 6910:1985

Glossary of terms electroplating

Method of testing anodic coating on aluminium and its alloys first revision) Method resistance of testing corrosion of electroplated and 8375: 1977

Method of testing corrosion resistance of electroplated and anodized aluminium coatings by acetic acid salt spray (AAS) test (first revision) Method for checking anodized coatings continuity of

5528 : 1985

ANNEX B (Clause 5)
B-l GENERAL Aluminium, in most of its forms can be anodized (see B-S), but the results differ widely in appearance, colour, maximum possible coating thickness, reflectivity, abrasion resistance, corrosion resistance and electrical breakdown potential. The protective value of the coating is excellent on aluminium produced for general engineering purposes, but for uniformity of appearance or other special effects (for example bright finishes) special grades of aluminium have been produced where close control of chemical composition and metallurgical properties are combined with special production procedures to provide high standards of surface finish and a guaranteed response to anodizing. These grades cannot readily be classified because different companies have developed their own range of products to meet the requirements of a particular industry or a customer and there is no clear dividing line between the various categories. The categories of coatings as listed below are given for general guidance and are based on the end-use. The anodizer must be therefore be aware of the enduse, and it is stressed that, for this reason, there must be close co-operation between the supplier of the aluminium. the customer and the anodizer. 5 B-2 ARCHITECTURAL QUALITY

Semi-finished products of this grade will give a substantially uniform appearance after anodizing when viewed from a distance of not less than 3 m. Some variations in appearance and colour can be expected after anodizing, between different batches of the same material and between different forms oJ the same material. It is sometimes possible to observe on close inspection, or from certain viewing angles, variations in brightness, banding, streaking and other visual defects. These do not affect in any way the quality of the coating. The extent to which such defects can he accepted shall be specified by the costomer. Special alloys have been developed for use with integral colour anodizing processes and these may have to bc specified for particular coloured finishes. B-3 DECORATIVE QUALITY

Semi-finished products of this catcqory have a nppearancc when viewed particularly homegeneous from a distance of 0.5 m. The finish may be matt, bright or semibright according to the material and anodizing treatment, but freedom from defects is assured (see 11).

IS 1868 : 1996 B-4 BRIGHT ANODISING QUALITY protective appearance,

IS 1868: 1996 value but with no guarantee although it may be good. about

Materials in this category will normally be based on ingot metal aluminium of high (99.7 percent) or very high (99.99 percent) purity. Proper manufacturing control of the metal is essential. B-5 GENERAL ENGINEERING QUALITY

Alloys containing high proportions of copper, silicon or zinc are likely to create, problem in anodizing and advise should be sought from the manufacturer and the anodizer, in particular, if the copper content is higher than 3 percent since anodising as _it will offer only a limited protection.
NOTE - IS 66.51:1972 may be referred for requirements of anodized aluminium for automibile use.

Most aluminium will come within this category and will anodize to give a continuous coating of good

ANNEX C (Clause 6)
C-l The pretreatment given before anodizing largely determines the final appearance and texture of the anodized aluminium surface. Different surface texture may be obtained by a variety of treatment processes. The work may be mechanically polished to obtain a smooth or bright surface. Chemical or electrochemical brightening can also be employed with special aluminium to obtain a very bright finish. Usually, the work, either polished or unpolished, is subjected to a chemical etching procedure to provide a range of texture from light satin with varying degrees of gloss to full matt, depending upon the type of etch used. Alternatively, the texture may be produced _mechanically using brushes, abrasive belts or wheels to give matt finishes which are lined or directional in contrast to the essentially non-directional etched finishes. Mechanical finishes have good reproducibility and are less dependent on metal structure and composition than chemical pretreatment finishes. Surface irregularities, if not too deep, can also be removed by mechanical means. C-2 The desired surface texture shall be agreed between the anodizer and the customer and, if necessary, on the basis of agreed samples. The provision of such samples is a useful guide in production, but it should be recognized that they are of limited value in assessing surface finish, since different forms and sizes of matcrinl may respond to pretreatments in slightly different ways.

lhreau

of Indian Standards

BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofIndian Stnndards Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amcndmcnts are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also rcvicwcd periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. MTD 20 (4076).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 t33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone { 323 76 17 323 38 41 337 64 99,337 S5 61 337 86 26,337 9120
- 60 38 43 ( 60 20 25

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58
' -f 8327891,8327892

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi-l 10015. India.

