**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11031 (1984) : Recommendations for storage and handling 
of inner tubes, tube valves and flaps for use with 
penumatic tyres for automotive vehicles [TED 7: Automotive 
Tyres, Tubes and Rims] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629-11 3-01 2-554004-3/-4 18:11031-1984 




( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
STORAGE AND HANDLING OF INNER TUBES, 
TUBE VALVES AND FLAPS FOR USE WITH PNEUMATIC 
TYRES FOR AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES 



1- Scope — Covers recommendations for storage and handling of inner tubes, tube valves and 
flaps for use with pneumatic types for automotive vehicles including earthmoving machinery, 
off-the-road vehicles, industrial trucks and agricultural tractors and trailers. 

1.1 This standard is not applicable to Inner tubes and tube valves for bicycles and rickshaws. 

2. New Inner Tubes 

2.1 Receipt — It shall be ensured that the inner tubes received are packed individually in suitable 
bags. If they are not packed individually and are bulk packed, it shall be ensured that the package 
contains tubes of same size. It shall also be ensured that they have been treated suitably during 
manufacturing to avoid adhesion to each other during storage. 

2.1-1 The receiver shall mark each consignment with: 

a) Date of receipt, 

b) Quantity received, and 

c) Supplier's name. 

2-1.2 If the inner tubes are received fitted inside the tyres, with or without flaps, the pressure 
shall be kept to the minimum necessary for the tubes to be held in position inside the tyre. 

2.2 14^are/?ot/se — Condition of the warehouse shall be such that the tubes are not exposed to the 
atmosphere, 

2,2.1 The Inner tubes shall be stored in a warehouse to prevent exposure to light from skylights, 
windows, doors or other openings. Skylight glass shall be painted all over with dark paint. Any 
openings shall be kept closed so that light entering the warehouse is reduced to the minimum 
possible. Electric lights shall not be left 'ON' beyond the tima necessary. 

2.2-2 In case the warehouse, where tubes are stored cannot be darkened for some reason, the 
storage piles of tubes shall be carefully covered with tarpaulin or some reasonably heavy woven 
fabric for complete protection against light, air current, dirt, water, etc. 

2.2.3 The tubes shall not be stored in a room where electrical discharges occur, or are likely to 
occur, as a result of the operation of electric motors, arc welding, generators, switches or other 
electrical devices. 

2.2.4 The tubes shall not be piled near radiators or other sources of heat or air coolers. The 
temperature in the warehouse shall be kept as low as possible. Storage at sub-zero temperatures 
shall be avoided. However, where it is necessary to do so, the tube manufacturer may be consulted 
for storage, handling and use. 

2.2.5 Air draughts shall be avoided in the warehouse to stem deterioration of tubes due to 
continued supply of oxygen in the air currents. 

2.2.6 Excessively, high humid atmosphere shall be avoided in the storage space, though slight 
humidity may be allowed. High humidity causes moisture to condense on the tube surface resulting 
in excessive tube inflation in service. This affects the service life and performance of tubes. 

2.2.7 Storage arrangements shall be so planned that stacks are rotated to move the oldest tubes 
first and any accumulation of very old stocks shall be avoided. 

2.3 Stacking and Storage — The new Inner tubes shall be stored inside warehouse meeting the 
requirements laid down in 2.2. 



Adopted 28 August 1984 



©November 1984, ISI 



Gr 2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



18:11031-1984 

2.3.1 Stacking of tubes on dirty floors shall be avoided. If the tubes are to be stacked on floor 
a foundation of clean wooden strips of about 13 mm thickness shall be laid on the floor to avoid 
contact with dirt, oils, grease, solvents, floor polish, etc. 

2.3.2 Inner tubes shall be so stacked that the load on them does not cause any permanent folds 
or creases. 

2.3.3 Inner tubes shall not be hung on a nail or arm projecting from a wall. 

2.4 Handling — For handling of inner tubes following precautions shall be observed: 

a) Do not use hooks for lifting tube bags, and 

b) Do not lift inner tubes by holding valve stem. 

2.4.1 Individually packed inner tubes shall not be taken out of the original packing until required 
for use. 

2.5 Issue — Storage of Inner tubes beyond one year shall be avoided as physical properties of 
tubes tend to progressively deteriorate. While issuing the inner tubes from stores principle of 
'first-in-first-out' ( FIFO) shall be applied. 

3. Tube Valves 

3.1 Receipt — It shall be ensured that tube valves received are packed in suitable boxes to avoid 
contamination with foreign matter. 

3.1.1 Each box shall have valves of one type only. The box shall be marked with the valve 
designation according to IS : 10939-1984 Designation system for tyre tube valves for automotive 
vehicles. 

3.2 lyare/jot/se — Tube valves shall be stored inside warehouse meeting the requirements laid 
down in 2.2. 

3.2.1 Tube valves shall not be exposed to sun and rain. 

3.3 Stacking and Storage — The packed tyre tube valves shall be stored in a cool dry place. 

3.3.1. Boxes containing tyre tube valves, spuds, etc. shall be so stacked that no distortion, folds 
or creases are caused to the rubber base by too high a stacker damaged boxes. 

3.3.2 Prolonged storage of tube valves shall be avoided, since physical properties of tube valves 
tend to progressively deteriorate. 

3.4 Issue — Tube valves shall be Issued on the principle of 'first-in-first-out' ( FIFO ) to ensure 
minimum prolonged storage of tube valves. 

4. Flaps 

4.1 Receipt — Where flaps are received fitted inside the tyres along with inner tubes, the assembly 
maybe stored according to procedures laid down in * Indian Standard Storage and handling of 
pneumatic tyres for automotive vehicles ' ( under preparation ). 

4.2 l//are/70iyse — Flaps shall be stored inside a warehouse meeting the requirements laid down 
in 2.2. 

4.3 Stacking and Storage — Stacking requirements laid down in 2.3.1 shall be followed. 
4.3.1 Bulk storage in one lot shall be avoided to prevent any permanent folds or creases. 

4.4 /sst/e — Flaps shall be issued on the principle of 'first-in-fJrst-out( FIFO ) ' to ensure minimum 
prolonged storage of flaps. 



15:11031-1984 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is one of the standards on the recommendations for storage and handling of 
tyres, inner tubes, flaps, rims' etc. The other standard in this series being * Indian Standard Storage 
and handling of pneumetic tyres for automotive vehicles ' ( under preparation ). 

This standard has been prepared to help the manufacturers, organized consumers and tyre 
and tube dealers for storage of inner tubes, tube valves and flaps. 

It is well known that rubber products deteriorate when exposed to sunlight, air currents, dirt, 
moisture, heat, etc. Therefore, these reccmmendations outline the methods to prevent innertubes 
with their contact. Electrical discharges in the vicinity of inner tubes have to be avoided as they 
generate ozone which greatly accelerates oxidation and deterioration of rubber products. High 
ambient temperatures also accelerate deterioration of rubber products. Sub-zero temperatures 
cause rubber products to become stiffer causing embrittlement and, therefore, for operation and 
storage at such low temperatures, tube manufacturers should be consulted. Air currents increase 
oxygen supply in the warehouses thereby causing oxidation of inner tubes, therefore, draughts 
should be avoided. 

The deleterious effects of the above factors can be minimized by a careful choice of storage 
conditions. An inner tube or tube valve or flap may prematurely fail in service because of poor 
storage conditions. 

Conformance to the recommendations in this standard can lead to increase in service life of 
inner tubes, tube valves and flaps. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuria India 



