тт HATAR IS 4925 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Фа Әт Эч эг dat — 
fats 


(FART FRAT ) 


Concrete Batching and Mixing 


Plant — Specification 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2023 


UR AH OT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ey HAH чач, 9 FR BMS AHL AMT, 95 Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2023 Price Group 7 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


At civil construction sites where considerable quantity of concrete is required, central batching plants or batching 
and mixing plants are generally deployed. These plants are erected at sites to deliver either the mixed concrete or 
dry mix of concrete. 


These plants are usually specially designed to suit the local conditions and the output required. Small plants may 
have an output of as low as 10 т? of mixed concrete per hour, medium plants may have the output in the range of 
30 т? to 100 т? of mixed concrete per hour and large plants may have an output of over 100 m° of mixed concrete 
per hour. The plants may be manually controlled, semi-automatic or fully automatic (see 6.1). The composition 
of the plant may also vary depending upon the type and composition of aggregates, cement, admixtures for 
concrete, and various other requirements such as temperature control of aggregates, mixing water and concrete 
and above all the quality of concrete expected from the plant. 


This standard was first published in 1968 and subsequently revised in 2004. This standard is being revised again 
to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international practices. Also, in this revision, the 
standard has been brought into the latest style and format of Indian Standards, and references of Indian Standards, 
wherever applicable have been updated. BIS certification marking clause has been modified to align with the 
revised Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016. The following major modifications have been incorporated in this 
revision of the standard. 


a) Clauses 3, 4.1, 6.3, 6.3.1, 7.1.1, 8.1, 9, 11.1, 11.4, and 13 have been modified; and 
b) Annex B on ‘Calibration and Weighing Equipment Accuracy’ and Annex C on ‘Routine Maintenance 
Checks for Plants and Equipment’ has been added. 


In view of intricate nature of such plants and of the variety of combination of ancillary equipment that may be 
required under different conditions, information on many aspects may have to be supplied both by the user for the 
guidance of the manufacturer and by the manufacturer to the prospective user, to obtain a true comparative 
assessment of different plants available and to ensure that the plant selected is suited to the conditions prevailing. 
For this reason, the standard contains clauses which call for agreement between the purchaser and the supplier 
and which permit the purchaser to use his option for selection to suit his requirements. A specimen enquiry format 
to be supplied by the user for the guidance of manufacturer is listed in Annex A. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4925 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CONCRETE BATCHING AND MIXING PLANT — 
SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard covers the requirements of 
concrete batching and mixing plant with manual, 
semi-automatic and fully automatic controls. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these 
standards : 


IS No. Title 
IS 1791 : General requirements for batch 
2020 type concrete mixers (third 
revision) 
IS 2062 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 


2011 structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 


IS 2932 Enamel, synthetic, exterior: (a) 


(Part 1) undercoating (b) finishing — 

2013 Specification: Part 1 For domestic 
and decorative applications (fourth 
revision) 

IS 4634 Batch-type concrete mixers — 

1991 Methods of test-performance (first 
revision) 

IS 4926: Ready-mixed concrete — Code 

2003 of practice (second revision) 

3 CAPACITY 


The maximum capacity of the plant shall be 
calculated using the minimum mixing time of a batch 
specified under 7.1.1, after all the materials to be 
mixed (except for a part quantity of water as stated 
under clause 7.1.1) are fed into the mixer. The time 
of a batching cycle for calculation of maximum 
capacity shall be considered from its start to the end, 
including time for full discharge of mixed concrete 
from the mixer. The capacity of the plant, as 
calculated above, shall be for concrete with 80 mm 
slump. 


4 COMPOSITION OF THE PLANT 


4.1 The plant shall be capable of accurate (see 6.1.1 
and 6.3.1) batching and mixing of aggregates, sand, 


cement, additives, ice flakes, etc. It is necessary for 
the purchaser to specify following details as an aid 
for manufacturer to select/design the appropriate 
batch mixing plant: 


a) Information regarding materials 


1) Number of cement and cementitious 
materials; 

2) Number of coarse and fine aggregates; 

3) Types of water (chilled water/ice flakes); 
and 

4) Desirable dispensing arrangement of 
additives such as, air entraining agent, 
water reducing and set retarding agent, 
etc, in liquid or powder form. 


b) Type of plant 


1) Storage arrangement for sand and 

aggregates; 

i) Boom scraper plant, that is open 
storage with retaining walls; 

ii) Ground storage hopper (for smaller 
plants); 

ш) Ground storage hopper with 
weighing facility at belt conveyor; 

iv) Overhead storage hopper indicating 
total storage capacity required for 
aggregates and sand and number of 
aggregate compartments required; 
and 

Storage arrangement for cement: cement 

silo, indicating its capacity and number 

of compartments. 


2 


МУ 


с) Weighing arrangements 


1 


wa 


Single weighing system for aggregates 
and cement; 

Independent weighing arrangement for 
cement as well as for all aggregates 
together; 

Independent weighing arrangement for 
each type of aggregate; 

4) More than one weighing arrangement for 
cement to cater to the different types of 
cements; 


2 


Кая 


3 


wm 


5) Arrangement for measurement of water 
through flowmeter or through 
weighment; 

6) Additional arrangements for weighment 
of ice flakes; and 


IS 4925 : 2023 


7) Number of admixtures and whether 
weighing arrangement is required for 
any of them. 


d) Type of mixer 


1) Non-tilting reversible drum concrete 
mixer; 

2) Double conical tilting mixer; 

3) Pan mixer; 

4) Turbo pan mixer; 

5) Planetary mixer; and 

6) Single shaft/twin shaft compulsory 
mixer/pug mill. 
NOTE — For plants up to 30 m*/h capacity, only 
one mixer is required. For plants beyond 30 m*/h, 


the customers have option for one or more than one 
mixer. 


e) Controls 


1) Manual control through individual levers 
for opening of gates (recommended for 
batching and mixing plants below 
15 m*/h capacity); 

Semi-automatic control through 
individual push buttons for opening of 
various gates by electro-pneumatically 
or hydraulically operated actuators 
(recommended for batching and mixing 
plants from 15 m*/h to below 30 m*/h 
capacity). However, if mutually agreed 
between the purchaser and the supplier, 
the batching and mixing plants under this 
range of capacity may be of fully 
automatic type; and 

Fully automatic control through a single 
push button for batching of all 
aggregates, cement, water and additives 
(recommended for batching and mixing 
plants of 30 m*/h and above capacity). 


2 


МУ 


3 


wm 


f) Ready mixed concrete plants 


Ready mixed concrete (RMC) plants shall be 
equipped with computer (containing minimum 
15 recipes), monitor and printer. Delivery slips 
of RMC plants shall contain the following 
information: 


1) Name of RMC plant supplier with logo 
and address; 

2) Delivery note no.; 

3) Name of receiving party; 

4) Ordered quantity in т; 

5) Recipe number; 

6) Number of batches; 

7) Batch size in m; 

8) Date; 

9) (i) Starting time ................... 
(ii) Finishing time ........................ Н 


10) Moisture percentage of each material at 
the time of batching; 

11) Weighing chart for each type of 
component with total for each 
component independently; 

12) Total quantity delivered in m?; 

13) Remarks column; 

14) Transit mixer number and capacity; 

15) Transit mixer driver’s name; 

16) Representative of RMC plant (signature 
column); and 

17) Representative of customer (signature 
column). 


NOTE — Besides challan, there are a number of 
other facilities, which can be provided. The 
necessary software may be designed as per 
customer requirements. 


g) Additional facilities 


1) Automatic cement/water correction 
arrangement; 

2) Mimic display panel showing high and 
low position of various storage hoppers; 

3) Material consumption report on annual, 
monthly, and daily basis; 

4) Customer report; 

5) Accounting; 

6) Stock maintenance; and 

7) Plant scheduling. 


4.1.1 If so desired by the purchaser, plants of 30 т?/һ 
capacity and above shall have suitable arrangements 
for cooling or heating of concrete. The actual details 
of the cooling or heating arrangements shall be as 
agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 


4.2 Unless otherwise agreed between the purchaser 
and the supplier, the plant shall consist of the 
following components of suitable size related to the 
capacity of the plant: 


a) Storage arrangement for different types of 
aggregates and cement; 

b) Batching equipment; 

c) Concrete mixer; 

d) Control panel; 

e) Material feeding and elevating arrangement; 
and 

f) Discharge hopper for mixed concrete. 


4.2.1 The various components shall conform to the 
requirements as specified in this standard. 


5 STORAGE 


5.1 Storage shall be provided either on the ground or 
in the bins for different sizes of fine and coarse 
aggregates and cement. The compartments for each 
type of aggregates shall approximately be equal or of 
sizes to suit the requirement as defined by the 
purchaser for specific job applications. For plants up 


to 30 m*/h capacity, a cement hopper of suitable 
capacity with screw conveyor/manual arrangement 
shall be provided. For plants of 30 m*/h capacity and 
above, cement weigh batcher shall be provided 
separately with independent structure and the cement 
compartment shall be water-tight and provided with 
necessary air vent, aeration fittings for proper flow of 
cement and emergency cement cut off gate. For 
plants of 30 m*/h capacity and above, cement silo 
may be provided as per agreement between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 


5.1.1 In case of scrapper type plant, based on the 
recommendations of the supplier, the purchaser shall 
provide aggregate storage capacity required for 
continuous plant operation of one-hour duration. 


5.2 Wherever a separate cabin is provided for the 
control panel, the cabin and its door shall be 
completely sealed to prevent entry of dust/rainwater. 


6 BATCHING EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Batchers shall be manual or semi-automatic or 
automatic in accordance with the requirements given 
below: 


a) Manual batcher 


Manual batcher shall be charged by devices, 
which are actuated manually. In such batching 
systems, the accuracy of batching operation is 
dependent on the operator’s visual observation 
of a scale or volumetric indicator. The various 
elements of the batching plant may be actuated 
by hand or by pneumatic/hydraulic cylinders. 


b) Semi-automatic batcher 


Semi-automatic batcher shall be charged by 
devices which are separately actuated manually 
to allow the material to be weighed but are 
actuated automatically when the designated 
weight of each material has been reached. The 
weighing accuracy shall be within the tolerances 
specified in 6.1.1. 


c) Automatic batcher 


Automatic batcher shall be charged by devices 
which, when actuated by a single starter switch, 
will automatically start the weighing operation 
of each material and stop automatically when the 
designated weight of each material has been 
reached. Automatic batcher shall be interlocked 
in such a manner that: 


1) Charging device cannot be actuated 
until the weighing scale has returned to 
zero.(within + 0.3 of 1 percent of the 
scale capacity); 

2) Charging device cannot be actuated, if 
the discharge device is open; 


IS 4925 : 2023 


3) Discharge device cannot be actuated, if 
the charging device is open; and 

4) The discharge device cannot be actuated 
until the indicated material is within the 
applicable tolerance. 


Automatic plants of 30 m*/h capacity and above shall 
have electronic display and printer attachment, if 
specifically agreed by the purchaser and the supplier. 


6.1.1 For individual batcher, the following tolerances 
shall apply, based on the required weight of material 
being weighed: 


SI №. Type of Material Tolerance in 
Percentage 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Cement and other +1 
cementitious materials 
ii) Sand and aggregates +2 
iii) Water +1 
iv) Admixture +3 


6.1.2 For cumulative batcher, interlocked sequential 
controls shall be provided and the above tolerances 
shall apply to the required cumulative weight of 
material as batched. 


6.1.3 The minimum weight of any material weighed 
to which the above tolerances shall apply is 
determined by the following formula: 


w = 03 ХЕ 
— T 


where 


W = minimum weight, in kg; 
R = weigher pan capacity, in kg; and 
T = weight tolerance, in percent. 


6.2 The batching equipment shall be such so as to 
accurately determine and control the prescribed 
quantities of various constituent materials of 
concrete, that is, water, cement, admixtures sand, and 
aggregates. For plants of capacity 20 m°/h and above, 
cement shall be weighed separately. However, for 
plants of capacity below 20 m/h, cement and 
aggregate can be weighed in one weigh batcher. In 
such case, a separate compartment in the weigh 
batcher shall be provided so that the cement does not 
come into contact with aggregate or sand. Water can 
be fed through a water meter of suitable size or by 
weigh batcher. The quantity of each admixture shall 
be determined by volumetric measurement/weighment 
for each batch. 


6.2.1 Equipment for carrying batched material from 
the batch hoppers or other suitable arrangement to 
and into the mixer shall be such that there will be no 
spillage of the batched materials or overlap of 
batches. Equipment for handling cement in the 
batching plant shall be such as to prevent noticeable 


IS 4925 : 2023 


increase of dust in the plant during measuring and 
discharge of each batch of material. 


6.3 Batching system shall have rated capacity (in 
terms of concrete in a single batch) to match with the 
maximum rated size of the mixer that could be 
adopted for use with the plant. Semi-automatic or 
automatic batcher shall be operated from the central 
control panel. Respective scales, batcher, and dial 
indicators shall be provided for the aggregates, 
cement, water, air-entraining agent and water 
reducing agent. Cement batcher shall be complete 
with dust preventive arrangements. To achieve 
greater efficiency, the weighing ‘cut off shall be in 
two stages, that is, ‘initial’ and ‘final’ with necessary 
jogging action for treble feed as the final weight 
approaches. All the weights shall be indicated on 
respective indicators on the central control panel. The 
scales shall be calibrated in kilograms. If agreed by 
the purchaser and the supplier, the weighing hoppers 
or other suitable arrangement shall permit obtaining 
representative samples of each material. Scale system 
shall have provision for necessary adjustment, 
levelling, aligning, balancing, and calibration from 
time to time. 


Weighing systems for all constituents of the concrete 
batch (including volumetric measurement of 
admixtures, wherever applicable) shall be calibrated 
after installation of the plant or reinstallation after 
shifting of its location. Subsequent calibration shall 
be carried out after minimum every three months of 
operation. Calibration and weighing equipment 
accuracy shall be as per Annex B. 


6.3.1 Each weighing unit shall be equipped with a 
visible indicator, which shall register the load at any 
stage of the weighing operation. The scales shall be 
interlocked so that a new batch cannot be started until 
the weighing hoppers have been completely emptied 
of the last batch and the scales are in balance. 


6.3.2 The equipment shall be capable of controlling 
the delivery of material for weighing or volumetric 
measurement so that the combined inaccuracies in 
feeding the material during normal operation shall 
not exceed the tolerance limits stated under 6.1.1. 


6.4 Batching of water shall be by weight but may be 
by volume in case of plants up to and including 
30 m*/h capacity. A reservoir tank for storage of 
water shall be provided with the batching and mixing 
plant and its size shall be as agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. Reservoir tank shall be 
complete with water piping, float valves, and other 
fittings for direct delivery to mixers without coming 
in contact with cement or the aggregate prior to the 
mixing operations. Water batcher shall be such that it 
can measure and discharge full batch of specified 
quantity of water simultaneously and within the same 
time as set for the rest of the batch. 


6.4.1 In case of small plants where water batching is 
provided by volume, water metering arrangement 
shall be so constructed that the flow may be cut off 
automatically after a predetermined quantity of 
water. Suitable arrangements shall be included in 
water meter system so that variations in the water 
supply pressure do not affect the rate of delivery and 
accuracy of the meter. 


6.4.2 The operating mechanism in the water-measuring 
device shall be such that leakages will not occur 
when the valves are closed and water will be 
discharged quickly and freely into the mixer without 
objectionable dribble from the end of the discharge 
pipe. In addition to the water-measuring device, there 
shall be arrangement for plants above 30 m*/h for 
measuring and introducing small increments of water 
into mixer when required for final tempering of the 
concrete. 


6.5 Dispensers (if provided, for air-entraining, water 
reducing, set-retarding agent) shall be of sufficient 
capacity to measure at one time the full quantity of 
properly diluted solution required for each batch and 
shall be maintained in clean and freely operating 
conditions. Equipment for measuring shall be 
designed for convenient confirmation of accuracy of 
the measurement for each batch and it shall be so 
constructed that the required quantity can be added 
only once to each batch. 


6.5.1 Batching system for admixtures (see 4.1) shall 
be either volumetric or by weigh batching and shall 
be such that the admixture is added to the mixer after 
or along with the mixing water. This system shall 
include a weighing tank of adequate capacity for each 
admixture solution at the batcher floor for gravity 
feed, delivery pump from the ground storage, float 
switch with automatic start and stop control of the 
pump to maintain fixed levels. The feeding of 
admixtures shall be interlocked with the mixing water 
feeding arrangement. 


6.6 The range of each scale shall be as required by the 
purchaser to suit the capacity of the batching plant 
(see 6.3). The purchaser shall indicate this range in 
his enquiry or in order. 


7 MIXERS 


7.1 The mixers shall be non-tilting reversible drum 
type/double conical tilting type/pan type/planetary 
type/single shaft/twin shaft compulsory type/pug mill 
type conforming to the performance requirements of 
IS 1791. The number and sizes of the mixers shall 
commensurate with the rated output of the plant 
based on the mixing time indicated in 7.1.1. The 
mixer drum and blades shall be made of high 
manganese/abrasion resistant steel. Alternatively, 
these items may be of carbon steel with replaceable 
liners of cast iron or abrasion resistant steel. 


7.1.1 Minimum mixing time for each batch (after all 
materials, except the full quantity of water have been 
added in the mixer drum) shall be as follows provided 


IS 4925 : 2023 


that all the mixing water shall be introduced before 
one-fourth of the mixing time has elapsed: 


SI №. Capacity of Mixer Type Minimum Mixing 
Litres Time 
(s) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 375, 500,750, 1 000, 1 500, 2 000 Non-tilting reversible 60 
drum type 
ii) 1 000, 2 000, 3 000, 4000, 5 000 Double conical tilting type 60 
iii) 375, 500, 750, 1 000, 1 500, 2 000, 3 000 Pan type 30 
iv) 500, 750, 1 000, 1 250,1 500, 2 000, 2 500, Single shaft/twin shaft 30 
3 000, 3 500, 4 000, 5 000, 6 000 compulsory type/pug mill 
type 
NOTE — Capacity of the mixer indicated above is for wet mix concrete. 
7.1.2 The minimum mixing periods specified above 8 CONTROL PANEL 


are based on standard speed of rotation of the mixer. 
Mixing time shall be increased if and when the 
charging and mixing operations fail to produce a 
concrete batch which conforms throughout with the 
foregoing requirements with respect to adequacy of 
mixing. 


7.2 The concrete as discharged from the mixer shall 
be uniform in composition and consistency 
throughout the mixed batch and from batch to batch, 
except where changes in composition or consistency 
are required. 


7.3 Mixer shall be so located in the plant that its 
operation can be observed conveniently by the 
batching plant operator. 


7.4 Each mixer shall be equipped with a 
mechanically or electrically operated timing and 
signaling (or locking) device, which shall indicate 
and assure completion of the required mixing period. 


7.5 Each mixer shall be complete with electric drive 
motor and starter, air or hydraulic operated controls, 
consistency indicators, etc. The operation of the 
mixer shall be controlled from the central control 
panel of the plant having necessary indication lights 
for the entire operation and adjustable mixing timers 
for each mixer. The arrangement for feeding the 
mixers shall not have any spillage or leakage of water 
or cement. Each mixer shall hold a full capacity batch 
concrete of the required consistency without undue 
spilling during rotation. The height of discharge as 
required by the purchaser shall be provided. 


7.6 In case wet concrete hopper is provided, it shall 
have an arrangement for concrete sampling device for 
taking samples of wet concrete for the laboratory 
tests. 


8.1 Fully automatic plant shall have desk type, single 
operator, push-button operated control panel 
completely inter-wired and having the following 
provisions: 


a) Panel mounted digital weight indicator/front 
located weight dials or screen based soft 
weighing indicators — For each material, or 
as required; 


b) Push buttons or soft key buttons and 
indication lights for complete range of 
batching, master batch pushbutton/soft key 
start button, mixing апа discharge 
push-buttons/soft key control buttons, etc. 
The operation of batching will be so designed 
that with a single master batch switch, all the 
constituents of the batch, that is aggregates, 
cement, water, admixtures, ice, etc shall be 
automatically batched апда shall Бе 
discharged into the mixer in the desired 
sequence. Overriding manual control shall be 
provided with necessary individual switches 
for manual batching and discharge of each 
material; 


c) Quick mix selector-unit shall comprise of at 
least 6 pre-set selections. Pre-setting of 
various mix constituents shall be simple and 
easy; 

d) Admixtures batch controls; 

e) Batch counters and load unique identifier; 


f) Truck dump light (if required) — The light 
shall be turned on from ground when a truck 
is in position and will automatically go off 
when the mix has been dumped. The 


IS 4925 : 2023 


discharge of the mixer shall be interlocked 
with the dump light for this arrangement; 


g) Complete range of push buttons or soft key 
buttons and indicator light for the mixers — 
The mixer shall automatically stop and give a 
ready light when it has taken the pre-set 
mixing time; 


h) Separate mixing time — Timers having a 
range of 0 min to 3 min minimum for each 
mixer; 


ыч. 
wa 


Mixer charging chute control push buttons and 
position indicator light — For each mixer if 
the plant has more than one mixer; 


k) Necessary interlocks for automatic and safe 
operation of the plant — All relays, 
electronic components and Programmable 
Logic Controller (PLC) used shall be 
enclosed in a dust proof cabinet. All the 
weighing scales, dials, and linkages shall 
have strong vibration free connection at the 
panel. The control panel and other controls 
shall be centralized in one control room for 
the plant. necessary emergency stop buttons 
and pull-cord switches/lock-out mechanisms 
may be provided to ensure safe operations/ 
maintenance activities; and 


m) Any other control or fittings as per latest 
design and practice for mass concrete plants. 


8.2 In case of manual or semi-automatic plants, the 
purchaser shall specifically indicate as to which of 
the items given in 8.1 would be required for the plant. 


9 ICE FLAKES FEEDING ARRANGEMENT 


When it is proposed to feed ice flakes and the same is 
specifically agreed between the purchaser and the 
supplier, the necessary provision for ice flaking 
machine complete with screw conveyor, bucket 
elevator, weighing machine and all other auxiliaries 
shall be provided in the plant. 


10 MATERIAL FEEDING AND ELEVATING 
ARRANGEMENT 


Suitable arrangements shall be provided for elevating 
cement to the cement silo/mixer of the batching plant 
and aggregates to the respective compartment bins of 
the batching plant. 


11 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


11.1 Irrespective of the foregoing specifications for 
the plant, which are broad-based and generalized, the 
manufacturer or supplier shall ensure that the plant 
shall be complete with all the fixtures, steel 
structures, platforms, ladders/stairs, railings, fittings, 
accessories, and any other material required for 
proper running of the plant though not specifically 


detailed in the standard. The manufacturer or supplier 
shall not be entitled for any extra amount in respect 
of such accessories required for the efficient 
operation of the plant, even though these have not 
been included in the standard or the purchase order. 


The mixer and all structural members shall be 
thoroughly cleaned/sand blasted prior to application 
of two coats of primer and one coat of synthetic 
enamel paint of agreed shade conforming to 
IS 2932 (Part 1) at the works of manufacturer. 


11.2 The electrical equipment shall be complete with 
starters for various motors. All internal wiring and 
cables shall conform to the requirements of relevant 
Indian Standards. All motors shall be totally enclosed 
fan cooled, squirrel cage or slip ring induction type. 
The electric motors shall have adequate protection 
against dust ingress and shall be able to perform to its 
specifications at an atmospheric temperature up to 
50 °C. Entire equipment shall be capable of 
satisfactory operation in tropical conditions. All 
solenoid and air valves of the plant shall be provided 
with automatic oiler unit and filters in the air lines. 


11.3 All steel structure for the plant shall be 
fabricated with the material conforming to IS 2062. 
Such structures shall generally comprise of the 
following: 


a) Complete bin structure of the plant with the 

supporting columns; 

Supporting columns and supporting structure 

for the mixers; 

c) Concrete dump hopper (if provided); 

d) All stairs, ladders, platforms, and railings; 

e) Feeding and weighing arrangement of ice 
flakes (if required); and 

f) Any other item the manufacturer may 
propose to complete. 


b 


wm 


11.3.1 Not withstanding the provision of 11.3, the 
manufacturer shall ensure that the plant forms a 
complete working unit for achieving the desired 
efficiency by using the items supplied by the 
manufacturer as well as those items specifically 
agreed for manufacture/supply by the customer. 


11.3.2 Partition walls, supporting structures of bins 
(including hard wares) and foundation bolts shall be 
provided by the customer. However, the sizes and 
type thereof shall be intimated in advance by the 
manufacturer. 


11.4 The manufacturer shall furnish a soft copy or 
one or more complete set in hard copy of operation 
and maintenance manuals, spare parts catalogue and 
any other relevant literature required for the plant. 
The routine maintenance schedule of the plant placed 
at Annex C is for general guidance of the user. 
However, the user shall strictly follow е 
maintenance schedules specified by the manufacturer 
of the plant. The manufacturer shall also supply a soft 


copy or hardcopy of set of drawings and erection 
details, foundation plan, control wiring diagrams etc. 
for the complete installation. 


11.5 The manufacturer shall supply one set of 
complete specifications of the plant and equipment 
and also supply complete illustrations and technical 
literature thereof. 


11.6 The manufacturer/supplier shall furnish price 
list of recommended spare parts for normal 2 year 
operation (5 000 working hours). 


11.7 While erection of the plant and all civil 
engineering works including foundations of the plant 
are to be done by the purchaser, the manufacturer 
shall provide technical guidance for the same. The 
manufacturer shall also provide technical advice to 
the customer during erection, commissioning and 
trial runs of the plant. 


11.8 The customer shall indicate in advance to the 
manufacturer/supplier, the characteristics of the 
available electric supply at the project. The customer 
shall also indicate the pressure at which air would be 
available at the project, in case air compressor is not 
in the supply scope of manufacturer/supplier. 


12 MIXING EFFICIENCY 


12.1 The mixed concrete from the batching and 
mixing plant can be tested in accordance with the 
method specified in IS 4634 with a view to checking 
its ability to mix the ingredients to obtain a concrete 
having uniformity within the prescribed limits. The 
uniformity of mixed concrete shall be evaluated by 
finding the percentage variation in quantity (mass in 
water) of cement, fine aggregate, and coarse 
aggregate in a freshly mixed batch of concrete. 


12.2 The percentage variation between the quantities 
of cement, fine aggregates, and coarse aggregates (as 
found by weighing in water) in the two halves of a 
batch and the average of the two halves of the batch 
shall not be more than the following limits: 


Cement 8 percent 
Fine aggregate 6 percent 
Coarse aggregate 5 percent 


IS 4925 : 2023 


13 GUARANTEE AND WORKMANSHIP 


Notwithstanding any qualification by the customer, 
the ultimate responsibility for supply of the complete 
plant and its satisfactory performance and output 
shall rest with the supplier. The 
manufacturer/supplier shall guarantee against any 
defect in the plant, either in design, material or 
workmanship. The plant and equipment supplied 
shall be a complete unit and shall conform to the 
highest standards of engineering design and 
workmanship. 


14 MARKING 


All major equipments of the concrete batching and 
mixing plant shall have suitable metal plate fixed on 
its body carrying the following data in legible form: 


a) Name of the manufacturer; 

b) Serial number and year of manufacture of the 
equipment; and 

c) Size/capacity/voltage of the equipment. 


In addition to above, each batching and mixing plant 
shall have a suitable metal plate fixed at a 
convenient place carrying the following data in 
legible form: 


a) Name of manufacturer of the plant; 

b) Serial number and year of manufacture of the 
plant; 

c) Size/capacity of the plant; and 

d) Voltage consumption. 


14.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of this 
standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 4925 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


SPECIMEN ENQUIRY FORMAT 


A-1 CAPACITY OF THE PLANT REQUIRED 


The indenter should work out his requirements 
assuming 75 percent efficiency of the plant. 


A-2 TYPE OF PLANT REQUIRED 


The indenter must indicate any of the following type 
based on site requirement: 


a) Central batching and mixing with overhead 
storage (indicate storage capacity); 

b) In line hoppers on ground with weighing 
arrangement on belt conveyor; 

c) Boom scraper plant with ground storage; and 

d) Storage hopper above weigh batcher (plant 
up to 20 m°/h). 


A-3 TYPE OF MIXER REQUIRED 


The indenter must indicate any of the following type 
of mixer required based on site requirement: 


a) Non-tilting reversible drum type; 

b) Double conical tilting type; 

c) Turbo/planetary pan type; 

d) Single shaft/twin shaft compulsory type/pug 
mill type; and 

e) Any other type. 


A-4 NUMBER OF AGGREGATES 


Indicate number and sizes of aggregates to be used in 
addition to sand. 


A-5 WEIGH BATCHERS 


Whether common weigh batcher for aggregates and 
cement or separate weigh batcher for each material is 
required. 


A-6 TYPES OF CEMENTS/CEMENTITIOUS 
MATERIALS USED 


Indicate whether one or more grade of cement to be 
used. 


А-7 NUMBER AND SIZE OF SILO(S) 


Available sizes are 20, 30, 45, 60, 75 t (bigger sizes 
of silos available for central storage of cement on 
ground level). 


A-8 FEEDING OF CEMENT 


Feeding of cement can be done through bucket 
elevator, screw conveyor, pneumatic system. 


A-9 FILTER FOR SILO 


Indicate whether filter on top of silo to avoid dust is 
required. 


A-10 ADDITIVES REQUIRED 


Indicate number of additives required. Also indicate 
whether these are in liquid form or powder form. 


A-11 WATER BATCHING (ANY OF THE 
FOLLOWING) 


a) Water meter (mechanical type); 
b) Water meter (electronic type); and 
c) Water weigh batcher. 


A-12 CAPACITY OF WEIGH BATCHERS 


Indenter must indicate the capacity of each weigh 
batcher required. 


A-13 COOLING OF AGGREGATE 


In case the indenter wants aggregate cooling 
arrangement the same may be indicated. 


A-14 NUMBER OF MIXERS 


For plant up to 30 m*/h capacity, one mixer is enough. 
Indenters can have more than one mixer in a central 
batching and mixing plant. 


A-15 OPERATION 


Indenter to indicate type of controls required as per 
4.1 (e) and 8.1. 


A-16 DISCHARGE HEIGHT 


Depending upon transportation of mixed concrete by 
dumper or transit mixer, the indenter must indicate 
the height of discharge required. 


NOTES 


1 Tenderer’s offer shall be complete with all technical 
specifications of the plant. The necessary technical 
leaflets/literature of key equipment shall be enclosed by the 
tenderer along with his tender. 


2 In addition to other details, the following technical 
parameters shall be clearly stated by the tenderer in his offer: 


a) Total electric power (kW) required with details like 
supply voltage, number of phases and frequency for 
running of the plant; 

b) Overall dimensions (length, width, and height) of the 
plant; and 

c) Total tare weight of the plant. 


ANNEX B 


IS 4925 : 2023 


(Clause 6.3 and Foreword) 


CALIBRATION AND WEIGHING EQUIPMENT ACCURACY 


B-1 THE FOLLOWING LIMITS SHALL 
APPLY TO CONCRETE BATCHING PLANTS 


a) The accuracy, sensitivity, and arrangement of 
the weighing devices shall be such as to 
enable the materials to be batched within the 
following tolerances: 


1) Cement, fly ash and other cementitious 
material: Within + 1 percent of the 
quantity of the constituent being 
measured; 


2) Sand and aggregate: Within + 2 percent 
of the quantity of the constituent being 
measured; 


3) Water: Within + 1 percent of the quantity 
of the constituent being measured; and 


4) Admixtures: Within + 3 percent of the 


quantity of the constituent being measured. 


b) For continuous mixer plants calibration shall 
be in increments not exceeding 5 kg for 
cement and mineral percent admixtures, 25 
kg for sand/aggregates and 2 litres/kg for 
water; 


с 


wm 


Calibration shall be done in increments of 
20 kg or 10 percent of scale value and up to 
30 percent of scale capacity; 


d 


wm 


Digital readouts shall have a scale increment 
not exceeding 2 kg for cement and mineral 
admixtures, 10 kg for sand/aggregates and 
1 litre/1 kg for water; and 


e) Chemical admixture dispensers shall have 
scale increments not exceeding: 


SI №. Range of scale in kg/l Scale increment 
in kg/l 
(0 (2) (3) 
1) 0.1 - 0.5 0.01 
ii) 0.5-1.0 0.02 
iii) 1.0 - 10.0 More 0.2 
iv) than 10.0 0.4 


f) All weighing and measuring equipment shall 
be tested and calibrated at least once in three 
months. Adequate and identified facilities 
shall be provided for the application of the 
test loads. 


g) Checks on continuous weigh systems shall 
be based on comparison of preset quantities 
with those actually produced. 


h) To achieve the required accuracy of 
calibration, a minimum of 500 kg of 


stamped weights are required, except that 
for low capacity scales, an acceptable limit 
on the total mass of calibration weights 
would be 20 percent of the scale capacity. 


j) When calibration of weighing equipment is 
carried out, all personnel involved shall be 
competent and fully trained. The procedures 
shall be fully documented and special 
attention shall be paid to the health and 
safety aspects of the procedure. 


IS 4925 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


ROUTINE MAINTENANCE CHECKS FOR PLANT AND EQUIPMENT 


C-1 Unless otherwise specified by the 
manufacturer, the routine maintenance checks for 
plant and equipment shall be as follows: 


C-2 STORAGE AND HANDLING 
EQUIPMENT 


C-2.1 Weekly Routine 


a) Check area under plant for spillage and 
trace source; 

b) Clean-up yard, checking that all drains and 
traps are clear; 

c) Maintain settlement pits, recyclers, and 
wash down areas in efficient working 
order; 

d) Check all storage bins and doors for 
efficient operation; 

e) Check conveyors for free running and 
wear, and adjust as necessary; 

f) Routine checks and servicing of loading 
shovels; 

g) Routine checks апа servicing of 
compressors; and 

h) Report any defects. 


C-3 BATCHING AND MIXING EQUIPMENT 
C-3.1 Daily Routine 


a) Adjust tare weights and clean weigh dials 
(if applicable); 

b) Ensure weighing hoppers empty properly; 

c) Washout central mixer drum or pan; and 

d) Ensure proper functioning of all limit 
switches, safety switches, and emergency 
buttons. 


C-3.2 Weekly Routine 


a) Maintain all hoppers and doors in clean and 
efficient working order; 


10 


b) Check central mixer blades, paddles or 
arms for wear and tightness and adjust as 
necessary; 

c) Remove any cement or concrete build up in 
the mixer; 

d) Shack out cement silo filter sock 
(if applicable) and maintain in efficient 
working order; 

e) Check dust seals on cement hoppers for 
wear; 

f) Clean knife-edges or load cells оп 
weighing equipment; 

g) Check calibration of moisture meter, if 
applicable; 

h) Check oil levels of airline lubricators; 

j) Drain water traps of airlines; 

k) Check rams and airlines for leaks; 

m) Check pipework for leaks and wear; 

n) Check wiring and electrical apparatus for 
correct operation and overheating; 

p) Routine greasing of bearings and gears; 

q) Routine checks and servicing of central 
mixers; and 

r) Report any defect. 


C-3.3 Monthly Routine 


a) Check the lubrication points of necessary 
moving parts and ensure that they are 
properly lubricated; and 

b) Check the oil level in gear boxes. 


C-3.4 Quarterly Routine 


a) Check calibration of all weigh scales; 

b) Check calibration of water meter; 

c) Check calibration of admixture dispenser; 

d) Inspection and testing of all weigh scales 
over their complete operational range; and 

e) Routine oil changes in gearboxes and oil 
baths. 


IS 4925 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Ajax Engineering Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Ammann Apollo India Private Limited, Jagudan 


Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 


B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 


Builders Association of India, Mumbai 


Caterpillar India Private Limited, Chennai 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defense, New Delhi 


Epiroc Mining India Limited, Nashik 


Escorts Construction Equipment Limited, Faridabad 


Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers 


Association, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


BRIG. RAJNEESH BHATNAGAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRIK. K. VYASAS (Alternate) 


SYED MOHAMMED RIAZ NAWAZ 
SHRIJORLIN P. V. (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANJUNATH D. JAGGAL (Alternate П) 
SHRI KRISHNA KISHORE (Alternate П) 


SHRI GIRISH DIXIT 
SHRI ASHISH PATEL (Alternate I) 
SHRI МАМАМ RAJPURA (Alternate П) 
SHRI PRASAD DAYAL (Alternate П) 
SHRI GEETESH MAKADIA (Alternate IV) 
SHRI ARPAN PATEL (Alternate V) 
SHRI KARTIK TRIVEDI (Alternate VI) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. D. BHOSALE 
SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. G. SAKTHIKUMAR 


SHRI К. ВЕЛ JOSE 
SHRI RAMESH VISHWANATHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DILIP KUMAR JHA 
SHRI KRISHNAJI SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SUVIR SINGH 
DR BANTI A. GEDAM (Alternate) 


COL AMIT BHARDWAJ 


COL RAVI LOGANATHAN 
LT COL S. TALEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VENKATESAN BASHYAM 
SHRI MUTTANNA JAPANNAVAR (Alternate) 


SHRI FAIZ AHMAD 
SHRI ASHOK CHAUHAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI LAXMI CHAND TYAGI (Alternate П) 


SHRI K. У. KRISHNAMURTHY 


IS 4925 : 2023 


Organization 


IRCON International Limited, New Delhi 


Jaypee India Limited, Kolkata 


John Deere India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Larsen and Toubro Construction Limited, Karnataka 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


Schwing Stetter (India) Private Limited, New Delhi 


Volvo Construction Equipments India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 
Wirtgen India Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (Flat no. 3052, Prestige 
Shantiniketan, Whitefield Main Road, Bengaluru) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RANDHIR GUPTA 
SHRIS. K. RAY (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR M. MEHTA 
SHRI RAHUL KUMAR TEOTIA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK KALIAPPAN 
SHRI RAJ ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI GURUPRASAD S. R. 
SHRI DHANAJI HARIBA MANGUDE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KESHAVA 
SHRI M. SURESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. SHARMA 
SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 
SHRI SAURABH BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHALIA 
SHRI V ARADHARAJAN R. (Alternate) 


SHRI V. R. SAI PRASAD POLIPALLI 
SHRI K. RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 
SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. MAHAJAN 


In Personal (Capacity (D-24, Amar Colony, SHRI SATENDER KUMAR 
New Delhi) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (20014). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


