( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 6305 ( Part I ) - 1980

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS
PART I APPLICATION, ( OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

First Revision )
MCPD 22
lpIplrscnting Macncill & Magor Ltd, Calcutta

Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee,
f3airmEn S~sr K. C. UXWITHAN Mmtkrs

SHRI S. ROY CHOWDHUBY ( Al&mate to Shri K. C. Unnithao ) Ministry of Dcfence ( VRDE ), Ahmcdnagar SEW N. K. APPAYYA SHRI J. S. MALHOT~A ( Alkrnatc ) Escorts Ltd, Faridabad Ssar S. K. CAAUDHRY sa~aL.R. CHOUDHARY ( Affnnafr) Indian Air Lines, New Delhi SURI M.S. EKBOTE SHRI YASEVIR KUHAR ( Al&mats ) Ministry of Dcfence ( DGI ) Saar P. K. GBO~H MAJ V. R. BANAHATTI ( Altarnate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ), Calcutta SRRIG. GOPAXUMAB Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI R. C. G~VINDARAJAN SHRI Q. H. TnasIq ( Altrmatr ) Madras Port Trust, Madras SHRIV. D. JOHN SERI~~~~~DRA" ( Al&m++ ) Mimrtry of Railways ( Railway Board ), New Delhi JOINT COMMERCIAL ' Ministry of Defencc ( DGI ) BRIG T. C. JOSEPH LT-COL R. SHIVDABANI ( Altnnats ) Directdrate General of Supplies & Dirposalr, Sam M. T. KANBE N&w Delhi Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI S. S. KHO~LA New Delhi SE~RID. P. GUPTA ( Altmatc ) Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta SHRI A. KONAR Directorate General, Factory Advice Service & SHRI P. J. MAKHIJANI Labour Institute, Bombay SHRI K. C. SAKSENA ( Altrrnatc ) ( Contim& on pOgc 2 )

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:6!305(PnrtI)-1980 ( coluinwdfiem pop 1)
Mmrbrrs Soar
&pJJd"g

J. S. MAI~WAHA Ministry of Railways ( RDSC ), Lucknow SH~I D. S. ARYA ( AN~rnotr )^ SH~I G. D. MODI Gujarat Industrial Trucks Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. G. MODI ( Alternate ) Shar P. S. NA~A~UNDARAM Minirtry of Defence ( Air Wing ) Sam D. K. SHARVA ( Alfemurs ) Saar D. N. PEBTOIUJI Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, &RI H. F. RA~INA ( Altarrurtc ) SHBI R. A. PHAYADE Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay SHBI M. F. GOVADIA ( Alternafr ) SHRI K. R. PRASAD Jost's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SBBI E. J. TARAPOBE ( Alternrrtc ) SHRI P. F. SETHNA Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHBI V. KAU~IK ( Akmatr ) SEBX B. R. SIXQH Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI S. CHITTARAXJAN ( Altsrnatr ) CAPT N. A. TAMEAXE Pallet Sectional Committee, MCPD 5, IS1 SHRI P. S. DA@, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-&io Member ) Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary )

Bombay

Forklift

Trucks

Subcommittee,

h4CPD

22

: 1

SHBI P. F. SETENA

Voltas Ltd, Bombay

dhmbars SHRI V. KAUSIIC ( Allrrnats to Shri P. F. Sethna ) SHRI V. P. DEWAN Ministry of Defence LT.COL V. P. DHALL ( Altrmatr ) SHBI M. T., KINBIG Dkectorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi SHEIJ.S. MARWAHA Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow Sam D. S. ABYA ( ~kwnutr ) SEBI D. N. PEST~NJI Godrej a Boyce manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay R. A. PEAYADE Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. F. GOVADIA ( Altrrnuts ) Jort's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SEBI'K. R. PRAEAD SHRI T. T. GALA ( Altsrnata ) SEBI S. K. SINEA Gard;nlcft;ch Shipbuilders & Engineers a SHBI A. K. JOARDAB ( Alferna& ) SHRI K. C. UNNITHAN Macneill & Magor Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. ROY GmOWDHUBY ( Aftnnata )
Swr SHBI M. K. MEET). ( Allamatr )

Ltd,

IS:6305(PortI)-1980

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS
PART I APPLICATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

( First Revision )
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 November 1980, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council.

0.2 Correct operation and regular maintenance are very important for powered industrial trucks for preventing damage and deterioration of equipment, reducing the risks of accidents, and thereby ensuring safety of personnel. This standard has been prepared to act as a guide for the user for application, operation and maintenance of powered industrial trucks. 0.3 The safety requirements for design and manufacture trucks are given in Part II of this standard. of industrial

Kevision of this standard 3.4 This standard was first published in 1971. ` Powered Industrial has been taken up to align it with ISO/3691-1977 issued by the International Organization for Trucks-Safety Code', Standardization ( IS0 ). I.

SCOPE
for application, tractors.

1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers the safety requirements operation and maintenance of powered industrial trucks.
1.2 This standard does not cover requirements

for industrial

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose

of this standard, in addition to the terms and definitions given in IS : 4660-1977* and IS : 7570-1975t the following definition shall apply.
*Glossary TGlossary of terms relating to powered industrial trucks. of terms relating to fork arma and attachments of forklift trucks.

3

IS:6363(PartI)-1980 21 User-The
user is defined as the owner or the person or company which the truck is hired. to

3. OPERATING USER

SAFETY

RULES

AND

PRACTICES

FOR

THE

3.1 Operator's Qmalifitations 3.1.1 Only trained and authorized
operate powered industrial trucks.

operators

shall be permitted

to

3.1.2 Operators of powered industrial trucks shall be physically fit and hold valid liccnce for heavy duty vehicles issued by the respective local transport authority. 3.2 for use in such environments by a responsible agency or the national authority shall be used. Such trucks shall be clearly marked with an appropriate tyykl$In and the building(s) and area(s) involved shall be clearly 3.2.2 Classification of hazardous areas shall be in accordance IS : 8790 ( Part I )-1978* and IS : 8790 ( Part II )-1978t. 3.3 shall not ride trucks except is made to accommodate them. with

Operation in Hazardous Areas 3.2.1 Only those industrial trucks which are of types approved

Passengers 3.3.1 Passengers

where a specific

provision

3.3.2 Riding by passengers is not permitted on a truck- when fitted with a work platform except under the following conditions:

4

The platform forks.

shall be secured

to the lifting

carriage

and

the

b) When
C) Only

personnel are on a platform not equipped with elevating controls, the operator shall be operator's po4tion on truck. on the platform shall be used when equipped with elevating controls.

the elevating controls personnel are on a platform

4

The combined mass of the platform, load and personnel shall not exceed one-half of the truck lifting capacity as indicated on the truck capacity plate. personnel positional
working working

e) The truck shall not be used to transport form. This shall not prohibit small necessary for work in hand. `General requirements of powered industrial Part I Internal combustion engine powered trucks. tGenera1 requirements of powered industrial Part II Electric battery powered industrial trucks.
trucks trucks

on the platadjustments
areas: areas:

m hazardous in hazardous

4

ISr6365(PartI)-I666 3.4 Truck Operation 3.4.1 Capah& Mod$cation and Marking 3.4.1.1 The manufacturer's exceeded. rated capacity of the truck shall not be

3.4.1.2 Any design modifications and additions liable to influence capacity and operation shall be effected only after the approval of the manufacturer. 3.4.1.3 Modificatl%ns arising from application of ancillary attachments shall be performed in such. a manner that safety is not reduced and is in accordance with the provlslons of this code. Capacity, operation and maintenance instruction plate, tags, or labels should be changed accordingly. 3.4.1.4 The user shall ensure that aJJpamtplates in place and are maintained in a legible cbndition. 3.4.2 Stability 3.4.2.1 The stability conditio$s for industrial trucks shall be in IS : 7309-1973t, IS : 7552-1974f, accordance with IS : 4357-1974* IS : 7631-19758 and IS : 9075-197911. If operating conditions differ from those as the normal operating conditions the loads shall be reduced. 3.4.2.2 Trucks equipped with atcachtnents shall be considered partially loaded trucks when operated without a load. 3.4.3 Protective Requirements and Devices 3.4.3.1 Trucks surroundings. shall be of a colour which contrasts with the as and markings are

3.4.3.2 High-lift rider trucks shall be equipped with an overhead guard, with the exception, however, of high-lift rider trucks used where the operating conditions preclude the use ot' such overhead guards. 3.4.3.3 When high-lift trucks are on the operator ( for example high rest extension having height; width minimize the risks of loads or parts shall be used. used to handle loads likely to fall or segmented loads ), a load backand size of openings sufficient to of it falling towards the operator

*Methods of stability testing of forklift trucks (first rmision ). *Stability tests for reach and straddle trucks. $&ability tests for trucks operating in special conditions. QStability tests for pallet stackers and high lift platform trucks controlled ) . JIStability tests fix side loader trucks.

(pedestrian

h rider

5

ISr6305( PartI)3.1.3.4 When operating conditions indicate, the trucks shall be equipped with additional warning devices, such as lights and blinkers. 3.4.3.5 Steering knobs shall not be attached to the steering wheels of industrial trucks not originally provided with such items, unless approved by the manufacturer of the truck. 3.4.4
Fuel Handling and Storage

3.4.4.1 Trucks shall be refuelled only at locations designed for that purpose. The locations shall be ventilated to minimize the accumulation of flammable fumes. LP-gas containers shall not be filled, and removable LP-gas containers shall not be exchanged near open pits, underground entrances, elevator shafts or other similar areas.

3.4.42 be indicated

Smoking shall by signs.

be prohibited

in refuelling from approved

areas which pumps,

shall be

34.4.3 Liquid fuels, not dispensed handled in closed containers. 3.4.4.4 LP-gas containers shall trained and designated personnel.

shall

be recharged

or exchanged

only by

3.4.4.5 LP-gas containers shall be stored and transported with the service valve closed and the safety valve in direct communication with the vapour space of the conthiner. The protective caps provided shall be fitted on the connections when containers are stored. 3.4.4.6 LP-gas containers shall be inspected to ensure that no vapour leakage exists before recharging and/or reusing. Particular attention Damaged containers shall shall be given to the valves and connections. not be used. Repairs may be made only by authorized firms. 3.4.5
Battery Charging and Changing

3.4.5.1 Battery charging installations shall be located in areas Facilities shall be provided for flushing and designated for that purpose. neutralizing spilled electrolyte, for fire protection,. for protecting charging apparatus from damage by trucks, and for adequate ventilation for dispersal of fumes from gassing batteries.

3.4.5.2 Smoking indicated by signs. 3.4.5.3 Only charge batteries. clothing.

shall be prohibted

in charging

areas

and

shall

be

trained and authorized personnel shall change or Personnel maintaining batteries shall wear protective

6

IS :6305(PartI)-1980 3.4.5.4 All battery changing shall be carried out in accordance with manufacturer's instruction; When reinstalling batteries, means provided for correctly connecting, positioning and securing shall be used. Tools and other metallic objects shall be kept away from the top of uncovered batteries. 3.4.5.5 The battery of an electric truck shall not be replaced by another battery having a different voltage, mass of size, without specific authorization by the original manufacturer of the truck. Means shall be provided for the safe changing of batteries. A properly insulated spreader bar shall be provided for use with any overhead hoist. 3.4.5.6 A chain hoist, if used, shall be equipped with a load-chain If a hand hoist is used, uncovered batteries shall be covered containtr. with a sheet of plywood or other non-conducting material to prevent the hand chain from shorting on cell connectors or terminals. 3.4.6 Defective or Damaged Trucks 3.4.6.1 If a powered industrial truck is found to be in any way unsafe or to contribute to an unsafe condition, it shall be removed from service until restored to a safe operating condition. 3.4.3 Accidents 3.4.7.1 The operator shall be required to report any accident involving injury, damage to building structures or equipment to the appropriate person at once. 3.5 Operating Conditions 3.5.1Aisles and Stacking Arca~ 3.5.1.1 Operating surfaces shall have sufficient load-carrying capacity and shall be maintained in such a manner as not to affect adversely the safe operation of the truck. 3.5.X.2 Transport aisles for trucks shall be arranged to provide good visibility and ease of truck cornering, and shall avoid inclines, steep ramps, narrow passages and low ceilings. Aisles shall be clearly outlined or defined. 3.5.1.3 In aisles where pedestrian traffic is likely to be encountered, aisle width shall be adjusted accordingly. 3.5.1.4 Markers 10 percent. shall be installed if permanent gradients exceed

3.5.1.5 Gradient shall provide for a smooth gradual change at top and bottom to prevent shock to the load or fouling of underside of the trucks. 7

IS : 6395 ( Part I ) - 1980 3.5.1.6 If, under travelling ( that is transporting ) conditions, load obstructs visibility, trucks shall be driven with load trailing.
the

- Under certain conditions ( for example strJing or negotiating certain NOTE gardients ) where movement with the load lading is required, the truck shall be driven with extreme care. Attention shall be given to providing ruch ancillary ( auxiliary ) means or additional persons as necessitated by the operating conditions.

3.5.1.7 Aisles, roadways, passageways, floors or ramps shall maintained in good operating conditions in order to prevent damage the truck or load and not to impair the stability. 3.5.1.8 Hazardous conditions, be prominently indicated. 3.5.1.9 kept clear. 3.5.2 including overhead and obstructions, sh$l

be to

shall be

Fire aisles, access to stairways,

fire equipment

Bridge Plntcs and Dockboards shall have an adequate maxiqum load shall be be secured to prevent on or

3.5.2.1 All bridge plates or dockboards safety margin to support loaded trucks. The shown on the plates, clearly and permanently. 3.5.2.2 Bridge plates or dockboards accidental movement, rocking or sliding. shall

3.5.2.3 Grab handles, or other effective means, shall be provided bridge plates to permit safe handling. Where possible, fork loops lugs should be provided for handling by fork trucks. 3.5.2.4 surface. Bridge plates and dockboards should have slip-resistant

3.5.2.5 The sides of all bridge plates and, where practicable, dockboaids shall be provided with means to minimize the possibility of trucks running over the edge. 3.5.2.6 When bridge plates or dockboards are in place, be provided to guard against unintentional movement of being boarded. 3.5.3 Lighting Lighting When of adequate intensity shall be provided in operating 32 IUX means shall the vehicle

3.5.3.1 areas. 3.5.3.2 3.5.4

( 3 cd ), auxiliary

lighting in the operating area is less than lighting shall be provided on the truck.

Slinging of Trucks only at the points 8 indicated by the

3.5.4.1 Slings shall be attached truck manufacturer.

IS I 6305 ( Part I ) - 1980 3.5.5 Simultanrous Usr of Trucks

3.5.5.1 The simultaneous use of two trucks for handling heavy or cumbersome loads is a dangerous operation requiring special precautions. It shall be done only in exceptional circumstances, under the supervision of the person responsible for handling operations. 3.5.6 Lifts ( Eleuators ) 3.5.6.1 It shall be ensured that lifts ( elevators ) used to transport powered industrial trucks will support the total mass of the truck, load, and operator. Such lifts ( elevators ) shall be designated, and operators instructed to use only designated lifts ( elevators ). 3.5.7 Operation in Road Vehicles ( Trailers ) 0; Railway Wagons

3.5.7.1 Before entering a road vehicle, it shall be confirmed that brakes have been applied and the whCels chocked to prevent movement.
NATE - Wheel chockes may not be required when the road vehicle with automatic positive locking spring-applied parking brakes. is quipped

3.5.7.2 When powered industrial trucks are driven on and off a semi-trailer not coupled to a tractor, spports may be necessary to prevent up-ending of the trailer. 3.5.7.3 It shall be ensured that the flooring system of road vehicles or railway wagons will support the total mass of the industrial truck, load, and the operator. The flooring system shall be checked for breaks, holes or other defects. 4. SAFETY PRACTKCES FOR THE OPERATOR

4.1 0nly trained persons shall drive or operate powered industrial trucks. Badges or other visual indications shall be displayed on the body of the operator at all times during the working period to show that he is duly authorized to operate such vehicles. 4.2 The operator should not allow any person to travel on the truck forks, attachments or trailers unless such equipment has been specifically designed for this purpose. He should not drive the truck up to a person standing in front of a bench or other fixed object. involving 4.3 Accidents - The operator should report all accident9 personnel, building structures, and equipment at once to the appropriate person. 4.4 The operator should look in the direction of travel and keep a clear view of the path along which he is travelling. The operator should slow down and sound the horn at cross aisles and at other places whae viaion When moving bulky loads that block forward visibility, is obstructed. the operator should drive the trucks with the load trailing. 9

IS : 6305 ( Part I ) - 1999 4.4.1 Operation on main roads outside the factory premises should permitted only with proper authorization of local transport authority. be

4.5 As a general rule the operator should keep to the left side of the aisle and adapt his speed to local traffic conditions. He should maintain a reasonable distance from vehicles ahead and always have control of his truck. 4.6 The operator should avoid making fast starts, sudden stops and quick turns and keep truck under control at all times. 4.7 The operator should not overtake any point of limited visibility. any vehicle at a crossing, or at

-4.8 The operator should not carry loads heavier than those for which the truck is rated. 4.9 The operator should carry loads which are safely arranged, and when handling off-centre loads which cannot be centred, the truck should be operated with caution. 4.10 The operator should make sure there is sufficient headroom he and the laden truck can pass safely. so that

4.11 The operator should not run his truck on to an elevator or lift, he should make certain that it would support the mass of the truck, including his own and that of the load. 4.12 The operator should operate the loaded truck within the prescribed gradients of truck. He should also not turn his truck on a gradient. 4.13 The load on a pedestrian-controlled in a lift or other confined areas. truck should always enter first

4.14 When on the elevator, the operator should neutralize the controls, shut off the power and set the brakes. It is advisable that all personnel should leave the elevator or lift before the truck is allowed to enter or leave. 4.15 Before crossing a bridge plate, the operator should make sure that it is secured and the truck is properly aligned with it, and should cross slowly and carefully. 4.16 To prevent an accumulation semi-enclosed areas, the operator idling. of fumes and gases in enclosed or should avoid unnecessary periods of

4.17 When leaving his truck unattended, the operator should ensure that controls are in neutral, power shut off, brakes applied, key or connector plug removed, if on an incline, the wheels should also be chocked. 10

IS : 6305 ( Part I ) - 1980
4.18 When

at any time a powered industrial truck is found to be defective the ooerator should report the matter immediately to the appropriate authority and no person should be allowed to operate the truck until the fault has been rectified. board to indicate that truck is out of order should should be not

4.19 Suitable displayed.

4.20 Unless specifically make repairs, alterations

authorized to do so, the operator or adjustments to the equipment. with

4.21 The operator should not operate the truck system until the leak has been corrected. 4.22 The operator under speed which will permit He should adapt the speed should slow down for wet 4.23
Supplementary

a leak in the fuel

all conditions should operate the truck at a him to be brought to a stop in a safe manner. He to the road surface, visibility and load. and slippery floors.
for Fork Lift Truck Operations

Instructions

4.23.1 When the operator forks are left on the ground.

leaves

his truck, he should

ensure or walk

that the under

4.23.2 The operator should elevated forks or attachments,

not allow anyone to stand whether loaded or empty.

4.23.3 The operator should always work within the limits of the rated He should neither add capacity of the truck and its attachments. supplementary counterweights nor additional personnel to increase the capacity of the machine. 4.23.4 To insurd stability of the load the operator should set the forks sufficiently far apart and insert them as far as possible under the load. 4.23.5 The operator should carry the load as low as possible, tant with safe operation, with the mast tilted backward. consis-

4.23.6 The operator should use forward or backward tilting of the He should use total range of formast with load with the utmost care. ward and backward tilting close to the ground level only. The mast/ uprights should not be tilted forward with the carriage elevated except Tilting of mast/uprights should to pick or deposit a load on the stack. be avoided when the truck is moving. 4.23.7 On level ground, the truck should be driven with the loaded end either in the rear or in the front as may be convenient to obtain the maximum visibility. 11

18 : 6305 ( Part I ) - 1980 4.23.8 On inclines and ramps, the truck should be driven slowly. The loaded end should always face uphill both while ascending and descending except that an unloaded non-counterbalanced truck should be operated with the loading end facing downhill. 4.23.9 The truck should not run over loose objects which damage the truck or affect the persons nearby. 413.10 The operator should not put arms or legs between of the mast or outside the running lines of the truck. 453.11 When stacking, procedures: the operator are likely to the uprights basic

should follow the following

Approach the stack at low speed and with the mast tilted 3 to 5' backward; Lift the load slightly over the stacking height and move forward; When the load is over the stack, bring the mast to the vertical position; Deposit the load on the stack; Ensure that the load is securely stacked; Free the forks from the Toad by lowering the forks and/or by tilting the mast forward; and Reverse from the stack and lower the forks to the travelling position. 423.12 When removing should be followed: a load from a stack the following procedures

4 b) cl 4

Approach

stack and stop with forks about 0.3 m from the stack; of load is within

Check that fork width is suitable and weight truck capacity; Adjust tilt and raise forks into position;

Move slowly forward, inserting the forks into the fork pockets until heels of forks are against the load; clear of stack ana apply partial rear

Raise forks until load is just e> tilt; f> Ensure that the way is clear

ld

and reverse away from stack suficiently to clear load; and Lower load to travelling position, tilt fully backwards and move off steadily.
in 4.23.11 and 4.23.12

Non - The speed with which procedures described arc carried out will depend on floor conditions. 12

ISr6305(PartI)-1960 5. MAINTENANCE PRACTICES

5.0 Satisfactory operation of powered industrial truck depends on careWhen maintenance is neglected trucks can become a ful maintenance. source of danger to personnel and property. 5.1 Maintenance Items - Preventive maintenance, lubrication, and inspection of all powered industrial trucks shall be performed according to a scheduled system in conformity with the following items and, in particular, with the manufacturer's recommendation, which should accompany the truck when delivered: a) Only qualified and authoriz;ed personnel shall be permitted to maintain, repair, adjust and inspect industrial truck;. b) Brakes, steering mechanisms, control mechanisms, warning devices, lights, governors, and lift overload protection devices shall he maintained in a safe operating condition. cl All parts of lift.and tilt mechanisms and frame members shall be carefully and regularly inspected and maintained in a safe operating condition. 4 Safety guards and safety devices shall be inspected regularly and shall he maintained on the truck in a safe operating condition. All hydraulic systems shall be regularly inspected and maintained. f-1 Cylinders, valves and other similar parts shall be checked to ensure that neither internal nor external leakage. has developed to the extent that it would create a hazard. d Batteries, motors, controllers and contactors, limit switches, protective'devices, electrical conductors and connections shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with generally accepted Special attention shall be paid to the condition good practice. of electrical insulation. Exhaust system and adjustment of carburettor, evaporator and fuel pump of internal combustion engine trucks shall be checked with regard to damage qnd leakage. of internal Caution : During maintenance, the operation combustion engines in confined areas can produce noxious subswhen internal tances. Adequate ventilation is recommended combustion engines are operated in such confined areas. Pneumatic tyres shall he checked for deterioration of bearing surface, side walls, and rims. The inflation pressure specified by the truck manufacturer shall be maintained. Before demounting pneumatic tyres on split rims, precautions shall be taken to ensure that the internal pressure has been, completely relieved.

e>

1)

13

IS I 6305 ( Part I ) - 1980

k) 4 4

The bonding of solid tyres to the metal bands or the rims shall be checked and foreign matter removed from the treads, if necessary. All information and instruction plates and tags ( decals ) shall be maintained in a legible condition. ,The fuel system shall be checked for leaks and the soundness of all fittings. LP-gas systems shall be checked for leaks by using a soap solution. Jn the case of leakages in the fuel system, the truck shall be taken out of service and shall not be returned to service until all leaks have been remedied.

P) All LP-gas containers shall be examined before recharging, and all removable LP-gas containers shall be examined before m-use for the following defects or damage: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) Dents, scrapes and gouges; Damage to valves and liquid level gauge; Debris in the relief valve; Damage to or loss of relief valve cap; Indications of leakage at valves or threaded connections; and Deterioration, damage or loss of flexible seals in the filling or servicing connections.

q)

r) s)

t)

Where defects and/or damage are discovered, LP-gas containers shall not be used until all such defects and/or damage has (have) been satisfactorily remedied. Any design modifications and additions liable to influence capacity and operating safety shall be effected only after approval of Applicable identification plates and instructhe manufacturer. tions shall be changed. All replacement parts shall be original parts or be of a quality at least equal to that provided in the original equipment. Industrial trucks shall be kept in a clean condition to prevent fire hazards and ensure the detection of loose or defective part. Attention shall be given to lifting and load-carrying devices, pedals, footsteps, and truck floor such that they are clean of grease, oil, dirt, etc. Maintenance of trucks working in hazardous areas shall. be in accordance with IS : 8790 ( Part I )-1978*; and IS : 8790 ( Part II )-19787.
areas: areas:

tGcnera1 requirements of powered industrial Part II Electric-battery-powered industrial trucks.

*General requirements of powered industrial trucks working in hazardous Part I Internalcombustion engine powered trucks.
trucks working in hazardous

14

PS : 6305 ( Part I ) - 1980 5.2 Inspection 5.2.1 If during an inspection, any fault, wear or damage is observed that can cause a safety hazard, effective measures for correction shall be taken before the truck is placed into operation again. 5.2.2 A scheduled preventative maintenance, lubrication and inspecThose records determined to be tion procedure should be followed. necessary ( or required by national authority ) shall be maintained. 5.2.3 An example of check form which may be used when inspecting a truck is given in Appendix A.

DIX APPEN ( Clause 5.2.3 )
EXAMPLE OF A CHECK

A
FORM

Industrial truck No . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . *. . . . . . . . . . . . Sheet No. . . . . . .._..._ ,..... . . . `Basic dimension' for checking-leaf or balance chains or roller chains,

respectively: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .- . . . ..I.. -.... mm Admitted minimum fork thickness: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . ., . . . . . . . . . . .* . . . . . . ._... . . . REGULAR Checks were carried out at: A Driving gear . . . . . . .. . ,.. .. . . . . . . . . . .
1. Steering system ................

CHECK

B

Lifting gear . . . ..-. . . . . ..T. . . . . . . . . 1. Hydraulic system ........... 2. Mast ............................ 3. Lifting system.. ............... 4. z;l suspending a~;t;~~ , platform, ments ........................... guard.. ............... .-_

2. Braking system ........... 3. Wheels ........................... 4. Chassis ............................

., ....

5. Drive control switch ......... 6. Drive ............................ C D 15

Overhead

Other matters ................

IS a 6365 ( Part 1) - 1960 Date of checking: Direction: on Executed by

.-

Notice taken by: . . . . . . . . . . . . .-. . . . .-.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( Date and signature of expert )

This original version remains in the checking map First copy to that one who has to execute the direction

Additional copies to: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.......................... ( Date and signature of workshop manager or his commissioner ) 16

