RAT Alte IS 6416 : 2022 
Indian Standard [ Amalgamating IS 6416 and IS 8795 ] 


Cele Al Ha-Scey Tht ATT Oh Ate 


(AT JETT ) 


Methods for 
Measuring Case Depth of Steel 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 77.040.99 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2022 Price Group 3 


Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee, MTD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1971. In the current revision, method for determining case depth of carburized 
steel using fracture test have been included which were previously covered separately in IS 8795 : 1978 ‘Method 
for determining case depth of carburized steel by fracture test’, the Committee decided to merge IS 6416 : 1988 
Methods for measuring case depth of steel (first revision) and IS 8795 : 1978 Method for determining case depth 
of carburized steel by fracture test as IS 6416 ‘Methods for measuring case depth of steel’. 


In this revision Clause on ‘Fracture Method’ have been added from IS 8795. 
The composition of the Committee and the Panel responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or 
calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for 
rounding off numerical values ( second revision )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6416 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
METHODS FOR MEASURING CASE DEPTH OF STEEL 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the following five methods 
of measuring case depth (CD) of steel hardened by 
carburizing, nitriding, carbonitriding, cyaniding or 
induction and flame hardening (applicable methods are 
indicated in Table 1): 


a) Hardness method, 

b) Chemical method, 

c) Macrostructure method, 

d) Microscopic method; and 

e) Fracture method (for routine process control). 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through in this text, constitute provisions ofthis standard. 
At the time of publication, the editions indicated were 
valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


Methods for chemical 


analysis steels 


228 (relevant parts) 


Metallic materials — Vickers 
hardness test: Part 1 Test 
method (fifth revision) 


Metallic materials — 
Rockwell hardness test: Part 
1 Test method (fifth revision) 


Glossary of terms relating to 
iron and steel 


1501 (Part 1) : 2020/ 
ISO 6507-1 : 2018 


1586 (Part 1) : 2018/ 
ISO 6508-1 : 2016 


1956 (relevant parts) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in 
IS 1956 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Effective Case Depth — It is the perpendicular 
distance from the surface to that point of the core of the 
piece at which hardness is equal to the values shown 
below: 


Type of Steel | HV | HRC | HRA | Treatment 
Steel with 

Carbon, 

Percent 
0.28 to 0.32 350 | 35 68 Flame or 
0.33 to0.42 |400| 40 | 70 | induction 

hardened 
0.43 to 0.52 450 | 45 73 
Over 0.53 500 | 50 76 
Case 550 — — Carburized, 
hardening and hardened 
steels and tempered 
Nitriding and Values to be Nitrided and 
carbonitriding mutually agreed | carbonitrided 
upon 


3.2 Total Case Depth — It is the perpendicular distance 
from the surface to that point at which the change in 
chemical composition, hardness or microstructure of 
the case and core no longer can be distinguished. 


4 SAMPLING 


The number of test pieces to be used for testing and their 
selection shall be as agreed to between the contracting 
parties. 


5 HARDNESS METHOD 


5.1 Principle 


This method consists of cutting the specimen at right 
angle to the hardened case, preparing the surface 
suitably for testing and making a hardness traverse on 
the case and core of the specimen. 


5.2 This method is considered to be most accurate for 
measuring case depths and may be used as a referee and 
control method applicable to either specimens or parts. 


5.3 Preparation of Surface to be Examined 


The test specimen shall be cut at right angle to the 
hardened case and polished so as to permit correct 
measurement of hardness impressions. Care shall be 
taken in cutting to avoid heating that may affect the 
hardened surface. 


IS 6416 : 2022 


5.4 Hardness Measurement 


Hardness testers that produce small shallow indentations 
shall be used. Testers used to produce diamond pyramid 
or Knoop hardness numbers are recommended. The 
test load will be between 0:98 and 98-1 Newtons 
(0-1 and 10 kgf ). Rockwell A or C scales produce a 
comparatively deeper indentation and these can be used 
in case of flame or induction hardened cases. 


5.4.1 For Vickers hardness and Rockwell C scale 
hardness test, reference may be made to IS 1501 
(Part 1) and IS 1586 (Part 1) respectively. 


5.4.2 A hardness transition curve shall be drawn by 
measuring hardness on a few number of points along 
the straight lines at right angles to the plane as shown 
in Fig. 1 and measuring the distance of respective 
hardness indentations from the outer edge of hardened 
case. This distance can be measured on a calibration 
optical instrument, micrometer stage or by other 
suitable means. The hardness traverse should extend 
up to the core. The space between the measuring 
points on sample (l-l, L-l,l;l, etc, in Fig. 1) will 
not exceed 0.1 mm, in general. The space between 
adjacent indentations shall be not less than 2:5 times 
the diagonal length of indentations. The effective case 
depth or the total case depth shall be determined from 
the hardness transition curve. 


6 CHEMICAL METHOD 


6.1 This method is generally applicable only to 
carburized cases, but may be used for nitrided, cyanided 
or carbonitrided cases. The procedure consists in 
determining the carbon content (and nitrogen when 
applicable) at various depths below the surface of a test 


SURFACE 


specimen. This method is considered the most accurate 
for measuring total case depth of carburized cases. 


6.2 Specimen 


Test specimens shall normally be of the same grade 
of steel as parts being carburized. Test specimen may 
be actual parts, rings or bars and should be straight or 
otherwise suitable for accurate machining of surface 
layers into chips for subsequent carbon analysis. 


6.2.1 Test specimens shall be carburized with parts. 
Care should be exercised to avoid distortion and 
decarburization in cooling test specimens after 
carburizing. In cases where parts and test specimens 
are quenched after carburizing, such specimens shall 
be tempered at approximately 600-65 G °C and 
straightened to 0-04 mm maximum total indicator 
reading (TIR) before machining is attempted. The 
time at this temperature should be minimized to avoid 
excessive carbon diffusion. 


6.2.2 Test specimens must have clean surfaces and shall 
be machined dry in increments of predetermined depth. 
The analysis of machined chips will then accurately 
reveal the depth of carbon penetration. Chosen 
increments usually vary between 0.050 and 0.10 mm 
depending upon the accuracy desired and expected 
depth of case. 


6.2.3 Chips from each increment shall be kept separate 
and analyzed individually for carbon content by an 
accepted method. Total case depth is considered to be 
the distance from the surface equivalent to the depth of 
the last increment of machining whose chips analyze 
to carbon content percent higher than that of the 
established carbon content of the core. 


aie ee — 


Fic. 1 ARRANGEMEIST FOR HARDNESS MEASUREMENT 


6.3 Analysis 


The chemical analysis of the metal shall be carried out 
in accordance with IS 228. 


7MACROSTRUCTURE METHOD 


7.1 Macroscopic method of determination of case depth 
is recommended for routine process control, primarily 
because of short time required for determinations 
and minimum of specialized equipments and trained 
personnel needed. This method is mostly applied to 
hardened and carburized specimens. 


7.2 The test consists of determining the depth of 
hardened surface under low magnification on the 
sectional surface of test specimen. A wide variety of 
etchants can be used successfully to enhance the contrast 
between case and core. The total case depth shall be 
determined by measuring the distance from the surface 
to the point showing a different coloration. Accuracy 
can be improved by correlation of macrostructure 
observed with other methods, such as hardness method. 


7.3 Preparation of Surface to be Examined 


The test specimens shall be cut or fractured perpendicular 
to the hardened surface. Following variations may be 
adopted depending upon the accuracy desired. 


7.3.1 Fracture 


Prepare product or sample by fracturing. Examine at 
a magnification not to exceed 20 x with no further 
preparation. 


7.3.2 Fracture and Etch 


Prepare product or sample by fracturing and then 
etching in 20 percent nitric acid in water for a time 
established to develop maximum contrast. Rinse in 
water and read while sample is still wet. 


7.3.3 Fracture and Rough Grind 


Prepare specimen by either fracturing or cutting and 
rough grinding. Etch in 10 percent nital for a period of 
time established to provide a sharp line of demarcation 
between case and core. Examine at magnification 
not to exceed 20 X and read all the darkened zone 
for approximate total case depth. Care shall be taken 
during the cutting and grinding to avoid any heating of 
the specimen. 


7.3.4 Fracture, Grind and Polish 


Prepare specimen by fracturing or cutting, grinding 
is no longer distinguishable. Through No. 000 or fine 
metallography emery paper, polish and etch in 5 percent 
nital for approximately one minute. Rinse in water and 
examine at a magnification not exceeding 20 x and 
read all the darkened zone. After correlation, effective 


IS 6416 : 2022 


case depth can be determined by reading from external 
surface of specimen to a select line of darkened zone. 


8 MICROSCOPIC METHOD 


8.1 The test consists in determining the depth of 
preparation. Hardened surface under a metallurgical 
microscope. In the case of nitride parts where depth is 
thin, this method is recommended. 


8.2 Preparation of Surface to be Examined 


The test specimen shall be cut perpendicular to the 
hardened surface and the cut face polished. Care shall 
be taken during cutting or polishing to avoid any 
heating of the specimen. 


8.2.1 The test surface shall be etched in two to three 
percent nital or any other suitable reagent. 


8.3 Magnification 


The polished and etched specimen shall be examined 
any heating of the specimen. at 100 times magnification. 


8.3.1 The total case depth is the distance from the 
surface to the point at which the change in structure is 
no longer distinguishable. 


9 FRACTURE METHOD 


9.1 This method of measuring case depth by fracture 
test is applicable for carburized steel for routine 
process control purposes. Recognizing the need for a 
quick shop-floor test, this standard has been prepared 
to provide a guide for procedure to be adopted for 
rapid determination of case- depth in carburized steels. 
However, this method shall not be used as a referee 
method. 


9.2 Preparation of Surface to be Examined 


Notched test bars (notched up to about half of diameter) 
with a diameter of at least five times the desired 
case-depth, of adequate length and made from the same 
batch of steel as the articles to be carburized, should 
be carburized with the work. As soon as the time 
specified for carburizing has elapsed, one test bar shall 
be withdrawn from the carburizing medium, quenched 
in water and fractured by a hammer. 


9.3 The fractured surface should be etched in a solution 
of 20 percent nitric acid in water for a time established 
to develop maximum contrast between the core and the 
case and then rinsed in water. The width of the case 
shall then be measured by means of a fine-point divider 
and a graduated scale. 


9.4 If required, a correlation may be established between 
the method described in 9.1 and the microscopic 
method of case-depth measurement as follows: 


IS 6416 : 2022 


Pilot samples, selected from the batch of steel to 
be carburized, should be subjected to carburizing 
treatment. Samples should be quenched in water 
after withdrawing from the carburizing media. The 
quenched sample should be cut by a metallographic 
or other abrasive cut-off saw under coolant. The 
cut-off face, if necessary, should be polished on emery 
papers, and then etched in 3-5 percent Nital solution 
for 15-30 s. The carburized layer will become visible 
as greyish black skirt in the periphery. The width of the 
skirt should be measured with a graduated scale and a 
fine point divider and also by the microscopic method 
as described in 8. The two sets of readings should be 
compared for establishing the correlation between the 
two methods of measurement. 


10 DESIGNATION OF CASE DEPTH 


10.2 The case depth shall be given in mm, measuring 
correct to one place of decimal, and be expressed in 
unit of 0.1 mm. 


Examples 

a) CDE 15 HV 1 effective case depth of 1’5 mm-measured by 
Vickers hardness test using | kg load. 

b) CDT 25 HV S total case depth of 25 mm-measured by Vickers 
hardness test using 5 kg load. 

c) CDT 22 Ma total case depth of 2’2 mm measured by 
macrostructure method. 

d) IDE ( 400 ) 15 HV 5 induction hardened, effective case depth 
of 1-5 mm measured up to 400 HV from the surface using 5 kg 
load. 

e) FDE (40) 25 HRC flame hardened, effective case depth of 
2.5 mm-measured up to 40 HRC from the surface. 

f) FDT 40 HV 5 flame hardened total case depth of 
4.0 mm-measured by Vickers hardness testing using 5 kg load. 


g) FDT 20 Ma flame hardened, total case depth of 
10.1 The indication of case depth shall be made by the 2.0 mm-measured by the macrostructure method. 
identification symbols given in Table 1. 
Table 1 Identification Symbols for Case Depth 
( Clauses 1 and 10.1 ) 
Case Depth Hardness Macrostructure Microscopic Chemical Fracture Method 
Method Method Method Method 
Carburized CDT___ HX* CDTcMa CDT__ Mi CDT__ Ch CDT__ Fr 
Total case depth 
Effective case depth Nitrided CDE()____HX* o oo oo ooo 
Total case depth NDT__  HX* NDT Mi NDT Ch 
Carbonitrided 
Total case depth CNDT__ HX* e n CNDT__ Mi | CNDT__ Ch ee 
Flame hardened 
Total depth of hardened FDT___ HX* FDT__ Ma FDT_ Mi a ee 
surface Effective depth of FDE ()___ HX* a ee ——— a 
hardened surface 
Induction hardened 
Total depth of hardened surface | IDT___ HX* IDT Ma IDT Mi ee a 
Effective depth of hardened | IDE()  HxX* ee ee a ee 
surface 


() Values inside the bracket are indicative of the hardness value at which the effective case depth is measured (see 3.2) 


*Indicates type of test and load, for example: 


a) HV — Vickers test; 


b) HV 5 — Vickers test with 5 kg load; 
c) HRC — Rockwell C scale; and 


d) HRA — Rockwell A scale 


IS 6416 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
METHODS FOR CASE HARDENING OF STEEL 


Steel 


Direct hardening: 


Process 


By differential hardening treatments namely, flame and induction hardening 


Carburizing steel: 


By case carburizing and hardening, carbon enrichment of case being obtained by pack 
carburizing, gas carburizing or carburizing in cyanide bath, or carbonitriding 


Nitriding steels: 


By a nitriding process 


Carbonitriding: 


During carbonitriding, C and N are absorbed simultaneously in the steel. N increases the 
hardness of the carburized layer. The process can be carried out in salt bath or gas. The 
treatment temperature is normally 800 900 °C but both lower and higher temperature 
can be employed. Carbonitriding in salt bath is the same as cyanide bath hardening. 
Carbonitriding means carburizing takes gas with simultaneous N pick up. Carburizing 
takes place by passing gases. Nitrogen in the form of ammonia is supplied direct into 
the furnace. The composition of the carbonitriding gases are as follows: 


Gas Volume (percent) 
N2 42 

H2 38 

CO 20 

NH3 8 


The surface carbon content is about 0-7 percent. The nitrogen content is 2-4 percent and 
the effective case depth varies between 0:3 and 0:6 mm. The heat treatment is done for 
2-4 hrs depending upon the depth of the case. After treatment, the steel is hardened in 
the same way as after conventional gas carburizing. 


Laser Glazing: 


The laser glazing process uses high power densities, that is, 10° to 107 W/cm and 
relatively short dwell times (10 to 10% s) to rapidly melt and recast the substrate of 
suitable material. In order to produce extremely fine-grained structure with improved 
wear and corrosion resistance. The treatment homogeneity adhesion of overlay coating 
is applied by electro-chemical technique. Glazed surfaces are produced by means of 
rapid solidification; the surfaces are non-crystalline (amorphous) and exhibit high 
hardness value. 


IS 6416 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee, MTD 22 


Organization Representative(s) 


Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Ministry DR AMIT BHATTACHARJEE (Chairman) 
of Defence, Hyderabad Suri M. Bucut BHANU (Alternate) 


Bharat Forge Limited, Pune SHRI SURESH ARANGI 
SHRI SAGAR Bapat (Alternate) 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi SHRI VEMANA UDAY KUMAR 
SHRI VARUN PANWAR (Alternate) 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of SHRI K. SAHA 


Defence, Ichapur SHRI KARTIKEY SHARMA (Alternate) 
Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur SHRI R. S. TIWARI 
Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai DR VIVEK SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI PRABI PURUSOTHAMAN (Alternate) 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Bengaluru SHRI S. SIVARAMKRISHNAN 
Suri D. K. DE (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai PROF NITYANANDA PRABHU 
PROF K. NARASIMHAN (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur DR ANISH UPADHYAY 
DR KRISHAN Biswas (Alternate) 
Institute of Indian Foundrymen, New Delhi SHRI A. K. ANAND 
JSW Steel Limited, Raigad SHRI GOUTAM MUKHERJEE 
SHRI KRISHNA RAMAVATH (Alternate) 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited, Hyderabad SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 
Mukand Limited, Thane SHRI DOMINIC SAVIO 
National Test House, Kolkata Dr P. KANJILAL 
Research Designs and Standards Organization SHRI VASANT D. MEHARKARE 
(RDSO), Lucknow Suri B. R .VERMA (Alternate) 
Tata Motors Limited, Pune SHRI PRADEEP KULKARNI 


SHRI SHAILESH SONWANE (Alternate) 


Tata Motors Limited, Jamshedpur SHRI MANASHI ADHIKARI 
DR GOUTAM MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI N. SURYANARAYANA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MTD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI VISHAL KUMAR RANA, 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (MTD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 22 (13399). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


f 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western s Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


