IS : 4081 - 1986 (Reaffirmed Reaffirmed 1995 ) ( 2005

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR BLASTING AND RELATED DRILLING OPERATIONS

( First Revision )
Second Reprint FEBRUARY 1997

UDC 69.055.00/03

: 614.8(026)

0 Copyright

1987

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS
NEW DELHI 110002

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG Gr 5 May 1987

IS:4081- 1986

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR BLASTING AND RELATED DRILLING OPERATIONS

( First Revision )
Safety in Construction Sectional Committee, BDC 45
Chairman
SHRI D. N. CHOPRA A-9/33, Vasant Vihar New Delhi

Members

Representing

,CHIEF ENGINEER( TRAINING ) SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( TRAINING ) ( Alfernate ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR( B & S ) CB

Central

Public Works Department,

New Delhi

Research Designs and Standards Organization, Ministry of Railways, Lucknow

ASSISTANT DESIGN ENGINEER ( B & S ) CS ( Alternate ) Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. M. DHARAP DIKECTOR, ENGINEERING GEOLOGY Geological Survey of India, Calcutta
DIVISION I, WESTERN REGION

SHRI S. K. MATHUR ( Alternate DIRECTOR OF MINES SAFETY JOINT DIRECTOKOF MINES SAFETY( Aifernare ) DIRECTOR( NHPD I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR( NHPD I ) SHRI H. K. GADI SHRI II. N. GUPTA
SHRI G. S. IYER

)

Directorate

General

of Mines Safety, Dhanbad

SHRI V. S. SASI KUMA; ( Altcrtwe ) Acrow India Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. M. KARUE ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, BRIG JAGDISV NARAIN quarters, New Delhi SHRI P. SHRIKANT ( Alternate )
0 Copyright 1987

Central Water Commission, New Delhi ( Alternate ) The Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi Ministry of Labour, Government of ( FASLI ), New Delhi

India

Army

Head-

( Continued

on page 2 ) .

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected undsr the Indion Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reprnduction in whole or in plrt by any mezms except with written permission of the pilblijher sh:lll be deemed to be an infrinzement of copvrighr under the slid Act.

IS:4081- 1986
( Continued from page Members 1 ) Representing ( A-101, Anand Vihar, New

SHRI P. N. MEHRO~RA SHRI J. P. MITTAL SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE SHRI M. S. RUDRAKSHI SHRI S. T. RANADE ( Alternate SHRI S. N. SANYAL
)

In personal

Delhi )

capacity

The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta Ministry of Home Affairs ( Fire Services ), New Delhi Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Forest Research Dehra Dun Institute and Colleges,

SHRI H. N. MISHRA ( Alfernate ) Ministry of Transport, New Delhi SHRI S. SEETHARAMAN SHRI I. J. MAMTANI ( Alternate ) Builders' Association of India, New Delhi DR SOM DATT National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN SHRI SASHI KANT ( Alternate ) SUPERINTENDENT ( CONSTRUCTION ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, Durgapur SHRI S. R. C. RAO ( Alternate ) National Buildings Constructioa Corporrtion, SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR New Delhi Centr;igad Research Institute ( CSIR ), New PROF C. G. SWAMINATHAN Indian Institute of Architecls. New Delhi SHRI TILAK RAJ TAKULIA Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi BRIG VIKRAU WADHAVAN SHRI H. S. PASRICHA ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member SHR~G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )
Secretary

)

SHRI K. K. SHARMA Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

IS :4081-1986

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR BLASTING AND RELATED DRILLING OPERATIONS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD 0.1This Irdian Standard ( First Revision > was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 November 1986, af;er the draft finalized by the Safety in Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.
0.2 Blasting and drilling is a specialized job involving a lot of hazards which often lead to accidents. It is necessary, lherefore, that certain safety precautions are laid down for various operations involved in the process of blasting and drilling for the guidance of these who are engaged on the work with a view to minimizing the risk of accidents and injuries. 0.3 This standard was first formulated in 1967 to lay down the safety requirements for blasting and drilling operations. In view of the advancement made in the field of blasting and drilling processes; it has now become necessary to revise the standard. This revision incorporates modifications to the safety rules, relating'to various operations involved like transportation of explosives and their storage, issuing of explosives, the drilling and loading operations, electrical shot firing and safety fire blasting. 0.4 Assistance has also been taken from the cxperitnce of Natioral New Delhi, while preparing this Hydroelectric Power Corporation, revision of the standard.

1.SCOPE 1.1This standard lays down the safety requirements for blasting re!ated drilling cperations in locations other than mines.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose apply. of this standard, 3 the fo!lowing definitions shall and

IS :4081-1986 2.1Blaster - The person assigned the duty of loading and blasting the
explosives. 2.2 Blasting Cap - A shell closed at one end and containing a charge of detonating compound, which is ignited from a spark. It is used for detonating explosives. 2.3 Detonator - Any device containing a detonating charge that is used for initiating detonation in an explosive. The term includes, but is not limited to, electric blasting caps of instantaneous and delay types< blasting caps for use with safety fuse and detonating cord delay connectors. 2.4 Electric Blasting Cap - A shell containing a charge of detonating compound which is ignited by an electric current from two projecting insulated leg wires. 2.5 Explosive - Any mixture or chemical compound which is capable of producing an explosion by its own energy. This includes black powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine compounds, fulminate, or explosive substance having explosive power equal to or greater than black powder. 2.6 Magazine - Any building or other structure used for the storage of explosives. 2.7 Missed Hole - A drilled hole containing an explosive charge that failed to explode. 2.8 Permanent Blasting Wires - Wires between the firing switches, for use in blasting where the power source is an electric circuit. 2.9 Primer - An explosive cartridge with a detonator or igniting agent inserted therein. 2.10 Safety Fuse/Detonating Fuse - A medium manufactured especially for firing explosive charges, that conveys a flame at uniform rate rather than one that is in itself a detonator or one that operates on some other principle. 2.11 Stemming - Material used for confining a charge of explosives in a hole or to cover explosives in mudcapying. 3. TRANSPORTATION 3.1 All the relevant framed thereunder Lo:lding, unloading qualified personnel. no electrical switch OF EXPLOSIVES

central, state and local laws and rules and regulations shall be complied and necessary licence obtained. and handling of explosives shall be supervised by At the time of loading or unloading of explosives, should be operated.

3.2 Containers - For carrying small q!lantity ( up to 5 kg of explosives ) specially designed insulated containers may be used. These cont.liners 4

IS : 4081-1986 shall be constructed of finished wood not less than 50 mm thick or plastic not less than 6 mm thick or pressed fibre not less than 10 mm thick. Metal components, including nails, bolts, screws, etc, shall not be used in the construction of the containers, which shall be waterproof and provided with lids. The containers shall be provided with suitable non-conductive carrying device, such as rubber, leather or canvas handle or strap. 3.2.1 Each explosive container should be clearly and indelibly marked to indicate: 9 manufacturer's name or trade mark, ii) name of the explosive, iii) lot number, iv) date of manufacture, v) expiry date, and vi) the words ` EXPLOSIVES, HANDLE explosives WITH CARE `? or detonators shall be 3.2.2 Containers used for storing used for that item only.

3.3 Vehicles - ` The vehicles used for transporting explosive shall be driven only by a licenced driver who is physically fit and is familiar with the precautions to be taken while carrying the explosives in his vehicles. ' All vehicles used for transporting explosives shall be maintained in good working condition. 3.3.1 The body-work of each vehicle shall preferably be of the completely enclosed type with a properly fitting door and locking `the body-work shall be leak-proof. In cpen bodied arrangement; vehic!es, the floor shall be leak-proof, the sides and ends shall be of sufficient height to prevent the explosives from falling off the vehicle and the explosives shall be covered with a waterproof and flame resistant tarpaulin. 3.3.1.1 The interior of the body shall not have any exposed metal parts, except those of copper, brass and other non-sparking metals, and shall preferably be lined with wood. 3.3.1.2 The chassis of the vehicles shall be well sprung, the unsprung country carts shall not be used :for the transportation of explosives. The tyre pressures shall be maintained as per the requirements of the Indian Explosives Regulations. both 3.3.1.3 The exterior of the body shall be conspicuously marked on sides and ends with the word ` EXPLOSIVES `, painted is not less 5

IS:4081-

1986

than 100 mm high letters in white over a red background in English and local language. 3.3.2 AI1 electrical wiring and equipment of vehicles shall be adequately insulated and protected aga'nst mechanical damage to prevent shortcircuiting. 3.3.3 Two carbon dioxide fire extinguishers, each. of not less than 3 kg capacity, conforming to IS : 2878-1986*, shall be carried on each vehicles. The extinguishers shall be securely mounted on the vehicles in such a manner that they can be readily removed for use in an emergency. 3.3.4 A motor vehicle carrying explosives shall not be re-fueled except in emergencies and even then only when the motor has been stopped and other precautions have been taken to prevent accidents. 3.3.5 All motor vehicles used for transportation of explosives shall be carefully inspected at the beginning of the day's work to ensure that: a) the vehicle is in good condition in all respects for safe transportation of explosives; b) the chassis, engine and body are clean and free from surplus oil and grease; the fuel system of the vehicle, including the fuel tank(s) is free 4 from leakage; d) all electrical wiring and equipment are in sound condition; e> lights, brakes and steering mechanism are in good working order; f) the tire extinguishers are serviceable and in position on the vehicle; and d Driver is trained in the use of extinguishers on his vehicle. 3.4 Safety Precautions - Safety precautions outlined in 3.4.1 to 3.4.12 shall be observed for transportation of explosives. 3.4.1 No metals except approved metal truck bodies shall be allowed to come in contact with cases of explosives. Metal, flammabie, or As far as corrosive substances shall not be transported with explosives. possible, transportation of any other material along with explosives shall be prohibited. 3.4.2 Smoking shall be prohibited in the vehicle carrying explosives and in its vicinity. *Portable fire extinguishers, carban dioxide typs 6
(first revision ).

IS : 4081 - 1986 3.4.3 No unauthorized explosives. person shall be allowed in the vehicle carrying

3.4.4 Explosives and detonators of blasting caps shall not be permitted to be transported in the same vehicle. 3.4.5 Detonators and other explosives for blasting shall be transported to the site of work in the original containers or in securely locked separate noa-metallic container and shall not be carried loose or mixed with other mat?riaIs. 3.4.6 Care ~h:tll be taken in loading and unloading of explosives. Sl!ed containers shall not be handled roughly or dropped. 3.4.7 Drivers shall not leave the vehicles unattended explosives. 3.4.8 The speed of the vehicle roads and 40 km/h elsewhere. shall not exceed The

while transporting 25 km/h on rough

3.4.9 Vehicles, transporting explosives shall not be taken into a garage, repair shop or parked in congested areas, public parkings or similar places. 3.4.10 Explosives shall not be transported in trailers. Further, any trailer shall not be attached to a motor truck or vehicle when it is being used in transporting explosives. 3.4.11 Explosives shall not be transported on public highways during darkness, except in emergencies and even then only when the written approval of the project authorities has been obtained. Such vehicles shall be fitted with adequate warning lights on both ends, while operating in darkness. 3.412 Explosives shall not be transferred from one vehicle to another on public highways. except in cases of emergency. 3.5 Weight of Consignments - The quantity of explosives that may be transported by different modes of transport shall be as given in 3.5.1 and 3.5.2. 3.5.1 For transportation by rail, unless otherwiqe permitted, quantity of explosive in any wagon shall not exceed 4 500 kg. The minimum gross wagon load ( inclusive of weight of packing cases ) shall be 3 000 kg, which is approximately equal to 102 cases of explosives if packed in wooden cases or 114 cases if packed in fibre board cases. 3.5.2 For transportation by road, the quantity of explosive carried in any single vehicle shall not exceed 75 percent of the rated load carrying capacity of that vehicle or 3 600 kg, whichever is less. 7

IS : 4081- 1986 cl. STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES

4.1 Storage of explosives is regulated by lhe Indian Explosives provision thereunder should be strictly observed.

Act and

4.2 Explosives shall be stored only in a magazine which is clean, dry, well ventilated, reasonably cool, correctly located, protected against lightning in accordance with Indian Electricity Act and Indian Explosives Act and rules and regulations framed thereunder substantially constructed bullet and fire resistant and securely locked. 4.3 The storage should be done in such a way that the first stored should be used first and to have this facility, the explosives should be stored in sequence. 4.4 Blasting caps, electric blasting caps or primers shall not be stored in the same box, container or rcom with other explosives. 4.5 Explosives, fuse or fuse lighters shall not be stored in a damp or wet place or near oil, gasoline, cleaning solutions or solvents or near radiators, steam pipes, or other sources of heat. 4.6 Smoking and use of matches, naked lights and readily flammable articles or open fires/flame shall be prohibited within the fenced area around it. Suitable notices to this effect shall be conspicuously posted at appropriate locations ( see also 4.15 ). 4.7 An area up to a distance of not less than 8 m on all sides of the magazine shall be maintained free of all vegetation, debris and combustibles. Oily cotton rags/waste and articles liable to spontaneous ignition shall not be allowed in or near the magazine. 4.8 Metals;metallic objects and metal tools that are capable of producing sparks shall not be stored or used inside or in the immediate vicinity of the magazine. 4.9 If nitroglycerine from deteriorated explosives has leaked down onto the floor of the explosive magazine, the floor shall be desensitized by washing thoroughly with an agent obtained before hand from the supplier of the exp!osives. For this purpose, desensitizing agents and the instructions for using them shall always be obtained along with the Supply of nitroglycerine. 4.10 Magazine shoes, without nails, shall be kept at all times in the magazine, and a wooden tub or cement'trough, approximately 300 mm hig h and 450 mm in diameter, filled with water shall be fixed near the Persons entering the magazine shall put on the door of the magazine. magazine shoes provided for the purpose, and be careful not be allow the magazine shoes to touch the ground outside clear floor. Persons with bare feet shall, before entering the magazine, dip their feet in water, 8

IS : 4081- 1986 and then step direct from the tub over the barrier ( if there is one ) on to the clear floor. 4.11 A brush or broom shall be kept in the lobby of the magazine for cleaning the magazice on each occasion it is opened for the receipt, delivery of inspection of explosives. 4.12 Boxes of explosives shall not be thrown down or dragged along the floor and may be stacked on wooden trestles. Where there are white ants, the legs of the trestles should rest in shallow copper, lead or brass bowls, containing water. 4.13 Packages containing explosives shall not be allowed the suh. 4.14 Empty boxes or packing materials shall not be stored to be around, inside or in t.he vicinity of the magazine. to remain in

or permitted

4.15 Adequate quantity of water and fire fighting equipment sball be Guards ( see 4.17 ) shall be properly trained provided in the magazine. m handling such equipment. EXPLOSIVES " " PRO4.16 Signboards reading " DANGER-HIGH TECTED AREA " " NO SMOKING ", etc, shall be prominently displayed in front of the magazine. 4.17 Well trained armed guard shall be posted to guard the magazine. 4.18 The following shall be hung up in the lobby of the magazine: a) A copy of Explosives rules, b) A statement showing the stock in the magazine, and c) Ce'rtificate showing the last date of testing of the lightning conductor. 4.19 For cbntinued blasting-operations, the magazine shall be located at a safe distance near the work-site and actual requirements of explosives for each blast may be drawn and transported to the site; left overs, if any, must be immediately returned to the magazine. Where the blasting operations extend to several scattered sites and/or one of a short duration, portable magazines shall be used. Each such magazine shall be located at a safe distance from the work site, enclosed in a fence and properly guarded. 5. HANDLING AND USE OF EXPLOSIVES be avoided during thunderstorm or All persons shall refire to place of 9

5.1 Handling of explosives shall whtin thunderstorm is expected. safety.

IS :4081-1986
dropped or handled roughly. The packages shall be opened at a safe distance and at a shielded'location vis-a.vis the magazine. 5.3 Sparking metal tools shall not be used to open kegs of explosives. 5.4 Smoking shall not be permitted nor matches. open lights, fire, flame, or any other device capable of producing sparks or flame shall be carried while handling or using explosives. 5.5 Explosives shall not be placed where these may be exposed to flame ,excessive heat, sparks or impact. 5.6 The covers of the explosive cases or packages shall be replaced every time after takiog out part of the contents as long as any explosives are left in them. 5,7 Explosives shall not be carried in the pockets or folds of clothing by any person. 5.8 Primers shall not be made up in a magazine, or near excessive quantity of explosives, or in excess of immediate needs. 5.9 Nothing shall be inserted in the open end of a blasting fuses. cap except

5.2Any package containing explosives shall not be dragged,

5.10No person shall strike, tamper with, or attempt to remove or investigate the contents of a blasting cap or an electric blasting cap or attempt to pull out the crimped safety fuse out of a blasting cap.
5.11 Children and unauthorized or unnecessary persons present where explosives are being handled or used. shall not be

5.12 No attempt shall be made to soften hard set explosives by heating over a fire pr by rolling the explosive on the ground. 5.13 The blasting powder, explosives, detonators, fuses, etc, shall be in good condition and not damaged due to damp moisture or any other cause. They shall be inspected before use and damaged articles shall be discarded totally and removed immediately. 5.14 No attempt shall be made to reclaim or use fuses, blasting caps, electric blasting caps or any other explosives which have been water soaked, even if these have been dried out. The manufacturers shall be consulted. 6. DRILLING AND LOADING be carried out only, with the permission of the The blasting operation shall remain in the charge of 10

6.1 Blasting shall engineer-in-charge.

IS : 4081- 1986

competent and experienced supervisor and workmen who are thoroughly acquainted with the details of handling explosives and blasting cbperations. All the materials, tools and equipment used for blasting operations shall be of approve type. 6.2 No drilling shall be started until previous holes in the blasted are flushed with air and K.iter. area

6.3 The blaster shall be competent and qualified by reason of his training, knowledge or experience in the field of transporting, storing, handling, and using of explosives and having a working knowledge of Rules and Regulations pertaining to explosives. The blaster shall be in good physical condition and not be under influence of drugs, a!cohol, intoxicants, etc. 6.4 While planning drilling operations for blasting purposes, consideration must be given to Ihe nature of startum and the overburden with a view to avoiding the possibilities of land-slides after blasting. 6.5 The face of rock shall be carefully examined before drilling, to deterNo attempt shall be mine the possible presence of unfired explosive. made to drill at a site if undenoted explosives are suspected. In all such cases action shall be taken according to 10.5. 6.6 The position of all holes to be drilled white paint. shall be marked out with

6.7 The bore hole shall be carefully checked for length, presence of water, dust, etc, with a wooden tamping pole or a measuring tape before loading. It shall be cleared of all debris before explosives are inserted. 6.8 The diameter of the bore of each hole shall be greater than the outside diameter of the cartridges of explosive. The line of detonating fuse extending into a bore hole shall be cut from the spool before loading the remainder of the charge. Use of short pieces of fuse shall be prohibited for detonation purposes. 6.9 Surplus explosives shall not be stacked loading. near working areas during

6.10 Loading and drilling shall not be carried out at the ssme time in the same area. 6.11 A bore hole shall not be loaded with explosives after springing ( enlarging the hole with explosives ) or upon completion of drilling without making sure that it is cool and that it does not contain any hot metal, burning or smoldering materials. Temperatures in excess of 65�C are dangerous. 11

IS : 4081- 1986
6.12 A bore hole near another hole loaded with explosives sprung.

shall not be

6.13 Cartridges or explosives shall not be forced on obstruction in a bore hole.

down a bore hole or

6.14 Blaster shall keep an accurate up-to-date record of explosives, blasting agents, blasting supplies used in a blast and shall keep an accurate running inventory of all explosives and blasting agents stored at operation-site. 6.15 No force shall be used for inserting a blasting cap or an electric `fhe cap shall be inserted into a hole made blasting cap into explosive. with a pricker designed for the purpose. A hitch of the electric blasting cap leading wire shall be made on the primer cartridge so as to prevent pulling out of the electric blasting cap from the explosive charge. In case of detonating fuse, the fuse shall be tied to the explosive cartridge so that the blasting cap is not pulled out. Care shall be taken so that the electric blasting cap, loading nire or the length of the safety fuse does not get damaged during loading of the charge. 6.16 No attempt primer. shall be made to slit, drop, deform or abuse the

6J7 No holes shall be loaded except those to be fired on the next round of blasting and after blasting, all remaining explosives and detonators shall be immediately returned to an authorised magazice. 6.18 Blasting caps or electric blasting caps shall not be connected to cIItoa~sting fuse except by methods recommended by the manufacturers 6.19 No cartridge shall be cut or explosive purpose whatsoever. removed from it for any

6.20 Metallic devices of any kind shall not be used in tamping. Wooden tamping tools with no exposed metal parts except non-sparking meta? connectors for jointed poles shall be used. Violerrt tamping shall be avoided. Primer shall not be tamped. 6.21 Care shall be taken to confine the explosives in the bore hole with sand, earth, clay or other suitable non-combustible stemming material. 6.22 Kinking or injuring of fuse or electric blasting cap wires shall be avoided when tamping. 6.23 No person shall be allowed to deepen drill boles which have contained explosives or blasting agents or insert a drill, pick or bore in butts of old holes even if examination fails to disclose expl&.v.es. 12

IS : 4981- 1986 6.24 Drilling shall not be resumed after blasts have been fired until a thorough examination has been made to make sure that there are no unexploded charges in the remaining butts of old holes or otherwise, which the drills may strike. 6.25 Rock drillers shall be equipped with approved respirators in sillicious dusty atmosphere arising out of drilling operations. for use

6.26 In tunnelling work, welding/cutting of metal shall not be done, inside the tunnel at the time of loading at the face, until the, blast has been fired. 7. ELECTRICAL SHOT-FIRING CIRCUlT

7.1 In deciding the sizes of wire, fuses, circuits, blasting switches, etc, instructions issued by the manufacturers of these articles shall be folio wed. 7.2 No person shall attempt to uncoil the wires and open out the short circuited bare loading wires of the electric b!asting cap during approach of dust storm or near any source of large charge of static electricity or near a radio transmitter. The manufacturer of the cap or the Collector of Exp!osives shall be consulted regarding the distance from the transl mitter beyond which electric blasting shall be conducted. 7.3 Firing circuit shall be kept completely insulated from the ground or other conductors, such as bare wires, rails, pipes or other paths of stray current. 7.4 There shall not be any electric live wires or cables of any kind near e?ectric blasting caps or other explosives except at the time and for the purpose of firing the blast. 7.5 All electric blasting caps shall be tested singly and also when connected in a circuit in series using only an approved type of circuit continuity tester or ohmmeter. 7.6 No attempt shall be made to use in the same circuit either electrical blasting caps made by more than one manufacturer or electric blasting caps of different design or function even if made by the same manufacturers unless such use is approved by the manufacturers. 7.7 No attempt shall be made to fire a circuit of electric blasting caps with less than the minimum current specified by the manufacturei.of that electric blasting cap. 7.8 Care shall be taken to ensure that all wire,ends for electricai connections are bright and clean. 13

IS :4081-1986
7.9 The electric cap wires or loading wires shall be kept short circuited until ready to fire. 7.10 When energy for blasting is taken from power circuits, ihe voltage shall ,not exceed 220 V. The wiring and controlling arrangements shall conform to the following: a) The blasting switch shall be strictly according to the specifica tions, externally operated double-pole double throw switch, which when locked in the open position will short circuit and ground the leading wires. The switch shall be installed at the location where the firing is to be controlled; b) A ` safety ' switch of the same type as the blasting switch shall be installed between the blasting switch and the firing circuit and lead lines, at a distance not to exceed 180 cm from the blasting switch; and c) Both the safety switch atd the blasting switch shall be locked in the open position immediately after firing the shot and before any person is Fermitted to the return to the blasting area. Key to the switches shall remain in the possession of the blaster at all times. 7.11 Copper wires with solid cores of appropriate gauge shall be used for firing lines; the w res shall be adequately insulated and in sound condition. 7.12 Blasting operations in the proximity of overhead power lines, communication lines, utility lines, or other structures shall not be carried out until the operator or the owner, or both of such lines have been notified acd precautiorary measures deemed necessary, have been taken. 7.13 All holes loaded on a shift shall be fired on the same shift. 7.14 ,4s far as possible, blasting shall be carried out using suitable exploder with 2.5 percent excess capacity. Electric power from the mains shall be used only when it is absolutely necessary. 7.15 Each electric meter before and carry the current. outside the tunr.el blas!ing cap shall be tested with an approved galvacoafter tamping in a hole to determine whether it will All testing shall be done by placing the galvanometer and away from the tunnel face. shall not tester

7.16 The number of electric blasting caps used in a circuit exceed the tested capacity of the blasting machine.

7.17 The circuit, including all caps, shall be tested with a circuit or galvanometer tefo:e being connected to the firing line. 14

IS : 4081- 1986 8. BLASTING WITH SAFETY FUSE 8.1 The fuse shall be carefully handled to avoid damaging the covering. In very cold weather, the fuse shall be slightly warmed before using so as to avoid cracking the water-proofing. 8.2 The minimum length of fuse shall be not less than that required by state laws; in any case, it shall be not less than 750 mm. The maximum burning rate of the fuse shall be such that it will allow sufficient time to all concerned persons to reach a place of safety before the blast occurs; the burning rate of the fuse shall, in any case, be not more than 600 mm,/min, Recommended minimum fuse lengths and maximum burning rates for normal conditions are given below: NugOe; of 4- 10 11 - 12 Minimum Fuse Length lG0 2 150 Maximum Burning Rate mmlmin 450 450

8.3 The fuse shall not be cut until all preparations have been taken to insert it into a blasting cap. About 25 to 50 mm length of the fuse shall be cut from its end to ensure a dry end. It shall be cut squarely across with a clean and sharp blade. The fuse shall be seated lightly against the cap charge and care shall be taken to avoid twisting after it has been placed in position. 8.4 Blasting caps shall not be crimped by any means other than a cap crimper designed for tk e purpose. It shall be necessary lo make sure that the cap is squarely crimped to the face. 8.5 The fuse shall be lighted with a fuse lighter designed for the purpose. If a match is used, the fuse shall be slit at the end and the match head held in the slit against the powder core ard then the match head rubbed against an abrasive surface to light the fuse. 8.6 The fuse shall not be lighted until sufficient stemming has been placed over the explosives to prevent sparks of live match head fl-om ccming into contact with an explosives. 8.7 The explosives shall not be held in hands when lighting the fuse. 8.8 Fat more than 12 holes shall be loaded 2nd shot at ore and fuse are used for detonating. 9. UNDER GROUND WORK time if cap

9.1 Only permissible explosives shall be used and that too in the manner In case ANFO is used, due care specified by the appropriate authority. 15

shall be exercised in doing more extensive temping required so as to eliminate chances of static current being generated. 9.2 Excessive quantities of explosives shall not be taken underground at any time. Black blasting powder or pellet powder shall not be used with any other explosive in the same bore hole. 9.3 For blasting in tunnels and shafts precautions detailed in IS : 5878 The poisonous gases shall be ( Part 2/Set 1 )-1970* shall be followed. promptly removed by using exhaust fans in shafts and reversible axial The air duct shall be of such size as not to allow flow fans in tunnels. too much pressure drop so that the velocity of air at the delivery end is not less than 0'2 m/s.

10.BEFORE AbID AFTER BLASTING 10.1Before blasting, sufficient warning shall be given to enable the people working In the blasting area to get off the danger zone. All persons, other than blaster, shall leave the danger area at least 10 minutes The danger zone shall be suitably cordoned before the blasting starts. off and flag men posted at important points.
10.2 No loose materials, such as tools, drilling implements, left on the rock surfaces to be blasted. etc, shall be

10.3 Blasting in the open shall be carried out during fixed hours every day or on fixed days in the week. This information shall be amply publicized and the following precautions observed: a) All approaches to the project site, where regular blasting operations are undertaken, shall be sign-posted for warning the public and indicating the days and timings when blasting is to be carried out; b) All approaches to the project site, shall be closed by barriers at a distance of not less than 400 m, 10 minutes before firing is to take place and c) Loud wailing note of not less than 1 minute duration shall be sounded on sirens to warn the public before commencement of firing. The end of firing operations must be followed by sounding an all clear signal on the sirens as a continuous long note of not less than 1 minute duration. 10.4 Each bore hole shall be thoroughly cleaned before a cartridge is inserted. Wooden tamping rods ( not pointed, but cylindrical throughout)
*Code of prnctlce for construction rock, Section 1 Drilling and blasting.

of tunnel: Part 2 Underground excavation 16

Es :4031-1986
shall be used in charging the holes. The cartridges shall be gently pJac.4 and not rammed. The primer cartridge shall be on the top.

10.5 The blaster shall not return to blasting site after firing, until at least 5 minutes have elapsed. In case of electric shot firing, the shot holes shall be examined after blasting and in cas.e of misfire no person shall be allowed to approach the blasting site for at least 5 minutes. In case of blasting with safety fuse, utmost care shall be taken to count the number of loud reports to ensure that all the shots have fired and in the event of misfire, no person shall be allowed to approach the blasting site for at least 30 minutes. In any case all holes shall be carefully inspected for residual undetonated explosives after firing the shots. No other person than those duly authorized shall approach the holes until one of the following operations has been performed in respect of each of the misfired holes:
a) If the misfire is due to a fauity cable or faulty electrical connection the defect shall be remedied and the shot fired; b) The stemming shall be floated out by use of water or air jet from hose until the hole has been opened to within 60 cm of the charge, whereupon water shall be siphoned or pumped out, then a fresh new charge placed and duly detonated; and c) A new hole shall be dril!ed 60 cm away from the old bore and parallel to it an.d about 30 cm less in depth and the new hole charged and duly fired. 10.6 If a shift change is unavoidable, the person in charge of the outgcing shift shall, before leaving the work, inform the person relieving him of any cases of misfired shots, point out to him their positions, duly cross-ma.rked, and also state clearly what action remains to be taken in each case. 11. EXPLOSIVES DISPOSAL

11.1 No explosive shall be abandoned. These shall be disposed off or destroyed strrctly in accordance with the approved methods and in doing so the manufacturers or the appropriate authority shall be consulted. 11.2 Explosives, caps, boxes lines or material used in packing of explosives shall net be left lying around in places to which children or unauthorized persons or livestock: can have access. 11.3 Paper or fibrous material employed in packing explosives,shall not be put to any subsequent use. Such material shall be destroyed by burning in the presence of a responsible person. 17

IS : 4081.1986 12. ACCOUNT 12.1 A careful day-to-day account of the explosives shall be maintained in an approved register and manner, which shall be open to inspection at all times by the concerned authorities. 12.2 Explosives shall be issued only to competent persons upon written requisition signed by the blaster or by an official authorised for the purpose and only against the signature or thumb impression. Such requisitions shall be preserved by the person-in-charge of the magazine.

18

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 8375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 11 3239399 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 00 32

Central Laboratory: Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional Offices: Central *Eastern

32376 17 : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700654 337 86 62 160022 603843

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANMGARH Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 23 15 western : Manakalaya. E9, Behind Mar01 Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 832 92 95
MUMBAI 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380901 $Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALOHE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201091 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781903 5-8-56C,' L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Seth Bhavan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 TC. No. 1411421, University P.O. Pafayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM Inspection Offices (With Safe Point): Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 52 51 71 323635 550 1348 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996 541137 201083 372925 21 6876 23 89 23 26 23 05 696034 621 17

*Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, PO. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 vales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, BANGALORE 560002

27 1085 309 65 28 2223971

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India

