**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12464 (1988) : Methods of test for roof bars used in 
mines [MED 8: Mining Techniques and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 622-284-5 : 669'1 4-422 : 620'1 



18:12464-1988 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR ROOF BARS 
USED IN MINES 



(Reaffirmed 1999) 



1. Scope - 

mines. 



Covers the methods of tests for roof bars ( both link bars and uncoupled bars ) used in 



1.1 Tests in addition to those given in this standard may be carried out as agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser, or as required by the statutory authority. 

2. Information to be Supplied by the Manufacturer — The manufacturer shall provide the 
information regarding classification, type, other details for identification and overall dimensioned 
drawing of the bars supplied. 

3. Tests and Test Methods 

3.1 Bend Test on Bar Section — The roof bar shall be simply supported at two points with a specified 
span and loaded centrally through a standard crown of a prop. The bar shall be loaded gradually up 
to a specified load corresponding to the bending moment of the bar. With this load acting, the 
deflection of the bat at the centre, that, is at the point of application of the load, shall be measured 
and recorded. 

3.2 Bend Test on Joint — The bars shall be linked togther and set in line by inserting the pin and 
wedge or by means of pin and shackle. The bars shall then be simply supported over a specified 
span. With hinge pin positioned at mid-span, two equal loads of a specified magnitude shall be 
applied gradually. With the specified loads acting on the bars, the deflection of the bars at the hinge 
pin shall be measured and recorded. 

3.3 Reverse Bend Test on Bar Section — The roof bar shall be centrally loaded through a standard 
crown of a prop. The bar shall be gradually loaded until the central deflection is of a specified value 
or until the load reaches a specified value whichever occurs first. The bar shall then be turned over 
and loaded again until the central deflection is of the specified value in the opposite direction or 
until the load reaches a specified value whichever occurs first. This cycle shall be repeated for a 
specified number of times. 

3.4 Crushing Test 

3.4.1 The roof bar shall be placed on a fiat surface with a minimum specified length, and a 
specified load shall be applied centrally with respect to the support length and gradually perpendicular 
to the flange of the bar through a standard crown of a prop at the point of support for props. After 
this test, the bar shall be checked for any permanent deformation. 

3.4.2 The bar shall be tested as in 3.4.1 except that the crown shall be inclined laterally at an angle 
of 10° to the normal. The bar shall be checked to see whether it withstands a specified crushing 
load at the point of support for props, 

3.5 Destruction Test on Bar Section — The roof bar simply supported shall be centrally loaded 
through a standard crown of a prop. The load shall be gradually increased till the failure of the bar 
section occurs. The maximum bending moment of the bar section at failure shall be determined. The 
deflections of the bar at the centre of the span at different loads ( in steps of 10 kN or 1 tonne after 
nominal bending moment ) shall also be noted. 

3.6 Destruction Test on Joint —1\no roof bars shall be linked together and loaded. The equal loads 
shall be increased gradually until the joint ( or bar ) failure occurs. The maximum bending moment 
of the joint at failure shall be determined. The deflections at the hinge pin with different loads shall 
also be noted. 



Adopted 22 September 1988 



@ March 1989, BtS 



Gri 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 12464 -1988 

3.7 Canti/ever Test — The fixed bar of a two bar cantilever shall be mounted between a standard 
crown of a prop and a flat steel plate so that the centre of the crown coincides with the quarter bar 
position nearer the fork end. An end load of specified magnitude is gradually applied and deflection 
is measured. As a cantilever, the bar shall sustain a minimum specified load before deflecting a 
specified value measured at the end of the bar. For uncoupled bars, load shall be applied at or near 
the end remote from the prop. The distance between the point of load application and the nearest 
edge of the prop head shall be of a specilied value. 

3.8 Ff aw Sensitivity Test— A sa\N cut shall be made transversely accross the flange of the bar 
section at the centre of the test span with a previously unused sharp blade having 710 teeth per 
metre rate. The saw cut shall be 2 mm deep for sections up to 88 mm total depth and 3 mm deep for 
sections over 88 mm total depth. A bend test shall be made over a span of 700 mm with the saw 
cut on the tension side and with single point central loading on the opposite face using the standard 
prop cap or with a knife edge to the full bar width. The load shall be applied at such a rate that the 
deflection at the bar centre, after the yield occurs, takes place at approximately 10 mm per minute. 
The test shall be carried out at a temperature of 300rt2° K. Bending shall continue until the fracture 
occurs. If the fracture does not take place on the first bend, to the limits of the deflection which can 
be applied, the bar shall be straightened, the depth of saw cut increased by 1 mm and the test 
repeated. 

3.9 Mode of Failure — Mode of failure of the bar, if any, in any of the tests in 3.1 to 3.8 shall be 
ductile rather than brittle and shall not be in an abrupt manner. 



EXP LA N ATORY NOTE 

This Indian Standard is a necessary adjunct to IS : 8473-1 988 'Specification for roof bars used 
in mines ( first revision )'. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following: 

DIN 21550-1969 Prufung von Strebkappen fiir den Grubenausbau (Testing of strut sole pieces 
for support in mines ), Deutsches Institut fur Normung { DIN ). 

JIS 2503-1967 Link bar. Japanese industrial Standards Association. 

Standard testing procedure No. 1 — Roof bars. National Coal Board, UK. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



