IS 16000:2004

Iw?lw

n

`g-inn

m

Indian Standard
AEROSPACE QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- REQUIREMENTS

ICS 03.120. 10; 49.020

0 BIS 2004

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

2004

Price Group 6

Aircraft, Space Vehicles, Air Cargo Handling and Aircraft Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee, TED 14

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Aircraft, Space Vehicles, Air Cargo Handling and Aircraft Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. Subsequent to the third revisionof1S09001 in 2000 superseding the second editionofISO9001 :1994 together with ISO 9002: 1994 and ISO 9003 : 1994, a need was felt to draw a quality management system (QMS) requirements standard to cover the aerospace industry besides those covered in ISO 9001 :2000. This aims to enhance aerospace customer satisfaction through the effective application of the system, including processes of continual improvement of the system and the assurance of conformity to aerospace customer and applicable regulatory requirements In the formulation of this standard, assistance has also been derived from SAE AS 9100:2001 `Quality systems -- Aerospace -- Model for quality assurance in design, development, production, installation and servicing'. The organizations initially developing IS 19000 based QMS must develop a QMS based on IS/ISO 9001. The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A.

IS 16000:2004

CONTENTS
1 Scope 1.1 General 1.2 Application References Terms and Definitions Aerospace Quality Management System Management Responsibility 5.1 General Requirements 5.2 Documentation Requirements 5.3 Management Commitment 5.4 Customer Focus 5.5 Quality Policy 5.6 Planning 5.7 Responsibility, Authority and Communication 5.8 Management Review 5.9 Resource Management Product Realization 6.1 Planning of Product Realization 6.2 Customer-Related Processes 6.3 Design and Development 6.4 Purchasing 6.5 Production and Service Provision 6.6 Control of Monitoring and Measuring Devices Measurement and Analysis 7.1 General 7.2 Monitoring and Measurement 7.3 Control of Nonconforming Product 7.4 Analysis of Data Improvement 8.1 Continual Improvement 8.2 Corrective Action 8.3 Preventive Action 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 5 5 6 7 8 8 8 8 9 9 9 9 10 10

2 3 4 5

6

7

8

1

IS 16000:2004

Indian Standard
AEROSPACE QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- REQUIREMENTS

1 SCOPE 1.1 General This standard specifies requirements for an Aerospace Quality Management System where an organization needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide product that meets aerospace customer and applicable regulatory requirements.
NOTE -- In this standard, the term `product' applies only to the product intended for, or required by, an aerospace customer.

IS No.

Title

(Part 3): 1993 1s/1s0 10012 (Part 1): 1992 (Part 2): 1997

Management of audit programmed Quality assurance requirements for measuring equipment Metrological conflation system for measuring equipment Guidelines for control of measuring processes

3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS/ISO 9000 apply. In addition, the following supply chain description applies to this standard: Supplier + Organization + Customer

1.2 Application All requirements of this standard are aerospace sectorspecific and are intended to be applicable to all organizations, regardless of tjpe, size and product provided. Where any requirement(s) of this standard cannot be applied due to the nature of an organization and its product, this can be considered for exclusion. Where exclusions are made, claims of conformity to this standard are not acceptable unless these exclusions are limited to requirements within 7, and such exclusions do not affect the organization's ability, or responsibility, to provide product that meets Aerospace Customer and applicable regulatory requirements. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions, which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below:

The term `organization' refers to the unit to which this Indian Standard applies. Throughout the text of this standard, wherever the term `product' occurs, it can also mean `service'.
4 AEROSPACE SYSTEM QUALITY MANAGEMENT

The Aerospace Quality Management System consists of the following: a) b) c) d) Management responsibility (see 5), Product realization (see 6), Measurement and analysis (see 7), and Improvement (see 8).
REffPONSIBILITY

5 MANAGEMENT

5.1 General Requirements

Is No.
1s/1s09000:2000

Title

Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary
(second revision)

Top management shall establish, document, implement and maintain an aerospace quality management system and continually improve its effectiveness in accordance with the requirements of this standard. Top management shall: a) identify the processes needed for the aerospace quality management system and their application throughout the organization (see 1.2). The processes identified shall include the processes arising out of meeting

1s/1s0 10011 (Part 1): 1990 (Part 2): 1991

Guidelines for auditing quality systems Auditing Quantification criteria for quality systems auditors 1

1S 16000:2004 customer as well as statutory and regulatory requirements. b) determine the sequence and interaction of these processes, c) determine criteria and methods needed to ensure that both the operation and control of these processes are effective, d) ensure the availability of resources and information necessary to support the operation and monitoring of these processes, e) monitor, measure and analyse these processes, and o implement actions necessary to achieve planned results and continual improvement of these processes. These processes shall be managed by the organization in accordance with the requirements of this standard. Where an organization chooses to outsource any process that affects product conformity with requirements, the organization shall ensure control over such processes. Control of such outsourced processes shall be identified within the aerospace quality management system.
NOTE -- Processes needed for the Aerospace Quality Management System referred to above should include processes for management activities, provision of resources, product realization and measurement.

5.2.2 Quality Manual Top management shall establish and maintain a quality manual that includes: a) scope of the aerospace quality management system, including details of and justification for any exclusions (see 1.2), documented procedures established for the aerospace quality management system, or reference to them, and a description of the interaction between the processes of the aerospace quality management system.

b)

c)

5.2.3 Control of Documents Documents required by the aerospace quality management system shall be controlled. Records area special type of document and shall be controlled according to the requirements given in 5.2.4. A documented procedure shall be established to define the controls needed: to approve documents for adequacy prior to issue; b) to review and update as necessary and reapprove documents; c) to ensure that changes and the current revision status of documents are identified; d) to ensure that relevant versions of applicable documents are available at points of use, including authorized signatories, sentencing authorities, customer, statutory and regulatory authorities' representatives; e) to ensure that documents remain legible and readily identifiable; o to ensure that documents of external origin are identified and fheir distribution controlled; and g) to prevent the unintended use of obsolete documents, and to apply suitable identification tQthem if they are retained for any purpose. 5.2.4 Control of Records a) Records shall be established and maintained to provide evidence of conformity to requirements and of the effective operation of the aerospace quality management system. Records shall be available for review by sentencing authorities, customer, statutory and regulatory authorities' representatives; Records shall remain legible, identifiable and retrievable; and readily a)

5.2 Documentation 5.2.1 General

Requirements

The aerospace quality management documentation shall include: a) b) c) d)

system

e)

Documented statements of a quality policy and quality objectives, A quality manual, Documented procedures required by this standard, Documents needed by the organization to ensure the effective planning operation and control of its processes, and Records required by this Indian Standard (see 5.2.4). -

NOTES 1 Where the term documented procedure apperus within this standard, this means that the procedure is established, documented, implemented and maintained. 2 The extent of the aerospace quality management system documentation can differ from one organization to another due to: a) b) c) size of the organization and type of activities, complexity of processes and their interactions, and competence of personnel.

b) c) 2

3 The documentation can be in any form or type of medium.

A documented procedure shall be established

IS 16000:2004 to define the controls needed for the identification, storage, protection, retrieval, retention time and disposition of records. 5.3 Management Commitment Top management shall provide evidence of its commitment to the development and implementation of the aerospace quality management system and continually improving its effectiveness by: a) communicating to the organization the importance of meeting customer as well as statutory and regulatory requirements, establishing the quality policy, ensuring that quality objectives are established, conducting management reviews, and ensuring the availability of resources. as the quality objectives; and b) integrity of the aerospace quality management system is maintained when changes to the aerospace quality management system are planned and implemented.

5.7 Responsibility, Authority and Communication 5.7.1 Responsibility
and Authori@

Top management shall ensure that responsibilities and authorities are defined and communicated within the organization. 5.7.2 Management
Representative

b) c) d) e)

Top management shall appoint a member of management, who irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have responsibility and authority that includes: a) Ensuring that processes needed for the quality management system are established, implemented and maintained, Reporting to top management on the performance of the aerospace quality management system and any need for improvement, and Ensuring the promotion of awareness of customer requirements throughout the organization.

5.4 Customer Focus Top management shall ensure that customer requirements are determined and are met with the aim of enhancing customer satisfaction (see 6.2.1 and 7.2.1). 5.5 Quality Policy Top management shall ensure that the quality policy: a) b) is appropriate to the purpose of the organization, includes a commitment to comply with requirements and continually improve the effectiveness of the aerospace quality management system, provides a framework for establishing and reviewing quality objectives, is communicated and understood within the organization, and is reviewed for continuing suitability. b)

c)

Management representative shall have the necessary responsibility and authority and organizational freedom to resolve matters pertaining to quality.
NOTE -- The responsibility of a management representative can include liaison with external parties on matters relating to the Aerospace Quality Management System.

c) d) e)

5.7.3 Internal Communication Top management shall ensure that appropriate communication processes are established within the organization and that communication takes place regarding the effectiveness of the quality management system. 5.8 Management Review 5.8.1 General The top management shall review the organization's aerospace quality management system, at planned intervals, to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. This review shall include assessing opportunities for improvement and the need for changes to the quality management system, including the quality policy and quality objectives. Records from management reviews shall be maintained (see 5.2.4). 3

5.6 Planning 5.6.1 Quality Objectives Top management shall ensure that quality objectives, including those needed to meet requirements for product [see 6.l(a)] are established at relevant functions and levels within the organization. The quality objectives shall be measurable and consistent with the quality policy. 5.6.2 Aerospace Quality Management System Planning Top management shall ensure that: a) planning of the aerospace quality management system is carried out in order to meet the requirements given in 5.1, as well

IS 16000:2004 5.&2 Review Input The input to management information on: a) b) c) d) e) f) g) review shall include 4) ensure that its personnel are aware of the relevance and importance of their activities and how they contribute to the achievement of the quality objectives, and appropriate records of 5) maintain education, training, skills and experience (see 5.2.4).

Results of audits, Customer feedback, Process performance and product conformity, Status of preventive and corrective actions, Follow-up actions from previous management reviews, Changes that could affect the quality management system, and Recommendations for improvement.

5.9.3 Infrastructure The organization shall determine, provide and maintain the infrastructure needed to achieve conformity to product requirements. Infrastructure includes, as applicable: a) b) c) buildings, workspace and associated utilities, process equipment software), and (both hardware and or

5.8.3 Review Output The output from the management review shall include any decisions and actions related to: a) Improvement of the effectiveness of the aerospace quality management system and its processes, Improvement of product related to customer requirements, and Resource needs.

supporting services (such as transport communication).

5.9.4 Work Environment The top management shall determine and manage the work environment needed to achieve conformity to product requirements. 6 PRODUCT REALIZATION 6.1 Planning of Product Realization The organization shall plan and develop the processes needed for product realization. Planning of product realization shall be consistent with the requirements of the other processes of the aerospace quality management system (see 5.1). In planning product realization, the organization shall determine the following, as appropriate: a) Quality objectives and requirements for the product,

b) c)

5.9 Resource Management 5.9.1 Provision of Resources The top management shall determine and provide the resources needed: a) to implement and maintain the aerospace quality management system and continually improve its effectiveness, and to enhance customer satisfaction by meeting customer requirements.

b)

5.9.2 Human Resources a) General Personnel performing work affecting product quality shall be competent on the basis of appropriate education, training, skills and experience. b) Competence, awareness and training. The top management shall: 1) determine the necessary competence for personnel performing work affecting product quality, 2) provide training or take other actions to satisfy these needs, 3) evaluate the effectiveness of the action taken, 4

b) Need to establish processes, documents, and provide resources specific to the product, c) Required verification, validation, monitoring, inspection and test activities specific to the product and the criteria for product acceptance, including in-process verification points are identified when adequate verification of conformance cannot be performed at a later stage of realization and the establishment of appropriate process controls and development control plans where key characteristics have been identified. Records needed to provide evidence that the realization processes and resulting product meet requirements (see 5.2.4).

d)

IS 16000:2004 The output of this planning shall be in a form suitable for the organization's method of operations.
NOTES 1 A document specifying the processes of the Aerospace Quality Management System (including the product realization processes) and the resources to be applied to a specific product, project or contract, can be referred to as a quality plan. 2 The organization may also apply the requirements given in 6.3 to the development of product realization processes. NOTE -- In some situations, such as internet sales, a formal review is impractical for each order. Instead the review can cover relevant product information, such as catalogues or advertising material.

6.2.3 Customer Communication The organization shall determine and implement effective arrangements for communicating with customers in relation to: a) product information; enquiries, contracts or order handling, including amendments; and customer feedback, complaints. including customer

6.2 Customer-Related 6.2.1 Determination
Product

Processes
of Requirements Related to (he

b) c)

The organization shall determine: a) requirements specified by the customer, including the requirements for delivery and post-delivery activities, requirements not stated by the customer but necessary for specified or intended use, where known, statutory and regulatory requirements related to the product, and any additional requirements determined by the organization.
Related to the Product

6.3 Design and Development 6.3.1 Design and Development development of product. During the design and development planning, the organization shall determine: a) b) design and development stages, review, verification and validation that are appropriate to each design and development stage, and responsibilities and authorities for design and development.
Planning

The organization shall plan and control the design and

b)

c) d)

6.2.2 Review of Requirements

c)

The organization shall review the requirements related to the product. This review shall be conducted prior to the organization's commitment to supply a product to the customer (for example, submission of tenders, acceptance of contracts or orders, acceptance of changes to contracts or orders) and shall ensure that: a) b) c) d) product requirements are defined, contract or order requirements differing from those previously expressed are resolved, organization has the ability to meet the defined requirements, and risk associated with new technology andlor short delivery time scale have been evaluated.

The organization shall manage the interfaces between different groups involved in design and development to ensure effective communication and clear assignment of responsibility. Planning output shall be updated, as appropriate, as the design and development progresses. 6.3.2 Design and Development
Inputs

Inputs relating to product requirements shall be determined and records maintained (see 5.2.4). These inputs shall include: ~ a) functional and performance requirements, including specified reliability, maintainability and safety requirements, applicable statutory and regulatory requirements, where applicable, information derived from previous similar designs, and other requirements essential for design and development.

Records of the results of the review and actions arising from the review shall be maintained (see 5.2.4). Where the customer provides no documented statement of requirements, the customer requirements shall be confirmed by the organization before acceptance. Where product requirements are changed, the organization shall ensure that relevant documents are amended and that relevant personnel are made aware of the changed requirements. 5

b) c) d)

These inputs shall be reviewed for adequacy. Requirements shall be complete, unambiguous and not in conflict with each other.

IS 16000:2004 6.3.3 Design and Development
Outputs

b)

The outputs of design and development shall be provided in a form that enables verification against the design and development input and shall be approved prior to release. Design and development outputs shall: meet the input requirements for design and development; appropriate information for b) provide purchasing, production and for service provision, including all pertinent data required to allow the product to be identified, manufactured, inspected, used and maintained shall be defined; c) contain or reference product acceptance criteria; and d) specify the characteristics of the product that are essential for its safe and proper use. a) 6.3.4 Design and Development
Review

Wherever practicable, validation shall be completed prior to the delivery or implementation of the product. Records of the results of validation and any necessary actions shall be maintained (see 5.2.4). Records shall ensure that reports, calculations, test results, etc, demonstrate that the product definition meets the requirements for all identified operational conditions and the product will function correctly.
Changes

c)

6.3.7 Control of Design and Development a) b)

At suitable stages, systematic reviews of design and development shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements (see 6.3.1): a) b) To evaluate the ability of the results of design and development to meet requirements, and To identify any problems necessary actions. and propose

c)

Design and development changes shall be identified and records maintained. The changes shall be reviewed, verified and validated, as appropriate, and approved before implementation. The review of design and development changes shall include evaluation of the effect of the changes on constituent parts and product already delivered. Design control system of the organization should provide for customer and/or regulatory agency approval of changes, when required. Records of the results of the review of changes and any necessary actions shall be maintained (see 5.2.4).

d)

6.4 Purchasing 6.4.1 Purchasing Process a) The organization shall ensure that purchased product conforms to specified purchase requirements. b) The type and extent of control applied to the supplier and the purchased product shall be dependent upon the effect of the purchased product on subsequent product realization or the final product. The control shall include the right of access by the organization, their customer and%egulatory authorities to all facilities in the order and all the applicable quality records. c) The organization shall evaluate and select suppliers based on their ability to supply product in accordance with the organization's requirements. d) Criteria for selection, evaluation and reevaluation of the suppliers shall be established. Records of the results of evaluations and any necessary actions arising from the evaluation shall be maintained (see 5.2.4).

participants in such reviews shall include representatives of functions concerned with the design and development stage(s) being reviewed. Records of the results of the reviews and any necessary actions shall be maintained, including the decision necessary for progression to the next stage (see 5.2.4). 6.3.5 Design and Development a)
Verification

Verification shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements (see 6.3.1) to ensure that the design and development outputs have met the design and development input requirements. Records of the results of the verification and any necessary actions shall be maintained (see 5.2.4).
Validation

b)

6.3.6 Design and Development a)

Design and development validation shall be performed in accordance with planned arrangements (see 6.3.1 ) to ensure that the resulting product is capable of meeting the requirements for the specified application or intended use, where known. 6

e)

IS 16000:2004 6.4.2 Purchasing
Information

Purchasing information shall describe the product to be purchased, including where appropriate: a) b) c) Requirements for approval of product, procedures, processes and equipment, Requirements for qualification of personnel, and Quality management system requirements.

6.5.2 Validation of Processes Service Provision

for Production

and

The organization shall validate any processes for production and service provision where the resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent monitoring or measurement. This includes any processes where deficiencies become apparent only after the product is in use or the service has been delivered. Validation shall demonstrate the ability of these processes to achieve planned results. The organization shall establish arrangements for these processes including, as applicable: a) b) c) d) Defined criteria for review and approval of the processes, Approval of equipment and qualification of personnel, Use of specific methods and procedures, Requirements for records (see 5.2.4), including the significant operations and parameters in the process to be controlled, and Revalidation.
and Traceability

The organization shall ensure the adequacy of specified purchase requirements prior to their communication to the supplier. 6.4.3 Verljlcation of Purchased Product a) The organization shall establish and implement the inspection or other activities necessary for ensuring that purchased product meets specified purchase requirements. Where the organization or its customer intends to perform verification the supplier's organization shall state the intended verification arrangements and method of product release in the purchasing information. When certification test reports are utilized to accept material, the supplier shall assure that data in said reports are acceptable as per applicable specifications. The organization shall periodically validate test reports.

b)

e)

6.5.3 Identlflcation c) a)

The organization shall identify the product by suitable means throughout product realization in order to identify the actual configuration and the agreed configuration. The organization shall identify the product status with respect to monitoring and measurement requirements. Where traceability is a requirement, the organization shall control and record the unique identification of the product (see 5.2.4).

b) 6.5 Production and Service Provision 6.5.1 The organization shall plan and carry out production and service provision under controlled conditions. Controlled conditions shall include, as applicable: a) b) c) d) e) Availability of information that describes the characteristics of the product; Availability necessary; of work instructions, as

c)

NOTE -- In some industry sectors, configuration management is a means by which identification and traceability are maintained.

Use of suitable equipment; Availability and use of monitoring measuring devices; and

6.5.4 Customer Properiy a) The organization shall exercise care with customer property while it is under the organization's control or being used by the organization. The organization shall identi&, veri&, protect and safeguard customer property provided for use or incorporation into the product.

The implementation of monitoring and measurement, including for the prevention, detect ion, and removal of foreign objects and completion of all manufacturing and inspection operations as planned, or as otherwise documented and authorized; and The controls required for off-site works, and

b)

0

.!3) The implementation of release, delivery and post-delivery activities. 7

c) If any customer properly is lost, damaged or otherwise found to be unsuitable for use, this shall be reported to the customer and records maintained (see 5.2.4).

IS 16000:2004
NOTE -- Customer property can include intellectual property.

7 MEASUREMENT AND ANALYSIS 7.1 General The organization shall plan and implement the monitoring, measurement, analysis and improvement processes needed: a) b) c) to demonstrate conformity of the product, to ensure conformity of the aerospace quality management system, and to continually improve the effectiveness of the quality management system.

6.5.5 Preservation a)

of Product

Organization shall preserve the conformity of product during internal processing and delivery to the intended destination. This preservation shall include identification, packaging, storage and protect ion. Preservation shall also apply to the constituent parts of a product.

b) c)

6.6 Control of Monitoring and Measuring Devices The organization shall determine the monitoring and measurement to be undertaken and the monitoring and measuring devices needed to provide evidence of conformity of product to determined requirements (see 6.2.1). The organization shall establish processes to ensure that monitoring and measurement can be carried out and are carried out in a manner that is consistent with the monitoring and measurement requirements. Where necessary to ensure valid results, measuring equipment shall: a) be calibrated or verified at specified intervals, or prior to use, against measurement standards traceable to international or national measurement standards; where no such standards exist, the basis used for calibration or verification shall be recorded; be adjusted or re-adjusted as necessary; be identified to enable the calibration status to be determined; be safeguarded from adjustments that would invalidate the measurement result; and be protected from damage and deterioration during handling, maintenance and storage.

This shall include determination of applicable methods, including statistical techniques, and the extent of their use. 7.2 Monitoring and Measurement 7.2.1 Customer Satisfaction As one of the measurements of the performance of the quality management system, the organization shall monitor information relating to customer perception as to whether the organization has met customer requirements. The methods for obtaining and using this information shall be determined. 7.2.2 Internal Audit The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether the quality management system: a) conforms to the planned arrangements (see 7.1) to the requirements of this standard and to the quality management system requirements established by the organization, and is effectively implemented and maintained.

b) c) d) e)

b)

In addition, the organization shall assess and record the validity of the previous measuring results when the equipment is found not to conform to requirements. The organization shall take appropriate action on the equipment and any product affected. Records of the results of calibration and verification shall be maintained (see 5.2.4). When used in the monitoring and measurement of specified requirements, the ability of computer software to satisfy the intended application shall be confirmed. This shall be undertaken prior to initial use and reconfirmed as necessary.
NOTE -- See 1S/1S0 10012 (Part 1) and 1S/1S0 10012 (Part 2) for guidance.

An audit programme shall be planned, taking into consideration the status and importance of the processes and areas to be audited, as well as the results of previous audits. The audit criteria, scope, frequency and methods shall be defined. Selection of auditors and conduct of audits 3hall ensure objectivity and impartiality of the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own work. The responsibilities and requirements for planning and conducting audits, and for reporting results and maintaining records (see 5.2.4) shall be defined in a documented procedure. The management responsible for the area being audited shall ensure that actions are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected nonconformities and their causes. Follow-up activities shall include the verification of the actions taken and the reporting of verification results (see 7.5.2). 8

IS 16000:2004

The organization shall conduct internal quality audits that assess compliance to their quality system and the requirements of this standard. A flow down of the requirements from this standard through the quality manual to the working-level procedures must be shown. Detailed tools and techniques shall be developed, such as check sheets, process flowcharts, or any similar method to support audit of the procedural requirements. The acceptability of the selected tools will be measured against the effectiveness of the internal audit process and overall organization performance.
NOrE -- See 1S/1S0 10011 (Part 1), 1S/1S0 10011 (Part 2) and 1S/1S0 10011 (Part 3) for guidance.

account process non-conformity result i~roduct non-conformity. c)

that may

The organization shall deal with nonconforming product by one or more of the following ways:

7.2.3 Monitoring

and Measurement

of Processes

The organization shall apply suitable methods for monitoring and, where applicable, measurement of the quality management system processes. These methods shall demonstrate the ability of the processes to achieve planned results. When planned results are not achieved, correction and corrective action shall be taken, as appropriate, to ensure conformity of the product. 7.2.4 Monitoring a)
and Measurement of Product

The organization shall monitor and measure the characteristics of the product to verify that product requirements have been met. This shall be carried out at appropriate stages of the product realization process in accordance with the planned arrangements (see 6.1). The organization's system shall provide a process, as appropriate, for the first product qualification. Evidence of conformity with the acceptance criteria shall be maintained. Records shall indicate the person(s) authorizing release of product (see 5.2.4). Product release and service delivery shall not proceed until the planned arrangements (see 6.1) have been satisfactorily completed, unless otherwise approved by a relevant authority and, where applicable, by the customer. Product

b) c) d)

1) By taking action to eliminate the detected nonconformity; 2) By authorizing its use, release or acceptance under concession by a relevant authority and, where applicable, by the customer; 3) By taking action to preclude its original intended use or application. d) Records of the nature of nonconformities and any subsequent actions taken, including concessions obtained, shall be maintained (see 5.2.4). Product disposed for re-grade shall require a change in product identification to preclude the product's original use. Adequate test reports and certifications shall reflect the regrading. Product disposed for scrap shall be conspicuously and permanently marked until rendered physically unsuitable for use in completed products. e) When nonconforming product is corrected it shall be subject to re-verification to demonstrate conformity to the requirements. 9 When nonconforming product is detected after delivery or use has started, the organization shall take action appropriate to the effects, or potential effects, of the nonconformity. The organization shall provide for timely reporting of non-conformance that may affect product already delivered. 7.4 Analysis of Data The organization shall determine, collect and analyse appropriate data to demonstrate the suitability and effectiveness of the quality management system and to evaluate where continual improvement of the effectiveness of the quality management system can be made. This shall include data generated as a result of monitoring and measurement and from other relevant sources. The analysis of data shall provide information relating to: Customer satisfaction (see 7.2. 1), Conformity to product requirements (see 6.2.1), c) Characteristics and trends of processes and products including opportunities for preventive action, and d) Suppliers. a) b) 9

7.3 Control of Nonconforming a)

The organization shall ensure that product which does not conform to product requirements is identified and controlled to prevent its unintended use or delivery. The controls and related responsibilities and authorities for dealing with nonconforming product shall be defined in a documented procedure. The procedure shall also take into

b)

1S 16000:2004 8 IMPROVEMENT 8.1 Continual Improvement " The organization shall continually improve the effectiveness of the quality management system through the use of the quality polity, quality objectives, audit results, analysis of data, corrective and preventive actions and management review. 8.2 Corrective Action The organization shall take action to eliminate the cause of nonconformities in order to prevent recurrence. Corrective actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the nonconformities encountered. A documented procedure shall be established to define requirements for: a) reviewing non-conformities (including customer complaints), b) determining the causes of nonconformities, c) evaluating the need for action to ensure that nonconformities do not recur, d) determining and implementing action needed, e) records of the results of action taken (see 5.2.4), and t) reviewing corrective action taken, including specific actions where timely and/or effective actions are not achieved.

8.3 Preventive Action The organization shall determine action to eliminate the causes of potential nonconformities in order to prevent their occurrence. Preventive actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the potential problems. A documented procedure shall be established to define requirements for: a) b) c) d) e) determining potential nonconformities and their causes; evaluating the need for action to prevent occurrence of nonconformities; determining and implementing action needed; records of results of action taken (see 5.2.4); and reviewing preventive action taken, including specific actions where timely and /or effective actions are not achieved.

10

IS 16000:2004

ANNEX A (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION

Aircraft, Space Vehicles, Air Cargo Handling and Aircraft Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee, TED 14

Organization

Representative(s)
SHRI M.

Aerial Delivery R&D Establishment, Agra Cantt Amphetronix Pvt Ltd, Bangaiore Research Centre Imarat, Hyderabad Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA), Bangalore Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE), Bangalore Airport Authority of India, New Delhi Allied Electronics Corporation, Mumbai Bharat Dynamics Ltd., Hyderabad Cee Cee Power Hydraulics Pvt Ltd, Indore Centre for Military Air Worthiness (CEMILAC), Bangalore and Certification

L.

SIDANA (Chairman)

SHRI RAIW JAIN (Mterrrde) SHRI MOHAN PHILIP Srnu RAJENDRAPRASAD SHRJS. C. SHRJMALI SHRJ PERDUMANSINGH SHsr N. C. SUD (Alternate) SHRI H.P. DASH Srwu S. P. S. CHowosnmY SHRJ BAKUL HARJSHANKER Smu PARDIPBAKOL (A/terrrate)

(Alternate)

W-m P. R. K. CHAKRAPANI
SrrruR. N. Dssm (Alferrra(e) Smu h4ANU CHHUGANI Smu JAYESHCHHUGANt(Alternate) SHJUK. V. MORALI Smu V. K. KALYANAM (Alternate)

Directorate General of Civil Aviation. New Delhi Directorate General of Aeronautical (DGAQA), New Delhi Himlustan Aeronautics Ltd, Nashik Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore Honeycomb India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore Incab Industries Ltd. Pune Indian Airlines, New Delhi Indian Space Research Organization, Thiruvananthapuram Mahindra Enginners & Chemical Products Ltd, Pune OEN Connectors Ltd, Cochin Sanghavi Aerospace Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad Space Application Ahmedabad Centre (ISRO), Department of Space, Quality Assurance

Sm

B. K. Josrn SrrruN. S. MONDAY (Ahervrafe) G.
KAVIMANDAN Ss+mM. C. SHARMA(Alternate)

SHRJS.

!%u G. Swu

M. SATBHAI P. B. PruBr+orw(Alternate)
VELLUSWAMY

SHRJ S. K.

SHJUN. MGTHUSWAMY(Alternate) SHRI M. B.
SHIU R.AKSFUT

K. V. R. RAO Smu A. J. BASU (Mernate)

SHRJRAhSANCHOPRA SHRJS.B. R. SENOY SHIUM. K. KJUSHANSWAMY (Alternate)

SHRJJ. P.

RATH

Smu H. S. MEHTA (Alternate) SHRJ P. DILIP KUMAR Smu KETAN SANGHVI Smu BHARAT SANGHVI(Alternate)

Wru VIJAY KIMAR

`Ihermodors Pvt Ltd, Pune

SHRJP. N. VENKATARAMAN Smu MONAN IYER (Alternate)

11

IS 16000:2004
Organization Representative(s) StrrrrS.

Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, Thiruvananthapuram

V. SHARMA

SmuSOJAN THOMAS (Akerwate) BIS Directorate General
Dkector & Head (TED) SHNK. K. VASHISTHA,

[Representing DirectorGeneral
Member-Secretary

(Ekofficio)]

M. KHANNA Joint Director (TED),BIS

SHRI J.

Ad-hoc Panel on Aerospace Quality System Standards, TED 14/AP-l
Research Centre Imarat, Hyderabad
Smu WNDM Srmr PRASAD (Convener)

Quality Assurance

Directorate Generalof Aeronautical (DGAQA), NewDelhi}
and Certification

D.

GANCOPADHYAY

Smu K. N. SINNA SHRt V. K. KALYANAM

Centre for Military Airworthiness (CEMILAC), Bangalore

Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE), Bangalore Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore Bharat Dynamics Ltd, Hyderabad Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi

SW

PERDUMANSINGH

Srmr N. C. AGARWAL Smu M. V. MOHAN(Alternate) Srrnr R. N. DESAI SHRIN. S. MUNDAY

12

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TED 14 (352).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

