(Reaffirmed 2015) 


SP 68 : 2005 
(Reaffirmed 2020) 


3g Va si 9001 : 2000 & fare aie) asr a 
Ares 


( Wee gader ) 
GUIDANCE ON STATISTICAL TECHNIQUES 


FOR ISO 9001 : 2000 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 03.120.10; 03.120.30 


© BIS 2005 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


July 2005 Price Group 10 


Quality Management Sectional Committee, MSD 2 


FOREWORD 


This special publication ( First Revision ) which is identical with ISO/TR 10017 : 2003 ‘Guidance on 
statistical techniques for ISO 9001 : 2000" issued by the International Organization tor Standardization 
(1SO ) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Quality Management 
Sectional Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division Council. 


This Technical Report reterred above has been prepared under the auspices of ISO/TC 176 — Quality 
Management and Quality Assurance Technical Committee of ISO, which is responsible for developing 
and maintaining the ISO 9000 family of international Standards. The main task of technical committees 
of ISO is to prepare the International Standards, but in exceptional circumstances a technical committee 
may propose the publication of a Technical Report, which is entirely informative in nature, A Technical 
Report does not have to be reviewed until the data it provides are considered to be no longer valid or 
useful. ISO/TR 10017, which is not to be regarded as an International Standard, may be updated to 
reflect future revisions of ISO 9001. 


The text of this ISO Technical Report has been approved as suitable to be published as a special 
publication without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards and special publications. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 


Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to 
use a point { . ) as the decimal marker. 


In this adopted Technical Report, normative reference appears to an International Standard for which an 
indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard, which is to be substituted in its place, 
is given below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated: 


international Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence 
ISO 9001 : 2000 Quality ISMSO 9001 : 2000 Quality Identical 
management systems — management systems — 
Requirements Requirements 


GUIDANCE ON STATISTICAL TECHNIQUES 
FOR ISO 9001 : 2000 


( First Revision ) 


1 Scope 
TOTEE TEDAN PENISO dorm igh etches’ most de <n geese sence techniques that may be 
useful to an organization in Lp en Onang, maaana an improving a 


quality management 
system in compliance with ISO 9001. Te- cona oy pantang mone requirements of ISO 9001 that involve 
ee eee and then identifying and describing the statistical techniques that can be useful 


techniques ( 
this Technical Report does not attempt repaired aah ra 


NOTE 1 The terms “statistical techniques” and "statistical methods” are often used interchangeably. 


NOTE2 References in this Technical Report to “product” are applicable to the generic product categories of service, 
software, hardware and processed materials, or a combination thereof, in accordance with the definition of “product” in 


ISO 9001:2000, Quality management systems — Requirements 


3 Identification of potential needs for statistical techniques 


The need for data that may reasonably be associated with the implementation of the clauses and 
sub-clauses of 9001 is identified in Table 1. Listed against the need for quantitative data thus identified 
are one or more statistical techniques that could be of potential benefit to the organization, when 
applied to such data. 


NOTE Statistical techniques can be usefully applied to qualitative data, if such data can be converted into 
quantitative data. 

Sees eee G CAA Do TARON a a OF SONNY FD OORT, no 
statistical technique is identified. 


The statistical techniques cited in this Technical Report are limited to those that are well known. Likewise, only 
relatively straightforward applications of statistical techniques are identified here. 


SP 68 : 2005 


Each of the statistical techniques noted below is described briefly in Clause 4, to assist the organization to 
assess the relevance and value of the statistical techniques cited, and to help determine whether or not the 
organization should use them in a specific context. 


Table 1 — Needs involving quantitative data and supporting statistical technique(s) 


180 9001:2000 quantitative data 


fimamonenio | 

4.1 General requirements See Introduction to this Technical 

Report 

4.2 Documentation requirements 

4.2.1 General None identified À 

[4.2.2 Quality manual [None sentite =| 
eee 
enna pe IE Si, 


d None identified 
5.2 Customer focus Need to determine customer See 7.2.2 in this table 
requirements 
Need to assess customer satisfaction | See 8.2.1 in this table 


5.5 Responsibility, authority and None identified 
communication 
5.5.1 Responsibility and authority None identified : 


5.6.2 Review input 

a) results of audits Need to obtain and evaluate audit data | Descriptive statistics; sampling 

b) customer feedback Need to obtain and assess customer | Descriptive statistics; sampling 

c) process performance and product | Need to assess process performance | Descriptive statistics; process 
conformity and product conformity capability analysis; sampling; SPC 


d) status of preventive and Need to obtain and evaluate data from | Descriptive statistics 
corrective actions preventive and corrective actions 


EES Redew pit 


| | 
i 


SP 68 : 2005 


is OO a aaa 
the actions taken effectiveness of training 

e220 frone ied 

ezz | need 
3 inirasiructwo O O OO 


6.3 Infrastructure None identified 


Descriptive statistics; measurement 
analysis; process capability analysis; 
sampling; statistical tolerancing 


Descriptive statistics; design of 
experiments; hypothesis testing; 
measurement analysis; regression 
analysis; reliability analysis; sampling; 
simulation; time series analysis 


Descriptive statistics; design of 
experiments; hypothesis testing; 
measurement analysis; process 
capability analysis; regression 
analysis; reliability analysis; sampling; 
simulation; time series analysis 


Need to validate that product meets Descriptive statistics; design of 
stated use and needs experiments; hypothesis testing: 

; measurement analysis; process 
capability analysis; regression 
analysis; reliability analysis; sampling; 
simulation 


SP 68 : 2005 


ae a 
1S0 9001:2000 


7.3.7 Control of design and Noed to evaluate, ———— 
development changes effect of design changes 


Need to ensure that purchased product Descriptive statistics; hypothesis 
conforms to specified purchase 
requirements 


processes whose output cannot be 
readily measured 


series i: 
zeeer _|Novekoried Si 


customer property 
oe 
SPC charts; time series analysis 
Descriptive : nm 


SP 68 : 2005 


See 8.2.4 in this table 


See 7.3.3, 7.3.5, 7.3.6 in this table 
See 7.4.1, 7.4.3 in thie table 
See 7.5.1, 7.5.2, 7.5.5 in this table 


SP 68: 2005 
4 Descriptions of statistical techniques identified 


The following statistical techniques, or families of techniques, that might help an organization to meet its 
needs, are identified in Table 1: 


— descriptive statistics; 

— design of experiments; : 
— hypothesis testing; 

— measurement analysis; 
— process capability analysis, 
— regression analysis; 

— reliability analysis; 

— sampling; 

— simulation; 

— statistical process control (SPC) charts; 
— statistical tolerancing; 

— time series analysis. 


Of the various statistical techniques listed above, it is worth noting that descriptive statistics (which includes 
graphical methods) constitutes an important aspect of many of these techniques. 


As stated earlier, the criteria used in selecting the techniques listed above are that the techniques are well 
known and widely used, and their application has resulted in benefit to users. 


The choice of technique and the manner of its application will depend on the circumstances and purpose of 
the exercise, which will differ from case to case. 


A brief description of each statistical technique, or asi, Aid techniques, is provided in 4.2 to 4.13, The 
descriptions are intended to assist a lay reader to assess the potential applicability and benefit of using the 
statistical techniques in implementing the requirements of a quality management system. 


The actual application of statistical techniques cited here will require more guidance and expertise than is 
provided by this Technical Report. There is a large body of information on statistical techniques available in 
the public domain, such as textbooks, journals, reports, industry handbooks and other sources of information, 
which may assist the organization in the effective use of statistical techniques’). However it is beyond the 
scope of this Technical Report to cite these sources, and (he search for such information is left to individual 
initiative. “ 


1) Listed in the Biblic ap 190 ond EC Stauton and Technical Raporte rolaled to stataticaltectetcues. Thay op 
cited here for | this Technical Report does not specify compliance with 


4.2 Descriptive statistics 


4.2.1 Whatitis 


The term descriptive statistics refers to procedures for summarizing and presenting quantitative data in a 
manner that reveals the characteristics of the distribution of data. 


The characteristics of data that are typically of interest are their central value (most often described by the 
average), and spread or dispersion (usually measured by the range or standard deviation). Another 
characteristic of interest is the distribution of data, for which there are quantitative measures that describe the 
shape of the distribution (such as the degree of “skewness”, which describes symmetry). 


The information provided by descriptive statistics can often be conveyed readily and effectively by a variety of 
graphical methods, which include relatively simple displays of data such as 


— a trend chart (also called a “run chart’), which is a plot of a characteristic of interest over a period of time, 
to observe its behaviour over time, 


— a Scatter plot, which helps to assess the relationship between two variables by plotting one variable on 
the x-axis and the corresponding value of the other on the y-axis, and 


— ahistogram, which depicts the distribution of values of a characteristic of interest. 


There is a wide array of graphical methods that can aid the interpretation and analysis of data. These range 
from the relatively simple tools described ahove (and others such as bar-charts and pie-charts), to techniques 
of a more complex nature, including those involving specialised scaling (such as probability plots), and 
graphics involving multiple dimensions and variables. 


Graphical methods are useful in that they can often reveal unusual features of the data that may not be readily 
detected in quantitative analysis. They have extensive use in data analysis when exploring or verifying 
relationships between variables, and in estimating the parameters that describe such relationships. Also, they 
have an important application in summarizing and presenting complex data or data relationships in an 
effective manner, especially for non-specialist audiences. 


Descriptive statistics (including graphical methods) are implicitly invoked in many of the statistical techniques 
cited in this Technical Report, and should be regarded as a fundamental component of statistical analysis. 


4.2.2 What itis used for 


Descriptive statistics is used for summarizing and characterizing data. It is usually the initial step in the 
analysis of quantitative data, and often constitutes the first step towards the use of other statistical procedures. 


The characteristics of sample data may serve as a basis for making inferences regarding the characteristics of 
populations from which the samples were drawn, with a prescribed margin of error and level of confidence. 


4.2.3 Benefits 

Descriptive statistics offers an efficient and relatively simple way of summarizing and characterizing data, and 
also offers a convenient way of presenting such information. In particular, graphical methods are a very 
effective way of presenting data, and communicating information. 


Descriptive statiStics is potentially applicable to all situations that involve the use of data. It can ald the 
analysis and interpretation of data, and is a valuable aid in decision making- 


424 Limitations and cautions 


Descriptive statistics provides quantitative measures of the characteristics (such as the average and standard 
deviation) of sample data. However these measures are subject to the limitations of the sample size and 


SP 68 : 2005 


sampling method employed. Also, these quantitative measures cannot be assumed to be valid estimates of 
characteristics of the population from which the sample was drawn, unless the underlying statistical 
assumptions are satisfied. 


4.2.5 Examples of applications 

Descriptive statistics has useful application in almost all areas where quantitative data are collected. It can 
provide information about the product, process or some other aspect of the quality management system, and 
may be used in management reviews. Some examples of such applications are as follows: 

— summarizing key measures of product characteristics (such as the central value and spread); 

— describing the performance of some process parameter, such as oven temperature; 

— characterizing delivery time or response time in the service industry; 

— summarizing data from customer surveys, such as customer satisfaction or dissatisfaction; 


— illustrating measurement data, such as equipment calibration data; 


— displaying the distribution of a process characteristic by a histogram, against the specification limits for 
that characteristic; 


— displaying product performance results over a period of time by means of a trend chart; 
— assessing the possible relationship between a process variable (e.g. temperature) and yield by a scatter 
plot. 


4.3 Design of experiments (DOE) 


4.3.1 What itis 


Design of experiments refers to investigations carried out in a planned manner, and which rely on a statistical 
assessment of results to reach conclusions at a stated level of confidence. 


DOE typically involves inducing change(s) to the system under investigation, and statistically assessing the 
effect of such change on the system. Its objective may be to validate some characteristic(s) of a system, or it 
may be to investi the influence of one or more factors on some characteristic(s) of a system. 


The specific arrangement and manner in which the experiments are to be carried out constitute the design of 
the experiment, and such design is governed by the objective of the exercise and the conditions under which 
the experiments are to be conducted. 


There are several techniques that may be used to analyse experiment data. These range from analytical 
techniques, such as the “analysis of variance” (ANOVA), to those more graphical in nature, such as 


“probability plots”, t 
4.3.2 What itis used for 


DOE may be used for evaluating some characteristic of a product, process or system, for the purpose of 
validation against a specified standard, or for comparative assessment of several systems. 


DOE is particularly useful for investigating complex systems whose outcome may be influenced by a 
potentially jarge number of factors. The objective of the experiment may be to maximize or optimize a 
characteristic of interest, or to reduce its variability. DOE may be used to identify the more influential factors in 
a system, the magnitude of their influence, and the relationships (i.e. interactions), if any, between the factors. 
The findings may be used to facilitate the design and development of a product or process, or to control or 


improve an existing system. 


SP 68 ; 2005 


The information from a designed experiment may be used to formulate a mathematical model that describes 
the system characteristic(s) of interest as a function of the influential factors; and with certain limitations (cited 
briefly in 4.3.4). Such a model may be used for purposes of prediction. 


4.3.3 Benefits 


When estimating or validating a characteristic of interest, there is a need to assure that the results obtained 
are not simply due to chance variation. This applies to assessments made against some prescribed standard, 
and to an even greater degree in comparing two or more systems. DOE allows such assessments to be made 
with a prescribed level of confidence. 


A major advantage of DOE is its relative efficiency and sconomy in investigating the effects of multiple factors 
in a process, as compared to investigating each factor individually, Also, its ability to identify the interactions 
between certain factors can lead to a deeper understanding of the process. Such benefits are especially 
pronounced when dealing with complex processes (i.e. processes that involve a large number of potentially 
influential factors). 


Finally, when investigating a system there is the risk of incorrectly assuming causality where there may be 
only chance correlation between two or more variables. The risk of such error can be reduced through the use 
of sound principles of experiment design. 


434 Limitations and cautions 


Some level of inherent variation (often aptly described as “noise”) is present in all systems, and this can 
sometimes cloud the results of investigations and lead to incorrect conclusions, Other potential sources of 
error include the confounding effect of unknown (or simply unrecognised) factors that may be present, or the 
confounding effect of dependencies between the various factors in a system, The risk posed by such errors 
can be mitigated by well designed experiments through, for example, the choice of sample size or by other 
considerations in the design of the experiment, These risks can never be eliminated and therefore should be 
borne in mind when forming conclusions. 


Also, strictly speaking, the experiment findings are valid only for the factors and the range of values 
considered in the experiment. Therefore, caution should be exercised in extrapolating (or interpolating) much 
beyond the range of values considered in the experiment. 


Finally, the theory of DOE makes certain fundamental assumptions (such as the existence of a canonical 
relationship between a mathematical model and the physical reality being studied) whose validity or adequacy 
are subject to debate. 


43.5 Examples of applications 


A familiar application of DOE is in assessing products or processes as, for example, in validating the effect of 
medical treatment, or in assessing the relative effectiveness of several types of treatment. Industrial examples 
of such applications include validation tests of products against some specified performance standards. 


DOE is widely used to identify the influential factors in complex processes and thereby to control or improve 
the mean value, or reduce the variability, of some characteristic of interest (such as process yield, product 
pepe cate durability, noise level). Such experiments are frequently encountered in the production, for exemple, 

, automobiles and chemicals. They are also widely used in areas as diverse as 
Sene and Wadia, The scope of applications remains potentially vast. 


4.4 Hypothesis testing 
44.1 What it ls 


Hypothesis testing is a statistical procedure to determine, with a prescribed level of risk, if a set of data 
(typically from a sample) is compatible with a given hypothesis. The hypothesis may pertain to an assumption 
of a particular statistical distribution or model, or it may pertain to the value of some parameter of a distribution 
(such as its mean value). 


SP 68 : 2005 


The procedure for hypothesis testing involves assessing the evidence (in the form of data) to decide whether 
a given hypothesis regarding a statistical model or parameter should or should not be rejected. 


The hypothesis test is explicitly or implicitly invoked in many of the statistical techniques cited in this Technical 
Report, such as sampling, SPC charts, design of experiments, regression analysis and measurement analysis. 
44.2 What It is used for 

Hypothesis testing is widely used to enable one to conclude, at a stated level of confidence, whether or not a 
hypothesis regarding a parameter of a population (as estimated from a sample) is valid. The procedure may 


therefore be applied to test whether or not a population parameter meets a particular standard; or it may be 
used to test for differences in two or more populations. It is thus useful in decision making. 


Hypothesis testing is also used for testing model assumptions, such as whether or not the distribution of a 
population is normal, or whether sample data are random. 


The hypothesis test procedure may also be used to determine the range of values (termed the “confidence 
interval") which can be said to contain, at a stated confidence level, the true value of the parameter in question. 
443 Benefits 


Hypothesis testing allows an assertion to be made about some parameter of a population, with a known level 
of confidence. As such, it can be of assistance in making decisions that depend on the parameter. 


Hypothesis testing can similarly allow assertions to be made regarding the nature of the distribution of a 
population, as well as properties of the sample data itself, 

444 Limitations and cautions 

To ensure the validity of conclusions reached from hypothesis testing, It is essential that the underlying 
statistical are adequately satisfied, notably that the samples are independently and randomly 
drawn. Furthermore, the level of confidence with which the conclusion can be made is governed by the 
sample size. 


At a theoretical level, there is some debate regarding how a hypothesis test can be used to make valid 
inferences. 


44.5 Examples of applications 


Hypothesis testing has general application when an assertion must be made about a parameter or the 
distribution of one or more populations (as estimated by a sample) or in assessing the sample data itself, For 
example, the procedure may be used in the following ways: 


— to test whether the mean (or standard deviation) of a population meets a given value, such as a target or 
a standard; 


to test whether the means of two (or more) populations are different, as when comparing different batches 
‘of components; 

to test that the proportion of a population with defects does not exceed a given valuo; 

to test for differences in the proportion of defective units in the outputs of two processes; 

to test whether the sample data have been randomly drawn from a single population; 

to test if the distribution of a population is normal; 

to test whether an observation in a sample is an "outlier", i.e. an extreme value of questionable validity; 


to test if there has been an improvement in some product or process characteristic; 


10 


SP 68 : 2005 


— todetermine the sample size required to accept or reject a hypothesis, at a stated level of confiderice; 
— using sample data, to determine a confidence interval within which the true population average might lie. 


4.5 Measurement analysis 


4.5.1 What itis 


Measurement analysis (also referred to as “measurement uncertainty analysis" or “measurement system 
analysis”) is a set of procedures to evaluate the uncertainty of measurement systems under the range of 
conditions in which the system operates. Measurement errors may be analysed using the same methods as 
those used to analyse product characteristics, 


4.5.2 What itis used for 


Measurement uncertainty should be taken into account whenever data are collected. Measurement analysis is 
used for assessing, at a prescribed level of confidence, whether the measurement system is suitable for its 
intended purpose. It is used for quantifying variation from various sources such as variation due to the 
appraiser (i.e. the person taking the measurement), or variation from the measurement process or from the 
measurement instrument itself. It is also used to describe the variation due to the measurement system as 8 
proportion of the total process variation, or the total allowable variation. 


453 Benefits 


Measurement analysis provides a quantitative and cost-effective way of selecting a measurement instrument, 
or for deciding whether the instrument is capable of assessing the product or process parameter being 
examined. 


Measurement analysis provides a basis for comparing and reconciling differences in measurement, by 
quantifying variation from various sources in measurement systems themselves. 


4.5.4 Limitations and cautions 


In all but the simplest cases, measurement analysis needs to be conducted by trained specialists. Unless care 
and expertise are used in its application, the results of measurement analysis could encourage false and 
potentially costly over-optimism, both in the measurement results and in the acceptability of the product. 
Conversely, over-pessimism can result in the unnecessary replacement of adequate measurement systems. 


4.5.5 Examples of applications 

45.5.1 Measurement uncertainty determination 

The quantification of measurement uncertainties can serve to support an organization's assurance to its 
customers (internal or extemal) that its measurement processes are capable of adequately measuring the 


quality level to be achieved. Measurement uncertainty analysis can often highlight variability in areas that are 
critical to product quality, and hence guide an organization in allocating resources in such areas to improve or 
maintain quality. 


45.5.2 Selection of new instruments 


Measurement analysis can help guide the choice of a new instrument by examining the proportion of variation 
that is associated with the instrument. 


4.5.5.3 Determination of the characteristics of a particular method (trueness, precision, repeatability, 
reproducibility, etc.) 


11 


SP 68 : 2005 


This allows the selection of the most appropriate measurement method(s) to be used in support of assuring 
product quality, It may also allow an organization to balance the cost and effectiveness of various 
measurement methods against their effect on product quality. 


4.5.54 Proficiency testing 


A OE ARUN CT MAY D8 Seereies AE NA by canparing Se mossur 
results with those obtained from other measurement systems. Also, in Se O RO Oo ane 
customers, this may help an organization to Improve its methods or the training of its staff with regard to 
measurement analysis. 


4.6 Process capability analysis 


4.6.1 What it is 


Process capability analysis is the examination of the inherent variability and distribution of a process, in order 
to estimate its ability to produce output that conforms to the range of variation permitted by specifications. 


When the data are measurable variables (of the product or process), the inherent variability of the process is 
stated in terms of the “spread” of the process when it is in a state of statistical control (see 4.11), and is 
usually measured as six standard deviations (60) of the process distribution. If the process data are a 
normally distributed (“bell shaped") variable, this spread will (in theory) encompass 99,73 % of the population. 


Process capability can be conveniently expressed as an index, which relates the actual process variability to 

the tolerance permitted by specifications. A widely used capability index for variable data is C, (a ratio of the 

total tolerance divided by 6c), which is a measure of the theoretical capability of a process that is perfectly 

centred between the specification limits. Another widely Used index is Cok “Ey ees Ge 

pee psd assay WCS DAY IEE De Darana: is especially applicable to situations involving one- 
sided specifications. Other capability indices have been to account for long- and short-term variability 

better and for variation around the intended process target value. 


When the process data involve “attributes” (e.g. percent nonconforming, or the number of nonconformities), 
process capability is stated as the average proportion of nonconforming units, or the average rate of 
nonconformities. 


4.6.2 What it is used for 


ils wade Aes gel moe io asians a SUTIY oF a- waa 2> y-rtimnny maladie 
to specifications, and to estimate the amount of nonconforming product that can be expected. 


This concept may be applied to assessing the capability of any sub-set of a process, such as a specific 
machine. The analysis of “machine capability” may be used, for exemple, to evaluate specific equipment or to 
assess its contribution to overall process capability. 


4.6.3 Benefits 

Process capability analysis provides an assessment of the inherent variability of a process and an estimate of 
E A of cece tees tat cane MNAM, This enables the organization to estimate the 
costs of nonconformance, and can help guide decisions regarding process improvement. 

Setting minimum standards for process capability can guide the organization in selecting processes and 
equipment that should produce acceptable product. 

4.6.4 Limitations and cautions 


Tho concep of capably sity apts 1o a process in a siate of iatisical control Tharsloro, procos 
Sapa GINE GRAF UE lial conjunction with control methods to provide ongoing verification of 


SP 68 : 2005 


Estimates of the percentage of nonconforming product are subject to assumptions of normality. When strict 
normality is not realised in practice, such estimates should be treated with caution, especially in the case of 


processes with high capability ratios. 


Capability indices can be misleading when the process distribution is substantially not norma!. Estimates of 
the percentage of nonconforming units should be based on methods of analysis developed for appropriate 
distributions for such data. Likewise, in the case of processes that are subject to systematic 

causes of variation, such as tool wear, specialized approaches should be used to calculate and interpret 
capability. 


4.6.5 Examples of applications 


Process capability is used to establish rational engineering specifications for manufactured products by 
ensuring that component variations are consistent with allowable tolerance build-ups in the assembled product. 
Conversely, when tight tolerances are necessary, component manufacturers are required to achieve specified 
levels of process capability to ensure high yields and minimum waste. 


High process aL eee 
ae iind GIRO reliability of complex systems. 


Machine capability analysis is used to assess the ability of a machine to produce or perform to stated 
requirements. This is helpful in making purchase or repair decisions. 


Automotive, aerospace, electronics, food, pharmaceutical and medical device manufacturers routinely use 
process capability as a major criterion to assess suppliers and products. This allows the manufacturer to 
ator direct Inspection of purchased products and materials. 


Some companies in manufacturing and service industries track process capability indices to identify the need 
for process improvements, or to verify the effectiveness of such improvements. 


4.7 Regression analysis 


4.7.1 What itis 


Regression analysis relates the behaviour of a characteristic of interest (usually called the “response 
variable") with potentially causal factors (usually called “explanatory variables"). Such a relationship is 
specified by a model that can come from science, economics, engineering, etc, or it can be derived ; 
TAO OSANG 4 O oedpelay diag DS agi rp oti heparin and to explain how much 

each factor contributes to that variation. This is achieved by statistically relating variation in the response 
variable with variation in the explanatory variables, and obtaining the best fit by minimizing the deviations 
between the predicted and the actual response. 


4.7.2 What it is used for 


Regression analysis allows the user to do the following: 


— to test hypotheses about the influence of potential explanatory variables on the response, and to use this 
Information to describe the estimated change in the response for a given change in an explanatory 
variable; . 


— to predict the value of the response variable, for specific values of the explanatory variables; 


— to predict (at a stated level of confidence) the range of values within which the response is expected to lie, 
given specific values for the explanatory variables; 


— to estimate the direction and degree of association between the response variable and an explanatory 
variable (although such an association does not imply causation), Such information might be used, for 
example, to determine the effect of changing a factor such as temperature on process yield, while other 
factors are held constant. 


13 


SP 68 : 2005 


4.7.3 Benefits 


Regression analysis can provide insight into the relationship between various factors and the response of 
interest, and such insight can help guide decisions related to the process under study and ultimately improve 
the process. 2 


The insight yielded by regression analysis follows from its ability to describe patterns in response Gate 
concisely, compare different but related subsets of data, and analyse potential cause-and-effect 

When the relationships are modelled well, regression analysis can provide an estimate of the 
magnitudes of the effect of explanatory variables, as well as the relative strengths of those variables. This 
information is potentially valuable in controlling or improving process outcomes, 


Regression analysis can also provide estimates of the magnitude and source of influences on the response 
that come from factors that are either unmeasured or omitted in the analysis. This information may be used to 
improve the measuring system or the process, 


Regression analysis may be used to predict the value of the response variable, for given values of one or 
more explanatory variables; likewise it may be used to forecast the effect of changes in explanatory variables 
on an existing or predicted response. It may be useful to conduct such analyses before investing time or 
money in a problem when the effectiveness of the action is not known. 


4.7.4 Limitations and cautions 


When modelling a process, skill is required in specifying a suitable regression model (e.g, linear, exponential, 
multivariate), and in using agesos to improve the model. The presence of omitted variables, measurement 
error(s), and olher sources of unexplained variation in the response can complicate modelling. Specific 
assumptions behind the regression model in question, and characteristics of the available data, determine 
what estimation technique is appropriate in a regression analysis problem. 


A problem sometimes encountered in developing a regression model is the presence of data whose validity is 
questionable. The validity of such data should be investigafed where possible, since the inclusion or omission 


of the data from the analysis could influence the estimates of the model parameters, and thereby the response. 


Simplifying the model, by minimizing the number of explanatory variables, Is important in modelling. The 
inclusion of unnecessary variables can cloud the influence of variables and reduce the precision 
of model predictions, However, omitting an important explanatory variable may seriously limit the mode] and 
the usefulness of the results. 


4.7.5 Examples of applications 


Regression analysis is used to model production characteristics such as yield, throughput, quality of 
performance, cycle time, probability of failing a test or Inspection, and various patterns of deficiencies in 
procsasaa. SARC LENG © IA Ue ME MOA moop aare i ose procandoti and the 
magnitude and nature of their contribution to variation in the characteristic of interest. 


Fangai dahaki Na pa hahaa, hed nga O OONA: praia or 
epee gpd in materials or production conditions 


Regression analysis Is uséd to verify the substitution of one measurement method by another, for example, 
replacing 9 destructive or time-consuming method by a non-destructive or time-saving one. 


Examples of applications of non-linear regression include modelling drug concentrations as functions of time 
and weight of respondents; modelling chemical reactions as a function of time, temperature and pressure. 


14 


SP 68 : 2005 


4.8 Reliability analysis 
4.8.1 What itis 


Reliability analysis is the application of engineering and analytical methods to the assessment, prediction and 
assurance of problem-free performance over time of a product or system under study”), 


The techniques used in reliability analysis often require the use of statistical methods to deal with uncertainties, 
random characteristics or probabilities of occurrence (of failures, etc.) over time. Such analysis generally 
involves the use of appropriate statistical models to characterize variables of interest, such as the time-to- 
failure, or time- between-failures. The parameters of these statistical models are estimated from empirical data 
obtained from laboratory or factory testing or from field operation. 


Reliability analysis encompasses other techniques (such as fault mode and effect analysis) which focus on the 
physical nature and causes of feilure, and the prevention or reduction of failures. 


4.8.2 What it is used for 


Reliability analysis is used for the following purposes: 


— to verify that specified reliability measures are met, on the basis of data from a test of limited duration and 
involving a specified number of test units; 


— to predict the probability of problem-free operation, or other measures of reliability such as the failure rate 
or the mean-time-between-failures of components or systems; 


— to model failure patterns and operating scenarios of product or service performance; 
— to provide statistical data on design parameters, such as stress and strength, useful for probabilistic 
design; 


— to identify critical or high-risk components and the probable failure modes and mechanisms, and to 
support the search for causes and preventive measures. 


The statistical techniques employed in reliability analysis allow statistical confidence levels to be attached to 
the estimates of the parameters of reliability models that are developed, and to predictions made using such 
models. 


4.8.3 Benefits 


Seton Teta Rta ene cay ee te es tae Aiiros:or 
Service interruptions. Reliability activities are closely associated with the containment of risk in system 
Operation. Reliability is often an influencing factor in the perception of product or service quality, and in 
customer satisfaction. 


The benefits of using statistical techniques in reliability analysis include 


— the ability to predict and quantify the likelihood of failure and other reliability measures within stated 
confidence limits, 


— the insighté to guide decisions regarding different design alternatives using different redundancy and 
mitigation strategies, 


2) Reliability analysis is closely related to the wider field of “dependability” which also includes maintainability and 
availability. These, and other related techniques and approaches, are defined and discussed in (he IEC publications cited 


15 


= E — | 


SP 68 : 2005 


a Sere Ee at eed e OR tare KE FRITS oonline tents: i 
CONOAS Sree ponanony Coirorivente ate ret 


= the capability to plan optimal preventive maintenance and replacement schedules based on the reliability 
analysis of product performance, service and wearout data, and 


— the possibility of improving design to achieve a reliability objactive economically. 

4.8.4 Limitations and cautions 

A basie assumption of rlaily analysis is that he patmance ofa syst under study can bo reasonably 
characterized by a statistical distribution. The accuracy of reliability estimates will therefore depend on the 
validity of this assumption. 2 

The complexity of reliability analysis is compounded when multiple failure modes are present, which may or 
may not conform to the same statistical distribution. Also, when the number of failures observed in a reliability 
test is small, this can severely affect the statistical confidence and precision attached to estimates of reliability. 
The conditions under which the reliability test is conducted are critically important, particularly when the test 
involves some form of “accelerated stress" (i.e. stress that is significantly greater than that which the product 
will experience in normal usage). It may be difficull to determine the relationship between the failures 


observed under test and product performance under normal operating conditions, and this will add to the 
uncertainty of reliability predictions. 


4.8.5 Examples of applications 
Typical examples of applications of reliability analysis include 
— verification that components or products can meet stated reliability requirements, 


— projection of product life cycle cost based on reliability analysis of data from tests at new product 
introduction, 


— guidance on decisions to make or buy off-the-shelf products, based on the analysis of their reliability, and 
the estimated effect on delivery targets and downstream costs related to projected failures, 


a pueciinn of soteunne pochat me maturity based on test results, quality novament and reliability growth, 
and establishing software release targets compatible with market requirements, and 


— determination of the dominant product wearout characteristics to help improve product design, or to plan 
the appropriate service maintenance schedule and effort required, 

4.9 Sampling 

4.9.1 What it is 

Sampling is a systematic statistical methodology for obtaining information about some characteristic of a 

noanik ba EAA f representative fraction (i.e. sample) of the population. There are various sampling 


ch as sim ndom , Stratified sampling, systematic sam) 
fechniques thal may be employed (Su ape Be ee aaraa VETS aTe ty te cece ot te 


samping and the conditions under which it's to be conducted. 


4.9.2 What It is used for 
Sampling can be loosely divided into two broad nonexclusive areas: “acceptance sampling” and “survey 
sampling”. 


16 


SP 68 : 2005 


Acceptance sampling is concerned with making a decision with regard to accepting or not accepting a “lot” (i.e. 
@ grouping of items) based on the result of a sample(s) selected from that lot. A wide range of acceptance 
sampling plans are available to satisfy specific requirements and applications. 


Survey sampling is used in enumerative or analytical studies for estimating the values of one or more 
characteristics in a population, or for estimating how those characteristics are distributed across the 
population, Survey sampling is often associated with polls where information is gathered on people's opinions 
on a subject, as in customer surveys. It can equally be applied to data-gathering for other purposes, such as 
audits, ¥ 


ro sar vemrcchleh atta drags: balers exploratory sampling, which is used in enumerative studies to gain 
information about a characteristic(s) of a population or a subset of the population. So is production sampling, 
which may be carried out to conduct say, a process capability analysis. 


Another application is the bulk sampling of materials (e.g. minerals, quide and:gaess) for which sampling 
plans have been developed. 


4.9.3 Benefits 


A properly constructed sampling plan offers savings in time, cost and labour when compared with either a 
census of the total population or 100 % inspection of a lot. Where product inspection involves destructive 
testing, sampling is the only practical way of obtaining pertinent information. 


Sampling offers a cost-effective and timely way of obtaining preliminary information regarding the value or 
distribution of a characteristic of interest In a population. 


43.4 ‘Limitations and cautions 


When constructing a sampling pian, close attention should be paid to decisions regarding sample size, 
pra aii sample selection, the basis of sub-grouping and various other aspects of sampling 
m y- 


Sampling requires that the sample be chosen in an unbiased fashion (i.e. the sample is representative of the 
population from which it is drawn). If this is not done, it will result in poor estimates of the population 
characteristics. In the case of acceptance sampling, non-representative samples can result in either the 
unnecessary rejection of acceptable quality lots or the unwanted acceptance of unacceptable quality lots. 


Even with unbiased samples, information derived from samples is subject to a degree of error, The magnitude 
of this error can be reduced by taking a larger sample size, but it cannot be eliminated. Depending on the 
specific question and context of sampling, the sample size required to achieve the desired level of confidence 
and precision may be too large to be of practical value. 


49.5 Examples of applications 

A frequent application of survey sampling is in market research, to estimate (say) the proportion of a 
population that might buy a particular product. Another application is in audits of inventory to estimate the 
percentage of items that meet specified criteria. 


Sampling is used to conduct process checks of operators, machines or products in order to monitor variation, 
and to define corrective and preventive actions. 


Acceptance sampling is extensively used in industry to provide some levei of assurance that incoming 
material satisfies prespecified requirements. 


By means of bulk sampling, the amount or the properties of constituents in bulk material (e.g. minerals, liquids 
and gases) can be estimated. 


17 


SP 68 : 2005 


4.10 Simulation 
4.10.1 What it is 


Simulation is a collective term for procedures by which a (theoretical or empirical) system is 
mathematically by a computer program for the solution of a problem. If the representation involves concepts of 
probability theory, in particular random variables, simulation may be called the “Monte-Carlo method", 


4.10.2 What it is used for 


In the context of theoretical science, simulation is used if no comprehensive theory for the solution of a 
problem is known (or, if known, is impossible or difficult to solve), and where the solution can be obtained 
through brute computer force. In the empirical context, simulation is used if the system can be adequately 
described by a computer program. Simulation is also a helpful tool in the teaching of statistics. 


The evolution of relatively inexpensive computing capability is resulting in the increasing application of 
simulation to problems that hitherto have not been addressed. 


4.10.3 Benefits 

Within theoretical sciences, simulation (in particular the Monte-Carlo method) is used if explicit calculations of 
solutions to problems are impossible or too cumbersome to carry out directly (e.g. n-dimensional integration). 
Similarly, in the empirical context, simulation is used when empirical investigations are impossible or too costly. 
The benefit of simulation is that it allows a solution with saving of time and money, or that it allows a solution 
at all. 


The use of simulation in the teaching of statistics is that it can effectively illustrate random variation. 


4.10.4 Limitations and cautions 


Within theoretical science, proofs based on conceptual reasoning are to be preferred over simulation, since 
simulation often provides no understanding of the reasons for the result. 


Computer simulation of empirical models Is subject to the limitation that the model may not be adequate (i.e. it 
may not represent the problem sufficiently). Therefore, it cannot be considered a substitute for actual empirical 
investigations and experimentation. 


4.10.5 Examples of applications 

Large-scale projects (such as the space programme) routinely use the Monte-Carlo method. Applications are 

not limited to any specific type of industry. Typical areas of applications include statistical tolerancing, process 

simulation, system optimization, reliability theory and prediction. Some specific applications are 

— modelling variation in mechanical sub-assembiies, 

— modelling vibration profiles in complex assemblies, 

— determining optimal preventive maintenance schedules, and 

— conducting cost and other analyses in design and production processes to optimize allocation of 
resources. 


4.11 Statistical process control (SPC) charts 


4.11.1 What it is 


An SPC chart, or “contro! chart”, is a graph of data derived from samples that are periodically drawn from a 
process and plotted in sequence. Also noted on the SPC chart are "control limits” that describe the Inherent 


18 


g 


EEE 


SP 68 : 2005 


variability of the process when it is stable. The function of the control chart is to help assess the stability of the 
process, and this is done by examining the plotted data in relation to the control limits. 


Any variable (measurement data) or attribute (count data) representing a characteristic of interest of a product 
or process may be plotted. In the case of variable data, a control chart is usually used for monitoring changes 
in the process centre, and a separate control chart is used for monitoring changes in process variability. 


For attribute data, control charts are commonly maintained of the number or proportion of nonconforming units 
or of the number of nonconformities found in samples drawn from the process. 


The conventional form of control chart for variable data is termed the “Shewhart" chart. There are other forms 
of contro! charts, each with properties that are suited for applications in special circumstances. Examples of 
these include “cusum charts” that allow for increased sensitivity to small shifts in the process, and “moving 
a a SNE a i aN POENE 


4.11.2 What it is used for 


An SPC chart is used to detect changes in a process. The plotted data, which may be an individual reading or 

some statistic such as the sample average, are compared with the control limits. At the simplest level, a 

plotted point that falls outside the control limits signals a possible change in the process, possibly due to some 

“assignable cause”. This identifies the need to investigate the cause of the “out-of-control” reading, and make 

a sc adalah Seeman ei 
run, 


The use of control charts may be refined to yield a more rapid indication of process changes, or increased 
sensitivity to small changes, through the use of additional criteria in interpreting the trends and pattems in the 
plotted data. 


4.11.3 Benefits É 


In addition to presenting the data in a visible form to the user, contro! charts facilitate the appropriate response 
to process variation by helping the user to distinguish the random variation that is inherent in a stable process 
from variation that may be due to “assignable causes” (i.e. to which a specific cause may be assigned) whose 
timely detection and correction may help improve the process. Examples of the role and value of control 
charts in process related activities are given below. 


— Process control: viatleble:covtres oharta: eae nbd. $y’ Gnc. Anoa tn Wis POOS cathe cr prooeee 
variability and to trigger corrective action, thus maintaining or restoring process stability. 


— Process capability analysis: if the process is in a stable state, the data from the control chart may be used 
subsequently to estimate process capability. 


— Measurement system analysis: by incorporating control limits that reflect the inherent variability of the 
measurement system, a control chart can show whether the measurement system is capable of detecting 
the variability of the process or product of interest. Control charts may also be used to monitor the 
measurement process itself. 


— Cause and effect analysis: a correlation between process events and contro! chart patterns can help to 
infer the underlying assignable causes andto plan effective action. 


— Continuous improvement: contro! charts are used to monitor process variation, and they help to identify 


and address the cause(s) of variation. They are found to be especially effective when they are used as 
part of a systematic programme of continual improvement within an organization. 


19 


SP 68 : 2005 


4.11.4 Limitations and cautions 


It is important to draw process samples in a way that best reveals the variation of interest, and such a sample 
is termed a “rational subgroup". This is central to the effective use and Interpretation of SPC charts, and to 
understanding the sources of process variation. 


Short run processes present special difficulties as sufficient data are seldom present to establish the 
appropriate control limits. 


There is a risk of “false alarms” when interpreting control charts (l.e. the risk of concluding that a change has 
occurred when this is not the case). There is also the risk of failing to detect a change that has occurred. 
These risks can be mitigated but never eliminated. 


4.11.5 Examples of applications 


Companies in automotive, electronics, defence and other sectors often utilize contro! charts (for critical 
characteristics) to achieve and demonstrate continuing process stability and capability. If 

products are received, the charts are used to help establish the risk and determine the scope of corrective 
action. 


Control charts are used in problem solving in the work place. They have been applied at all javels of 
organizations to support problem recognition and root cause analysis. 


Control charts are used in machining industries to reduce unnecessary process intervention (over-adjustment) 
by enabling employees to distinguish between variation that is inherent to the process and variation that can 
be attributed to an “assignable cause”. 


Control charts of sample characteristics, such as average response time, error rate and complaint frequency, 
are used to measure, diagnose and improve performance in service industries. 


4.12 Statistical tolerancing 
4.12.1 What it is 


Statistical tolerancing is a procedure based on certain statistical principles, used for establishing tolerances. It 
makes use of the statistical distributions of relevant dimensions of components to determine the overall 
tolerance for the assembled unit. 


4.12.2 What it is used for 


When assembling multiple individual components into one module, the critical factor or requirement in terms 
of assembly and interchangeability of such modules is often not the dimensions of the individual components 
but instead the total dimension achieved as a result of assembly. 


Extreme s for the total dimension (i.e. very large or small values) only occur if the dimensions of al 
SoReal AAD ts cba & tn BAr E ANAA tad bad Ween: aa ranges of tolerances. 
Within the framework of a chain of tolerances, if the individual tolerances are added up into a total dimension 
tolerance, then one refers to this as the arithmetical overall tolerance. 


statistical determination of overall tolerances, it is assumed that in assemblies Involving a large number of 
rc campaneria, mensions kony ore aro Ma rango of ia rane wil bo balanced Py 
imensions of the tolera! example, an ual dimension e 
k at Bode Anaa Ga phic araja for COmERNNION oF ) at 


k SP 68 : 2005 


4.12.3 Benefits 

Given a set of individual tolerances (which need not be the same), the calculation of statistical overall 
FR ae an ere ere DA on pay om HONEA Sree mee Ie ree 
dimensional tolerance calculated arithmetically. 

This means that, given an overall dimensional tolerance, statistical tolerancing will permit the use of wider 
tolerances for individual dimensions than those determined by arithmetical calculation. In practical terms, this 


can be a significant benefit, since wider tolerances are associated with simpler and more cost-effective 
methods of production. 


4.12.4 Limitations and cautions 

Statistical tolerancing requires one to first establish what proportion of assembled modules could acceptably 
lie outside the tolerance range of the total dimension. The following prerequisites must then be met for 
statistical tolerancing to be practicable (without necessitating advancad methods): 

— the individual actual dimensions can be considered as uncorrelated random variables; 

— the dimensional chain is linear; 

— the dimensional chain has at least four units; 

— the individual tolerances are of the same order of magnitude; 

— the distributions of the individual dimensions of the dimensional chain are known, 

It is obvious that some of these requirements can only be met if the manufacture of the individual components 


in question can be controlled and continuously monitored, In the case of a product still under development, 
experience and engineering knowledge should guide the application of statistical tolerancing. 


4.12.5 Examples of applications 


Th hay fal ang i rouineiy apple in the aasombiy of pars tance ave eiatons 
or cases involving simple subtraction (e.g. shaft and hole). Industrial sectors that use statistical tolerancing 
include mechanical, electronic and chemical industry. The theory is also applied in computer simulation to 
determine optimum tolerances. 


4.13 Time series analysis 


4.13.1 What it is 


Time series analysis is a family of methods for studying a collection of observations made sequentially over 
time. Time series analysis is used here to refer to analytical techniques in applications such as 


— finding “lag” patterns by statistically looking at how each observation is correlated with the observation 
immediately before it, and repeating this for each successive lagged period, 


— finding patterns that are cyclical or seasonal, to understand how causal factors in the past might have 
repeated influences in the future, and . 


— using statistical tools to predict future observations or to understand which causal factors have 
contributed most to variations in the time series. 


While the techniques employed in time series analysis can include simple “trend charts", in this Technical 
ae ee en ee oe ae 


SP 68 : 2005 


4.13.2 What it is used for 
identifying “outliers” (i.e. extreme 


another time series, with all the objectives inherent in regression analysis, 


Time series analysis is used to predict future values of time series, typically with some upper and lower limits 
known as the forecast interval. It has extensive use in the area of contro! and is often applied to automated 
processes. In this case, a probability model is fitted to the historical time series, future values are predicted, 
and then specific process parameters are adjusted to keep the process on target, with as little variation as 


4.13.3 Benefits 


Time series analysis methods are useful in planning, in control engineering, in identifying a change in a 
process, in generating forecasts and in measuring the effect of some outside intervention or action. 


Time series analysis is also useful for comparing the projected performance of a process with predicted 
values in the time series if a specific change were to be made. 


Time series methods may provide insights into possible cause-and-effect patterns. Methods exist for 
separating systematic (or assignable) causes from chance cayses, and for breaking down patterns in a time 
series into cyclical, seasonal and trend components. 


Time series analysis is often useful for understanding how a process will behave under specified conditions, 
and what adjustments (if any) could influence the process in:the direction of some target value, or what 
adjustments could reduce process variability. 


4.13.4 Limitations and cautions 


The limitations and cautions cited for regression analysis also apply to time series analysis. When modelling a 
process in order to understand causes and effects, a significant level of skill is required to select the most 
appropriate model and for using diagnostic tools to improve the model. 


Whether included or omitted from the analysis, a single observation or a small set of observations can have a 
significant influence on the model. Therefore influential observations should be understood and distinguished 
from “outliers” in the data. 


Different time-series estimation techniques can have varying degrees of success, depending on the patterns 
in the time series and on the number of periods for which predictions are desired, relative to the number of 
time periods for which time-series data are available. The choice of a model should consider the objective of 
the analysis, the nature of the data, the relative cost, and the analytical and predictive properties of the various 
models. 


4.13.5 Examples of applications 


Time series analysis is applied to study patterns of performance over time, for example, process 
measurements, Customer complaints, nonconformance, productivity and test results. 


Forecasting applications include predicting spare parts, absentesism, customer orders, materials needs, 
electric power consumption, e 


Causal time-series analysis is used to develop predictive models of demand. For example, in the context of 
reliability, it is used to predict the number of events in a given time period and the distribution of time intervals 
between events such as equipment outages. 


SP 68 : 2005 


Bibliography 


ISO publications related to statistical techniques 


(1) 


12) 


13) 


{4 


(18) 


ns 


ISO 2602:1980, Statistical interpretation of test results — Estimation of the mean— Confidence 
interval 


ISO 2854:1976, Statistical interpretation of data — Techniques of estimation and tests relating to 
means and variances 


ISO 2859-0:1995, Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes — Part 0: Introduction to the ISO 
2859 attribute sampling system 


ISO 2859-1:1999, Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes — Part 1: Sampling schemes 
indexed by acceptance quality limit (AQL) for lot-by-lot inspection 


ISO 2859-2:1985, Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes — Part 2: Sampling plans indexed 
by limiting quality (LQ) for isolated lot inspection 


ISO 2859-3:1991, Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes — Part 3: Skip-lot sampling 
procedures 

ISO 2859-4:2002, Sampling procedures for inspection by attributes— Part 4: Procedures for 
assessment of declared quality levels ; 

ISO 3207:1975, Statistical interpretation of data — Determination of statistical tolerance interval 

ISO 3301:1975, Statistical interpretation of data — Comparison of two means in the case of paired 
observations 


ISO 3494:1976, Statistical interpretation of data — Power of tests relating to means and variances 


ISO 3534-1:1993, Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols — Part 1; Probability and general statistical 
terms 


ISO 3534-2:1993, Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols — Part 2: Statistical quality control 
ISO 3534-3:1999, Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols — Part 3: Design of experiments 

ISO 3951:1989, Sampling procedures and charts for inspection by variables for percent nonconforming 
ISO 5479:1997, Statistical interpretation of data — Tests for departure from the normal distribution 


ISO 5725-1:1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results — Part 1: 


ISO 5725-2:1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results — Part 2: 
Basic method for determination of repeatability and reproducibility of a standard measurement method 


ISO 5725-3:1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results — Part 3; 
Intermediate measures of the precision of a standard measurement method 


ISO 5725-4:1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results — Part 4: 
Basic methods for the determination of the trueness of a standard measurement method 


23 


SP 68 : 2005 


[20] 


ISO 5275-5:1998, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results — Part §: 
Alternative methods for the determination of the precision of a standard measurement method 


ISO 5725-6:1994, Accuracy (trueness and precision) of measurement methods and results — Part 6: 
Use in practice of accuracy values 


ISO 7870:1993, Contro! charts — General guide and introduction 

pial RT, Cumulative sum charis — Guidance on quality control and data analysis using 
ISO 7873:1993, Control charts for arithmetic average with warning limits 

ISO 7966;1993, Acceptance control charts 

ISO 8258:1991, Shewhart control charts 

ISO 8422:1991, Sequential sampling plans for inspection by attributes 

BO 6678-108), yuani seri piana fer gadai Ay VONA Er paraan noraini 
ISO/TR 8550:1994, Guide for selection of an acceptance sampling system, scheme or plan for 
inspection of discrete items in lots 

ISO 8595:1989, Interpretation of statistical data — Estimation of a median 

ISO 9001:2000, Quality management systems — Requirements 

ISO 9004:2000, Quality management systems — Guidelines for performance improvements 


ISO 10012, Measurement management systems — Requirements for measurement processes and 
measuring equipment ‘ 


ISO 10725:2000, Acceptence sampling plans and procedures for the inspection of bulk materials 

ISO 11095:1996, Linear calibration using reference materials 

ISO 11453:1996, Statistical interpretation of data— Tests and confidence intervals relating to 
proportions 


ISO 11462-1;2001, Guidelines for implementation of statistical process contro! (SPC)— Part 1; 
Elements of SPC 

ISO 11648-2, Statistical aspects of sampling from bulk materials — Part 2: Sampling of particulate 
materials 


ISO 11843-1:1997, Capability of detection — Part 1: Terms and definitions 

ISO 11843-2:2000, Capability of detection — Part 2: Methodology in the linear calibration case 
ISO/TR 13425:1995, Guide for the selection of statistical methods in standardization and specification 
180 1428%-1:1908, Geometric Product Specifications (GPS) — inspection by measurement of 


and measuring equipment — Part 1: Decision rules for proving conformance oF NOR- 
conformance with specifications 


143] 


a 


[45] 
(46) 
(47 


[48] 


[49} 


ISO/TS 14253 2:1999, Geometric Product Specifications (GPS) — Inspection by measurement of 
workpieces and measuring equipment — Part 2: Guide to the estimation of uncertainty in GPS 
measurement, in calibration of measuring equipment and in product verification 


ISO 16269-7:2001, Statistical interpretation of data— Part 7: Median — Estimation and confidence 
intervals 


ISO Guide 33:2000, Uses of certified reference materials 
ISO Guide 35:1989, Certification of reference materials — General and statistical principles 


ISO/IEC Guide 43-1;1997, Proficiency testing by interlaboratory comparisons — Part 1: Development 
and operation of proficiency testing - 


ISONEC Guide 43-2:1997, Proficiency testing by interlaboratory comparisons — Part 2: Selection and 
use of proficiency testing schemes by laboratory accreditation bodies 


ISO Standards Handbook:2000, Statistical methods for quality control 
Volume 1: Terminology and symbols — Acceptance sampling 
Volume 2: Measurement methods and results — Interpretation of statistical data — Process contrél 


IEC publications related to reliability analysis 


IEC 60050-191:1990, international Electrotechnical Vocabulary — Chapter 191: Dependability and 
quality of service 


IEC 60300-1:1993, Dependability management — Part 1: Dependability programme management 
IEC 60300-2;1995, Dependability management — Part 2: Dependability programme elements and 
tasks 

IEC 60300-3-9:1995, Dependability management— Part 3: Application guide — Section 9: Risk 
analysis of technological systems 


IEC 60812:1985, Analysis techniques for system reliability — Procedure for failure mode and effects 
analysis (FMEA) a 


IEC 60863:1986, Presentation of reliability, maintainability and availability predictions 
IEC 61014:1989, Programmes for reliability growth 

IEC 61025:1990, Fault tree analysis (FTA) 

IEC 61070:1991, Compliance test procedures for steady-state availability 

IEC 61078:1991, Analysis techniques for dependability — Reliability block diagram method 

IEC 61123:1991, Reliability testing — Compliance test plans for success ratio 

oe Reliability testing — Compliance tests for constant failure rate and constant failure 


IEC 61163-1:1995, Reliability stress screening — Part 1: Repairable items manufactured in lots 
IEC 61163-2; Ed 10, Reliability stress screening — Part 2: Electronic components 
IEC 61164:1995, Reliability growth — Statistical test and estimation methods 


SP 68 : 2005 


IEC 61165:1995, Application of Markov techniques 


165} 
[66] IEC-61649:1997, Goodness-of-fit tests, confidence intervais and lower confidence limits for Weibull 
distributed data > 


[67] IEC 61650:1997, Reliability data analysis techniques — Procedures for comparison of two constant 
failure rates and two constant failure (event) intensities x 


Other publications 
[68] ISO 9000:2000, Quality management systems — Fundamentals and vocabulary 


{69] | GUM:1993, Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement. BIPM, IEC, IFCC, ISO, IUPAC, 
IUPAP and OIML 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest 
amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of ‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly 
Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MSD 2 ( 299). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: i 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website : www.bis.org.in 


Regional Offices : Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 23237617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern ; 1/14C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700 054 . 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 ie 3843 
260 9285 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 {a 1216, 2254 1442 
í 2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400 093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 


