IS 14126:1994 IS0 2177:1985 (Reaffirmed 2001)

Indian Standard
METALLIC COATINGS 1 MEASUREMENT OF COATING THICKNESS CblJLOMETRIC METHOD BY ANODIC DISSOLUTION
; UDC f 669.053531.717

[543.432]

0 BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

May

1994

Price Group 5

Metallic and Non-metallic Finishes Sectional Committee, MTD 20

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard is identical with IS0 2177:1985 `Metallic coatings - Measurement of coating thickness - Coulometric method by anodic dissolution' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Metallic and Non-metallic Finishes Sectional Committee and approval of the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. The text of the IS0 Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard; attention is drawn especially to the following : a) b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker, while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. Wherever the words `International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'.

Technical Committee has reviewed the provisions of IS0 2064 to which reference is made in the text and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. In reporting the results of test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final.value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`.

IS 14126: 1994 IS0 2177: 1966

Indian Standard
METALLIC COATINGS MEASUREMENT OF COATING THICKNESS COULOMETRIC METHOD BY ANODIC DISSOLUTION

1

Scope and field of application
Standard for

I
meth6d of by

of the coating thickness from the quantity of electricity coulombs) used, which may in turn be calculated from metallic 61 the time interval between

(in

This International anodic coatings. Typical dissolution

specifies a coulometric the thickness

measuring

the start and the end of the current density; used in dissolving

test, if it is conducted b) the integrated

at constant

quantity

of electricity

combinations

of coatings

and substrates

that can be

the coatings.

tested by this method

are given in table 1. Other combinations

may be tested with electrolytes in current use (see annex B), or new electrolytes may be developed for them, but, in both cases, it is necessary system. The method is also applicable to example CulNilCr (see also 8.6). multi-layer systems, for to verify the suitability of the complete

5 6.1

Instrumentation

Suitable instruments may be constructed from readily available components but proprietary instruments are usually used (see annex A).

5.2 This method may be used to measure the thickness of coatings applied by various means, if due account is taken of special features, such as the presence of an alloy layer. In some cases, the presence and thickness of diffusion layers can also be measured. coatings It can also be used to measure on cylindrical specimens the thickness of and wires (see 8.8). With

Proprietary

direct

use with electrolytes recommended
instruments record

instruments are available for by the manufacturer. Other the quantity of electricity, in coulombs,

reading

used in dissolving the coating from the measuring area (see clause 31, usually in arbitrary units, from which the thickness is calculated direct using factors reading or tables. the calculation of thickness

instruments,

from current

density is made electronically. of the instrument known shall be checked If the instrument of the further adjustshall be rehowever, be instructions. thicknesses

2

Reference
5.3 The performance agree to +5 Metallic and other non-organic concerning the coatings Definiof using specimens readings specimens, ment. moved. of known coating thickness. % of the

IS0 2064, tions and thickness.

conventions

measurement

the instrument

may be used without of the discrepancy shall always,

Otherwise, Proprietary

the cause

instruments

3

Definitions
the definitions

calibrated

in accordance

with the manufacturer's

For the purpose of this International Standard, of IS0 2064, and the following, apply. measuring area: The area of the significant is made.

Suitable specimens of known coating thickness shall consist of the same type of coating and substrate as the specimen to be measured, and they shall have an accuracy of 5 % or better. specimens If measuring alloy coatings, particular importance. the use of correct is of

surface

over

which a single measurement The measuring

area for this method is the area enclosed by the

sealing ring of the cell.

6

Electrolyte
shall have a known, adequate shelf-life and shall

The electrolyte be such that:

4

Principle
dissolution of a well-defined Detection area of the coating using a diaaolu-

Ano&

a) there is no reaction with the coating absence of an impressed flow of current;

metal

in the

suit&I@ abctrdyte.

of the virtually complete

tiqn of the coeting by a rapid change in cell voltage. Calculation

b) the coating dissolves anodically at an efficiency to 160 % as possible;

as close

1

IS 14126: 1994 IS0 2177 : 1995

Table 1 -

Typical combinations

of coatings and substrates which can be tested by the coulometric Substrate (basis material) Copper

method

T
Coating Aluminium* Cadmium Chromium Copper Lead Nickel Nickel, autocatalytic** Silver Tin Tin-lead alloys*** Zinc
l

and copper alloys X X Only on brass and copper-beryllium X X X X X X X

Nickel X X X X X X X X X

Nickel-cobaltiron alloys (such as Kovar)

Silver

Steel X

Zinc

Nonmetals X X X X X X X X X X

X X X X X X X X X X

-

X X X X X X X X X

The detection of the change in the cell voltage may be difficult with surne aluminium alloys. The coulometric method can only be used if me phosphorus
The method is sensitive to alloy composition. or boron contents of these coatings are within certain limits.

l

*

l

**

c) a detectable sharp change in electrode potential occurs as the coating is penetrated and an increasing area of substrate is exposed ; d) the test area exposed in the test cell is completely wetted.
The electrolyte shall be chosen in relation to the coating and

be eliminated, or reduced, by increasing the rate of dissolution, i.e. by increasing the current density used in the test.

7.2

Current

variation

substrate materials, the current density and electrolyte circula.tion within the test cell. Typical electrolytes that have been found satisfactory

for use with one type of test apparatus for testing various electrodeposited coatings on specific substrates are described in annex B. For proprietary instruments, the electrolytes shall normally be chosen on the `recommendations of the manufacturer.

For instruments using the constant current and time measuring technique, current variation will cause errors. For instruments using a current-time integrator, too large a change in current may change the anode current efficiency or interfere with the end-point causing an error.

7.3

Area variation

7
The

Factcm
following

affecting
factors may

the measuring
affect the

accuracy
of coating

accuracy

thickness

measurements.

The accuracy of the thickness measurement will be no better than the accuracy to which the measuring area is known. Area variations due to gasket wear, gasket pressure, etc., may lead to measurement errors. Much greater accuracy can be obtained if the electrolytic cells are so designed that sealing rings consistently give well-defined measuring areas.`) In some cases it may be advantageous to measure the area after it has been deplated and compensate accordingly.

7.1

Coating

thickness

7.4

Agitation

(if required)

Generally, the accuracy is lower than optimum for coating thicknesses greater than 50 urn and less than O,2 urn, unless special equipment is used. With coatings thicker than 50 pm, there may be an appreciable amount of bevelling or undercutting as the anodic dissolution proceeds. The amount of bevelling is largely dependent on the method employed for stirring the electrolyte. Undercutting may

Inadequate agitation can cause a false end-point.

7.5

Alloy layer between

coating and substrate

The measurement of coating thickness by the coulometric method assumes implicitly that a sharply defined interface exists between the coating and the substrate. If an alloy layer

1)

Error due to variatrons calibration

of the measuring Such

area may,

in some instances,

be minimized

by modifying

the Instrument actual tests,

calibration

using coating curved

thickness surfaces.

standards.

standards

should create

similar test conditions

to those dunng

particularly

if testing

2

1s 14126: 1994 IS0 2177: 198!3

exists between the coating and the substrate as, for example, in the case of coatings applied by hot dipping'), the coulometric end-point may occur at some point within the alloy layer, thus giving a hiph value for the thickness of the unalloyed coatings.

8
8.1

Procedure
General

7.6

Purity of coatings

Materials that co-deposit with a coating metal (including alloying metals) may change the effective electrochemical equivalent of the coating metal, the anode current efficiency, and the coating density. 7.7

If commercial equipment is used, follow the manufacturer's instructions with respect to the operating procedure for measurement, the electrolytes and, if necessary, calibration (see 5.3). Appropriate attention shall be given to the factors listed in clause 7. 8.2

Pm-set voltage

Condition of test surface

Oil, grease, paint, corrosion products, polishing ingredients, conversion coatings, passivity of nickel coatings, etc., may interfere with the test. 7.8

If using instruments that require a pm-set voltage, it should be noted that the actual value is dependent on the particular metallic coating, current density, electrolyte concentration and temperature, and circuit resistance, for example lead-out connections. For these reasons, it is considered advisable to first perform an evaluation test. 8.3

Density of coating material

Preparation of test surface

Because the coulometric method measures intrinsically mass per unit area, variations in density from the normal density of the coating metal will cause corresponding variations in linear thickness measurements. Normal variations of the composition of an alloy result in small, but significant changes in alloy density and its electrochemical equivalent.

If necessary, clean the test surface (see 7.7) with a suitable organic solvent. It may also be necessary to activate the test surface by mechanical or chemical means, but care should then be taken to avoid removal of metal. 8.4

7.9

Cleanliness of the ceil

Ceil application

Deposition of metal may take place on the cathode in some electrolytes. This deposit can alter the cell voltages or block the cell aperture. It is, therefore, essential to keep the cathode clean.

7.10 Cieairiiness of electrical connections
In the case of instruments other than the constant current type, if the electrical connections are not clean, the current/potential relationship will be disturbed and false end-points obtained.

Press the electrolytic cell, fitted with its flexible sealing ring, on to the coating so that a known area is exposed to the test electrolyte. If the cell body is metallic, for example stainless steal, it normally forms the cell cathode, but, otherwise, insert a suitable cathode (incorporated in some instruments as part of the electrolyte agitation mechanism).

8.5

Electrolysis

7.11 Calibration standards (if used)
Measurements made using calibration standards are subject to the additional error of the standards. If the thickness of allo) coatings is being determined, it is usually necessary to use coating standards and to test them using the same procedure.

Introduce the appropriate electrolyte and make sure that no air bubbles occur on the measuring surface. If required, put the agitation mechanism into the cell. Make the electrical connections, and operate the agitator as appropriate. Continue electrolysis until dissolution of the coating is complete, as indicated by a sharp change in the anode potential or cell voltage, or by the operation of the automatic cut-out.

8.6

Undercoats

7.12

Non-uniform dissolution

If the rate of dissolution is not uniform over the measuring area, a premature end-point may be obtained, and yield low results. Hence, one should examine the surface after the test to verify that most of the coating has dissolved. On some substrates, however, a visible, but insignificant, portion of the coating may remain. The presence of other material in the coating, the roughness of the coating surface and interface and the presence of porosity in the coating can cause fluctuation of the cell voltage. Such fluctuations can prematurely affect the end-point.

When one or more undercoats are to be measured, after measuring the top coating ensure that the top coat has first been completely removed from the whole of the measuring area. Remove the electrolyte from the cell with a suitable suction device, and thoroughly rinse out the cell with distilled or demineralized water. Do not disturb the cell at any time during these operations. Abandon the test if the slightest displacement has OCmrred. Reset the instrument controls for the next coating, introduce the appropriate electrolyte and continue the test as before.

1) See the footnote to clauseA.1

IS 14126: 1994 IS0 2177: 1985

8.7

Examination after test

The thickness may also be expressed as :

After completion of the test(s), remove the electrolyte from the ceil, rinse out with water, lift off the cell and examine the specimen to ensure that the removal of the coating is complete over the area enclosed by the seal (see 7.12).

XQ
where X is a constant for a given metal coating, electrolyte and cell. The value of X can either be calculated theoretically from the area of the test specimen exposed by the sealing ring, the efficiency of anodic dissolution (usually 100 %I and the electrochemical equivalent and density of the coating metal, or can be determined experimentally by measuring a coating of known thickness. With most commercial instruments, the thickness is either read directly from the instrument or the instrument reading is converted to thickness by applying a factor appropriate to the measuring area exposed by the cell and the coating metal.

8.8

Coatings on cylindrical specimens

If the surface area is too small to use the normal cell with a flexible gasket, replace it by an electrolyte container and an appropriate holding device, u&g an agitator if necessary. This device shall be adjustable and shall be pm-set to allow a known length of specimen. to be immersed. For direct reading instruments, especially those with alternative cell sizes, calculate the length of specimen to be immersed so that the same known surface area is presented to the cathode as for a test cell. In the majority of applications, the same electrolyte can be used but, in order to obtain the optimum instrument sensitivity and accuracy, the operating conditions may have to be modified, for example the cut-off voltage and deplating current. NOTE - An exact deplating area is necessary for accurscy and thb main source of error is due to the meniscus and current field at the ebctm@ SUtf8C8.

10 Measurement uncertainty
The test equipment and the procedure shall be such that the coating thickness can be measured to within 10 % of its true thickness.

11

Test report
information :

The test report shall include thefollowing

9

Expression of results

aj b)

a reference to this International Standard; an identification of the test specimen ; over which the

The coating thickness, d, in micrometres, is given by the equation d-

cl the area, in square centimetres, measurements were made ; d) the location of the reference area ;

k ia the currentefficiency of the dissolution process (equal to 100 in the case of 100 % efficiencyl;
E `is the electrochemical equivalent, ingrams per coulomb, of the coating metal for the condMms of the test;

ej the location(s) on the coated item at which the tests were carried out ; f) the identity of the electrolyte used ;

A

is the area, in square centimetrea, from which the coating is dissolved, i.e. the measuring area;

,f7 is the density, in grams per cubic cehtimetre, of the coating ; Q is the quantity of electricity, in coulombs, passed in dissolving the coating ; if an integrating meter is not used, calculate Q from the equation

g) the measured thickness in micrometres at each area at which the tests were carried out; the number of measurements averaged for each reported measurement ; h) j) k) m) n) the name of the operator and testing laboratow ; the date; any deviation from the method specified ; any factor that may have influenced the result; an identification of the instrument used.

Q = It
where I t is the current, in amperes,
is the test duration, in seconds.

1s 14126: 1994 ISQ 2177: 1966

Annex A Types of instrument
(This annex is for information only and does not form part of this international Standard.)

A.1

General

The instrument may operate on either of two principles : a) b) measurement of the time of anodic dissolution at constant cell current; measurement of the quantity of electricity consumed during the test bv current.time integration.

With the former, ?he current passed through the test cell has to be controlled at a constant value, a timer then being used to measure the time interval between the start and the end-point of the test. With the latter, an integrating meter is used to measure the quantity of electricity passed, in which case accurate knowledge of the magnitude of the current and separate measurement of the time interval are unnecessary. The results may be displayed as single time units, as the product of current and time (quantity of electricity) units or, more frequently with recent designs of apparatus, directly as thicknesses. The end-point can be determined by observing the marked change in cell voltage on a suitable voltmeter, or a cut-out can be used to terminate the test automatically. In the latter case, the cut-out is set to operate at a predetermined value l) of either the cell voltage or the rate of increase of cell voltage. Other non-mandatory, but advantageous, fea@res of coulornatric instruments may include digital results display, electronic timing and switching for greater accuracy of pncJ$oint determination, and the capability to accept different test ceil sizes or use different current densities. The test cell sealing ring should be capable of being interchanged rapidly. Many modern instruments display results as direct thickness measurements and may incorporate initial automatic setting of the cut-out at the start of each test to terminate the test at the correct end-point.

A.2

Electrolytic cell

The electrolytic cell consists of a container, usually cylindrical, applied to the article under test through an intermediate nonconductive and elastic seal made, for example, of rubber or plastics material. The cell itself, if it is made of metal, for example stainless steel, can serve as the cathode, in which case the seal will also serve as insulation between the cathode and anode. If the cell is of insulating material, a separate cathode is used and immersed in the electrolyte before starting the test The area of surface enclosed by the seal has to be well defined and small enough to permit its application to a curved surface. Smaller cells may be required for measuring the thickness of coatings on intricately shaped substrates, but these pose probfems connected with the definition and measurement of the area of the seal. With any cell, the accuracy of the method is largely controlled by the accuracy of measurement of the area over which the thickness measurement is made. Inaccuracies can occur if the seal defining the test area is applied on a curved surface. A further inaccuracy can also arise from the wear or distortion of the end of seal. This can be assessed visually by examination of the periphery of the circle of stripped coating. For substantially flat surfaces, a typical deplated area is 0,2 cm2, but curved surfaces can be measured with cells of the sixes indicated in table 2, depending on the diameters of the deplated areas. Table 2 Diameter of deplated area
cm 0.32 0.22 0,15

.
Cell sizes for measurements Deplated area
cm2 0.080 0.038 0,018

on curved surfaces Minimum diameter of curved surfaces
cm 3.0 1.0 0.4

I

I

1) In the case of hot-dipped coatings, or other coatings where a diffusion layer may have developed between the coatings and the basis metal, this predetermined value may be either that at which the main coating has been removed to expose the diffusion layer or that at which the diffusion layer has been removed to expose completely the basis metal.

IS 14120 : 1994 Is0 2177: 1995

Annex Typical

B

electrolytes

(This annex is for information only and does not form part of this International Standard.)

B.0

Introduction

Although it is possible to use higher current densities with some proprietary electrolytes (and possibly with some of the electrolytes listed in this annex), the following electrolytes (B.l to B.16) were formulated to give substantially 166 % anodic efficiency with current densities ranging from 166 to 400 mA/cm2. However, a few electrolytes were found only to be suitable when used towards the lower or upper ends of this current density range and these electrolytes are marked with an asterisk. These electrolytes dissolve the metallic coatings at substantially 100 % anodic efficiency. Therefore, the thickness, in micrometres, can be calculated with satisfactory accuracy from the expression

or from instrument factors calculated from this expression. (See clause 9 for definitions of the symbols.) There is no need to use coating standards when using these electrolytes. Direct calculation from the above expression will normally give more accurate results than those based on calibration of coulometric instruments with coating standards. 1) The solutions given in B. 1 to 8.4 should preferably be made up from reagents of recognized analytical grade and using distilled or demineralized water. Small variations in concentration of the solutions will not affect the accuracy of the results, but may affect the voltage settings in an automatic cut-out mechanism, based on a preset voltage, is employed. All the electrolytes, except B.9, have shelf-lives in excess of 6 months. The instrument manufacturer's advice or instructions shall be followed regarding whether any of these electrolytes may be used with their instruments or whether it is n&rsssry to use proprietary electrolytes for any particular coating/substrate combination. A summary of the applicability of the electrolytes described in clauses 9.1 to B.16 is given in table 3.

B.l

Electrolyte

for cadmium

coatings

on steel, copper or brass
per litre.

Prepare a solution containing 36 g of potassium chloride (KC11and 36 g of ammonium chloride (NH&I) This electrolyte requires a critical pre-set voltage.

Table 3 l-

Applicability of electrolytes Substrate fbaais metsrlsl)
1

Coating

Aluminlum

Copper and copper alloys (such as brass)
B.l 8.3 _ 8.8 B.10 8.11 8.12 8.16 6.14

Nickel

Steel
B.1 8.2 8.5

Zinc

Non-metals
B.l 8.2 and B.4 8.5, 0.6 and 8.7 8.8 B.9 and B.10 B.11

Cadmium Chromium Copper Lead Nickel Silver Tin Tin-nickel alloys Zinc

8.2 and 0.4 8.5 and 6.6 _ B.9 8.13 -

0.2 and 0.4 8.6 8.8 6.11 6.12

0.7

8.8 0.9 8.12 8.15 8.14

-

-

8.12 and 6.13 8.15 and 6.10 8.14

1) Both direct calculation and use of calibration standards have inherent errors which have to be considered, for example an error in the diameter of the test cell of 3 % will give a 9 96 error in measurement.

6

IS

14126:

1994

IS0

2177:

1985

8.2

@Electrolyte

for chromium

coatings

on steel,

nickel

or aluminium

Diiute 95 ml of orthophosphoric acid (H,POd oxide ( CrOJ WARNING Orthophosphoric

solution, Q = 1,75 g/ml, to 1 Ooo ml with water and add 25. g of chromium(\ll)

acid causes burns: avoid contact with eyes and skin. material and causes severe burns: avoid inhaling dust

ChromiumMl oxide may cause fire on contact with combustible and prevent contact with eyes and skin.

This solution is only suitable for use at a current density of about 100 mA/cm2 and for coatings up to 5 pm thick, when the accuracy of measurement is probably + 10 %.
NOTE - Anodic dissolution of chromium in this electrolyte - and in electrolytes 8.3 and 8.4 - produces hexavalent chromium ions Cr(VI) andthe electrochemical equivalent for CrWI) shall be used when calculating the thickness.

B.3

*Electrolyte

for chromium

coatings

on copper

or brass

Prepare a solution containing 100 g of sodium carbonate (Na.$O,)

per litre. and for coatings up to 5 pm thick.

This electrolyte is only suitable for use at a current density of about 100 mA/cm*,

B.4

*Electrolyte

for chromium

coatings

on nickel

or aluminium

Dilute 64 ml of orthophosphoric acid (H,PO,) solution, Q = 1.75 g/ml, to 1 000 ml with water. WARNING See clause 8.2.

This electrolyte is best used at a current density at about 100 mA/cm2 and is, therefore, particularly useful on thin or decorative
chromium coatings. (See also the note to clause 8.2.)

B.5

Electrolyte

for copper

coatings

on steel

or aluminium

Dissolve 800 g of ammonium nitrate (NH,NO,) WARNING - Ammonium bustible material.

in water, dilute to 1 000 ml and add 10 ml of ammonia solution (NH,), e = 0.88 g/ml. material. Keep out of contact with all com-

nitrate may cause fire on contact with combustible

Ammonia causes burns and is irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin : avoid breathing vapour and prevent contact with eyes and skin. This electrolyte gives thickness results that are about 1 to 2 96 lower than the correct value.

B.6

Electrolyte

for copper

coatings

on nickel

or aluminium
acid (H,PO,) solution,

Dissolve 100 g of potassium sulfate (K$Od) in water, dilute to 1 000 ml and then add 20 ml of orthophosphoric
Q = 1.75 g/ml. WARNING See clause 8.2.

B.7

Electrolyte

for copper

coatings

on zinc or zinc die-cast

alloys
30 % (m/m) with skin and if swallowed

Use pure hexafluorosilicic WARNING inhaling vapour

acid (H,SiF,J,

of concentration

not lower than approximately by inhalation,

Hexafluorosilicic and prevent

acid causes contact coatings with with

burns and is toxic

in contact

: avoId

eyes and skin.
100 % efficiency at quite

This solution dissolves copper

low voltages, with practically no anodlc attack "11 the IIT,I:

substrate exposed at the end of the test. There is, however, a tendency to leave slight traces of copper, as spots, on the Lirtc, in tbc test area but, although noticeable, they are normally too small to affect significantly the accuracy of the results.

7

IS 14126: 1994 IS0 2177: 1966

It is important to note that : a) a pure grade of hexafluorosilicic acid is required, substantially free from impurities such as chlorides and sulfates whii allow anodic attack on the zinc substrate when`it is exposed at the end of the test; would

b) the acid should not have too high a water content, which would lead to an affect similar to that described in al. If the water content of the available acid is too great, its deleterious effect can sometimes ba overcome by dissolving a little magnesium hexafluorosilicate in the acid.

6.8

Electrolyte

for lead coatings

on steel, copper or nickel (with or without tin undercoats)
and 200 g of ammonium acetate tCHsCOONH$ par litre.

Prepare a solution containing 260 g of sodium acetate Ui&OONa)

This electrolyte tends to give slightly lower than 100 % efficiency, but will probably give results that are not more than about 5 % higher than the correct value.

B.9

Electrolyte

for nickel coatings

on steel or aluminium a 76 g/l

Dissolve 800 g of ammonium nitrate (NH4NO$ (see the warning to clause 6.5) in water, dilute to 1 Ml6 ml and add 56 ml of thiourea ICSfNH&l solution.

This mixed solution has rather a short shelf-life and should thus be made up not more than 5 days before use, preferably from stock solutions of 860 g/l ammonium nitrate solution and'76 g/l thiourea solution, which have sheif-lives of at least 6 months. NOTE - The efficiencyof this electrolyte is reduced by passivity.of nickel coatings: it will not dissolve nickel with 100 % efficiency if lts wrface is passive. Nickel surfaces can also become passi,ve by the snodic action of phosphoric acid electrolyte used to remove chromium top coats bafora measuring the thickness of the nickel coating.
The cell voltage during the test can serve as a guide to this behaviour. If testing at about 400 mA/cmt, the cell voltage for dissolving nickel with 100 % efficiency is normally less than 2.4 V, while a cell voltage of 25 V or more usually indicates either that the nickal is dissolving at much leas than 109 % efficiency, usually accompanied by eleotropolishing of the nickel, or that oxygen is being evolved without any dissolution of the nickel. If necessary, the nickel can be activated before the test by introducing a little dilute hydrochloric acid [I mol/l < c(HCI) < 2 mol/ll 1)solution into the cell, removing it after about 0,5 to 1 min and rinsing well before introducing the ammonium nitrate/thiourea electrolyte to test for nickel thickness.

6.10

*Electrolyte

for nickel coatings on copper, brass or other copper alloys or on stainless steel

Dilute 100 ml of hydrochloric acid (tiCI). e = 1,18 g/ml, to 1 Ooo ml with water.

WARNING - Hydrochloric acid causes burns and is irritating to the respiratory system: avoid breathing the vapour and prevent contact with eyes and skin.
This electrolyte is only satisfactory for nickel coatings on copper or copper alloys when used at current densities of about 400 mA/cmZ, but not when used at about 160 mA/cm2. `NOTE - Electrolytes B.9 and B.10 are also suitable for testing the thickness of cobalt, cobalt-nickel or nickel-iron alloy coatings. The electrochemical aquivalonts of cobalt and iron are very close to that of nickel, thus no significant error occurs when the thicknesses of allovfi of these metals are calculated as though they were nickel alone.

6.11

Electrolyte

for silver coatings

on copper, copper alloys or nickel,

Prepare a 160 g/l potassium fluoride (KF) solution. WARNING - Potassium fluoride is toxic by inhalation, and prevent contact with eyes and skin.
This el'ectrolyte is satisfactory satisfactory

in contact with skin and if swallowed:

avoid inhalation

of dust

for dull silver coatings or bright silver coatings incorporating containing small percentages of antimony

sulfur-containing

brighteners,

but is not as

for bright silver alloy coatings

or bismuth.

_.___~
1) Hitherto expressed as "1 N to 2 N"

8

IS 14126: IS0 2177

1994 : 1985

NOTE - When testing silver coatings with electrolyte 8.11, there is a tendency for the silver to be deposited as metal on the inside of stainless steel cells. The deposit is, however, in fhe form of a uniform coating, that does not block the aperture, but it can lower the cell voltage needed for dissolution of the silver coatings. It is, therefore, desirable to dissolve away the silver deposit from stainless steel ceil bodies with nitric acid &er each determination.

8.12

Electrolyte

for tin coatings

on steel, copper alloys or nickel

Dilute 170 ml of hydrochloric acid (HCI),

e = 1,18 g/ml, to 1 000 ml with water.

WARNING

-

See clause B.10.

This solution dissolves tin coatings at very low cell voltages at which there is no anodic attack on the substrates when they are exposed at the end of the test. There is, however, a tendency for the tin to be deposited out of this solution during thefest as a spongy deposit on the cathode, for example on a stainless steel cell body, and this deposit can block the cell aperture after a while and thus prematurely stop the test when testing very thick tin coatings or e number of thinner ones. The aperture of the cell should therefore be cleaned of these growths at fairly frequent intervals. NOTE Th$ electrolyte is believed to have 100 96 efficiency.

B.13

*Electrolyte

for tin coatings

on aluminium
to the

Dilute 50 ml of sulfuric acid (H$04), water, and dissolve 5 g of potassium

e = I,84 g/ml, with water to 1 000 ml by carefully adding the acid, in small portions, fluoride (KF) in this solution.

WARNING - See clause B.11. (Sulfuric acid causes s6vere burns: prevent contact with skin and eyes and do not add water to sulfuric acid.1

8.14

Electrolyte

for zinc coatings
chloride

on steel, copper or brass

Prepare a 100 g/l potassium This electrolyte

(KC11 solution. but not quite as critical as that for testing cadmium coatings (clause 6.1).

requires a fairly critical pre-set voltage,

6.15

*Electrolyte

for tin-nickel
acid (H,PO,)

alloys on steel
solution, Q = 1.75 g/ml, saturated with 50 ml of hydrochloric at room temperature. acid (HCII, e = 1,18 g/ml, and (C,H,O,.ZH,O),

Mix 100 ml of orthophosphoric

50 ml of a solution of oxalic acid dihydrate WARNING -

See clauses 8.2 and B.10. IOxalic acid is harmful in contact with skin and if swallowed:

avoid contact with

eyes and skin.)
This electrolyte was formulated for use at a current density of about 100 mA/cm2 and at this current density the tin in the alloy was

found to dissolve as tin(ll) ions. The correct electrochemical i.e. 0,505 mg/C, should be used for calculating the thickness. position of the alloy (see 7.8).

equiva1er.t for a 65/35 tin-nickel alloy, with tin in the divalent form, For greater accuracy the factor should be adjusted for the actual com-

B.16

*Electrolyte

for

tin-nickel

alloys

on copper

or brass
(NiCI,.GH,O), 13 g of anhydrous tin(lV) chloride (SnCI,), e = 200 ml of

Prepare a solution containing water, 40 ml of hydrochloric See clauses

12 g of nickel chloride hexahydrate acid tHCU, e = 1,18 g/ml, 8.2 and B.10. (Nickel

and 50 ml of orthophosphoric

acid (HsPO,)

solution,

I,75 g/ml.

WARNING

chloride

has a harmful

dust and is irritating

to skin and eyes: avoid

breathing

dust and avoid contact with eyes and skin.1 avoid contact with eyes and skin and do not

Tin(lV) chloride causes burns and is irritating to the respiratory system: allow to come into contact with water inadvertently.
This electrolyte i.e. 0,305 mg/C, was formulated for use at a current density of about 400 mA/cm* equivalent for a 65/35 the thickness.

and at this current density the tin in the alloy was tin-nickel alloy, with tin in the quadrivalent form,

found to dissolve as tin(lVl

ions. The correct electrochemical

should be used for calculating

For greater accuracy the factor should be adjusted for the actual com-

position of the alloy (see 7.8).

9

Bureah of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed, if the review indicates that changes arc needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian standard has been dcvclopcd from DoC NO. MTD 20 (3854)

--Amend No

Amendments Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected -

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 33101 31,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Bra ches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 85 61 G 7 86 26, 37 86 62 53 38 43, 53 53 1 35 02 16, 235 e 235 15 19, 235 1640 23 84 04 42 23 15

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054
: SC0 445446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093 GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. HYDERABAD.

632 92 95, 632 78 58 1 632 78 91, 632 78 92 JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA.

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.

Printed BI Dee Kay Prmrers, New Delhi-l 10015, India

