«а Add IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2018) 


ч må чата ch Frac, 
Waren ak wacaa Ф Кис 
чап afem 


aT 5 {еа че 
(чест чта ) 


Safety Code for Construction, 
Operation and Maintenance of 
River Valley Projects 
Part 5 Electrical Aspects 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2014 


Ra AM эй 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 етте AHL AM, Чї feeei-110002 
Ми МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2014 Price Group 6 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


With large scale increase in construction activity of river valleys projects, the number of major accidents has 
been increased. The degree of safety achieved in project construction has a direct bearing on the amount of effort 
expended to avoid accidents by those who control the conditions and practices on the project. 


There are number of aspects that need to be kept in mind when the safety norms of an entire river valley project 
are envisaged. To this end, various aspects that need consideration, from the viewpoint of safety, are dealt with in 
various parts of this standard. 


This Part covers the safety aspects to be kept in view during work on or around electrical installations and those 
electrical aspects that are to be kept in mind from the view point of safety as well. 


The guidelines given in this standard are generalized and indicative in nature, given for the guidance of the 
concerned project engineers. Each project may have its own safety hazards which need to be identified and taken 
care of accordingly. Further, in addition to those general guidelines the instructions issued by the suppliers of 
various equipment should be strictly adhered to. 


All electrical installations should, however, be designed so as to conform to the requirements of the Central 
Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010. The model code for 
safe operation and maintenance of generating stations and the manual on layout of sub-stations of the Central 
Electricity Board. The requirements of codes prepared by local electricity boards and any other reports issued by 
the Ministry of Energy as well as other statutory requirements should also be adhered to. The requirements given 
in this standard are a supplement to these. 


This standard was first published in 1992. In this revision, new clauses for instrument transformers, gas insulated 
switch gear, cables, metal clad switch gear and preventive measures during work inside underground structures, 
general safety precautions, precautions during oil and SF, handling, splicing de-energized conductors have been 
incorporated in the standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


Indian Standard 


SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION 
AND MAINTENANCE OF RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
PART 5 ELECTRICAL ASPECTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 5) lays down the safety 
requirements covering indoor/outdoor electrical 
installations of generating stations, tunnels, electrical 
stores, pumping stations, including generators, 
breakers, isolators, transformers, current transformers, 
potential transformers, instrument transformers, gas 
insulated switch gear, cables, metal clad switch gear, 
lightning arrestors, motors, storage batteries, 
illumination systems, pumps, cranes and hoists, etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on these 
standards are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


2190 : 1992 Selection, installation and 
maintenance of first-aid fire 
extinguishers — Code of practice 


(third revision) 


3716 : 1978 Application guide for insulation 
coordination (first revision) 

9668 : 1990 Provision and maintenance of water 
supplies for fire fighting — Code of 
practice (first revision) 

10386 (Part 7): Construction, operation and 

1993 maintenance of river valley projects 
valley — Safety code: Part 7 Fire 
safety aspects 

13039 : 1991 External hydrant systems — 


Provision and maintenance — Code 
of practice 


3 PREVENTION OF ACCIDENTAL CONTACT 


All exposed electrical installations either because of 
location or otherwise should be so guarded that 
dangerous contact by persons shall not be possible. 


Step bolts on structural steel tower columns should be 
placed such that their use shall not bring a person into 
the vicinity of electrical conductors, transformers or 
switch boxes that may be installed on the face of a 
tower, adjacent to the step bolts. Sufficient clearance 
should be provided in the design of substations, switch- 
yards and transformer yards so that vehicles moving 
around and about high voltage equipment will not come 
in contact with equipment and damage it, or endanger 
themselves. Necessary provisions should also be made 
for stopping stray animals and cattle from coming into 
the vicinity of electrical installations. 


4 GROUNDING 


All non-current carrying parts/structures, materials, 
electrical appliances, tools, equipment, conduits, 
transformer enclosures, etc, should be effectively 
grounded. Parts of structures which might be expected 
to collect high static charge, such as towers and outlet 
pipes, should likewise be grounded. As a special 
precaution against accumulation of static charge on 
metals, floors and equipment in oil-storage rooms, or 
where explosive gases are to be used or may 
accumulate, these should be grounded. The power 
outlets and switches in these rooms should be fully 
enclosed in spark/explosion-proof chambers as far as 
practicable. All exposed switches and all other exposed 
and energized electrical installations should be so 
located as to avoid the possibility of simultaneous 
contact with them and with pipes, plumbing, or other 
connections to the ground. Manually operated remote- 
controlled disconnect-switch handles should be 
pigtailed to the grounded structure. The grounding of 
all electrical equipment should conform to relevant 
Indian Standards. Design of the grounding materials/ 
electrodes should be done so as to limit the step and 
touch potentials within safety limits. 


5 DE-ENERGIZING POWER LINES 


5.1 Provision should be made for de-energizing power 
lines and other installations and also grounding the 
same when maintenance and repair work is to be done, 
except where it is contemplated that hot-line tools are 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


to be used. Keys of locks, electrical interlocks on all 
chambers, cubicles or switchgear should be retained 
with senior authorized persons and other keys with the 
operator on duty or the person in charge of the 
concerned working party. 


5.2 Proper clearance procedure of obtaining permit to 
work on various electrical installations as given in ‘The 
model code for safe operation and maintenance of 
generating stations’ of Central Electrical Board should 
be followed. 


6 SUB-STATIONS 


6.1 Minimum and sectional clearances as given in 
IS 3716 should be maintained in the sub-stations. 


6.1.1 Where adequate ground clearance cannot be 
provided in sub-stations, fences, guards, or other means 
of protection should be provided. In sub-stations and 
transformer decks, sufficient clearance should be 
provided for the safe operation of service vehicles 
without damage to the installed equipment or exposing 
maintenance and repair men to hazards. 


6.1.2 Barriers in stations, cutting off access to 
enclosures within the station chambers, cubicles or cells 
containing high and/or extra high voltage apparatus 
should normally be kept locked. No person except an 
authorized person or person acting under his immediate 
supervision should have access to any enclosure, 
chamber, cubicle or cell in which a live conductor is 
exposed. 


6.2 Overhead Lines 


Ground clearance for over head lines across streets or 
along streets and other structures should be as given in 
Central Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to 
Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010. 


7 GENERATORS 


7.1 Insulation of large generators should be of epoxy 
based resin, mica, glass, thermosetting or any other 
material which is non combustible, flame retarding and 
self extinguishing. Fire protection systems with carbon 
dioxide may not be advisable in underground 
installations. Use of water spray for fire protection of 
generators may be considered in such cases. 


7.2 For working on generators, the following 
procedure should be adopted: 


a) A permit-to-work or sanction should be 
obtained for all work/test on generators and 
generator-transformer circuits as per normal 
clearance procedures given in Annex A. 

b) For isolating and de-energizing generators, the 
generator main disconnecting switch, the 


neutral disconnecting switch, generator 
potential transformer switches or fuses and 
switches connecting unit auxiliary 
transformer should be opened. 

c) Before any work is carried out on the 
generator windings or on directly coupled 
generator transformer circuits the generator 
should be at rest (unless permission has been 
given by the senior authorized person). Whilst 
the generator is on run, the field circuit should 
be opened/isolated and locked out and the 
inlet-valve controlling supply to the prime 
mover should be locked in the closed position. 

d) All remote operational controls should be 
rendered inoperative before taking up any 
maintenance work. 


e) Before undertaking work in the generator and 
its enclosure, all its fire protection features 
should be rendered inoperative. 

f) Metal rods, bars or strips should not be 
brought near live electromagnets or passed 
over the energized machine. 


8 TRANSFORMERS 


All transformers should be fenced or protected to 
prevent persons coming in contact with terminals or 
buses. Suitable fencing and curbs should be provided 
for transformer vaults located in galleries of dams and 
rooms/buildings, to prevent possible personal contact. 
Such equipment should be installed out-side a plant 
building, wherever possible, especially if oil filled 
transformers are in use. As far as possible, in the case 
of underground power houses transformers should be 
located in a separate cavern. If the transformers are 
installed in the power house, these would normally be 
in a separate gallery, every transformer should be 
housed in separate cubicles, formed by fire protection 
walls. Suitable ducts for removal of foul gases, smoke, 
and fumes in the event of fire should be provided. Oil 
soaking pits should be provided for collecting spilled 
oil. Use of dry type of transformers inside power houses 
tunnels etc, should be recommended as far as possible, 
to avoid fire hazards. Adequate clearances as prescribed 
in ‘Indian Electricity Rules’ should be provided. A 
permit to work or sanction for test should be obtained 
for all work on transformers and proper procedure as 
laid down in Central Electricity Authority (Measures 
Relating to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 
2010 shall be followed. 


9 INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMERS 


9.1 А permit to work or sanction for test shall be 
obtained for all works on instrument transformers. 


9.2 Following precautions should also be observed 


while working on instrument transformers: 


a) Cases of all instrument transformers shall be 
earthed. 

b) Inhandling instrument circuits the secondary 
circuit of a current transformer shall not be 
opened while it is alive. 

c) Before any work is carried out on an 
instrument or other device in a current 
transformer secondary circuit the device shall 
be bridged with jumpers, so that the circuit 
can not be opened at the device. The circuit 
shall never be opened at meter connections 
until it has been bridged elsewhere. 

d) Potential transformer (PT) secondaries shall 
never be short circuited. 

e) Low voltage windings of PTs shall always 
have one side permanently and effectively 
earthed. 


10 GAS INSULATED SWITCHGEAR 


10.1 A permit to work or sanction shall be obtained 
for all works on gas insulated switchgear. 


10.2 In case gas insulated switchgear has been installed 
for the generating stations, the following safety 
precautions should be taken while working on gas 
insulated switchgear: 


a) The fact that the metal enclosed gas insulated 
switchgear offers a high degree of safety, shall 
not lead to the operating personnel showing 
а certain indifference to the safety rules in the 
course of time. 


b) The operating personnel shall be familiar with 
the handling of sulphur hexa fluoride (SF,). 

с) Gas handling, for example filling, evacuation 
has to be carried out only by qualified 
personnel. The gas is about 5 times heavier 
than that of air. Therefore, it collects at the 
lowest point, for example in the basement, 
cable ducts, etc, displaces the air and causes 
risk of suffocation. 


10.3 Following precautions should also be observed 
while working on GIS: 


a) Before carrying the maintenance, the room 
should be thoroughly ventilated; 


b) Do not inhale the dust (use dust protection 
mask), do not let it come into contact with 
eyes (use gas proof protective glasses) and 
do not let it come into contact with skin (wear 
protective clothes); 

c) Any dust on skin should be washed off with 
plenty of water; 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


d) Do not stirrup the dust, remove it with a 
vacuum cleaner with paper filter (let through 
< 0.5 percent) or wipe it off with dry cleaning 
rag; 

e) Treat filters, cleaning bags and other materials 
so that the trapped dust is not set free again. 
Do not open filter bags; 

f) Before discarding any equipment, it should 
be neutralized by immersing in 3 percent soda 
solution for 24 h, then disposed-off as waste; 


g) Do not eat, drink and smoke in rooms, 
particularly where switching dust is likely to 
be present; 

h) Before taking a break and after work, 
thoroughly clean your face, neck and arms 
using soap and plenty of water. 


11 CABLES 


11.1 A permit to work or sanction shall be obtained 
for all works on cables. 


11.2 Following precautions should also be observed 
while working on cables: 


a) Before digging, put off the point of fault. The 
authorized person shall determine the 
particulars of all cables in the vicinity of the 
faulty cable. 


b) All cables in the vicinity of fault point shall 
be exposed and identified to establish the 
identity of the faulty cables. 

c) Before a high or extra high voltage cable is 
cut, the authorized person shall make definite 
checks to identify the cable and to ensure that 
the cable has been made dead and earthed. 
He shall then spike the cable in an approved 
manner at the point where the cut is to be 
made. 

d) After completion of work the cable shall be 
properly tagged and its position entered in 
appropriate place (for example cable 
identification card). 

e) Employees shall not step on live cables even 
though they are insulated and enclosed in lead 
sheath. Tools and material shall not be rested 
against the sheath of the cables. 


12 METAL CLAD SWITCH GEAR 


12.1 A permit to work or sanction shall be obtained 
for all works on metal clad switch gear/ bus bar spouts/ 
feeder/voltage transfers spouts. 


12.2 Following precautions should be observed while 
working on Metal Clad Switch Gear: 


a) А permit-to-work or sanction for test shall be 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


obtained for all work on bus bar spouts and 
feeder and voltage transfers spouts. 

b) The isolating arrangements and the shutters 
of live spouts shall be locked so that they can 
not be operated. In the case of bus bar spouts 
where duplicate switches in one tank or on 
load bus bar isolators are installed and it is 
not possible to isolate a bus bar fed from 
different sources of supply, all the switches 
that can be closed to the gear involved shall 
be locked in the open position and the closing 
mechanism made inoperative. 

c) Approved indicators shall be used to verify 
that the circuit is not live and the indicator 
itself shall be tested before and after use. 


d) Approved appliances shall be used for 
earthing. The insertion of hand or any other 
tool in the bus bar, feeder or transformer 
spouts for this purpose shall be strictly 
forbidden. 

e) Temporary earthing shall be removed from 
one phase at a time from the point of work. 


13 ACCESS TO CONTROLS 


Switches and other control devices should be located 
and arranged so as to be readily accessible for safe 
operation. Platforms should be built, wherever 
necessary, to provide access to switches. Adequate 
space should be provided to operate and service 
equipment so that unnecessary, uncomfortable or 
hazardous positions during normal operations are not 
needed. 


14 OUTLETS 


Flush type floor level receptacles should be used to 
obviate tripping hazards. Electrical outlets in all 
permanent installations, where power tools are used, 
should be of the type which provide a ground 
connection for the tool. Tools specified for operation 
at such installations should also be provided with 
ground wire and a three-way or four-way plug as the 
case may be. 


15 CONDUITS 


Lengthy runs of cable conduits should terminate in such 
a manner so as to preclude the possibility of water 
condensing therein and dripping on equipment. 


16 BUS-BARS 


16.1 Generator bus leads, terminating in a mesh or 
screen covered box on the side of a generator, with 
which personnel frequently come in contact, should 
be totally enclosed when so situated, and when live 
parts are within a short distance of such a covering. 


16.2 Buses on main control boards of high potential 
should be provided with protective guards or insulating 
tape. 


17 ASSEMBLY PEDESTALS 


Pedestals for generator rotor assembly and transformer 
untanking pits should be recessed in floors with removable 
flush covers, protective guards and hand rails, etc. 


18 SWITCHES 


Electrical switches controlling moving of dangerous 
equipment should be equipped with locking devices 
so they can be locked in the ‘open’ position. 


19 STORAGE BATTERIES 


19.1 Isolation 


All stationary storage batteries using acid or alkali as 
electrolyte, consisting of cells connected in series with 
a nominal voltage of 50 У ог more should be installed 
in separate rooms. The room should be provided with 
an exhaust fan and running water with a wash basin. 
Outside the room acid resistant paint should be used 
to reduce the corrosive effect of acid fumes. 


19.2 Caution 


Smoking, or the use of open flames, or of tools which 
may generate sparks, should be avoided except when 
cells are not actively gassing and when prior ventilation 
has been ample. Sparks from frictional or static 
electricity should be avoided as they may ignite the 
gas, if discharged close to its source, as at the vent of a 
scaled type cell during overcharging. The electrolyte 
of storage batteries and spray containing electrolyte 
are somewhat corrosive, particularly when 
concentrated by evaporation, and contact with body 
or clothing should be prevented. 


20 LIGHTNING ARRESTORS 


20.1 No work should be done on a lightning arrestor 
unless it is disconnected from the live circuit and 
earthed at both the line and ground terminals. 


20.2 Tanks of electrolyte or shields of oxide films of 
lightning arrestors should never be touched when the 
arrestors are energized. 


20.3 High voltage and extra high voltage lightning 
arrestors, where accessible, should be provided with 
suitable screens or fences against possible contact while 
the arrestors are alive. The gate of the screens should 
be kept locked and the key should be with the operator 
on duty. 


21 FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE FIGHTING 


21.1 The details of construction and provision of fire 


extinguishing systems and fire fighting equipments 
should be according to IS 10386 (Part 7). 


21.2 The provision of water supply should be made 
according to 1S 9668 and external hydrants should be 
according to the provisions of IS 13039. 


21.3 Periodic training classes should be held to ensure 
that all regular employees are familiar with the 
following: 


a) Common fire hazards, techniques of fire 
prevention and fire fighting; 


b) Use of various types of fire safety equipment; 

c) Location of exits and fire fighting equipment; 

d) Precautions against electric shock and 
inhalation of toxic gases; and 

e) Operations to be carried out in case of fire 
involving electrical equipment, or in the 
vicinity thereof. 


21.4 Precautions to prevent common types of electrical 
equipment fires are briefly given below: 


a) Electrical equipment should be installed, 
operated and maintained properly and in a 
manner so as to eliminate sparks due to poor 
contacts in switches and fittings, worn out 
insulation, crossed wires, opening of switches 
carrying large currents, etc. 

b) Metal parts of oil tanks, electrical equipment 
and buildings ‘etc’ should be adequately 
bonded and grounded to prevent fires by 
lightning and static electricity. 

c) Flammable gases or materials should not be 
stored near electrical equipment. 

d) Electrical lamps should not be surrounded by 
or laid on, combustible materials. 


21.4.1 Motors should be equipped with over current 
and under voltage protection to prevent excessive 
heating. 


21.4.2 Battery rooms should have no loose connections 
and there should be no sparking devices, for example 
bells, buzzers, relays, fuses or switches in the room. 
Smoking should be prohibited and rubbish and other 
combustibles should not be allowed to accumulate in 
battery rooms and near electrical plants and machinery. 


21.4.3 Type of fires and the equipment to be used for 
extinguishing them are given in IS 2190. 


22 PUMPING PLANTS 


22.1 In case of power stations provision of suitable 
and reliable drainage and dewatering pumps of 
adequate capacity (it is advisable to provide 100 percent 
spare pumping capacity) capable of running under the 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


most adverse conditions should be made. Discharge 
pipes from equipment to be drained should be directly 
connected to headers going to the sump. Capacity of 
sump and pump should be adequate to ensure reliability 
of operation. Power supply to the pumps should be 
reliable and to achieve this, pumps should be supplied 
from at least two power sources employing a carefully 
designed interlocking scheme. The control panel for 
drainage and dewatering pumps should be located at 
higher elevations to avoid flooding. Water proof cables 
should be used for submersible pumps. 


22.2 Pumping plants can be dangerous because of the 
electrical equipment installed there. In order to protect 
persons from getting hurt, it is good practice to place 
fences around all unhoused pumping plants. These 
fences also serve to protect the installed equipment 
from being tampered with. The protection of persons 
from hazards of open hatches, slippery floors, trash 
rack decks and other danger spots also needs to be kept 
in view and appropriate measures taken. 


23 POWER DRIVEN MACHINERY 


23.1 As used herein, this classification includes wood 
working machinery such as a bench saws, jointers, band 
saws, jig saws and lathes; metal working machinery 
such as lathes, punch presses, drill shapers, drilling 
machines, milling machines and grinding wheels; and 
other similar machinery. 


23.2 All electrically driven machinery and portable 
tools should be provided with special insulated power 
transmission cables having water proof connections, 
and should have three wire extensions and three-way 
plugs and outlets, one of which connects the non- 
current carrying parts of the motors and the frame to 
the ground. Tools provided with two-way outlets should 
also be grounded. Where stationery machinery such 
as bench saws, jointers and drill presses are driven by 
individual motors, the motors and frames should like 
wise be grounded. 


23.3 If required electrical equipment operating on 
110 V or 24 V may be used with measures as decided 
by the engineer in charge. 


24 CRANES AND HOISTS 


24.1 All cranes and hoists should have a minimum 
safety factor of 5, and should never be used to handle 
loads in excess of their designed capacity. They should 
be equipped with proper safety devices and braking 
equipment, which should be capable of effectively 
braking a weight at least one and one and a half times 
the full rated load. Provisions should be made in the 
design, so that loads of all types can be lowered with 
the power on and the motor in gear. 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


24.2 Capacity name plate should be attached to all 
cranes and hoists and should clearly indicate the safe 
load in tonnes. 


24.3 The design should provide for sufficient number 
of full ways of cable on the drums of cranes and hoists. 


24.4 Electrical controls and switches should be placed 
in access ways to remote-controlled elevated cranes to 
ensure that the crane busbar, etc, are de-energized 
before the equipment can be reached for servicing. It 
is recommended that each controller in an overhead 
traveling crane cab, or cage, be equipped with a 
mechanical lockout suitable to hold a padlock. Design 
specifications should also contain provisions for clearly 
labelling or marking all electrical switches and controls. 
Limit switches and automatic power shutoffs should 
be provided in the design for all bridge cranes. 


24.5 All elevators, hoists and lifts should be designed 
with safety devices to prevent dropping of cages or 
loads, in case of equipment or power failure, and the 
entrances to shafts should be guarded by gates or doors 
that are closed and locked automatically when the car 
or cage leaves a floor. Elevator escape hatches should 
be designed for easy removal. The outside, stationary 
door on each floor of the elevator shaft should be so 
designed that it may be opened manually from inside 
the shaft, in the event of the elevator being stalled 
between floors. 


25 FIRST AID AND RESUSCITATION 


25.1 The contractor for the works under his contract 
and project authorities should provide the following: 


a) Adequate first aid arrangements at various 
places of work. 


b) First aid kits to the working parties. 


c) Arrangement and incentives for training in 
rendering of first aid to its employees. 

d) Instructional charts for artificial respiration 
and other first aid should be displayed at 
conspicuous places. Telephone numbers of 
nearest Doctor/Ambulance service should 
also be prominently displayed. 


25.2 First aid personnel should cultivate a methodical, 
regular and natural approach to be able to render skilled 
assistance. The guidelines given below should also be 
kept in mind: 


a) Remove the patient from the source of injury 
viz electric conductor, water, moving 
machinery, etc. 

b) Where patient is in contact with a live 
conductor or equipment, switch off current 
at once before removal of the patient. If this 
cannot be done and the patient is in contact 


with low voltage apparatus, pull him off by 
using rubber gloves, if handy, or by his coat 
or shirt, or any dry cloth, bag, newspaper or 
dry rope. If the patient is in contact with high 
voltage apparatus, he should be handled only 
with a high voltage operating rod or a piece 
of perfectly dry wood or rope, care being 
taken to have at least 1 m of wood or rope 
between the hands of the man and any live 
metal. 

c) Incase of electric shock extinguish sparks, if 
any, and if breathing has stopped, begin 
artificial respiration without delay, even if the 
person appears to be dead. The doctor should 
be called immediately. 


26 LIGHTING IN THE POWER HOUSE 


26.1 In addition to normal lighting in the power house 
emergency lighting from d.c. storage batteries should 
also be provided. Sufficient provision should be made 
in the capacity of the battery on this account so that 
whenever station a.c. supply for lighting fails, d.c. 
lighting supply is automatically switched on and 
continuous lighting is maintained in the power house. 
Portable dry or rechargeable battery operated lamps 
for emergency use may also be used where necessary. 


26.2 Use of fluorescent lamps is preferred due to their 
high efficiency. Protective guards around all lighting 
points in the vicinity of likely working zones is also 
essential. 


27 VENTILATION 


27.1 All underground locations where electrical 
apparatus is installed, various buildings and enclosures, 
should be adequately ventilated to ensure adequate 
number of air changes as prescribed in the relevant 
standards. 


27.2 Ventilation may be forced or induced by fans, etc. 


28 PREVENTIVE 
EARTHQUAKES 


MEASURES AGAINST 


28.1 АП electrical plant and equipment should be 
designed according to relevant Indian Standards to 
withstand earthquake intensity of the project site. 
Anchor bolts for moving equipment such as 
transformers and cranes, etc, should be provided with 
a clamping arrangement to avoid accidental movement. 


28.2 As a prevention against damage to the civil 
structures and electrical installations, designs should 
be comprehensive after taking into account the 
maximum probability and intensity of earthquakes in 
the area. In this connection relevant Indian Standards 
may be consulted. 


29 EMERGENCY POWER SUPPLY 


Arrangements of power supply for essential services 
such as dewatering, operation of head gates, 
illumination and ventilation of important and hazardous 
areas, etc, should have adequate alternative stand by 
power sources such as diesel/fossil fuel operated 
generating sets, etc. 


30 WORKSHOP MACHINERY AND WELDING 


30.1 All electrical machines like lathes and drilling 
machines should be properly provided with guards to 
avoid any accidents. 


30.2 Field machinery, like stone crushers, employing 
belt transmission systems should be provided with 
protective guards. 


30.3 Extensive welding is done in projects. Suitable 
safety appliances like goggles, hand gloves, etc, should 
be used by the welders. Welding accessories like cutting 
torches, cables, nozzles, etc, should be inspected 
periodically and kept in good condition. 


31 PREVENTIVE MEASURES DURING WORK 
INSIDE UNDERGROUND STRUCTURES 


31.1 No person shall enter or be permitted to enter any 
underground chamber or other confined space in which 
dangerous fumes are likely to be present, unless, 


a) itis provided with a man hole of adequate 
size or other effective means of egress; 

b) a certificate in writing has been given by a 
competent person based on a test carried out 
by himself, that the space is free from 
dangerous fumes and fit for persons to enter; 
or 


c) while work is being performed in manholes or 
vaults, a person must be available in the 
immediate vicinity to render emergency 
assistance, if required. It shall also be ensured 
that the employee is wearing a suitable 
breathing apparatus and a belt, which is securely 
attached to a rope, the free end of which is held 
by the person in the immediate vicinity. 


31.2 Open flames and smoking shall be avoided in 
underground chambers. 


31.3 For work inside the underground structures, 
special attention shall be given to general safety rules, 
familiarity with the cable and equipment being worked 
on, and rules applying to such underground work. 


31.3.1 General Safety 
All work shall be done with the following precautions: 


a) Continuous adequate ventilation should be 
provided. 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


b) A ladder should always be used when entering 
or leaving a manhole or vault. Climbing into 
or out of manholes or vaults by stepping on 
cables or cable supports shall be forbidden. 
Manhole ladders, when not in use, shall be 
placed as not to be a hazard to workers, 
pedestrians, or vehicular traffic. Hard hats 
should be used when entering or working in 
manholes. 

с) Tool handling should be done in a manner that 
protects the workers and work area. 

d) Tools or materials should always be placed at 
a safe distance from manhole openings, where 
they will not cause a stumbling hazard or 
come in contact with energized conductors 
or equipment. 


e) Tools or materials should not be thrown into 
or out of manholes. Canvas buckets or hand 
lines should be used for lowering tools or 
equipment into and removing them from 
manholes. Workers should be warned before 
lowering tools. 

f) Before starting work, an inspection should be 
made to determine, if there are any dangerous 
conditions such as burnt or cut cables or loose 
or defective ladders. Use of portable ladders 
should be preferred. Ladders in manholes, if 
provided, may have rusted and become 
unsafe. Before using open flames in manholes 
or excavations where combustible gases or 
liquids may be present, the atmosphere shall 
be again re-tested and found safe or cleared 
of the combustible gases or liquids. When 
open flames have to be used in manholes, 
extra precautions shall be taken to provide 
adequate ventilation. 

g) Flashlights or facility with approved lighting 
units should only be used for illumination in 
manholes. 

h) Low voltage equipment is especially 
hazardous in or around subsurface structures. 
Motor frames and equipment cases may be 
energized by electrical conductors with frayed 
or damaged insulation. The faults may occur 
only momentarily or may be prolonged 
through high-resistance grounding paths. 
Contact with energized equipment surfaces 
and the damp and well-grounded floors and 
walls often results in electrocution. So, only 
pneumatic tools and low-voltage (24 V) 
lighting systems should be used in 
maintaining subsurface vaults and facilities. 


31.3.2 Precautions Before Commencing Work 


a) The worker should be familiar with the system 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


and then proceed to any necessary tagging of 
cable and equipment. 

b) Every possible precaution should be exercised 
to correctly identify voltage, circuit, and phase 
of cable or apparatus to be worked upon. 

c) The external appearance of medium-voltage 
and low-voltage cables is often similar. For 
this reason, a very careful check should be 
made of duct/manholes locations and tag 
numbers before starting work. Any errors 
found in the tagging of cables or in the records 
of manholes or maps should be immediately 
reported to the supervisor. Under no 
circumstances should an identification tag be 
removed or placed on a circuit without direct 
permission from the supervisor. 


31.3.3 Requirements for De-energized Work Safe 
Clearance Procedures 


a) Where cables are being de-energized to be 
worked on, all instructions pertaining to the 
clearing of circuits, tagging, and grounding 
shall be complied with. 

b) Standard practice for cable work is to provide 
complete isolation of cable and protection 
against premature energizing. An absolute 
check to ensure that no potential exists shall 
be made prior to cutting into any cable. The 
cable (lead or other) sheathing should be 
removed and tested for voltage. Approved 
voltage detectors should only be used. 


c) Working on cable and equipment should 
normally be done after de-energizing the 
cable or apparatus to be worked on. 


31.3.4 Checks for De-energization 


The cable or apparatus shall be considered energized 
and worked with adequate protective devices until the 
following steps have been taken: 


a) The item has been tested with an approved 
device and proven to be de-energized. 

b) The item has been grounded from all possible 
sources of power (including transformer 
secondary backfeeds). 

с) The item has been proved de-energized at the 
work location. The ground connection may 
be removed for test purposes with the 
approval of the supervisor in charge after the 
circuit has been tested and proven to be de- 
energized. The removal of ground connection 
should only be permitted, if their application 
increases the work hazard. 


d) Before working on any section of cable or 
apparatus to which cable is connected, care 


shall be taken to ensure that the cable has been 
grounded for a sufficient length of time to 
drain off any static charges. 

e) Heating materials and equipment used in 
splicing cable should be heated in such a 
manner as to prevent any hazard to those 
working in manholes or vaults including the 
persons and vehicles around. 


31.3.5 Hazard Elimination 


The following precautions should be observed to 
protect the personnel and the workplace: 


a) Gloves should be worn while heating or 
working with hot insulating compound. 

b) The cylinders containing liquefied petroleum 
gas, such as butane or propane, should not be 
placed in a manhole or vault. 


31.3.6 Lighting 


Adequate lighting shall be provided at the face and at 
any other point where work is in progress, at equipment 
installations. 


Emergency lights (battery operated) shall be installed 
at the working faces and at intervals along the tunnel 
to help escape of workmen in case of accidents. All 
supervisors and gang-mates shall be provided with cap 
lamps or hand torches. 


Voltage for lighting in the underground works should 
be as specified for underground lighting as per Central 
Electricity Authority (Measures Relating to Safety and 
Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010. 


32 GENERAL SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 
The following safety precautions should be observed: 


a) АП electric apparatus shall be considered as 
live unless it is checked and confirmed. 

b) No person should touch the insulation, which 
covers or supports any conductor subject to 
extra high or high voltage, unless the 
conductor is dead and earthed. 

c) The spaces adjacent to exposed live 
equipment shall not be used as passage ways. 


d) In places where there are possibilities of 
explosion from flammable gas or vapour 
mixture, all electrical apparatus shall be so 
constructed so as to exclude such dangerous 
items from the area of risk. 

e) Electrical conductors, cable, etc, shall as far 
as practicable be so arranged that their route 
can easily be traced. 

f) Pliers, screwdrivers, fuse pullers and similar 
hand tools used in connection with electric 


work shall be adequately insulated. 

g) Handles of oil cans and of wipers, brushes 
and other cleaning devices used around 
electrical equipment shall be made of non- 
conducting materials. 

h) Electrical circuit and other electrical 
equipment shall be identified by labels or 
other suitable means to reduce the risk of 
accidents from mistakes. 


33 PRECAUTIONS DURING OIL AND 
SULPHUR HEXAFLUORIDE (SF, ) HANDLING 


33.1 During oil handling operations on oil-filled 
equipment, following precautions should be observed 
to prevent the build up of a hazardous electrical charge: 


a) The apparatus tanks, conductive hoses, 
pumping or filtering equipment, drums, trucks 
and portable storage tanks should be grounded 
to the station ground mat. The vehicle end 
should be connected first and disconnected 
last to prevent possible arcs near the vehicle. 
Conductive hoses should be tested for 
continuity before use. 

b) The exposed conductors should be grounded, 
such as transformer or circuit breaker 
bushings, or coil ends of transformers where 
bushings have been physically removed, to 
the same grounding point. 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


33.2 Sulphur hexafluoride (SF,) equipment should be 
grounded in accordance with manufacturer’s 
recommendations. 


34 PRECAUTIONS DURING OPENING OR 
SPLICING DE-ENERGIZED CONDUCTORS OR 
OVERHEAD GROUND WIRES (OGW) 


Before separating and/or splicing a conductor or OGW 
(while under a clearance), the following precautions 
should be taken: 


a) All conductors should be bonded together, 
including OGWs when applicable, and these 
should be bonded to the ground as near to the 
worksite as practicable. 


b) A ground should be installed for the damaged 
conductor or OGW at each structure from 
which it is to be lowered. Continuous 
grounding shall be in place until the conductor 
or OGW is reinstalled. 


c) A ground rod and ground cables should be 
installed and bonded to the metallic work 
platform if one is used. A ground rod (using a 
hotstick) should also be installed to each side 
of conductor where the conductor or OGW is 
to be cut or spliced. 


NOTE — If an insulated work platform is used, it must 
be kept clean and dry. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.2 ) 


CLEARANCE PROCEDURE 


A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 


A-1.1 The clearance procedure is intended to meet 
the following principal requirements in relation to 
potentially dangerous jobs: 


a) Protection of men at work; 
b) Protection of equipment; and 
c) Designation of abnormal conditions. 


A-1.2 The requirements given in A-1.1 are to be 
achieved by providing safe working conditions, 
essential information and guidance to the men at work, 
checking arrangements to ensure reliability of the 
highest order, etc, through the use of the following: 


a) Permit-to-work; 
b) Sanction for test; 


c) Station guarantee; 
а) Self-protection tag; and 
e) Danger notices. 


A-1.3 Clearance procedure is equally applicable to 
electrical and mechanical processes. 


A-1.4 The undertaking should issue instructions for, 


a) making applicable such portions of the 
provisions of this section as apply to their 
work; 


b) appointment of senior authorized person(s) 
for controlling the issue and cancellation of 
clearances under various conditions and safe 
and expeditious execution of work there 
under, their relations with ‘power controllers’, 
etc; 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


с) 


d) 


appointment of authorized person(s) for work 
on various types of jobs; and 


copies of these instructions should be 
displayed in the office of the senior authorized 
person, control room and appended to this 
code, in so far as may be required for 
reference of the persons concerned. 


A-1.5 For switching operations on electrical apparatus 
the following conditions should be observed: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


Switches used in isolating apparatus for 
giving clearance should have contacts that are 
visible or the positions of which can be 
positively determined by inspection. All 
phases of such switches, irrespective of the 
type, should be inspected to make sure that 
they all open; 

If electrically operated or remote 
mechanically operated switches are used, they 
should be locked or blocked open or a portion 
of the mechanism should be removed to 
prevent accidental closure; 


Switching operations in unattended stations 
and line sectionalizing points for purposes of 
clearance should be done by persons 
specifically authorized for this purpose; and 
Particulars of all switching operations and 
transactions connected therewith should be 
recorded in the station log or the registers 
maintained for this purpose. 


A-1.6 Persons issuing clearance should ensure that, 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


е) 


clearance is issued only for the actual work 
on electrical apparatus or mechanical 
equipment. 

clearance is issued in the name of the persons 
under whose supervision the work is intended 
to be carried out. In case the nature of the 
work requires personal supervision of the 
senior authorized person, a clearance be 
issued by him only. 


before issuing a clearance, the electrical 
apparatus or mechanical equipment, as the 
case may be, is made entirely safe for working 
and danger notices are attached at appropriate 
places and in a conspicuous manner. 


the person taking clearance understands the 
particulars of the work to be done as well as 
particulars of the operations carried out 
(including those of earthing arrangements) to 
make the working safe and the extent of the 
area safe for working. 

the electrical apparatus or mechanical 
equipment covered by the clearance has been 
duly surrendered and cancelled. 


10 


5) 


particulars of clearance ( for example type, 
serial No., time of issue and cancellation ) are 
recorded in the station log or a register to be 
kept for this purpose. 


before going off duty they formally handover 
records relating to clearances issued by them, 
indicating clearly the clearances remaining 
unsurrendered. The senior authorized person 
and the operator taking over should 
correspondingly acknowledge the records and 
the information as above and make sure that 
they have a clear understanding of the 
situation in each case. 


A-1.7 Person taking clearance should ensure that, 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


е) 


5) 


h) 


all electrical apparatus are treated alive by the 
persons under his charge until a specific 
clearance has been issued; 


the area covered by the clearance is made safe 
for working and proper danger notices have 
been placed on switches and/or the controlling 
points concerned; 


where a possibility of hazard exists in the 
vicinity of the work site, the boundaries of 
the area safe for working are clearly marked 
and persons other than the members of the 
working party or those specifically authorized 
by the Senior Authorized Person are not 
allowed to enter hazardous positions of the 
work site; 


all persons under his control who are to work 
on the electrical apparatus or mechanical 
equipment covered by the clearance, 
understand the extent of the area safe for 
working: 

in cases where the work involves hazards in 
the vicinity of the work site, one of the 
members of his party to be appointed as a 
safety man and it should be his duty to 
maintain a continuous watch over the 
workmen and to issue warnings of any unsafe 
conditions which he observes; 


before starting work the person in charge of 
the working party should check, in the 
presence of another person, by means of 
approved devices or visual inspection whether 
the line or equipment concerned is de- 
energised and effectively earthed; 


the safety measures, as above, continue to be 
in force until the work is completed or 
suspended (for example earthing 
arrangements should not be removed ); 

on completion of the work the ( 1 ) material, 
tools, etc, and ( 2 ) persons under his control 
are immediately removed and made clear of 


the equipment under clearance; 

the clearance is surrendered for cancellation 
to the issuing officer immediately after the 
action referred to under ( h ) is completed; 


}) 


К) where any changes which may affect the 
operation of the equipment or the line have 
been made, this should be clearly brought to 
the notice of the officer issuing the clearance 


while surrendering the clearance; 


if due to any circumstances the clearance 
cannot be surrendered by its holder within the 
period originally estimated, the fact should 
be immediately brought to the notice of the 
officer issuing the clearance; and 

n) where possible the person surrendering the 
clearance should initial the log entry. 


А-2 PERMIT-TO-WORK 


A-2.1 Permit-to-work is a means to make known to 
persons undertaking construction, repair or 
maintenance jobs exactly what electrical apparatus or 
mechanical equipment have been made safe to work 
on, description of the job, special precautions, if any, 
for safety of workmen on the job, etc. It ensures safe 
working conditions until it is surrendered. For forms 
showing permit-to-work on electrical apparatus or 
mechanical equipment “The Model Code for Safe 
Operation and Maintenance of Generating Stations’ of 
Central Electricity Board should be referred to. 


A-2.2 No construction, repair or maintenance work 
on, or in the proximity of high tension or extra high 
tension apparatus or mechanical equipment where 
technical knowledge or experience is required to avoid 
danger, should be carried out unless a permit-to-work 
on the prescribed forms has been issued by the senior 
authorized person to the authorized person. 


A-2.3 In cases, where the work is to be carried out on 
major units of plant and equipment, or the work 
requires extraordinary care in supervision of the work, 
the permit should be used with the approval of the 
station superintendent, and in cases where the station 
superintendent is the senior authorized person himself, 
the permit should be issued with the approval of the 
Engineer-in-Charge of the undertaking. 


11 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


А-2.3.1 The person issuing а permit-to-work should 
ensure that the apparatus/ equipment is made perfectly 
safe to work on as follows: 


a) Inthe case of electrical apparatus the isolation 
is complete, the metal parts are adequately 
earthed and caution notices are attached at 
appropriate places; 

b) In the case of mechanical equipment, the 
isolation is complete and condition rendered 
safe ( for example by opening proper valves, 
gates, etc, to reduce the equipment to 
atmospheric pressure; removal of poisonous, 
suffocating or explosive gases; application of 
brakes and blocks; allowing temperature to 
come down; as the case may be ), and caution 
notices are attached at appropriate places; and 
Maintenance of the above conditions is 
essential until the permit is surrendered and 
cancelled. 


A-2.4 Permits should be prepared in duplicate. The 
first copy of the permit should be handed over to the 
person-in-charge of the work (also known as permit 
holder) and the second copy should be retained by, or 
forwarded to, the operator or any other person-in- 
charge of operations. Permit books should be treated 
as important records. The sheets and the books 
themselves should be serially numbered. No page 
should be detached or used for any but bonafide work. 
If any paper is advertently detached, a dated and 
initialed statement should be placed there and then 
recorded in the book by the person concerned. 


A-2.5 The permit holder should be responsible for 
identifying the isolated and de-energized circuits in 
the case of work on multi-circuit lines or on single 
circuit lines situated close together. 


A-2.6 After surrender of the permit to the person 
issuing the permit, the original copy, duly completed 
should be forwarded by him to the station 
superintendent for information and record and the 
second copy should be retained in the records of the 
senior authorized person. Provided, where the station 
superintendent is the senior authorized person himself, 
the original copy should be forwarded to the Engineer- 
in-charge of the undertaking. 


IS 10386 (Part 5) : 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley 
Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 21 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 

Irrigation & CAD Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, 
Hyderabad 

Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 

Irrigation Department, Government of Maharastra, Nashik 

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttarakhand, Dehra Dun 

NHPC Ltd, Faridabad 


National Projects Construction Corporation Limited, Faridabad 


North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, Shillong 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 
Saradar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd, Gandhi Nagar 
Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam, Shimla 


Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Chennai 


THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh 


Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh, 
Bhopal 


Representative(s) 
Suri V. K. Gupta (Chairman) 


MEMBER (IRRIGATION) 
Director (Dam Sarety) (Alternate) 


SHRI A. С. Gupta 
Suri М. L. Bawesa (Alternate) 


SHRI Manos SIKDAR 
Suri Manos Tripatut (Alternate) 


Director (DSM) 
Director (DSR) (Alternate) 


Suri D. N. BHATTACHARYA 
Suri С. PauL (Alternate) 


Dr Сораг, CHAUHAN (WRDM) 


Suri І. S. N. КАЛ 
Suri S. PANDURANGA Rao (Alternate) 


Сш ENGINER (RSDD) 
Director Dams (RSDD) (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DSO) 
Executive Engineer (DSO) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (GANGA VALLEY) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (MB Dam) (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. Jain 
Suri КАЈАІ. Sana (Alternate) 


Suri S. BASAK 
Suri A. К. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri А. С. BORAH 
Suri К. G. Mittat (Alternate) 


Suri С. L. HURIA 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (D&P) 


Suri R. K. SHARMA 
Suri V. S. (Alternate) 


SHRI K. Gora 
SHRI V. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri R. К. VISHNoI 
Suri Manos Sarpana (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (DAM SAFETY) 
Suri R. К. JAIN (Alternate) 


In personal capacity [Institution of Fire Engineers (India), Genmala Suri С. В. MENON 


High School Road, Venmala 682028, Cochin] 


BIS Directorate General Suri J. С. Arora, Scientist ‘F & Head (WRD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Dr К. К. Dasu 
Scientist ‘C’ (WRD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 21 (0508). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


