IS 6452.: 1989 


se z (Reaffirmed 2014) 
Indian Standard a 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


= HIGH ALUMINA CEMENT FOR STRUCTURAL 
S USE — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 
AIM maT 
i | aaa salt *@ fat sea Cafaar dite — fafsrftz 
( agm qara ) 


UDC 666°948 


d © BIS 1990 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 1990 I Price Group 3 


€ement:and Concrete Sectional Committee, CED 2 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 24 November 1989, after 
the draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


High alumina cement (HAC) is a special cement containing essentially hydraulic calcium 
aluminates as the major ingredient. The presence of the mono calcium aluminate ( CaO Al,Os } 
constituent in HAC imparts certain unique properties, such as high early strength and refractoriness. 


High alumina cement is mainly a refractory cement but in some cold regions this cement may find 
use as a structural material taking advantage of high heat of hydration and high early strength 
development. The hydration of mono calcium aluminates imparts high early strength and hence 
this cement will have special utility in work involving emergency repair or construction. However, 
conversion of the hydration product of the calcium aluminates from dicalcium aluminate hydrate 
to aluminate hydroxide and tricalcium aluminate hydrate and water will result in increased poro- 
sity and gradual reduction in strength. This conversion is more rapid in presence of moisture and 
at atmosphere temperatures over 18 to 20 C. In tropical climates the loss in strength can be as 
much as 50 to 80 percent. i 


There has been considerable controversy on the long term effect of storage of high alumina cement 
concrete in water at temperatures around 18°C, also the data on retrogression is conflicting. In 
view of this, the use of this cement should be restricted to areas of continuously low temperature 
where highest summer temperatures do not exceed 18°C, 


In view of the above and other properties of bigh alumina cement, there are certain restrictions 
given below about the use of this cement in concrete which should be strictly followed: 


a) In view of the restrogression in strength and reduced durability, high alumina cement shall 
not be used in locations where the ambient temperatures are likely to exceed 18°C even for 
short periods. It shall not be used in mass concrete in view of the high heat of hydration 
inducing conversion of the hydrated compounds; 


b) Accelerators like calcium chloride shall not be used with this cement; 
c) Steam curing or elevated temperature of curing shall be avoided; and 
d) High alumina cement shall not be mixed with any other type of cement. 


This standard was first published in 1972. Since publication of this standard large number of 
amendments have been issued from time to time in order to modify various requirements and also 
other standards referred to in the specification have been revised, The important amendments 
include incorporating a clause allowing different types of bags for packing 50 kg cement, permitting, 
packaging of cement in 25 kg bags and incorporating a note regarding supply of cement in bulk 
and intermediate containers. Asa result of these modifications, the Sectional Committee decided 
to bring out the first revision of this standard incorporating all the amendments for the conveni- 
ence of the users. 


Mass of cement packed in bags and the tolerance requirements for the mass of cement packed in 
bags shall be in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Standards of Weights and Measures. 
( Packaged Commodities ) Rules, 1977 and B-1.2 ( see Annex B for information ). Any modifica- 
tion in these rules in respect of tolerance on mass of cement would apply automatically to this 
standard. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with,the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)’. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the-specified. 
value m this standard. 


IS 6452 : 1989 


Indian Standard 


HIGH ALUMINA CEMENT FOR STRUCTURAL 
USE — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the manufacture of 
high alumina cement ( HAC) and the specific 
requirements for its use asa structural building 
material in the colder regions of our country 
(continuously 18°C and below ). Its use as a 
refractory cement is not covered. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The Indian standards listed in Annex A are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard. 


3 MANUFACTURE 


3.1 The cement shall be manufactured from 
aluminous and calcareous materials either by 
fusion or by sintering, and grinding the resulting 
clinker so as to produce a cement complying 
with this specification. No materials, other 
than water, shall be added during grinding of 
the cement. 


-4 PROPERTIES 


4.1 The total alumina content ( AL,Os ) deter- 
mined in accordance with the method specified 
in IS 4032 : 1985 shall not be less than 32 percent 
by mass. 


4.2 Fineness 


Fineness of cement expressed in terms of specific 
surface determined by Blaine’s air permeability 
method described in IS 4031 ( Part 2): 1988 
shall be not less than 225 m?/kg. 


. 4.3 Soundness 


When tested by the ‘Le-Chatelier’ method des- 

cribed in IS 4031 ( Part 3 ) : 1988, ( except that 

the quantity of mixing water shall be 22 percent 
. of cement by mass ) the cement shall not have 
. an expansion of more than 5 mm. 


. 4.4 Setting Time 


' The setting time of cement, when tested by the 
Vicat apparatus method described in IS 4031 
(Part 5): 1988 (except that the quantity of 
mixing water shall be 22 percent of cement by 
mass ) shall conform to the following require- 

“ments: 


a) Initial setting time not less than 30 min, 
and 


b) Final setting time not more than 10 h. 


4.5 Compressive Strength 


The average compressive strength of at least 
three mortar cubes (area of face 50 cm?) com- 
posed of one part of cement, three parts of 
standard sand ( conforming to IS 650 : 1966 ) by 
mass and 10°5 to 11 percent ( of combined mass 
of cement plus sand ) water, and prepared, stored 
and tested at temperature 18 + 2°C in the 
manner described in IS 4031 ( Part 6): 1988 
shall be as follows: 


a) At 24 h + 30 min not less than 30 MPa, 
and 


b) At 72 + 1h shall show an increase on 
the compressive strength at 24 h and shall 
be not less than 35 MPa. 


5 SAMPLING 


5.1 Samples for Testing 


A sample or samples for testing may be taken by 
the purchaser or his representative, or by any 
person appointed to superintend the work for 
the purpose of which the cement is: required or 
by the latter’s representative. The samples shall 
be taken within three weeks of delivery and the 
tests shall be made within four weeks of delivery. 


5.2 Notwithstanding the requirements of 5.1, 
the methods and procedures of sampling shall be 
in accordance with IS 3535 : 1986. 


5.3 Facilities for Sampling and Identifying 


The manufacturer or supplier shall afford every 
facility and shall provide all labour and mate- 
tials for taking and packing the samples for 
testing the cement and for subsequent identifica- 
tion of the cement sampled. 


6 TESTS 


6.1 The sample or samples of cement for test 
shall be taken as described in 5.1 and shall be 
tested in the manner described in 4. 


6.2 Temperature for Testing 


The temperature at which physical tests may be 
carried out shall be 18 + 2°C. 


6.3 Non-Compliance with Tests 


Any cement which does not comply with any of 
the tests and analysis specified above, or which 
has not been stored in the manner provided in 
7.1 may be rejected as not complying with this 
standard. 


IS 6452 : 1989 


6.4 Independent Testing 


6.4.1 If the purchaser or his representative re- 


quires independent tests, the samples shall be © 


taken before or immediately after delivery at the 
option of the purchaser or his representative 
and the tests shall be carried out in accordance 
with this standard on the written instructions of 
the purchaser or his representative. 


6.4.2 Cost of Testing 


The manufacturer shall supply, free of charge, 
the cement required for testing. Unless other- 
wise specified in the enquiry and order, the cost 
of the tests shall be borne as follows: 


a) By the manufacturer in the event of the 
results showing that the cement does not 
comply with this standard, and 


b) By the purchaser in the event of the results 
showing that the cement complies with 
this standard. 


6.4.3 After a representative sample has been 
drawn, tests on the samples shall be carried out 
as expeditiously as possible. 


7 STORAGE 


7.1 The cement shall be stored in such a manner 
as to permit of easy access for proper inspection 
and in a suitable weather-tight building to pro- 
tect the cement from dampness and to minimize 
warehouse deterioration. 


8 MANUFACTURER’S CERTIFICATE 


8.1 The manufacturer shall satisfy himself that 
the cement conforms to the requirements of this 
standard and, if requested, shall furnish a certi- 
ficate to this effect to the purchaser or his 
representative. 


9 DELIVERY 
9.1 The cement shall be packed only in new bags 


[ jute sacking bag conforming to IS 2580: 1982, 
double hessian bituminized ( CRI type ), multi- 
wall paper conforming to IS 11761 : 1986, poly- 
ethylene lined ( CRI type ) jute, light weight jute 
conforming to IS 12154: 1987, woven HDPE 
conforming to IS 11652 : 1986, woven polypro- 
pylene conforming to IS 11653: 1986, jute 
synthetic union conforming to IS 12174 : 1987 or 
any other approved composite bags ] bearing the 
indication of the source of manufacture, if any. 
Second hand bags shall not be used. 


9.1.1 In order to distinguish aluminous cement 
from ordinary Portland cement, a distinctive 
mark along with the words ‘High Alumina 
Cement’ shall be permanently marked on the 
bag or container. 


9.2 The average net mass of cement per bag shall 
be 50 kg ( see Annex B ). 


9.2.1 The average net mass of cement per bag 
may also be 25 kg subject to tolerances as given 
in 9.2.1.1 and packed in suitable bags as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


9.2.1.1 The number of bags in a sample taken 
for weighment showing a minus error greater 
than 2 percent of the specified net mass shall be 
not more than 5 percent of the bags in the 
sample. Also the minus error in none of such 
bags in the sample shall exceed 4 percent of the 
specified net mass of cement in the bag. How- 
ever, the average net mass of cement in a sample 
shall be equal to or more than 25 kg. 


9.3 Supplies of cement in bulk may be made by 
arrangement between the purchaser and the 
supplier ( manufacturer or stockist ). 


NOTE — A single bag or container containing 
1 009 kg or more net mass of cement shall be con- 
sidered as bulk supply of cement. Supply of 
cement may also be madein intermediate contai- 
ners, for example, drums of 200 kg, by agreement 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2.1 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 


IS 650 : 1966 Specification for Standard 
sand for testing of cement 
( first revision ) 
Specification for jute sacking 
bags for packing cement 
( second revision ) 


IS 2580 : 1982 


IS 3535 : 1986 Methods of _ sampling 
hydraulic cements ( first 
revision 

IS 4031 ( Parts 1 Methods of physical test for 

to 13): 1988 hydraulic cement first 
revision ) 


IS No. 
IS 4032 : 1985 


Title 


Method of chemical analysis 
of hydraulic cement ( first 
revision ) 


IS 4905 : 1968 Methods for random sam- 
pling | 

Specification for high density 
polyethylene ( HDPE ) wo- 
ven sacks for packing cement 


IS 11652 : 1986 


IS 11653 : 1986 Specification for polypropy- 
lene ( PP ) woven sacks for 


packing cement 


IS No. Title 
IS 11761 : 1986 Specification for multi-wall 
paper sacks for cement 


valved-sewn-gussetted type 


IS 12154 : 1987 Specification for light weight 


IS 6452 : 1989 


IS No. Title 


jute bags for packing cement 


Specification for jute syn- 
thetic union bag for packing 
cement 


IS 12174 : 1987 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 9.2 ) 


TOLERANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE MASS OF CEMENT PACKED IN BAGS 


B-1 The average net mass of cement packed in 
bags at the plant in a sample shall be equal to 
or more than 50 kg. The number of bags in a 
sample shall be as given below: 


Batch Size Sample Size 
100 to 150 20 
151 to 280 32 
281 to 500 50 
501 to 1 200 80 
1 201 to 3 200 125 
3 201 and over 200 


The bags in a sample shall be selected at random 
( see IS 4905 : 1968 ). 


B-1.1 The number of bags ina sample showing 
a minus error greater than 2 percent of the speci- 
fied net mass (50 kg ) shall be not more than 


minus error in none of such bags in the sample 
shall exceed 4 percent of the specified net mass 
of cement in the bag. 


NOTE — The matter given in B-1 and B-1.! are 
extracts based on the Standards of Weights and 
Measures ( Packaged Commodities ) Rules, 1977 to 
which reference shall be made for full details. Any 
modification made in these Rules and other related 
Acts and Rules would apply automatically. 


B-1.2 In case of wagon/truck load of 20 to 25 
tonnes, the overall tolerance on net mass of 
cement shall be 0 to + 0°5 percent. 


NOTE — The mass of a jute sacking bag conform- 
ing to IS 2580 : 1982 to hold 50 kg of cement is 
531 g, the mass of a double hessian bituminized 
(CRI type ) bag to hold 50 kg of cement is 630g, 
the mass of a 6-ply paper bag to hold 50 kg of 
cement is approximately 400 g and the mass of a 
polyethylene lined (CRI type) jute bag to hold 


5 percent of the bagsin the sample. Also the 50 kg of cement is approximately 480 g. 
ANNEX C 


COMPOSITION OF THE TECHNICAL COMMITTEE 


Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDC 2 


Chairman 


Dr H. C. Visvesvaraya 


Representing 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 


New Delhi 


Members 


Shri K. P. Banerjee 

Shri Harish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Banerjee 
Chief Engineer ( BD ) 

Shri J. C. Basur ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Designs ) 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay 


National Test House, Calcutta 
Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Superintending Engineer ( S & S ) ( Alternate ) 


Chief Engineer (Research-cum-Director ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab 


Research Officer ( Concrete 

Technology ) ( Alternate ) 
Director 

Joint Director ( Alternate ) 
Director 


Chief Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director ( C & MDD-II ) 


Deputy Director ( C & MDD-II ) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Ghanekar 


A.P. Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 


el her ae and Materials Research Station, New 
i 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 


Ghaziabad 


3 


IS 6452 : 1989 


Members 
Shri S. Gopinath 
Shri A. K. Gupta 
Shri J. Sen Gupta 


Shri P. J. Jagus 
Dr A. K. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 


Joint Director Standards ( B & S )/CB-I 


Joint Director Standards 
(B &S)/CB-II ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Joshi 
Shri R. L. Kapoor 


Shri R. K. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. K. Majumdar 


Dr A. K. Mullick 


Shri P. N. Mehta 

Shri S. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri Nirmal Singh 

Shri S. S. Miglani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Pal 

Shri Biman Dasgupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Parate 

Lt-Col R. K. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. S. Pasricha 
Shri Y. R. Phull 


Shri S. S. Seehra ( Alternate ) 
Dr Mohan Rai 

Dr S. S. Rebsi ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. V. Ramana 

Dr K. C. Narang ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Ramdas 


Shri T. N. Subba Rao 
Shri S. A. Reddi ( Alternate ) 


Dr M. Ramaiah 


Dr A. G. Madhava Rao ( Alternate ) 


Shri A. U. Rijhsinghani 
Shri C. S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 


Secretary 
Shri K. R. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer ( Designs ) 
Executive Engineer ( SMD Division ) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri L. Swaroop 
Shri H. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 


Shri S. K. Guha Thakurta 


Representing 
The India Cements Limited, Madras 
Hyderabad Industries Limited, Hyderabad 
National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 
The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 


Research, Designs and Standards 


Organization 
( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 


Indian Hume Pipes Co Limited, Bombay 


Roads Wing ( Ministry of Transport ), Department of 
Surface Transport, New Delhi 


Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (India) 
Ltd, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 


Development Commissioner for 
( Ministry of Industry ) 


M.N. Dastur and Company Private Limited, Calcutta 


Cement Industry 


Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army Headquarters 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi and Central Road 
Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Central Building Research Institute (CSIR ), Roorkee 


Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Limited, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Supplies 


New Delhi 
Gammon India Limited, Bombay 


and Disposals, 


Structural 
Madras 


Engineering Research Centre (CSIR), 


Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 
Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu 


Orissa Cement Limited, New Delhi 


Gannon Dunkerley and Co Ltd, Bombay 


Shri S. P. Sankarnarayanan ( Alternate ) 


Dr H. C. Visvesvaraya _ 
Shri D. C. Chaturvedi ( Alternate ) 


Shri G. Raman, 
Director ( Civ Engg ) 


The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 
Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 


Secretary 


Shri N. C. Bandyopadhyay 
Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 


4 


IS 6452 : 1989 


Cement, Pozzolana and Cement Additives Subcommittee, BDC 2:1 


Convener 
Dr H. C. Visvesvaraya 


Dr A. K. Mullick 
Dr (Shrimati) S. Laxmi 
Members 
Shri S. K. Banerjee 


Shri N. G. Basak 
Shri T. Madneshwar ( Alternate ) 


Shri Somnath Banerjee 


Chief Engineer ( Research-cum-Director ) 
Research Officer ( CT ) ( Alternate ) 


Shri N. B. Desai 

Shri J. K. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Director 

Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
Director (C & MDD II) 

Deputy Director ( C & MDD II) 

( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Gattani 

Shri R. K. Vaishnavi ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Sen Gupta 
Shri P. J. Jagus 

Dr A. K. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 


Joint Director, Standards ( B & S ) ( CB-I) 


Joint Director, Standards 
( B & S )/CB-II ( Alternate ) 


Shri R. L. Kapoor 
Shri R. K. Datta ( Alternate ) 


Shri W. N. Karode 
Shri R. Kunjithapattam 


Shri G. K. Majumdar 


Shri K. P. Mohideen 
Shri Nirmal Singh 


Shri S. S. Miglani ( Alternate ) 


Shri Y. R. Phull 
Shri M. R. Chatterjee ( Alternate ) 


Shri A. V. Ramana 
Dr K. C. Narang ( Alternate ) 


Col V. K. Rao 
Shri N. S. Galande ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. A. Reddi 


Dr S. S. Rehsi 

Dr Irshad Masood ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. U. Rijhsinghani 
Shri M. P. Singh 
Superintending Engineer ( D ) 

Senior Deputy Chief Engineer 

( General ) ( Alternate ) 

Shri L. Swaroop 

Shri H. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. M. Wad 


Representing 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
New Delhi 


l ( Alternates to Dr H.C. Visvesvaraya ) 


National Test House, Calcutta 


Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 


Cement Manufacturers Association, Bombay 
Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 
Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nasik 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Bombay 


National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 
The Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 


Research, Designs and “Standards 


Organization, 
Lucknow 


Roads Wing ( Ministry of Transport) Department of 
Surface Transport, New Delhi 


The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 


M/s Chettinad Cement Corporation Ltd, Poliyur, 
Tamil Nadu 


Hospital Services Consulting Corporation ( India ) Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 
Development Commissioner for Cement Industry 

( Ministry of Industry ) 
Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi 
Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi 
Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army Headquarters 


Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 
Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee 


Cement Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 
Federation of Mini Cement Plants, New Delhi 
Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu 


Orissa Cement Ltd, New Delhi 


Bhilai Steel Plant, Bhilai 


Standard Mark 


The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 


to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 


Revision of Indian Standards 


Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 


Doc : No. CED 2 ( 4689 ) 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters : 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Telephones : 33101 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 


Regional Offices : 


Telephone 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg { 331 01 31 
NEW DELHI 110002 331 13 75 
Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 
Northern: SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 
Southern : C.1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 


Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAP URAM. 


Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delbi, India 


