NAT HA IS 4720 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


vm afgana — 
tia dear 


(UGT) 


Ventilation of Surface Hydel Power 
Stations — Code of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 17.120.20 


O BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 4 


Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Committee, WRD 15 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1968. The first revision was done in 1982 to include requirements of 
natural ventilation with the provision of windows and ventilators. Since, then more experience has been gained 
in the field and to reflect the latest practices the present revision has been taken up. In this revision, requirements 
of inside temperature and relative humidity has been specified. Also reference has been given for design of air 
conditioning using data for outside design conditions for air conditioning for Indian cities. 


Due consideration should be given to the ventilation requirements in designing surface hydel power stations. 
Provision for ventilation becomes necessary in the power station building to provide for any or all of the following 
purposes: 

a) To prevent temperature stratification, 

b) To remove contaminated or vitiated air, 

c) To remove waste heat from generators, 

d) To provide for cooling or heating of building, 

e) To furnish clean/tempered air, and 

f) To furnish outside air necessary for human comfort. 


Ventilation in surface hydel power stations by natural means alone using gravity may be sufficient in some 
stations to meet the above mentioned purposes. Where these purposes cannot be met by natural ventilation, forced 
ventilation or combination of the two with heating and cooling systems, where necessary, may be resorted to 
ensure clean, and if necessary, tempered air to reach various premises in the power station, which will, otherwise, 
receive little or no ventilation and where for the protection of equipment and to maintain satisfactory thermal 
environments, the heat to be removed is too great to be handled by gravity. 


This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on surface hydel power stations. Other standards so far 
published in this series are the following: 


IS 4247 (Part 1) : 1993 Code of practice for structural design of surface hydroelectric power stations: 
Part 1 Data for design (third revision) 


IS 4461 : 1998 Code of practice for joints in surface hydroelectric power stations (second 
revision) 
IS 4721 : 2014 Code of practice for drainage and dewatering of surface hydroelectric power 


stations (second revision) 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4720 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


VENTILATION OF SURFACE HYDEL POWER 
STATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers basic requirements regarding 
design of ventilation system for surface hydel power 
stations. 


1.1.1 For installation, operation, testing and 
maintenance of ventilating system reference may be 
made to IS 3103. 


1.2 This standard, however, does not cover the 
requirements for ventilation of generators or other 
equipment and specifications for fans, ducts and other 
equipment used in the ventilation of surface hydel 
power stations. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian standards listed in Annex A contain 
provision, which through references in this text 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on these standards are encouraged to 
investigate the possibilities of applying the most recent 
edition of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TYPES OF VENTILATION 


The ventilation may be of following types: 
a) Natural — That is, by forces set in motion by the 
heat of sun, namely, winds; and 


b) Forced or Artificial — That is, by extraction or 
propulsion. 


4 GENERAL RULES FOR DESIGN 


4.1 Natural Ventilation 


4.1.1 Thorough ventilation of power house building 
should be aimed at by the provision of adequate 
windows and ventilators. 


4.1.2 Provision of Windows and Ventilators 


The object of providing windows and ventilators 
is two-fold, that is, to get fresh air and light. The 
minimum area of windows and ventilators to be 
provided in power house building shall be one-tenth 
of the floor area. However, efforts should be made 


to increase it to one-fifth of the floor area. Windows 
should be well distributed and be located on windward 
side at low level and should not, as far as possible, be 
obstructed by adjoining structures or partitions. When 
wind direction is variable, windows should be provided 
on all sides, if possible. Effort should be made to 
develop cross-ventilation. For protection against fire, 
it is preferable to provide steel doors and windows in 
power house and auxiliary rooms. Reference may be 
made to IS 1038 and IS 1361. The ventilators should be 
fixed as high as possible for proper expulsion of warm 
air. Full advantage should be taken of sunshine which 
is important in ventilation and its availability depends 
on the orientation of the power house which in turn 
may depend on site condition. In providing openings, 
measures to guard against entry of birds, moths, etc, 
should be taken. 


4.2 Forced Ventilation 


4.2.1 Forced ventilation system is designed keeping the 
inlet fan capacity 10 percent more than the exhaust fan 
capacity. 


4.2.2 Unassigned rooms and storage rooms should be 
carefully considered, so that sufficient ventilation may 
be provided in those which might be used for purpose 
requiring additional ventilation in the future. 


4.2.3 In portions of the power station building where 
moisture condensation is anticipated, dehumidified 
air should be supplied to prevent condensation, as 
condensation causes deterioration of point, corrosion 
of metal surfaces and breakdown of insulation on 
electrical equipment. 


4.2.4 The quantity of air required for the power station 
building should be worked out from the number of 
air changes preferred for the various premises of the 
building as given in Table 1. In addition to this the 
points given in 4.2.4.1 to 4.2.4.10 should also be kept 
in mind. 


4.2.4.1 One air change per hour means that the 
quantity of air equivalent to the total volume of the 
room is supplied to and exhausted from the room 
each hour. This air may be all outside air or a part 
of the circulated air, depending upon the oxygen 
content. 


IS 4720 : 2020 


Table 1 Preferred Air Changes and Inside Condition 
( Clause 4.2.4 ) 


SI Power House Premises Preferred Air Inside Relative Humidity, 
No. Changes Per Temperature, °C Percent 
Hour 
Summer Winter 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Main generator hall /floor, machine hall, turbine floor, service bay, 2 <35 >12* <75 
Inlet valve floor, Cooling water pump floor, dark room, transformer 
hall, GIS floor, Storage rooms and record rooms. 
ii) Passage, approach gallery, pipe gallery, ventilation 4 <35 >12* <75 
equipment room, governor gallery, cable gallery, 
cable spreader room / shafts, dewatering and drainage 
pump room or sump or gallery, carbon dioxide (CO,) 
room, fire fighting room, staircases. 
ili) oil storage purification /sludge room, compressor room, terminal 6 <35 >15 <70 
board room, mechanical workshops, electrical workshops, 
switchgear room, battery and battery charger toom. Telephone and 
communication equipment rooms and maintenance rooms 
iv) All offices, reception room, toilets, pantry, first aid room and 8 <28 >18 <60 


control room 


4.2.4.2 The proportion of outside air to the circulated 
air supplied to a room depends upon temperature 
conditions, number of occupants and kind of equipment 
installed in the room. 


4.2.4.3 The number ofair changes per hour provided for 
any room is dependent upon the number of occupants. 
The air should be changed at the rate of 1.5 m?/min per 
person and not less than 0.3 m*/min of this air should 
come from outside sources. The minimum fresh air 
quantity in the ventilation system should not be less 
than 10 percent of the total supply capacity and should 
not be less than the maximum value of the following 
two air volumes: 


a) Fresh air volume : 34 m?/h per person and 
b) Fresh air volume, : 2 m*/h per m? of floor area 


4.2.4.4 The number of air changes per hour provided 
for rooms containing equipment generating heat shall 
necessarily be increased, depending on the amount of 
heat to be carried out by the ventilating system. 


4.2.4.5 For medium climates, the maximum 
temperature rise of air carrying off heat of transformers 
should be limited to 20°C, and for hot climates the 
temperature rise shall be limited to 16°C; however, 
the final temperature of the air exhausted shall not 
exceed 45°C. 


4.2.4.6 Air supplied to rooms containing special 
mechanical or electrical equipment should be filtered 
and circulation maintained at a minimum, through 
diffusers, to prevent the accumulation of dust on 
sensitive mechanisms. 


4.2.4.7 Rooms which may contain air contaminated 
with objectionable or harmful odours, carbon dioxide 
gas or smoke, should be exhausted directly to the 
outside of the building. 


4.2.4.8 When heating or cooling units are provided 
in the power house, their effect on the quantity and 
temperature or air circulating through the building shall 
be considered. 


4.2.4.9 The spacing of supply and exhaust openings in 
long rooms or galleries should be such that sufficient 
air changes per hour are provided along the full length 
ofthe room. 


4.2.4.10 The effective height of machine hall, erection 
bay shall be 6 m from the finish floor level for calculation 
of ventilation or air-conditioning system. 


5 FANS 


Forced air ventilation is provided by propeller, axial 
or centrifugal type fans powered by electric motors. 
Propeller fans may be used either to supply or exhaust 
where no duct system, filters or other restrictions 
are in the air passage. When duct system is used, 
axial or centrifugal fans may be used for any type of 
operation involving the movement of air and may be 
accompanied by filters, and coolers or heaters where 
cleaning and tempering of supply air is required. Choice 
of a particular type of fan may be made by consulting 
the fan manufacturers’ data, which give full operating 
characteristics with a preferred range of operation for a 
particular fan. 


6 AIR INTAKE AND EXHAUST OPENINGS 


6.1 Openings are provided for intake and exhaust of 
air where outside air is required for ventilation. Where 
natural ventilation is used, the opening of windows is 
sometimes sufficient. For forced ventilation, special 
openings are required. The number of openings 
for intake and exhaust of air depends on the space 
arrangement in the building, on the size of the building 
and the design of the ventilation system. Small power 
plants may have one opening of each type. For larger 
power plants, separate outside air intake should be 
installed for the control, service and main unit bays. 
Each intake should be provided with storm louvers, 
screens, and dampers for controlling the mixture of 
outside and circulated air. The obstructive effect of the 
louvers should be compensated for by making the gross 
area of the initial intake twice the area of the connecting 
duct. When filters are used, the area shall be increased 
to accommodate the required filter area. 


6.2 Air opening may be placed anywhere on the 
exposed walls or roof of the power plant building, 
except that, in order to reduce dust intake, air intake 
should be at least 1.25 m above ground or deck level. 


6.3 Air is exhausted from the building through exhaust 
openings provided with louvers or by axial-flow 
exhaust fans located near the roof in the main generator 
room. Normally, the number of exhaust openings 
may be more than the air inlet openings, since the 
spaces to be exhausted are seldom located in the same 
general area, nor do they have common requirements. 
Individual centrifugal fans and connecting ducts are 
usually installed to exhaust air from toilets, battery 
rooms and oil storage rooms. 


6.4 The size of air openings is dependent on noise level, 
and to a lesser degree, on horse power requirements, 
since the smaller the opening the higher will be the 
noise level and the resistance. The size of air openings 
may also be worked out from the air velocity as 
recommended in Table 2, which will be found to 
give satisfactory results in designing conventional 
systems. 


7 AIR CLEANING 


It is desirable to clean the air entering the power 
plant building in order to remove the air-borne dust 
particles which, if allowed to enter the building, 
may have an abrasive effect on rotating machinery, 
interfere with the operation of electric or electronic 
devices, and may, otherwise settle on equipment, 
glving a dirty appearance. The air filters are usually 
located upstream of the fan. The size of the air filters 
may be determined by the recommended velocity of 
air passing as given in Table 2. The choice of the air 
filter may be made by reference to the manufacturer’s 
catalogues. 


IS 4720 : 2020 


8 AIR-CONDITIONING 


8.1 When the desired temperatures and humidity 
inside the hydel power station are not obtainable 
by ordinary ventilation, air-conditioning may be 
resorted to by heating or cooling the entering air to the 
desired temperature to maintain comfortable working 
conditions in the premises occupied by working 
personnel. The premises where it will be desirable to 
provide air-conditioning are control room, machine 
shop, offices, reception room, first-aid room, dark 
room, electrical laboratory, switchgear and terminal 
board room and telephone and carrier communication 
room. For designing of air-conditioning, the data of 
outside design conditions for air condition of Indian 
cities as per IS 7896 may be used. For air-conditioning 
reference may be made to IS 16678 (Part 1), IS 16678 
(Part 2), IS 16678 (Part 3) and IS 16678 (Part 4). 


Table 2 Recommended and Maximum Duct 
Velocities for Systems in Power House Building 


( Clauses 6.4 and 7, 9.4 ) 


SI Designation Recommended Maximum 
No. Velocities Velocities 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Outer air intakes 150 370 
2)  Filters* 110 110 
3) Heating coils* 180 210 
4) Air washers 150 150 
5) Fan outlets 500-730 850 
6) Main ducts 370-550 670 
7) Branch ducts 250-300 550 
8) Branch risers 250 500 


* These velocities are for total face area and not the net free areas other 
velocities in the table are for net free area. The net free area is the 
total minimum area of the opening in the face of coil, grille, register 
or louver through which air can pass . 


8.2 In general, all rooms, used by sedentary personnel 
shall be maintained at 24°C to 26°C with a relative 
humidity less than 50 percent, or in special cases local 
radiant type portable heaters may be used for the space 
actually occupied. Operation of the air-conditioning 
system should be independent of the main ventilating 
system and the control ofthe system should be automatic 
by means of thermostatic devices. Heating and cooling 
load computations may be based on currently accepted 
standard practice. 


9 DUCTS 


9.1 Where positive ventilation requires ducts for 
proper air distribution, considerable advantage may be 
achieved by incorporating the ducts into the building 
structure and by having the interior surfaces carefully 
finished to render them smooth and air-tight. 


IS 4720 : 2020 


9.2 Where meta duct work is installed, it shall be 
fabricated from galvanized steel or aluminium sheets, 
and shall conform to IS 655. 


9.3 The transfer of air by ducts from source to delivery 
point, should be as direct as practicable with the fewest 
possible bends. Flexible connections shall be provided 
between fans and duct work to prevent the noise of fan 
vibration being transmitted directly to the sheet-metal 
ducts. 


9.4 The size of the air ducts shall be worked out from 
the permissible air velocities given in Table 2. 


9.5 Supply and exhaust ducts of acid battery rooms 
shall be painted with acid resistant painl both inside 
and outside. 


9.6 Ducts shall be suitably insulated wherever 
required. 


10 AIR DISTRIBUTION CONTROL 


To regulate the flow of air in a ventilating system, 
control dampers shall be provided throughout. At 
outside air intakes, multi-louver dampers shall be 
used to control the amount of air admitted. A similar 
damper is required on inside air intakes to control the 
amount of recirculated air. These two dampers shall be 
interconnected to permit regulation of the proportion of 
outside air to inside air used in the ventilating system. 
These may be operated manually or automatically. 
Back-draft dampers are used where it is desired to 
prevent a reverse flow of the air, such as the air supply 
duct to a battery room. Exhaust ducts from rooms 
containing a fire hazard shall have dampers which can 
be automatically and manually closed in case of fire. 
Discharge openings, provided with propeller exhaust 
fans, should be fitted with motor or mechanically 
operated type multi-louver dampers, which will open 
and close automatically when the fan motor starts and 
stops. 


IS No. 


2: 1960 


3103 : 1975 


1038 : 1983 


1361 : 1978 


655 : 2006 


7896: 2001 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Rules for rounding off 
numerical values (revised) 


Code of practice for 
industrial ventilation (first 
revision) 

Specification for steel doors, 
windows and ventilators 
(third revision) 

Specification for steel 
windows for industrial 
building (first revision) 

Air ducts — Specification 
(second revision) 


Data for outside design 
conditions for air 
conditioning for indian cities 
(first revision) 


IS No. 


16678 (Part 1) : 2018/ 
ISO 5149-1 : 2014 


16678 (Part 2) : 2018/ 
ISO 5149-2 : 2014 


16678 (Part 3) : 2018/ 
ISO 5149-3 : 2014 


16678 (Part 4) : 2018/ 
ISO 5149-4 : 2014 


IS 4720 : 2020 


Title 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pump — Safety and 
environmental requirement: 
Part 1 Definitions, classifi- 
cation and selection criteria 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pump — Safety and 
environmental requirements: 
Part 2 Design, construction, 
testing, marking and 
documentation 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pump — Safety and 
environmental requirements: 
Part 3 Installation site 


Refrigerating systems and 
heat pump — Safety and 
environmental requirements: 
Part 4 Operation, mainten- 
ance, repair and recovery 


IS 4720 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Committee, WRD 15 


Organization 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Andritz Hydro Pvt Ltd, Dist. Faridabad 
Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal 
Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Roorkee 

Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Himachal Pradesh Power Corporation Limited 

IIT, Roorkee 

Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 

Ranjit Sagar Dam Design, Irrigation Works, Govt of 
Punjab, Chandigarh 

Jaypee Infra Ventures, Noida 

M/S GE Power India Ltd, Noida 

NHPC Limited, Faridabad 

NTPC Ltd, Noida 

SJVN Ltd, New Shimla 


THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh 


UJVN Ltd (1), Dehradun 
Wapcos Ltd, Gurgaon 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


(Co-Opted) 


Representative(s) 
CE Desicn (N&W) (Chairman) 
PRESENTLY SHRI S. K. SIBAL 
SHRI CHANDRA KANT JAIN 


MEMBER (IRRIGATION) 
Sr DESIGN ENGINEER — II (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRI DEEPAK SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. GoEL 
SHRI ANIL Swarup (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
Suri M. S. HANUMANTHAPPA (Alternate) 


Director HCD (N&W) 
Director HCD (E&NE) (Alternate) 


SHRI BONTHU AJAYA KUMAR 
Dr MRIDUL Srivastava (Alternate) 


Dr POONAM BINIJOKAR 
Er D. P. Gupta (Alternate) 


DRM. L. KANSAL 
Dr THANGA Ras CHELLIAH (Alternate) 


GOURAV GOEL 
AMAR JEET San (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI VATSAL CHOPRA 
Suri RAJNISH YADAV (Alternate) 


SHRI DURGESH SHAH 


SHRI SARABJIT SINGH 
SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR (Alternate I) 
Suri AsHIsH Rao (Alternate II) 


SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI AMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
SHRI MANISH CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA SINGH 
SHRI SANJAY GOEL (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI ANUPAM MISHRA 
SmT P. Sumana (Alternate) 


SHRI S. L. Gupta 
Suri Hari Dev (Alternate) 


IS 4720 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
S K System Pvt Ltd, Delhi SHRI AJAY BHARGAVA 
SHRI VIPUL Gupta (Alternate) 
Central Design Organisation, Water Resources SUPTG ENGINEER (GATES CIRCLE) 
Department, Nashik EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (GATES & OUTLETS Div-4) 
BIS Directorate General Mrs RACHNA SEHGAL, SCIENTIST “F” AND HEAD (WRD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 
ScIENTIST “E” ( WRD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 15 (11547). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, TV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


