**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 9859-2 (1982) : Code of practice for installation and 
maintenance of outdoor PLC equipment. Part 2: Coupling 
devices [LITD 10: Power System Control and Associated 
Communications] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 3859 ( Parti? >- 1982 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

OUTDOOR POWER LINE CARRIER EQUIPMENT 

PART II COUPLING DEVICES 



UT>C rt2l '3'0j2'63 r ^21*^72 ^^12 t flOfi 7fi 




® Copyught 1903 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK UHA^'AN^ y BAHAPt K .SI [AH ZAFAJl .S[AkG 

NEW DELHI IVml 

Gr 2 J^mary 1&83 



IS : 9859 ( Part II )- 1982 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

OUTDOOR POWER LINE CARRIER EQUIPMENT 

PART II COUPLING DEVICES 



Power Line Carrier Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment 
Sectional Committee, LTDC 25 

Chairman Representing 

Shht T. R. Sxtbhahmanyan Tata GonsiuUing Engineers, Bombay 

A"! embers 

Shui D, R. Ult.al ( Alternate to 
Shri T. R. Subrahmanyan ) 
Shri S. C. Btjch Gujarat Electricity Board, Vadodara 

Shri K. K. Chhaya ( Alternate ) 
Shkt T. B. Chikkoba Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shkt S. K. Ramastjbramanian- ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. F. Choudhtjky Wireless Planning & Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry 

of Communication ), New Delhi 
Shbi V. N. Desikah Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shbi M. V. Dhekne Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Dtrectok ( TELECOMMUNiCATTOisr ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Tet.k- 
coMMUNiCATiON ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Mehta Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. P. Shikodkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sakat Mttkerji Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta 

Shri A. R, Chaxjdhttri ( Alternate ) 
Shrt N. Nath The English Electric Company of India Ltd, Madras 

Shri R. Lakshmanak ( Alternate ) 
Shrt K. Radhakrishnan Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, New 

Delhi 

Shri S. Raghavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri JM, D. Santhanam Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. Ganesh ( Alternate ) 
Secretary ( Powp:ii ) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Deputy Secretary ( Power ) ( Alternate ) 
Sbri S. N. Sengupta West Bangal State Electricity Board, Calcutta 

Shri S. Pal ( Alternate ) 

{ Coniinned on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright i4ci ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS I 9859 ( Part II ) • 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. S. Sikand Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. Sankaban ( Alternate ) 
Db R. K. Sbivastava Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Shbi D. P. Bobde ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R, K. Tandok U.P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow 

Shbi K. P. Viswanath Power Systems & Projects Pvt Ltd, Palgha't 

Shbi K. P. Jacob ( Alternate ) 
Shut R. C. Jain, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Head ( Electronics ) 



Secretary 

Shbi Hakchaban Singh 
Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



IS: 9859 (Tart II) -1982 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

OUTDOOR POWER LINE CARRIER EQUIPMENT 

PART II COUPLING DEVICES 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 22 November 1982, after the draft finalized by the Power 
Line Carrier Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommuni- 
cation Division Council. 

0.2 This standard ( Part II ) is intended to serve as a guide to installa- 
tion engineers, contractors and users of power line carrier equipment, 
so far as coupling devices are concerned, 

0.3 In view of the consideration that this code is required to be in con- 
formity with the prevailing practices in the country, considerable assis- 
tance has been derived from the Indian Electricity Rules ( 1956 ). 
Reference to the relevant provisions of the Indian Electricity Rules ( 1956 ) 
has, therefore, been made in appropriate places with a view to bringing 
to the notice of the installation and/or maintenance engineer(s) the 
statutory regulations concerning this work. 

0.4 This standard ( Part II ) covers installation and maintenance of 
coupling devices. The other parts in this series are given below; 

Part I Line traps 

Part III Coupling capacitor/CVT 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requiren:ient of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS : 9859 ( Part II )- 1982 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II ) covers installation and maintenance of 
coupling devices generally used in outdoor installations. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 8997- 
1978* shall apply. 

3. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 

3.1 Before ordering the coupling devices, information should be ex- 
changed between the owner, switchyard designer, design engineer, 
installation engineer, maintenance engineer and manufacturer, so that the 
coupling device is procured to suit the duty, location and installation 
conditions under which it will operate. 

3.1.1 The technical particulars of the coupling device should be 
checked to ensure its suitability with respect to bandwidth and power 
handling capacity. 

3.2 The engineer should obtain well in advance all relevant information 
about the overall dimensions, weight for transport, installation, etc, of the 
coupling device. When the parts comprising the coupling device are 
separately packed, a packing list and drawings showing the assembly 
should be supplied to the user. 

4. GENERAI. REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 The manufacturer should provide drawings and instructions for the 
installation and maintenance of the coupling device well in advance of 
the time of delivery. It is essential that the installation of the coupling 
device as well as its maintenance is performed in accordance with the 
instructions given by the manufacturer. 

4.2 All electrical installations shall comply with the requirements of the 
Indian Electricity Act ( 1910 ) and Rules ( 1956 ) made thereunder. 

4.3 If considered necessary, the local authorities concerned in the 
administration of the rules and regulations in the manner of layout of 
installation should be consulted in regard to the rules and regulations 
that may be applicable. 

4.4 The installation shall be carried out only by authorized persons com- 
petent to undertake such work under the rules and regulations that may 
be in force in different states. 



"Specification for coupling devices for PLC systems. 

4 



IS : 9859 ( Part II ) - 1982 

5. INSTALLATION 

5.1 General — The installation shall be done in such a manner that 
maximum safety to operational and maintenance personnel is assured. 

5/2 Arrangement 

5.2.1 The drain coil, main arrester, matching transformer, isolating 
transformer and earthing switch. are normally so constructed as to be 
suitable for outdoor mounting on the same pedestal structure which 
supports the coupling capacitor. 

5.2.2 Angles, plates or strips of m.ild steel either bolted or welded to 
the coupling capacitor pedestal structure may be used for mounting the. 
parts of the coupling device. 

5.3.3 The method of mounting the coupling device should be such as 
to allow ease of operation, access for connections and inspection from 
ground level. 

5.3 Electrical Connections to the Coupling Device 

5.3.1 Special single core cable or bare stiff copper conductor strip may 
be used for all connections between the coupling device and the coupling 
capacitor and between the parts of the coupling device. The connecting 
cable should be able to withstand a voltage of 5 kV ( rms ) for 1 minute. 
Carrier frequency cables may be used to connect the coupling device to 
to the powder line carrier terminals. 

5.3.1.1 The size of the round conductor shall be 5 mm ( dia ), Min 
and rectangular strip 2v^ X 1'6 mm, A4in. 

5.3.2 Direct connection shall be given from the low voltage terminal 
of the coupling capacitor/CVT to the earthing switch. 

5.3.3 The minimum clearances of the bare copper conductor/strip 
from the earthed structures shall be based on 4.2.1 of IS : 8997-1978*. 

5.3.4 It ^should be ensured thai all copper conductor/strip connections 
are properly tinned by brazing stove. After cooling, the copper strip 
may be painted. The connecting leads should be as short as possible. 

6. MAINTENANCE 

6.1 Periodic inspection of the connections and cleaning are recommended. 

6.2 Tightness of waterproof joints should be checked. 

6.3 At the time of maintenance on the coupling device, low voltage 
terminal of the coupling capacitor/CVT shall be effectively earthed. 



♦Specification for coupling devices for PLC systems, 

5 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
9«ae Units 



QUANTITT 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Ma»s 


kiJogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








QUANTfTY 


Unit 


Symbot. 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








QCTANTITY 


Unit 


SYifBOIi 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


N - 1 kg.m/s« 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - 1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb - 1 V.S 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T - 1 Wb/m" 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s"^) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S - 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V -- 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa - 1 N/m» 



