IS 15676:2006

%'wfhm -=W-I-$3 m m wqi3* awmmm

Indian Standard FLOW MEASUREMENT OF NATURAL GAS BY TURBINE METERS

lCS 75.160.30; 75.180.30

(3 BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

June 2006

Price Group 8

Weights and Measures Sectional Committee, PG 26

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the drafl finalized by the Weights and Measures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production and General Engineering Division Council. This standard is taken for measuring the gas consumption at bulk supplier as well as the users' end when the gas is supplied through the pipelines. In order to meet the requirement of bulk supplier and consumer, the Bureau of Indian Standards, has formulated the above standard for accuracy of metering system and regulation of gas at different delivery point -to filfill the consumer satisfaction. This standard deals with installation conditions, leakage, testing and pressure testing and provides a series of information as well as recommendation for use, field checks and perturbations of the fluid flow. In preparing this standard considerable amount of assistance has been taken from the following publications:. 1S0 9951 :1993 Measurement of gas flow in closed conduits -- Turbine meters AGA 7 American gas authority report for turbine meters Annexes A, B, C, D and E are for information only. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1S 15676:2006

Indian Standard FLOW MEASUREMENT OF NATURAL GAS BY TURBINE METERS
1 SCOPE

3 DEFINITIONS
3.1' For the purpose of this standard, following basic and

This standard specifies the requirements of dimensions, ranges, construction, performance, calibrati-on and output characteristics of turbine meters for gas flow measurement for custody transfer. It also specifies installation conditions, Ieakage testing and pressure testing and provides a series of informative Annexes A to E including recommendations for use, field checks and perturbations of the fluid flowing. This standard does not cover tie equipment used in the determinations of the pressures, temperatures, densities and other variable that rtiust be known for the accurate determination of measured gas quantities. tn cases where conflict exists between mandatory regulations and this standard, the former shall prevail.
2 REFERENCES

general terms in metrology apply. The following definitions are given only for terms used in some special senseor forterms whose meaning it seems usefil to recall. 3.1.1 F'lowrate-Actual volume of flow per unit of time. 3.1.2 Working. Range -- Range of flowrates of gas limited by the maximum flowrate qMU and the minimum flowrate qMi~ for which the meter error lies within specified limits (sometimes also called `rangeability'). 3.1.3 Designated 0.2 qM~X `0 qMin.
Flow Range -- Flow between

3.-1.4 Metering Pressure -- Gas pressure in a meter to which the indicated volume of gas is related. 3.1.5 Average Velocity -- Volume flowrate per unit of cross-sectional area. 3.1.6 Shell -- Pressure-containing structure of the meter. 3.1.7 Metering Conditions -- Conditions, at the point of measurement, of the gas whose volume ik to be measured, for example, gas temperature and pressure. 3.1.8 Base Conditions -- Conditions to which the measured volume of the gas is converted (for example, base temperature and base pressure). 3.1.9 Specl~ed Conditions -- Conditions of the gas at which performance specifications of the meter are given.
NOTE -- Metering and base conditions relate only to the volume of the gas to be measured or indicated, and should not be confused with `rated operating conditions' or `reference conditions' (VIM 5,05 and 5.07), which refer to influence quantities (VIM 2. 10).

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based an this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below:
Standard No. Title

.

IS 1076 (Part 1): Preferred numbers : Part 1 ,Series of 1985 preferred numbers (second revi.sion) IS 2148:2004 Electrical apparatus for explosive gas atmospheres -- Flameproof enclosures "d" (third revision) 1S04006 :1991 Measurement of fluid flow in closed conduits -- Vocabulary and symbols 1S0 5167-1 Measurement of fluid flow by means 1991 of pressure differential devices -- Part 1 : Orifice plates, nozzles and venturi tubes inserted in circu Iar cross-section conduits minning full 1S05168 :1978 Measurement of fluid flow -- Estimation of uncertainty of a flowrate measurement 1S0 5208:1993 Industrial valves -- Pressure testing of valves 1S0 6708:1980 Pipe components -- Definition of nominal size

4 SYMBOLS AND SUBSCRIPTS See Table 1. 5 PRINCIPLE
MEASUREMENT OF THE METHOD OF

A turbine meter is a fluid flow measuring device in which the dynamic forces of the flowing fluid cause the turbine wheel to rotate with a speed approximately proportional to the rate of volume flow. The number of revolutions of the turbine wheel is the basis for the indication of the volume passed through the meter.

1S 15676:2006 TaMel Symbols and Subscripts (Clause 4)
Symbol (1) Quantity (2) Dimensions (3) S1 llnit (4)

:
D D, DN DA', H L : N P Pm ; s t T v z P v b
m s

Symbol Pressure loss coefficient depending on meter type Relative density of the gas (d,i, = 1) Inside diameter pipe outlethrlet Inside diameter pipe "Nominalsize meter outlet/iniet Nominal size pipe Height or strut Length of tbe strut Mass Molar mass Number of moles of-gas Absolute pressure Metering pressure Flowrate Molar gas constant Chord distance between adjacent struts measured at the tip Time Absolute temperature of the.gas Volume Compressibility factor (deviation from ideal gas laws) Density of the gas Working range qtdqm,,
Subscripts

p
Dimensionless "L
L

Dimensionless Dimensionless L L M M Dimensionless MI.-' Tz
M~-l ~2 L.? ~1 MLI p @

ni' -- m m -- -- m :g kg/mol mol Pa Pa n+ Is J/(mol-K) M

L T

o
L' Dimensionless ML., Dimensionless

s K M3 --
kg/m' --

Base conditions for volume or rate calculations Metering conditions.of the gas Specified conditions for volume or rate

A second turbine wheel may be included in the mechanism, designed to rotate at a significantly slower speed than the first due to the difference in blade angles of the two rotors. A change in rotational speed between the two rotors for a given fluid velocity will indicate a shift in calibration conditions, for example, a change in bearing friction, flow pulsations or a change in flow profile. Schematics ofaxial-flow gas turbine meters are shown in Fig. 1. Gas entering the meter increases in velocity through the annular passage formed by the nose cone and the interior wall of the body. The movement of gas over the angled rotor blades imparts a force to the rotor, causing it to revolve. The ideal rotational speed is directly proportional to the flowrate. The actual rotational speed is a function of the passageway size and shape, and the rotor design. It is also dependent upon the load, that is, imposed due to internal mechanical friction, fluid drag, external loading, and the gas density. 6 FLOW M-ETER The maximum and minimum flowrates shall be specified for the gas densities for which the meter will operate within the specifications of meter performance defined in 3. The maximum flowrate in cubic metres 2

per hour (m3/h) of the meter shall preferably be a number of the preferred series [see IS 1076 (Part 1)]. The unit of cubic metres per hour (m3/h) is preferred. 7 METER CONSTRUCTION 7.1 General Meters shall be designed and manufacturing tolerances shall be set to allow interchangeability of meters of the same size and type. 7.2 Materials The meter body and the internal mechanism shall be manufactured of materials suited for the service conditions and resistant to attack by the fluid which the meter is to handle. Exterior surfaces of the meter shall be protected as necessary against corrosion. 7.3 Shell The meter shell and all other parts comprising the fluidcontaining structure of the meter shall be constructed of sound materials and designed to handle the pressures and temperatures for which they are rated. 7.4 Connections
anti Maximum Flowrates

The inlet and outlet connections of the meter shall conform to recognized standards (see Table 2).

IS 15676:2006

`BODY \

u IEIIZI(KIEJ
-

~ (IL Ell )
NOSE CONE .--1
v

eEND cONNEC TION

OUTLET

Id'

MECHANISM HOUSING AND TAIL CONE

BODY

END CONNECTION

INLET ~ TURBINE ROTOR

FIG.

1 SCHEMATICDRAWINGS OF AXIAL FLOW GAS TURBINE METERS
Maximum

Table 2 Preferred Nominal Sizes (DN) and Corresponding Flowrates at Metering Conditions (q~~,) (Clause 7.4)
S1 No. (1) i) Maximum Flowrates at Metering Conditions m3h (2)

Nominal Size, DN mm (3)

ii) iii) iv)
v) vi) vii)

40 65 100 160
250

50 50 50
80 80

viii) ix) x) xi)
xii)

400 650 1000 1600 2500 4000
6500

xiii) xiv)
xv)

I 0000 16000
25000

100 150 150 200 250 300 400 500
600

xvi)

40000

750 "1000

NOTE -- Meter sizes are designated by G 16, G 40, etc, according to OIML R-32,

3

1S 15676:2006 7.5 Length

The length of the meter "between the ends of its inlet and outlet connections shall be less than or equal to 5 D of meter sizes greater than 25 mm.
7.6 Pressure Tappings 7.6.1 A4etering-Pressure Tappings

construction of the meter as specified in this clause is maintained. 7.8.3 Each removable meter mechanism shall have a unique serial number marked on it. 7.8.4 Each removable meter mechanism shall be capable of being sealed against unauthorized interference. 7.9 Overloading The meter shall be designed to be capable of occasionally running 20 percent above the maximum flowrate within the range of pressure and temperature for which it is rated, for a time period of 30 min without damage or without influence on the error curve of the meter. 8 PRESSURE
8.1 General TESTING

At least one metering pressure tapping shall be provided on the meter, to enable measurement indirectly if necessary of the static pressure at the turbine wheel of the meter at metering conditions. The connection of this pressure tapping shall be marked `pm'. If more than one `p~'tapping is provided, the difference in pressure readings shall not exceed 100 Pa at maximum flowrate with an air density of 1.2 kg/m3. 7.6.2 Other Pressure Tappings A meter shall be equipped with other pressure-tappingsin addition to the `pm' tapping. These serve to determine the pressure drop over a metertappings shall be marked `p,ri'. 7.6.3 Dimensions
7.6.3.1

8.1.1 The pressure testing shall be based on the shell test for industrial valves as specified in 1S0 5208.

Circular tappings shall conform to the requirement given in1S05 167-1 except that they shall have minimum bore diameter of 3 mm and a maximum bore diameter of 12 mm, and the length of the bore shall be a minimum of one bore diameter. 7:6.3.2 Slit-shaped tappings shall have a minimum dimension of 2 mm and a maximum dimension of 10 mm in the direction of flow, and a minimum crosssectional area of 10 mm2. 7.6.4 Sea[ing Any pressure test point or tapping connection on the meter shall be provided with a suitable means of closure, for example, a plug, and shall be capable of being sealed against unauthorized interference. 7.7 Flow Direction The direction offlow or the inlet of the meter shall be clearly and permanently marked. 7.8 Meter Having a Removable Meter Mechanism
7.8.1 The construction of a meter with a removable

8.1.2 Meters shall not be painted or otherwise coated with materials capable of sealing against leakage before leakage tests are completed. Chemical corrosion protection treatments and internal linings are permitted. If pressure tests in the presence of. a representative of the purchaser are specified, painted meters from stock may be retested without removal of paint. 8.1.3 Test equipment shall not subject the meter to externally applied stress which may affect the results of the tests. 8.2 Test F)uid
8.2.1 The test may be carried out with water, kerosene,

or any other suitable liquid having a viscosity not greater than that of water or with gas (air or any other suitable gas). 8.2.2 When testing with a liquid, the meter shall be thoroughly purged of any air which it contains. 8.3 Strength Test of the Pressure-Containing
Parts

8.3.1 The test shall be performed at a minimum internal

pressure of 1.5 times the maximum allowable operating pressure at ambient temperature. 8.3.2 The test shall be performed by applying pressure inside the pressure-retaining walls of the assembled meter with the connections closed. 8.3.3 There shall be no visually detectable leakage through the pressure-retaining walls is not acceptable. The test duration shall not be less than that specified in Table 3. 4

meter mechanism shall be such that the performance characteristics of the meter as defined in 3.1 are maintained after interchange of the mechanism and/or after repeated mounting and dismounting of the same mechanism. 7.8.2 The design and method of replacement of .a removable mechanism shall ensure that the

IS 15676:2006 Table 3 Strength Test Duration (Clause 8.3.3)
s] No.
(1) O ii) Nominal Size, DN (2) DN = 50 Minimum Test Duration & 15

iii)

50< D/vs 200 DN >200

60 180

8.4 Meter Leakage Test The assembled meter shall be pneumatically tested for external leakage at minimum internal pressure of 1.1 times the maximum allowable operating pressure. The pressure shall be increased slowly up to the test pressure and shall be maintained there for a minimum of 1 min. During this period no fluid shall escape from the meter. If a leakage test is run after a hydrostatic test, a water seal could develop, therefore, the meter shall be dried before assembling the mechanism and carrying out the leak test. After the test, the pressure shall be released at a rate not greater than that used for pressurization. 9 PERFORMANCE See also Annex C. 9.1 Error The relative error, E, in percent, is defined as the ratio of the difference between the indicated value Vi,,~ of the volume of the test medium which has passed through the gas meter, to this latter value:
~ =
ynd v � `true

that are above qMn. O. 1; 0.25; 0.4; 0.7 of qm
~d qMW;

b) c)

name and location of the calibration facility; method of calibration (bell prover, sonic nozzles, other meters, etc); d) estimated uncertainty of the method; e) nature and conditions (pressure and temperature) of the test gas; and t) position of the meter (horizontal, vertical flow upwards, vertical flow downwards).
Conditions

9.2.2 Calibration

CHARACTERISTICS

The calibration is preferably .carried out at conditions as close as possible to operating conditions. 9.2.3 Calibration Facility The facility at which the calibration is carried out shall be traceable to the primary standards of mass, length, time and temperature. 9.2.4 Installation
Conditions at Calibration

The performance of the meter shall not be influenced by the installation conditions of the test facility. 9.2.5 Meter shall conforms to accuracy of + 1 percent over a specified flow range for any operating density. Turbine meters are capable of *0.25 percent accuracy over a specified flow range if they are individually calibrated against an acceptable standard at the particular density at which they will be operated. Therefore, the most accurate turbine meter performance is obtained when each meter is calibrated under density conditions approaching the meter's actual operating density. If meter calibration at operating density is impractical, it is necessary to rely on the manufacturer's prediction of the calibration shift to be expected between the calibrating and operating densities. 9.2.6 Determination
of Calibration Factor

true

All meters shall have a maximum permissible error of + I percent over the designated flow range. Between qvi,,to 0.2 q~~ythe permissible error shall be +2 percent. A meter is considered to satisfy this requirement, if it is met at the flowrates. The density range for which the relative errors are within these allowances shall be specified. For the calculation or errors, see1S05 168. 9.2 Calibration An individual calibration of each meter shaIl be made. The results of this calibration shall be available on request, together with a statement of conditions under which the calibration took place. 9.2.1 Calibration
Data

Itis a general practice, and most convenient, to use a

The calibration data provided shall include: a) error at qM,n and all the following flowrates 5

fixed meter calibration factor over the whole range of flowrates. This will be a calibration factor `K' (pulses per unit volume) for an electrical output, For mechanical output meters, the factor is set by choosing change gears that make each meter output shaft revolution represent a definite volume, for "example, 0.085 or 0.85 m3 at flowing conditions.

1S 1-5676:2006 9.3 Meter Position

The pmition in which the meter is mounted to achieve the specified performance shall be stated. The following positions shall be considered: horizontal; vertical flow upwards, or vertical flow downwards. If a mechanical output and/or mechanical counter is used, the different possible positions of these devices shall be taken into consideration when speci~ing the meter position. 9.4 Temperature
Range

indicate, to within one unit of the last digit, a throughput volume corresponding to at least 2000 h of operation at the maximum flowrate. 10.2.2 Units The counter shall indicate the throughput of the meter in S1 units or units directly derived from S1 units. On the counter, the units used shall be clearly and unambiguously stated. 10.2.3 Numbers The -height of the numerals of the counter shall be minimum 4 mm. The change of numerals shall be such that the advance of one figure at any point of the counter must be completed while the figure of the next lower range describes the last tenth of its course.
10.2.4 Construction

The tluid and ambient temperature ranges over which the meter is designed to perform within standard performance specification shall be stated. 9.5 Pressure Loss Pressure loss data for the meter shall be provided (see Annex B). Apart from the pressure loss across the meter, the pressure 10SS in adjacent pipe work and flow conditioners necessaryto satisfi the requirements for performance limits shall be taken into account. 9.6 Installation
Conditions

Counters shall be of. good design and reliable construction. When mounted on the turbine meter they shall operate reliably and remain legible over the entire temperature range. 10.2.5 Smallest Division of the Counter When the only output of the meter is a mechanical counter, the readout shall enable the meter to be calibrated with the required accuracy at the minimum flowrate in a reasonably short time. The smallest division of the least significant digit of the counter or test element should therefore be smaller than the minimum hourly flowrate divided by 400. 10.3 Flowrate Output The flowrate output of the meter, whether it is in the form of a pulse rate or the rotational speed of a shaft, shall be in a known ratio to the rate of change in the counter. 10.4 Mechanical Output Provision shall be made for covering and sealing the free ends on any extra output shafts, where provided and when they are not being used. The revolution of an output shaft and the direction of rotation shall be marked on the shaft or on an adjacent point on the meter. 10.5 Voltage-Free
Contact

The conditions for the installation of the meter shall be specified in order that the relative meter error does not differ by more than one third of the maximum permissible error specified in 9.1 from the meter error obtained with an undisturbed upstream flow condition. Consideration shall be given to such items as the straight lengths of pipe upstream andlor downstream of the meter, andJor the type and location of a flow condit ions if required (see Annex E). 9.7 Mechanically
Driven External Equipment

If an output shaft is provided which drives instrumentation other than the normal mechanical counter loading of this shaft will retard the meter. This effect is largest for small fbwrates and low gas densities. Therefore, the meter specifications shall state the maximum torque which may be applied by the output shafl and the effect of this torque on the meter performance for different densities, as well as the range of flowrates for which this statement is valid.
10 OUTPUT 10.1 General AND READOUT

The output of the meter consists of an electrical or mechanical counter totaling the throughput of the meter. An electrical pulse-rate signal or a rotating shaft may be used to represent the flowrate through the meter. 10.2 Counters
10.2.1 Counter Capacity

If a voltage-free contact is provided, its operation shall represent a volume being a decimal sub multiple of, equal to, or a decimal multiple of the volume indicated per revolution of the drivm part of the counter. The value of the pulse shall be clear!y indicated on the meter.
10.6 Electrical Pulse Output

The number of digits in a counter shall be sufficient to 6

The number of pulses per cubic metre indicated by the counter shall be stated on the meter.

IS 15676:2006

10.7 Electrical Safety Meters equipped with electrical or electronic equipment shall satisfy IS 2148, if intended for use with combustible gas or in a hazardous atmosphere. 11 MARKING The meter shall be marked with at least the following information: a) b) c) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark; Serial number; Maximum flowrate, qM~x in actual volume units;

d) e)

Maximum allowable operating pressure; and Minimum flowrate, q~a at 1.2 kglm' fluid, density.
Marking

11.1 BIS Certification

The product may also be marked with the Standard Mark.
11.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The detaiIs of conditions under which the licence for the use of Standard Mark may be grarrted to manufacturers or producers maybe obtained fi-omthe Bureau of Indian Standards.

ANNEX A (Foreword and
Clause

1)

RECOMMENDATIONS

FOR USE

A-1 GENERAL Turbine meters should operate within the specified flow range and operating conditions to achieve the desired accuracy and normal lifetime. Premature wear and damage may be caused by turbine wheel over speed and the presence of debris in the pipeline. Key considerations for successfld operation are appropriate meter size for the intended flow, correct installation, and proper operation and maintenance procedures. A-2 START-UP NEW LINES REC-OMMENDATION FOR

A-3.2 A greater degree of meter protection may be achieved through the use of a dry-type or separatortype filter installed upstream of the meter inlet piping.

A-3.3 It is recommended that the pressure differential across a, filter be monitored -to ensure that the filter remains in good condition and that flow distortion is prevented. A-4 OVER RANGE PROTECTION Turbine meters may generally withstand a gradual over ranging without suffering internal damage other than accelerated wear. However, extreme gas velocity encountered during pressurizing, venting or purging may cause severe damage to the meter due to the resulting sudden turbine wheel over speed. A-4.1 As with all meters, turbine meters should be pressurized and started up slowly. Shock loading -by opening valves quickly will usually result in turbine wheel damage. In high pressure applications, the installation of a small bypass line around the upstream meter-isolating valve may be utilized to safely pressurize the meter to its operating pressure. A-4.2 In installations where adequate pressure is available, either a critical flow orifice or a sonic Venturi nozzle may be installed to help protect the meter turbine wheel from over speeding. The restriction shall be installed in the piping downstream of the meter and should be sized to limit the meter loading to 7

Before starting up a meter installation, particularly on new lines or tines that have been repaired, the line should first .be cleaned to remove any collection of welding beads, rust"accumulation and other pipeline debris. The meter mechanism should be.removed during all hydrostatic testing and such line cleaning operations to prevent serious damage to the meter measuring element. A-3 ST-RAINERS OR FILTERS A-3. 1 Foreign substances in a pipeline may sariously damage turbine meters. Strainers are recommended when the presence of damaging foreign material in the gas stream is anticipated. Strainers shall be sized so that a maximum flow there is a minimum pressure drop and installed so that there is no undue flow distortion (see Annex E).

IS 15676:2006 approximately 20 percent above its qM,x. Generally, a critical-flow orifice will result in a 50 percent pressure loss and a sonic Venturi nozzle will result in a 5 to 20 percent +ressure loss.
A-5 BYPASS

The particle size shall not be more than 5 microns for turbine meters. The purpose of a straightening vane is to eliminate swirls and cross currents set up by the pipe fittings, valves, or regulators proceeding the meter inlet piping. While the spe-cificationswhich follow apply particularly to the type of vanes shown in Fig. 6, venues of other designs can be used if they meet these specifications. In construction of vanes the maximum transverse dimension, `a' of any passage through the vanes should not exceed one-fourth the inside diameter, `D' of the pipe. Also, the cross-sectional area, `A', of any passage within the assembled vanes should not exceed onesixteenth of the cross-sectional area of the containing pipe. The length, `L', of the vanes shall be at least 10 times the maximum inside dimension, `a'. The vanes may be built of standard weight pipe or thinwalled tubing, either welded together and securely attached into the meter inlet piping, or mounted into two end-rings small enough to slip into the pipe. The amount of passage blockage-caused by the end-rings shall be kept as small as practical. All tubes shall be reamed as thin as practical at both ends. Square, hexagonal, or other shaped tubing maybe used in making the vanes. It is not necessary that all the vane passages "be of the same size, but their arrangement shall be symmetrical.
A-7.1 Installation Lengths) A-7. 1.1 Recommended Configurations (Minimum

If interruption of the gas supply cannot be tolerated, a bypass should be installed so that the meter may be maintained.
A-6 FREQUENCY INSPECTION OF MAINTENANCE AND

Turbine meter accuracy, in addition to depending on sound design and installation procedures, is dependent on good maintenance practice and adequate tlequency of inspection. Basically, the time between meter inspections is dependent on the gas conditions. Meters used in dirty gas applications require more frequent attention than those used with clean gas, and inspectioli periods should reflect this aspect.
A-7 STRAIGHTENING VANES

The turbine meter is velocity measuring device. The piping configuration immediately upstream of the meter shall be such that the flow profile entering the meter has a uniform distribution and is without jetting or swirl. Since the turbine meter construction is designed to direct the flow-to the annular passage upstream of the rotor, it effectively tends to average the velocity profile of most normal flow conditions. Thus minimizing the influence of minor flow distortions on meter performance. Straightening vanes are recommended; however, regardless of location they will not eliminate the effect of strong jetting. Integral straightening vanes installed in the entrance to a meter and a part of the meter design will eliminate minor swirl conditions. Straightening vanes located in the upstream meter piping in accordance with piping configurations will eliminate most normal flow swirl conditions. The installation of a throttling .device such as a regulator or partially closed valve is not recommended in close proximity to the meter. Where such installations are necessary, the throttling device shall be placed an additional eight nominal pipe diameters upstream or an additional two nominal pipe diameters, downstream in the in-line recommended installation in Fig. 2. In installation configurations illustrated in Fig. 3, 4 and 5; the throttling device shall be placed eight additional nominal pipe diameters ahead of the inlet vertical. riser or an additional two nominal pipe diameters downstream of the outlet vertical riser. Placement of such a device in closer proximity to the meter may result in accuracy degradation and/or reduced bearing life. 8

Installation for In-line Meters

The recommended installation requires a length of 10 nominal pipe diameters upstream with the straightening vane outlet located at five nominal pipe diameters from meter meltas shown in Fig. 2. Alength of five nominal pipe diameters is recommended downstream of the meter. Both inlet and outlet pipe should be of the same nominal size as the meter. A-7. 1.2 Optional Installations for In-line Meters The use of optional installations may result in some degradation in meter accuracy.
A-7.2 Optional Short-Coupled Installation

In those instances where the required space for the recommended installation of Fig. 2 is not available, a short-coupled installation may be employed as shown in Fig. 3. This configuration utilizes a minimum of four nominal pipe diameters upstream with straightening vanes located at the inlet of the piping. The distance between the straightening vane outlet and the meter inlet should be a minimum of two nominal pipe diameters. The meter is connected to the vertical risers using a

IS 15676:2006

GAS TURBINE METER 10 NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETERS ? . INLET ~ 4 STRAIGHTENING VANES
FIG.

i

2 RECOMMENDED INSTALLATIONOFAN IN-LINE GAS T.URBINE METER (MINIMUM LENGTHS)

~;:+' 90 ELBOW "ORTEE I rTlr_. +_. MAXIMUM PIPE SIZE

I
I
`

DIAMETERS LONG

OR STRAINER / 0
FIG.

DIAMETERS 90 ST#NDARD LONG RADIUS ELBOW

3 SHORT-COUPLED INSTALLATION OFAN IN-LINE GAS TURBINEMETER (MINIMUM LENGTHS)

;3

y:ow

I I r.r T I I r---+ --- I
Ill Ill pi I I I ;~~r--+

r ----r ----`1 I

-----~

I

r
T

GAS TURBINE

METER
r ----1

I

MAXIMUM REDUCTION ONE NOMINAL PIPE SIZE

SPACE FILTER

FOR VALVING OR STRAINER

SPACE FOR VALVING

) ul!7

90

FXG.4 CLOSE-COUPLED INSTALLATION OFAN IN-LINE GAS TURBINEMETER WITHINTEGRALSTRAIGHTENING VANES

9

1S 15676:2006

INLET PIPING 10 NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETERS LONG NOMINAL PIPE DIAMETERS WITH STRAIGHTENING VANES) (5 90 ELBOW OR TEE L ----I MAXIMUM `rrl I -+Ilr REDUCTION 111 I ONE NOhNNAL Ill PIPE SIZE L:fI SPACE FOR VALVING FILTER OR STRAINER SPACE FOR VALVING AND TEMPERATURE WELL
---r ..--+

I

GAS TURBINE METER=

2 a -HORIZONTAL INSTALLATION ( INLET IN HORIZONTAL PLANE b OUTLET DOWN)

FIG. 5 RECOMMENDED INSTALLATION OF AN ANGLE BODY GAS TURBINEMETER

L"A"

AREAS

~1
FIG.

6 STRAIGHTENING VANES

standard tee or elbow. The maximum pipe reduction to the risers is one nominal pipe size. Valving, filters, or strainers may be installed on the risers. A-7.3 Optional Close-Coupled Installation Close-coupled installation of a gas turbine meter is shown in Fig. 4. -The meter design must incorporate integral straightening vanes upstream of the rotor. The installation should be used where the available space for a meter installation is critical and design considerations have eliminated jetting and abnormal swirl conditions. The meter is connected to the vertical risers using a standard tee or elbow. The maximum pipe reduction to the risers is one nominal pipe size. Valving, filters, or strainers maybe installed on the risers. 10

A-7.4 Recommended Meters

Installation

for Angle Body

The recommended installation for an angle body meter is shown in Fig. 5. It is recommended that the meter inlet piping be connected to the riser using a 90� elbow or tee. Valving, filter or a strainer maybe installed on the riser. When straightening vanes are not used the upstream.
A-7.5 Meter Inlet Pipe

Meter inlet piping length should be 10 nominal pipe diameters. W-hen straightening vanes are used, the length of upstream pipe maybe reduced to five nominal pipe diameters. The straightening vane inlet shall be

IS 15676:2006

five nominal pipe diameters from the meter inlet. There are no restrictions on the downstream piping except that the companion. Flange attached to the meter outlet must be full-size. A vertical installation may be used and thesame basic piping configuration applied as used in the horizontal installation. A-7.6 Other Installation
Considerations

volume to baseline conditions or for recording operating parameters shall be installed properly and the connections made as follows. A-8.1 Temperature Measurement

In addition to the above-mentioned items, it -is also necessary to take the following installation practices in to consideration, as the lack of attention to any one item could result in serious measurement errors: a) Meter and meter piping should be installed so as to minimize strain on the meter due to pipeline stresses; b) Use care to ensure a concentric alignment of the pipe connections with the meter inlet and outlet connections; c) Prevent gasket and/or weld bead protrusion into the bore, which could disturb the flow pattern; d) If liquid could be encountered, installations shall be sloped to provide continual draining of the meter, or the meter shall be installed in the vertical position. In cases where a considerable quantity of liquid is expected, it is recommended that a separator be installed upstream of the meter. Flow distortion by the separator shall be taken into consideration in the piping recommendation; and e) Turbine meters should not be used where frequently interrupted and/or strongly fluctuating flow or pressure pulsations at present,

Since upstream disturbances shall be kept to a minimum,-the recommended location-for a thermometer well is downstream of the turbine wheel. It shall be located as closely as possible downstream of the turbine wheel, but within 5 pipe diameters from the turbine wheel and upstream of any outlet valve or flow restrictions. The thermometer well shall be installed such that the temperature measured is the real temperature corresponding to flowrates between q~in and "qM,xand is not influenced by heat transfer from the piping or well attachment. A-8.2 Pressure Measurement The pressure tapping -marked `pm' on the meter body shall be used as the pressure sensing point for recording or integrating instruments. A-8.3 Density Measurement The conditions of the gas in the density meter shotild represent the conditions in the turbine wheel over the operating flow rates of the meter. Consideration shall be given to the possible presence of unmetered gas when using purged density meter. Density riteters installed in the piping should preferably be installed -downstream of the turbine wheel. A-8.4 Gas Sampler The location of samplers for gas analysis shall in the downstream of the meter and in close proximity to the meter.

A-8 INSTALLATION OF ACCESSORIES Accessory devices used for converting the indicated

ANNEX B
(Foreword

and

Clauses

1 and

9.5)

OTHER METER PERFORMANCE

CHARACTERISTICS

B-1 GAS CONDITIONS

B-1.l

Metering Conditions

Generally, it is desirable to know the quantity of gas in terms of mass or in terms of volume at certain conditions. In all cases this quantity is derived from the measurement of volume at metering conditions, taking into account the meter reading and measurement of the metering conditions. 11

See 3.1.7. Symbols related to these conditions have the subscript `m'. B-1.2 Specified Conditions See 3.1.9. Symbols related to these conditions have the subscript `s'.

IS 15676:2006
B-1.3 Base Conditions

,9ee 3.1.8. Symbols related to these conditions have the subscript `b'.
B-2 PRESSURE LOSS

The pressure loss over a turbine meter is determined by the energy required for driving the meter mechanism, the losses due to friction of internal passage, and changes in flow velocity and direction. The pressure loss is measured between a point one pipe diameter upstream and a point one pipe diameter downstream of the meter on piping of the same size as that of the meter. Care shall be taken in selecting and manufacturing the pressure points to ensure that flow pattern distortions do not affect the pressure readings. The pressure loss basically follows the turbulent flow loss relationship (except at ve~' low flow rates): Apm= cp~q2~ From the pressure loss at specified conditions and fi-om the equation of state of an ideal gas, it follows that:
Apm=Ap,

maximum flowrate, qM,x in order not to exceed a certain-turbine wheel speed and a certain pressure loss. This maximum flowrate of the meter remains the same, unless stated otherwise, for all metering conditions up to the stated maximum allowable operating pressure. From the minimum flowrate, pressure, temperature and fluid composition as specified by the manufacturer, the minimum flowrate can be written as:

qm,Min

=

qs,Mh

r
P
A Al

B-4 WORKING

RANGE

Since the maximum flowrate generally does not change and the minimum flowrate can change (see C-3), the working range V, of a gas turbine meter changes essentially with the square root of the gas density:

and

; ~= ()()

B-5 EFFECTS PRESSURE

OF

TEMPERATURE

AND

B-3 MAXIMUM

AND MINIMUM

FLOWRATES

Gas turbine meters are generally

designed for a

Changes in meter performance can occur when the operating temperature and pressure are very different from the calibration conditions (see 9.2.2). These changes may be due to changes in dimensions, bearing fi-iction or to physical phenomena.

ANNEX C (F'wewoni and
DATA COMPUTATION
Clauses 1 and 9)

AND PRESENTATION

C-1 EQUATIONS FOR VOLUME CALCULATION

(baseline pressure and baseline temperature): for metering conditions
p,~V~ = Z~NRTm

Since the turbine meter measures volumes at metering conditions, the equation of state of ideaI gases may be applied to convert the indicated volume to a volume at baseline conditions, when these conditions are constant. The following equations convert the gas volume indicated by the gas turbine meter at metering conditions into gas volume at baseline conditions

and for baseline conditions
p~V~ = ZbNRTb

Since R is a constant for the gas regardless of pressure and temperature, for a number of moles N of gas, the two equations can be combined to yield:

12

IS 15676:2006

`="+?)(3[29
Above Equation can be used for the specific conditions at the meter. For non-constant metering conditions:

m = q,np. dt

J

The densities pm and p~ may be determined by measurement orby computation tlom the composition and conditions of the gas. C-3 PRESENTATION
OF CALIBRATION DATA

-Vb = /qm
(:)(?)[2)"

C-2 EQUATION FOR CALCULATION m = `bpb. `,npm Gas at varying densities

OF MASS

The meter calibration data shall be plotted as a function of the actual flowrate, baseline flowrate or pipe Reynolds number. The actual or baseline flow conditions for pressure and temperature as well as the test fluid shall be stated in the calibration data.

ANNEX D
(Foreword

and

Clause

1)

FIELD CHECKS

D-1 GENERAL

The most commonly applied field checks for turbine meters are visual inspection and the spin time test. Information can often be gained from meters in operation by observing the noise or vibrations generated. Severe vibration of the meter usual Iy indicates damage which has unbalanced the turbine wheel; this may lead to complete meter failure. Turbine wheel rubbing and poor bearings can often be heard at relatively low flowrates at which such noises are not masked by normal flow noise.
D-2 VISUAL INSPECTION

previous test. If the mechanical friction has not significantly changed, if the meter area is clean, and if the internal portions of the meter show no damage, the meter should display no change in accuracy, A significant increase in the mechanical friction indicates that the accuracy characteristic of the meter at low flowrates has degraded. Typical spin times for meters can be provided by the manufacturer on request. The spin time test must be conducted in a draught free area with the measuring mechanism in its normal operating position. The turbine wheel is rotated at a reasonable speed, that is, a minimum speed of approximately 1/20 of the rated speed corresponding to qMaxrind is timed from the initial motion until the turbine wheel stops. Spin tests shall be repeated at least three times and the average time taken. The usual cause for a decrease in spin time is increased turbine wheel shaft bearing friction. It shall be noted, however, that there are other causes of mechanical friction which affect spin time, such as heavily lubricated bearings, low ambient temperature, draughts and attached accessories.
NOTE -- Other methods of conducting a spin time test are possible, as long as the method is specified.

During visual inspection, the turbine wheel shall be inspected for missing blades, lubrication mechanism (if provided), accumulation of solids, erosion or other damage that would affect the turbine wheel balance and the blade configuration. Meter internals should also be checked to ensure there is no accumulation of debris. D-3 SPIN TIME TEST The spin time test determines the relative level of the mechanical friction present in the meter in celation to a

13

IS 15676:2006

ANNEX E
(Foreword

and

Clauses

1,9.6

andA-3.

1)

PERTURBATIONS

E-1 GENERAL This Annex provides guidance for flow disturbances that may affect meter performance and standardized tests to assess the effects of such disturbances. E-2 SWIRL EFFECT If the fluid at the meter inlet has significant swirl, the turbine wheel speed may be influenced. A swirl at the turbine wheel in the direction of rotation increases the turbine wheel speed, whereas a swirl in the opposite direction decreases the turbine wheel speed. For high accuracy flow measurement, such a swirl effect shall be reduced to an insignificant level by proper installation of the meter. E-3 VELOCITY PROFILE EFFECT The gas turbine meter is designed for and calibrated under conditions which approach a uniform velocity profile at the meter inlet. In case of significant deviation from this profile, the turbine wheel speed at a given flowrate can be affected by the actual velocity profile at the turbine wheel. For a given average flowrate, a non-uniform velocity profile generally results in a higher turbine wheel speed than a uniform velocity profile. For high-accuracy flow measurement, the velocity profile at the turbine wheel shall be ensured to be essentially uniform by proper installation of the meter. E-4 PERTURBATION E-4. 1 Tests Tests to determine the sensitivity of meter to installation conditions should be carried out a close to atmospheric conditions with air flowrate of 0.25 qM,x. The installations that satisfy the specifications in 9.6 shall be described for each meter. E-4.2 Low Level Perturbations The piping configurations shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b) consisting of a pipe with nominal size DN1 arrd length of 5D1 two elbows of diameter equal to D1 in two perpendicular planes, and a concentric expander from DN1 to DN and a length between D and 1.5 D can be considered to be representative of low level perturbations produced by piping elements such as bends, tees, convergent and divergent sections. The values of DiV, are listed in Table 4. TESTING

Qominal sizes of pipe components are defined in SO 6708.
Table 4 Relationship
S1No.
(1) 0 Meter DN (2) 50 80

of

DN, to DN
Pipe DN1 (3) 40 .50 80

ii) iii) iv)

100
150
200 250 300 400 500 600 750 1000

100
150 200 250 300 400 500 600 750

v)
vi)
vii)

viii) ix)
x)

xi)
xii)

If the elements shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b), installed 2D upstream of the meter inlet [see Fig. 7(c)] cause an error shift at atmospheric conditions not exceeding the difference mentioned in 9.6, no flow conditioner or additional length of upstream pipe is required in service if only low level perturbations occur at a distance of 2D or more upstream of the meter inlet.
E-4.2.1

E-4.2.2 If the error difference is greater than the value given in 9.6, tests should be carried out with a longer upstream straight pipe and/or flow conditioner, preferably of the; types mentioned in 1S0 5167-1, to determine the inlet section configuration necessary to keep the error differences within the limits given in 9.6. The flow conditioner should be installed in pipe of diameter D with the end of the flow conditioner at least 2D from the meter inlet. E-4.3 High Level Perturbations E-4.3. 1 To determine the sensitivity of a meter to high level perturbations caused by -regulators or other; throttling devices, tests should be carried out with the piping configurations shown in Fig. 7 but with a halfpipe area plate as shown in Fig. 8 installed between the two elbows, with the opening towards the outside radius of the first bend. E-4.3.2 If the error difference is greater than that stated in 9.6, the procedure described in E-4.2.2 should be carried out to determine the upstream configuration that satisfies the requirements of 9.6. E-4.3.3 These tests are not representative of all situations 14

IS 15676:2006

where.a regulator produces a strong eccentric outlet jet. Great care is needed when turbine meters are used downstream of regulator produces a strong eccentric outlet jet. Greatcare is needed when turbine meters are used downstream of regulators operating with large pressure reductions. Also, for piping systems having an unknown potential influence on meter performance, it is recommended that a flow conditioner as shown in Fig. 9 be installed at a minimum of 4D tlom the conditioner outlet to the meter inlet connection.
NOTE -- A flow conditioner of this type causes a relatively large pressure loss. ban those cases where such a pressure loss can be handled, installation of such a flow conditioner is advised downstream of a regulator.

In those cases where the pressure drop across the flow conditioner in Fig. 9 cannot be tolerated, installation of a flow conditioner as shown in Fig. 10 may also be used.

NOTE -- Free area: 20 percent of pipe area. For this area ratio, the pressure loss at q~d, is approximately 0,07 times the static pressure for a nominal pipe diameter DN according to 7.4 and for a relative gas density of 0.64.

The whole pattern shall be such that the holes on adjacent plates do not provide a straight path for the flowing fluid. The perforated plates are attached to a sleeve such that all fluid passes through the plates.

a)

b)

FLO

FIG.

7 PIPING CONFIGURATIONS FORTESTSAT Low LEVELPERTURBATION 15

IS 15676:2006

a -0

. 1[:::D=+
FIG.

8 LOCATIONOF HALF-AREA OPENINGFORTEST AT HIGH LEVELPERTURBATION

FLOW ~ .--. ---

..

---B1

---

B1

B2

w

BI

B2

FIG. 9 FLOW CONDITIONER TO DAMP OUT HIGH LEVELPERTURBATION

ANY FLOW CONDITIONER GIVEN IN ISO 5167-1 8II 1 .----- . M. .--

50

.-- 4=

---.

-- I d.

NOTE -- The straight lengths specified are minimum values. FIG. 10 ALTERNATIVEFLOW CONDITIONERCONFIGURATIONTO 13AMP OUT HIGH LEVEL PERTURBATION

16

!,

IS 15676:2006

E-5 SIMILARITY If similarity of design exists in the meter inlet section for various size meters, a minimum of two meter sizes shall be tested. Ifthe results are similar, it can be assumed L i

other meter sizes would produce the -same results. Similarity can be assumed to exist if the values of H/D and SYLfor any meter are equal to or less than those for the tested meters (see Fig. 11).

I
/'

//////////f///A/////////A
,#------

I
r

1
\

T /
ii

<

1

.--
-----

---

~----t-t

1

N

`(

v
FIG.

s'

11 METER DIMENSIONS DEFININGSIMILARITYFORVARIOUSSIZE METERS

17

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright
BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of nec~ssary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.

Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PG 26 (10 18).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 i3ahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Westeim : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 `{ : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone

f

23237617 ~ 23233841

23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAICHAPATNAM.
F'nntedat Prabhat Olhet Ress, New Delhi-2

AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 2007 TO IS 15676:2006 FLOW MEASUREMENT OF NATUU GAS BY TURBINE METERS
(Foreword, third para, line 3) -- Substitute `American Gas Association' for `American gas authority'.

(PG 26)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

