( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 4595 -

196s

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-SPARKING TOOLS
Hand Tools Sectional Committee, EDC 12
Chairman SHRI K. N. P. RAO Members
SHRI Ii. R. VENKATAIZHALAM ( Ahnate to Shri K. N. P. Rao ) Metalcraft ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta Slw S~SIR BANERJEB SHRI H. N. GANG~LY ( Alfsmulr) DIRECTOROF FLEET MAINTENANCE Indian Navy Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SIXRI L. R. GOSUN Department of Defencc Production, Ministry of LT-COL J. C. Jose Defcnce ( DGI ) SHRl M. R. S. SOORMA ( Al&mote) The Mysore Implements Factory, Hassan SHIU S. K. KEYPALUI SARI N. S. VENKAT~~U (Ahma&) SXRI G. KUPP~~WA~ Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI S. N. VOHRA ( A&mate) Development Commissionur, Small Scale Industries SHRID. MAWAR of Industrial Development & (Ministry Company Affairs ) SHIU G. B. JAKIIET~A( Alternate ) SIXIU S. D. h&JUUDAR National Test House, Calcutta SHRIT. H. N~MAL Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community Dcvelopment i? Co-operation Gobindo Sheet Metal Works & Foundry, Calcutta Snax GOBIND~ PRY PAUL Kumar Industries, Parli ( S. Malahar ) 3;: E t RAmAqlsnNluv . ANRhRANARAYANAN Directorate General of Technical Development ( h4inistry of Supply, Technical Development & Materials Planning ) SHRI SATXSH &%NJXA ( Allemok ) SHRI R. P. SOOD Director of Industries, Government of Haryana Snar M. SRINIVASAN Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SH~I R. T. S. RANOIAH ( Alkmotc ) SHRZR. M. TALATI Usha Forgings & Stampings Limited, New Delhi SHRI R. M. MOUDGILL ( Alternate.) &RX T. C. THAUNI Engineer-in-Cbicf's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI M. V. PATANKAR, Director General, IS1 ( &ol)l6cio Member ) Director ( Mcch Engg )

Ibpram*tlg
The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshcdpur

secrets
Assistant B, L. RA~A Director (Me& Eugg ), `IS1

SHRI

( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEwRELIq

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR . MARG

Non-Spark Wety Tools Study Group, EDC 12/SG
Rejnesenihg SxsRtK. s eAuAyANA?l Directorate General of Technical (Ministry of Supply, Technical k Mata-iab Planning )
I&iris

Dcvclopmeot Developmart

&chitectural Industries Private Calcutta Gco Miller & Co Private Ltd, Calcutta SHRI H. A. R-ALE SHRI P. C~ATI-ERJEE ( Altcmufe ) Oil and Natural Gas Commitri~& Dclva Duo Smtt R. P. SXARXA

MsJnbers SxiRt s. IL LmIRt

Ltd,

.
1

rst4595-1909

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-SPARKING TOOLS 0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 January 1969, after the draft finalized by the Hand Tools Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 This standard lays down the requirements for non-sparking tools. These tools are made of non-ferrous alloy having a low sparking hazard and a low magnetic permeability. These tools are used in the presence of flammable gases, dust and explosives and other applications where low magnetic permeability is essential. 0.3 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from GGG-W-642 a ` Wrench, bung ( non-sparking and non-magnetic ) ' issued by USA Federal Supply Service. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard covers the general requirements for non-sparking
2. MATERIAL

tools.

2.1 Non-sparking safety tools shall be manufactured from any suitable non-sparking material. The chemical composition of one of such nonsparking materials is given below:

Conrtitfmt
Aluminium Iron Nickel Manganese Copper
.Rula for roundingOBnumericalvalues ( ret&d ) .

Percent
8.5 to I@5 3.5 to 5.5 4-5 to 6.5 1*5, Max Remainder 3

i6:4595-1969 composition below:

2.1.1 The content of the impurities in the non-sparking mrtuia$
Conrh'tumt Tin Lead Silicon Magnesium

the of which is indicated in 2.1, shall not exceed the limits given

\

Perccn&
0.10 o-05 0.25 o-05 percent. tensile strength

The total content of impurities shall not exceed 630 2.19 The material of 70 kgf/mm?. 3. HARDNESS shall have a minimum ultimate

3.1 The working edges of non-sparking tools shall have a hardness value within the hardness range of 190 to 230 HV ( see IS : 1810-1961* ). 4. SHAPES AND SIZES 4.1 The shapes, sizes and dimensions of various types of non-sparking hand tools shall be as specified in the relevant specifications. 5, WORKMANSHIP AND FIIVISH

5.1 The non-sparking safety hand tools shall be free from defects, such as fins, scales, cracks, seams, burrs, or any other defect which may adversely Flash lines shall be removed affect the proper functioning of the product. sufficiently to blend smoothly with adjacent surfaces. 6. MARKING 6.1 The tools shall be marked with the manufacturer's name or trademark. The year of manufacture shall also be stamped, if required by the purchaser. 6.1.1 The tools shall also be marked with the name, abbreviation or chemical symbol of the alloy used in the manufacture of the tool. 6.1.2 The tools may also be marked with the ISI CertiCcation Mark,
NOTE- The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Ccrti6cation Marks ) Act, and the Rules and R ations Presence of this mark on prod&s covered by an Indian P tandard made thereunder. conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control This system, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by during production. the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed arc Details of conditions, under continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to the standard. which a licencc for the UM of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manuf?cturcrs or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. *Method for Vickm Jmrdncss test for light metals and their alloys.

4

Is% 4595 - 1969 7. PACKING 7.1 The tools shall be suitably wrapped in paper and packed in cardboard cartons. The cardboard cartons shall be marked with designation, size of the tool and the manufacturer's name or trade-mark. 8.8AlUPLINC 8.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, the sampling plan and criteria for conformity&en in Appendix A shall be followed. 9. TESTS 9.1 Sparking Test

9.1.1 Apparutrrr- The sparking test shall be conducted in an explosion chamber having a volume of 127.4 dms. The chamber shall be furnished with a hot plate for vaporizing gasoline, a means of admitting gasoline and oxygen at atmospheric pressure, a fan for mixin the gasoline vapour and oxygen, two electrodes or other suitable means fg or providing electric spark, a 75 mm diameter by 6 mm thick metal wheel having coarsely knurled surface on the circumference and rotating at a fpeed of. 10 000 revolutions per minute and a fixture for holding the test specimen against the circumference of the metal wheel while applying pressure from the outside of the The metal wheel shall be made of carbon tool steel conforming chamber. to T90 of IS : 1570-1961* with a maximum sulphur and phosphorus content of 0.025 percent each and heat-treated to a hardness value of 700 to 820 HV (see IS : 1501-1959t ). The gasoline used during these tests shall be aviation gasoline conforming to grade 100/130 of IS : 1604-19602. An oxygen an+lyzer shall be used to determine the percentage of oxygen in the chamber. test specimen approximately 6 mm in diameter by 9.13 Procedure -A 50 mm in length shall be made from the material used in the manufacture of the tools, and shall be subjected to the sparking test. The specimen shall be mounted in ihe holder fixture and the chamber shall be sealed. Oxygen shall be admitted into the chamber until the oxygen content in the air reaches 50 percent. A pan resting on the hot plate shall then be filled in with 20 cnP of gasoline through an opening of the top of the The opening shall be sealed and the fan turned on and the chamber. gasoline evaporated. After the gas is completely evaporated, the fan shall be turned off and the specimen held against the rotating wheel with a
*Schedules tMethod
$Speci6catian

for wrought for Vickm

stcda for general engineeringpurposes. test for
steel.

hardneg

for aviation

gaxoline.

5

IS:

4!B5-1969

force of l-134 kgf. If no explosion occurs before 5 seconds, the mixture shall be exploded by means of the electric spark to demonstrate the presence of an explosive mixture. Three runs shall be made with the test specimen and if the specimen explodes the gasoline and oxygen-enriched air mixture during any of these runs, the tool represented by the specimen tested shall be disapproved for use as a non-sparking tool. 9.2 Magnetic Permeability Test -The magnetic permeability of the manufacturing material shall not exceed l-02 and shall be determined by any suitable method.

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1 )

A
FOR

SAMPLlNG OF NON-SPARKING TOOLS AND CRITERU CONFORMITY A-l. SCALE OF SAMPLING

all the non-sparking tools of the same type, shape and size, and manufactured from the same material under essentially uniform conditions of manufacture shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. A-I.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to the requirements of the relevant specification, tests shall be carried out for each lot separately. The number of non-sparking tools to be selected at random for this purpose shall be in accordance with co1 1 and 2 of Table 1.
TAB?

A-l.1 Lot - In any consignment

1 SCALE OF SAMPLING

AND PERMISSIBLE OF DEFECTIVES

NUMBER

(Clauses A-1.2, A-1.3 and A-2.1.1 ) No. OF NON-SPARRINO

TOOLSIN

SAMPLE

SIZE

THE

LOT

PERMISSIBLR NUMBER 01 DEFECTIVE Toou

iv (1)
Up 26 51 101 301 to ,, ,s ,, n 25 50 100 300 500

n (2)
5 8 13 20 (3) 0 0 0 1

32
50 a0

1
2 3

501 ,, 1000 1001 and above

6

ls:4595-196i A-1.3 To ensure the randomness of selection, random number tables shall be used. In case they are not available, one of the following procedures is recommended: a) If all the tools are packed in one box, then starting from any tool inthelot,counttheminoneorderasl,2,3, . . . . . . . . . . etc,uptorand so on, where r is the integral part of N/n ( Nbeing the number of tools in the lot and n being the number of tools to be selected ). Every rth tool thus counted shall be withdrawn to constitute the sample. 6) If the tools are packed in diierent cartons, then a suitable number of cartons ( at least 20 percent of the total in the lot subject to a minimum of 2 ) shall be selected-at random and as far as possible equalrmmberaf:oeolfshallbcdnwn~~cartonto got the required number specified in co1 2 of Table 1, A-2. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA

FOR CONFORMITY

shapes and sizes, and workmanship and finish. Any tool failing to meet the requirements for any one or more of the characteristics shall be considered as defective.

A-2.1 The tools selected according to A-I.3 shall be examined for hardness,

A-2.1.1 If the number of defective tools is less than or equal to the corresponding number given in co1 3 of Table 1, the lot shall be declared in conformity to the requirements of the characteristics mentioned in A-2.1. A-2.2 If so desired by the purchaser, one test specimen from every batch or
melt of the material shall be supplied by the manufacturer for subjecting it to each of the tests, namely, chemical analysis, tensile strength, sparking and magnetic permeability.

A-2.2.1 The lot shall be declared conforming to the requirements of the above characteristics if all the test specimens satisfy the relevant requirements.
A-2.3 The lot shall be declared conforming to the rquirements of the relevant specification if it is found satisfactory according to A-2.1.1 and A-2.2.1.

