( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS:8013-1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND TESTING OF MARINE DIESEL ENGINES FOR FISHING VESSELS

(First Revision)
Fishing
Chairman
SHRI R. BALASUBBAMANYAN*

Vessels Sectional

Committee,

MCPD

21

RePresenting Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Cochin

Members to Shri R. Balasubramanyan ) Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay SHRI P. K. BANERJEE SHRI S. M. MURHERJEE (Alternate) SERI S. G. GAWIL CumL;FpuDieesel Sales and Service ( India ) KirloskBr Pneumatic Go Ltd, Pune SIIRI B. K. GLARE SERI R. Y. GHANIKAF. ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. GIIOSH Directorate General of Technical Development, SHnI ANIL KUX:~R ( Alternate SERI M. JAYARAJ New Delhi
SHRI K. SREEDHARAN NAXBOODRI ( Alternate

j

SI~RI B. L. K&CB~QI ( Alternate ) SHRI K. M. JOSEPH Exploratory SRRI S. K. BHADURY ( Alternate ) SHRI V. J. JOSEPH SRRI P. P. CHIOHU~R ( Alternate SHRI R. A. KAMATH SHRI P. L. D'ABREO ( Alternate ) CAPT S. K. KAPUR SHRI M. J. ALVARES ( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. Knaa~ SHRI A. K. CHOPR~ ( Alternate )

Office of the Directorate Karnataka, Bangalore Fisheries Project,

of

Fisheries

in

Bombay Bombay

Greaves Cotton and Co Limited, ) Kamath and D'Abreo, Cochin Goa Shipyard Limited, Goa

Indian Register of Shipping,

Bombay

l Sbri FL Balasubramanyanwas in the chair in the mwring in which this standard w& finalized.
( Continued on page 2 )

0 INDIAN

Copyright 1985 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright` hct ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any meansexcept with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said kc81

IS:8013 -1985
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHRI C. R. KULASEEARAM SHRI P. S. KUMARADAS Representing Gear Transmission Pvt Limited, Madras Fisheries Department, Government of Kerala, Trivandrum

SERI V. G. JOSEPH (Alternate ) Indian Trawler's Association, Cochin SHRI K. B. MENON Geeta Engineering Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. K. NANQIA SERI S. N. SEN~UPTA (Alternate ) Andhra Pradesh Fisheries Corporation ( P ) Ltd, PRODUCTIONMANAQEX Kakinada Guiarat Fisheries, Ahmadabad SHRI VIJAY RANCHAW SHRI M. S. MICHAEL (Alternate) Bharati Engineering Co, Bombay SHRI M. G. RANE Directorate of Fisheries, Teynampet, Madras SHRI A. D. ISAAC RAJENDRAN Kirloskar Cummins Ltd, Pune SHRI R. S. RAW SRRI K. K. MAHAJAN ( Alternate ) Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd, Pune SHRI S. G. SARDESAI SHRI A. B. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) Brunton and Co Engineering Ltd, Cochin SHRI M. SHANMUQAM SHIU S. THIAQARAJAN ( Alternate ) Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay CAPT J. SUBBIAH SERI V. VENKATESI~ ( Alternate ) Ruston Hornsby ( India ) Ltd, Pune SHRI D. D. SUltYAWANSHI SERI P. S. SATWE ( Alternate ) Ministry of Agriculture SHRI M. SWAMINATH SHRI K. B. C. MENON (Alternate ) Britannia Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. K. TAQORE Directorate of Fisheries, Lakshdwipa AdminsiSHRI GEORQE VARQHESE tration, Kavaratti Island Director General, ZSI ( Bx-o$cicio Member) SHRI B. L. RAINA, Director ( MCPD ) SHRI V. K. SEHQAL

Secretnrv

Senior Deputy Director

( MCPD

), IS1

2

IS : 8013 - 1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR PERFORMANCE ' REQUIREMENTS AND TESTING OF MARINE DIESEL ENGINES FOR FISHING VESSELS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian
Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Fishing Vessels Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council.

0.2 This standard was first published in 1976. This first revision was necessitated to include the performance requirements of marine diesel engines for fishing vessels so as to make them amenable for certification and to assess their suitability for use as propulsion machinery for fishing vessels. 0.3 The on-board testing of the diesel engines may be carried out by the Central Institute of Fisheries Technology ( GIFT ), Cochin. The marine diesel engines shall also comply with the latest rules and requirements of the classification societies and statutory authorities in all respects. Oi4 To enable the engine manufacturers to (marinize' their land engines, certain data and details of special requirements to be supplied are given in Appendix A for guidance, 0.5 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from JISF 4301-1978 `Water cooled four cycle marine diesel engines for propelling use' issued by Japanese Industrial Standards Committee ( JISC ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard lays down performance requirements and testing of marine diesel engines specifically meant for use as propulsion machinery for fishing vessels up to 15 m length/25 NRT. ,t

3

r)

4r

IS:8013

- 1985

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions, in addition to those given in IS : 3979-1967*, shall apply. 2J.l Marine Engine - An engine ,suitably designed with necessary accessories and fittings for installation in a vessel as propulsion machinery for operation in the sea or inland waters. 2.1.2 Rated Power - The maximum continuous brake power specified by the manufacturer at specified revolutions per minute of the engine and in accordance with the standard operating conditions given in IS : 10000 (Part 2)-198OT. 2.1.3 Fishing Vessel - A vessel engaged in any type of fishing inclusive of fish transport, fisheries survey and fisheries research. 3. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS duty,

3.1 The engine shall meet the following performance requirements. The performance shall be tested at shop, and full load shall be the continuous power. The tests shall be carried out on the engine with essential dependent auxiliaries as specified in IS : 10000 ( Part 1 )-1980$. 3.2 Start follows: up Perfcmmance -The start up performance shall be as

a) In case of the engine starting with compressed air, the engines shall be able to start up at least six times, using the air reservoir to be equipped on single screw vessel or the one having the same capacity. b) In case of the engine with electric starter, the engine shall be able to start up at least six times without recharging, beginning from the full charged condition, using the batteries prepared for the engine or the one having the same capacity. c) The engine with manual starting shall be able to start up quite easily by one or two men. 3.2.1 The starting gear shall be as follows: a) For the engine of compressed air starting, the working pressure of compressed air shall be up to 30 kgf/cms ( 2.94 MPa ) or less.
*Code of practice for testing of marine diesel engines of 800 rpm and above. tMethods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 2 Standard reference conditions. $Methods of tests for internal combustion engines: Part 1 Glossary of terms relating to test methods. a 1)

4

IS:

8013-1985

b) For the engine of electric motor starting, the batteries shall be of 12 V or 24 V. 3.3 Performance at Full and Overload full and overload shall be as follows:
Operation -

Performance

at

a) Performance operation - The engine shall operate satisfactorily within manufacturer's published parameters. b) Fuel consumption rate - The fuel consumption rate at rated power shall be according to the values given in IS : lOOOl-1981* and IS : 10002-1981t. 3.4 Performance on Partial Load Operation - At l/4, l/2 and 314 of full load, the engine shall be able to operate smoothly and continuously without any adjustment during the operation. 3.5 Performance of Governor -Performance of governor shall be in accordance with IS : 10000 ( Part 7 )-1980f for class B governing. 3.6 Performance on Non-supercharging Operation - For the engines with superchargers removing the superchargers or shutting off an arbitrary number of superchargers, the engines shall operate smoothly and continuously without any adjustment during operation at a speed and load recommended by the manufacturer. 4. TESTS of the engine in general and its suitability for use on board fishing vessels as a propulsion machinery in accordance with the specifications of the manufacturer or supplier. 4.2 Type Tests - Whenever marine diesel engines of a new design or a re-modelled and deemed as new design which has not been already approved by the statutory authorities, are manufactured, one unit from this series shall be selected and subjected to the following tests for 24 hours to establish its mechanical reliability and performance characteristics. Once it is approved, all engines of this series shall not be subjected to type testing again: a) Construction, shape and dimensional turers' data ( 7.1 ), b) Starting test ( 7.2 ),
*Performance requirements for general purposes ( up to 20 +Performance requirements for general purposes ( above 20 $Methods of tests for internal tant speed engines and selection

4.1 The object of the tests is to verify the performance

test according to manufac-

for constant speed compression ignition (diesel) engines kW ). for constant speed compressio? jgnition (diesel) engines kW ). combustion engines: Part 7 Governing tests for consof engines for use with electrical generators. U ~ I)

5

IS:8013 -1985 c) Minimum speed test at no load ( 7.3 ), d) Partial load operation test ( 7.3 ), e) Full load and overload operation test ( 7.3 ), f) Governor performance test ( 7.4 ), g) Non-supercharging operation test ! ( if agreed manufacturer and the purchaser ) ( 7.5 ), h) Overhaul inspection ( 7.6 ), j) Re-assembly inspection ( 7.7 ), and k) Marking inspection ( 7.8 ). 4.3 Routine Test - The following tests shall be carried out for the engines which have already passed the type tests and which are from the same manufacturer and are of the same design: a) Load test, b) Fuel consumption test, and c) Governing test. 4.4 On-Board Tests - For every new design of diesel engines manufactured, one unit from the series shall be selected and subjected to a series of test as given in 8 to establish its suitability as a propulsion machinery for fishing vessels. 5. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR CONDUCTING TESTS 5.1 If the site for conducting type tests is not specified in the contract, these tests shall be carried out at the premises of the manufacturer or the supplier. 5.2 When tests are conducted at the premises of the manufacturer or supplier, he shall be responsible for providing all the materials, measuring instruments, fuel oil, lubricating oil and the required personnel. 5.3 When tests are conducted at the permises of the purchaser, he shall provide necessary help and equipment for installing the apparatus. Instruments, other than those supplied with the machine, required for conducting the tests shall be provided by the manufacturer or the supplier. This does not include supply of dynamometer and such other instruments for measurement of power. 5.4 When tests are conducted at the premises of the purchaser, these shall be carried out immediately after initial commissioning of the engine. The initial csmmissioning of the engine shall be carried out by the manufacturer's or supplier's representative within a pe,rjod of one month from the date of the receipt of the engine at the purchaser's end, unless otherwise agreed upon. * *I 6 to between the

IS : 8013

l

1985

5.5 When tests are conducted at the premisea of the purchaser, the manufacturer or supplier shall always have the right to conduct, prior to these tests, an examination of the engine or the complete unit and to carry out preliminary tests at his own cost to ensure that the engine or the complete unit is in perfect working condition. If the fuel oil of the characteristics specified in the contract is not used during the tests, the effect of this deviation and the possible correction factor to be used shall be specified by the manufacturer or supplier before the tests. 5.6 If during type tests any major repair/replacement complete test shall be repeated. is necessary, the

5.7 If the ambient conditions at the test site are different from those specified in the contract, the corrections shall be made in accordance with 4 of 1s : 10000 ( Part 2 )-1980*+ 5.7.1 In case of pressure charged engines, the derating to be applied shall be as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 6. MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 6.1 For tests, the manufacturer's standard calibrated instruments shall be used in parallel with the instruments delivered with the engine. 6.2 The measuring Standards. instruments shall comply with the relevant Indian

6.3 It shall be possible to check the readings of the recording during working.

instruments

6.4 The speed of the engine shall be determined preferably by means of a stroke counter or a revolution counter over a measured period of time particularly when the speed is a factor in the power determination. When such an instrument is not available, or applicable, the speed may be determined by means of a calibrated tachometer. 7. TYPE TESTS

7.1 Construction, Shape and Dimension Test - The construction, shape and dimension of the completed engine shall be checked and compared with the manufacturer's data. 7.2 Starting Test - The engine shall be tested in accordance Appendix B and shall satisfy the requirements specified in 3.2. with

7.3 Load Test - The engine shall be subjected to no load, partial load, full load and overload test in accordance with Appendix C.
*Methods tions. of tests for internal combustion engines: Part' L? Standard reference condi-

7

IS : 8013

- 1985 1 and the

engine

The time of continuous operation shall conform to Table shall satisfy the requirements specified in 3.2 and 3.3.
TABLE 1 LOAD TEST ( Clause 7.3) Full load 11 hours

Load Continuous

l/4, 214, and 314 load rated Each 20 min.

loo/, over load 1 hour

output 01' engine

7.4 Governor Performance Test below and shall satisfy the requirements

The engine shall be tested as given, specified in 3.5. of the governor, by comthe maximum revolution

7.4.1 In order to ascertain the characteristics pletely releasing the load of the engine suddenly, speed shall be measured by the governor test.

7.5 Non-supercharging Test - The engine shall be operated for 20 minutes as follows and shall satisfy the requirements specified in 3.6. 7.5.1 Non-supercharging Test or Supercharger Cut-of Test - For the engine equipped with exhaust gas turbo-charger, the following test shall be carried out upon agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. For the same type of engines, however, the test shall be carried out for only one engine, and may be omitted for the others. i) Non-supercharging test - The test shall be made while the supercharger is disconnected or locked as recommended by the manufacturer. 7.6 Overh'aul Inspection - After the completion of tests given in 7.1 to 7.5, the engine shaIl be subjected to the overhaul inspection as follows and there shall be shown no abnormality. 7.6.1 On completion of the trial, the overhaul inspection shall be carried out during the overhauling of the engine, and the working parts shall be insoected in accordance with Table 2. The range and extent cf inspection i$ sub.jected to the prior agreement between the manufacturer and purchaser. The major working parts of the engine shall be inspected for the following, and the principal dimensions shall be recorded:
Contact conditions of sliding surface,

Oil clearance and expansion effecectof fit on fitting parts, Wear on sliding surfaces, of gas leakage, keys and locking Evidence Whether

allowance

of sliding

surfaces

and

I'
devices properly secured,

u

.er,

8

tsr8013-1985 f) Evidence of oil or water leakage at joints, and g) Any other part where inspection is considered necessary.
TABLE 2 OVERHAUL INSPECTION

( Clause 7.6.1 )

It:,
(1)
1.

COMPONENT

INSPEOTION METHOD (3)

REXABKS (4) When liner is not fitted

(2) Cylinder Cylinder Cylinder Piston liner head

2.
3.

4.

Inspect internal surface Inspect internal surface of liner in fitted condition Remove all valves and inspcet essential parts Dismantle and inspect surface

For oil cooled piston; select a piston and inspect inside surface, if necessary

5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. II. 12. 13. 14.

Piston

ring

Piston pin Piston pin bearing metal Crank pin bcaring metal Connecting rod Bolts of connecting rod Crankshaft Main bearing metal Inlet andexhaust valve Valve gears (cam, camshaft and camshaft bearing) injection/ Fuel nozzle Driving gear and chains Engine driven water pump of air blower Oil filter Turbocharger

Dismantle and inspect surface Draw out and inspect surface Inspect bearing surface Inspect bearing surface

Inspect surface Draw out the bolts and inspect surface Inspect the crankshaft surface Inspect bearing surface Dismantle and over Inspect working position Make an injection inspect surface all in

-

-

15. 16. 17.

test measure

Inspect surface and back lash of gears During overhauling

18. 19.

Dismantle element Inspect

and

inspect

filter

1) ` .

9

`i

7.7 Reassembly Inspection - Reassembly follows and there shall be no abnormality.

inspection shall be done as

7.7.1 Reassembly Inspection After Overhaul Inspection - When required, in order to ascertain the condition of reassembled engine after overhauling, the reassembly inspection ( after overhaul inspection ) shall be carried out and the following items shall be,confirmed by running the engine for a duration of 30 minutes at full load. a) b) c) d) No leakage in cooling water and lubricating oil system, No leakage of high pressure gas through gasket joints, No sign of overheating in moving parts, and Engine runs smoothly and maintains good governor performance.
Inspection TEST -

7.8 Marking 8. ON-BOARD

The markings shall conform to 9.

The speed of the fishing vessel at various engine revolution ( rpm ) up to and including the rated speed, starting from 50 percent of the rated speed, shall be measured in free running conditions without any external load.
8.1 Speed Test -

8.2 Fishing-cum-Endurance Test - The engine shall be tested under actual working conditions, that is, during the fishing operation, for a period of 1 000 hours, to be completed within 6 months. Fishing operation shall be carried out on the designated vessel and the following data shall be recorded:

4 Base of operation; b) Date and time of starting and stopping the engine; 4 Type and size of vessel used; 4 Type, size and description of the fishing gear used; e) Depth of operation; f-1 Length of trawl warp released; lid Speed of the vessel while fishing; h) Engine speed while fishing; .i) Tension on each trawl warp; and k) Duration of each haul and mass of catch.
the maxi8.2.1 The engine shall, as far as practicable, be .- loaded _. to -_ __^^^ mum possible extent at continuous power as defined in IS : 1WUU ( Part 1 )-1980*. `'
combustion engines: Part 1 Glossary of terms relating 1

*Methods of tests for internal to test methods.

L

10

1s : 8013 -`19&5 8.3 Performance on Reversing Operation - In the reversing operation test, the engine shall operate smoothly and continuously for 30 minutes without any adjustment during the operation. 9;. MARKING 9.1 The following particulars the engine: shall be marked on a prominent place of

4 Maximum continuous b) Manufacturer's name 4 Model No. and Serial d) Year of manufacture.

rated output ( in kW ) at particular speed, or trade-mark, No. of engine, and

9.1.1 Marine diesel engines may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.
NOTE - The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.4)

A

DATA AND DETAILS OF SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS BE SUPPLIED TO THE ENGINE MANUFACTURER A-l. Main parameters of fishing vessel.

TO

A-2. Power requirement for propulsion, trawling and other ( where necessary lighting loads are also to be included ).

auxiliaries

A-3. Specific instruction to provide a bilge pump as an accessory to the engine. The bilge pump capacity to be mentioned depending on the parameters of the vessel. I'

Is : 8013 - 1985 A-4. Specific instructions to provide an engine sump with an accessible draw-in cock and a connection to a hand pump for draining the oil sump. A-5. Details deration the temperature. likely to be ing could be of the cooling system and air intake system taking into consienclosed engine room space having a normal high ambient Efforts shall be made to indicate the highest temperature encountered in the engine room so that appropriate deratapplied to the engine for assessment. could

A-6. Acceptable vibration and noise levels so that the manufacturer suggest suitable foundation and shock absorbers, if required.

A-7. Test results when on-board test are conducted, with a view to help the manufacturers to improve the design as to be suitable for use on fishing vessel. A-8. Engine labrication not to fail under bad weather which the vessel is normally permitted to operate. conditions up to

A-9. Specific instruction for a positive engine starting arrangement.

APPENDIX ( CZausc 7.2 )
STARTING TEST

B

B-l. To ascertain the starting ability of the engine, the starting test shall be carried out, under no load condition at room temperature, as follows. The minimum starting pressure test, however, shall be made only when necessary. B-l.1 Hand Starting - It shall be ascertained that capable of being started manually by one or two persons. B-l.2 Compressed Air Starting the engine is

B-l.3 Ordinary Test - When the test is carried out using an air reservoir provided with the engine ( or a reservoir having the same capacity and pressure ), the engine shall start in the normal direction, in succession until the engine cannot be started any further, ancl the possible number of starts and the minimum starting pressure shall be ascrrtained. When an air reservoir of optional capacity is used, it is sufhcient to start the engine a few times to ascertain the starting ability.

IS:8013-1985
B-l.4 Minimum Starting Air Pressure Test - Using an air reservoir provided with the engine or a reservoir having the same capacity and pressure, and by increasing the air pressure by 0.5 kgf/cm2 ( 0.05 MPa )a from the initial air pressure of 5 kgf/cms ( 0.49 MPa ), the minimum starting pressure shall be ascertained. B-l.5 Electric Motor Starting - Starting the engine by pushing the starter button, the starting ability shall be ascertained and the electric current shall also be measured.

A,P,,PENDIK (~Czause7.3 ) I
LOAD. +EST

C

C-l. The load test; shall be carried out for 25 hours to ascertain the performance of ithe engine. The load shall be varied in stages, to l/4, 2/4 and 314 of maximum continuous output and to overload output. The revolution speed at each load shall be decided upon by agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser.

13

tNTERNATlONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS)
Base Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units Unit radian steradian Symbol rad st Definition 1 1 1 1 1 N = 1 kg.m/s' J = 1 N.m W = 1 J/s T = 1 Wu/m* S = 1 A/V V =l W/A Pa = 1 N/m* candela mole cd mol Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin Symbol m kg
S

A K

Supplementary Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Units

Derived

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux denslty Frequency Electric Pressure, conductance force stress Electromotive

Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 Wb = 1 V.s
1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1)

1
1

