**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 766 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to rubbing [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of 
Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS:766-1M8 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO RUBBING 

( First Revision ) 



Fiist Reprint JANUARY 1992 



UDC 677.016.474:535.686.1 



O Copyright 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 1 March 1989 



IS : 766-1988 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO RUBBING 

( First Revision ) 

0- FOREWORD 



0^1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 
July 1988, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Methods of Test Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and has been revised to align it with ISO 105/X - 
1984 Textile— Tests for colour fastness X12 
Coloxir fastness to rubbing', issued by the In- 
ternational Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) and also to incorporate changes in line 
with other standards on coloiu^ fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of con- 
siderable importance to the consumer. The fast- 
ness depends not only upon the natiu"e and the 
depth of shade of the dyestufi' used but also upon 
the nature of the fibre and the method of dyeing 
or printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing diflFerent fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly diflFerent results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for deter- 
mining coloxir fastness of textile materials to 
diflFerent agencies likely to eflFect change in colour 
is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for deter- 
mination of colour fastness of textile materials 
of all kinds and in all forms including textile floor 
coverings and other pile fabrics, to rubbing off 
and staining- other materials. The method is 
applicable to a laid textile floor covering or to 
a detached sample or yams. Two tests are made, 
one with a dry rubbing cloth and the other with 
a wet rubbing cloth. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 Specimens of the textile are rubbed with 
dry and wet rubbing clothes. Two alternative 
sizes of rubbing finger are specified, one for pile 
fabrics and the other for other textiles. The 
staining of the rubbing clothes is assessed with 
the grey scale. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine the conformity of a lot 
of coloured textile material to a specification 
shall be selected so as to be representative of the 
lot. 

3J! Sample drawn in compliance with the rele- 
vant material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fastness 
of the material in the lot shall be held to be re- 
presentative of the lot. 



4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Suitable vTesting Device — For determining 
the colour* fastness to rubbing. Such a device 
has one of two alternative sizes of rubbing finger, 
depending upon the type of textile to be tested 
as follows. 

4.1.1 For Pile Fabrics, Including Textile Floor 
Covering — A rubbing finger of 3-2 cm diameter 
and flat area of 2 • 5 cm diameter with a circular 
transition of 0-32 cm radius shall be used. The 
rubbing finger exerts a downward force of 22 N, 
moving to and fro in a straight line along a 10 cm 
track. 

Note — A suitable device is the crockmeter of the 
type developed by the American Association of Textile 
Chemists and Colourists (AATCC) — USA. 

4.1.2 For All Other Textiles — A rubbing 
finger comprising a cylinder of 1-6 cm diameter 
moving to and fro in a straight line along a 
10*0 cm track on the specimen with a downward 
force of 9 N shall be used. 

4.2 Grating of Stainless Steel Wire — 1 mm dia- 
meter and the width of mesh of about 20 mm. 

4.3 Rubbing Cotton Cloth — desized, bleached, 
without finish, cut into squares 5x5 cm. 

4.4 Grey Scale for Evaluating Stainii^ 



18:766-1988 



5. PREPARATION OF COMPOSITE 

SPECIMEN 

5.1 If the textile to be tested is a fabric or textile 
floor covering, draw from the sample two pieces 
each not less than 14 x 5 cm for dry rubbing and 
two 'pieces for wet rubbing. One specimen of 
each pair has the long direction parallel to the 
warp yarns (or in the direction of manufacture) 
and the other parallel to the weft or filling yarns 
( or at right angles to the direction of manufac- 
ture). 

5.2 If the textile to be tested is yarn or thread, 
knit or weave it into fabric to provide four speci- 
mens at least 14 x 5 cm, two for dry rubbing and 
two for wet rubbing. Alternatively,, prepare 
four specimens by forming a layer of parallel 
strands by wrapping it lengthways on a card- 
board rectangle of suitable dimensions. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 Fix the test specimen to the rubbing device 
by means of clamps such that the long direction 
of the specimens follows the track of the device. 
Test the specimens according to the procedure 
given in 6.3 and 6.4. 

6.2 When testing multicoloured textiles, care 
should be taken to position the specimens in such 
a way that all colours of the design are rubbed 
in the test. Alternatively, if the areas of colour 
are sufficiently large, more test specimens may be 
taken and individual colour assessed separately. 

63 Dry Rubbii^ — With the dry rubbing cloth 
flat in place over the end of the finger of the test- 
ing device, rub it to and fro in a straight line 
along a track 10 cm long on the dry specimen, 
10 times to and fro in 10 seconds^ with a down- 



ward force on the finger of 22 N or 9 N ( see 
4.1.1 and 4.1.2 ). 

Note — It is necessary to eliminate dyed fibres pulled 
out during rubbing and retained on the surface of the 
rubbing cotton clotih ; consider only the colouration due to 
staining by the dyestuff. 

6.4 Wet Rubbii^ — Repeat the test described 
in 6.3 with a fresh dry specimen and with a rub- 
bing cloth that has been wetted with water by 
placing it on the gating and dropping evenly 
on to it its own mass of water, or use any method 
to ensure a take up of about 100 percent. After 
rubbing, dry the cloth at room temperature 
{see Note under 6.3).- 

6.5 Assess the staining of the rubbing cotton 
clothes with the grey scale by the method pres- 
cribed in IS : 769 — 1982*. 

Note 1 — Difficulty may be exi>erienced in making 
the assessments of the degree of staining on the rubbing 
cloth when pile fabrics are tested using the 1 • 6 cm dia- 
meter finger due to heavier staining occurring on the cir- 
cumference of the stained area that is, haloing. The 
3-2 cm diameter rubbing finger will eliminate the haloing 
in many types of pile fabrics. Even with the use of tiie 
larger diameter rubbing finger, difficulty may be experi- 
enced in assessing staining when fabrics with high pile 
are tested. 

Note 2 — In fease of doubt in the assessment of colour 
fastness ratings by a single observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall average 
rating should be reported. 

7. REPORT 

7.1 Report, the numerical rating for dry staining 
and wet staining of the rubbing cotton cloth, for 
each direction of manufacture. 



♦Method for evaluating staining (first revision). 



Reprography Uait» BIS, New Delhi, India 



