MAT Aah IS 16332 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


vaqe are — as saat ag eh 
Wer at ATİ 


Automotive Vehicles — Strength of 
Superstructure of Large Passenger 
Vehicles 


ICS 43.040.60 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM SKİ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM AT, 9 qerqure WAL Art, we feeei-110002 
am MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2017 Price Group 5 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipments Sectional Committee, TED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 


The superstructure of the bus shall be so designed and constructed as to eliminate to the greatest possible extent 
the risk of injury to the passengers and operators in the event of an accident. This standard specifies the requirement 
of strength of the bus superstructure for the protection of passengers and operators of the bus. 


While formulating this standard, considerable assistance is derived from the following: 


ECE Regulation No. 66: Uniform provisions concerning the approval of Large Passenger Vehicles with 
regard to the Strength of their Superstructure — (Revision 2, including the amendments entered into 
force on October 16, 1995) Addendum 65: Regulation No. 66, Amendment 1, Supplement 1 to the 
original version of the Regulation — Date of entry into force: September 3, 1997 (Issue: 1 Jul/1999) 


AIS 031 with Amendment No. 1 — Automotive vehicles — The Strength of Superstructure of large 
passenger vehicles 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant placed retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value, in this standard. 


IS 16332 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — STRENGTH OF 
SUPERSTRUCTURE OF LARGE PASSENGER VEHICLES 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard applies to single-deck rigid or 
articulated vehicles designed and constructed for the 
carriage of more than 22 passengers, whether seated 
or standing in addition to the driver and crew. 


1.2 It does not apply to medium and high capacity 
vehicles designed and constructed for urban and sub- 
urban/city transport with area for standing passengers, 
to allow movement of passengers associated with 
frequent stops and the low capacity vehicles which are 
designed and constructed for urban and sub-urban/ city 
transport exclusively for carrying seated passengers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
9211 : 2003 Terms and definitions of weights of 
road vehicles other than 2 and 3 
wheelers (second revision) 
Method of determination of centre of 
gravity of automotive vehicles 


11849 : 1986 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Approval of a Vehicle — The approval of a vehicle 
type with regard to the construction features specified 
in this standard. 


3.2 Vehicle Type — A category of vehicles which do 
not differ essentially in respect of the constructional 
features specified in this standard. 


3.3 Passenger Compartment — The space intended 
for passengers’ use excluding any space occupied by 
fixed appliances such as bars, kitchenettes or toilets. 


3.4 Driver’s Compartment — The space intended for 
the driver’s exclusive use and containing the driver’s 
seat, the steering wheel, controls, instruments and other 
devices necessary for driving the vehicle. 


3.5 Vehicle Kerb Weight (MK) (kg) — The complete 
vehicle kerb weight as defined in IS 9211 with an 
addition of 75 kg for mass of the driver. 


3.6 Residual Space — The space to be preserved in 
the passenger compartment during and after the 
structure has been subjected to one of the tests 
prescribed in 6. 


3.7 Superstructure — The parts of a vehicle structure, 
which contribute to the strength of the vehicle in the 
event of a roll-over accident. 


3.8 Body Section — A section containing at least two 
identical vertical pillars on each side representative of 
a part or parts of the structure of the vehicle. 


3.9 Total Energy — The energy assumed to be 
absorbed by the complete structure of the vehicle. This 
may be determined as shown in C-4. 


4 APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL 


4.1 The application for approval of a vehicle type with 
regard to the strength of its superstructure shall be 
submitted by the vehicle/bus body manufacturer to the 
Test Agency. 


4.2 It shall be accompanied the under mentioned 
documents giving the following particulars: 


a) A detailed description of the superstructure 
of the vehicle type including its dimensions, 
configuration and constituent materials and 
its attachment to any chassis frame; 

b) Drawings of the vehicle and those parts of its 
interior arrangement which have an influence 
on the strength of the superstructure or on the 
residual space; 


c) The complete vehicle kerb weight (kg) as 
defined in IS 9211 (In the case of an 
articulated bus this information shall be given 
separately for the two rigid portions); 

d) The vehicle kerb weight for each axle (kg) as 
defined in IS 9211; 

e) The position of the centre of gravity of the 
unladen vehicle in the longitudinal, transverse 
and vertical directions as defined in IS 11849; 
and 


f) The maximum distance between the centre 
lines of the outboard passenger seats. 


IS 16332 : 2017 


4.3 The vehicle/bus body manufacturer may either offer 
a complete vehicle or one or more sections of the 
superstructure representative of the type to be approved 
shall be submitted to the Test Agency for conducting 
the approval tests unless the approval is to be conducted 
by means of calculation, in which case the calculation 
shall be submitted to the Test Agency. 


5 APPROVAL 


If the vehicle submitted for approval to this standard 
meets the requirements of 6, approval of that vehicle 
type shall be granted. 


6 GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


SPECIFICATIONS AND 


6.1 The superstructure of the vehicle shall be of 
sufficient strength to ensure that during and after it 
has been subjected to one of the methods of test or 
calculation prescribed in 7. 


6.1.1 No displaced part of the vehicle intrudes into 
the residual space, as specified in 7. 


6.1.2 No part of the residual space projects outside 
the deformed structure. 


6.2 The requirements of 6.1 shall apply to the vehicle 
including all its structural parts, members and panels 
and all projecting rigid parts such as luggage racks, 
on-the roof ventilation equipment, etc. However, 
bulkheads, partitions, rings or other members 
reinforcing the superstructure of the vehicle and fixed 
appliances such as bars, kitchenettes or toilets shall be 
ignored for the purposes of 6.1. 


6.3 In the case of an articulated vehicle each part of 
the vehicle shall comply with the requirements 
specified in 6.1. 


7 TEST METHODS 


7.1 Each type of vehicle shall be verified according to 
one of the following methods at the discretion of the 
manufacturer or according to an alternative method 
approved by the competent authority: 


a) A roll-over test on a complete vehicle in 
accordance with the procedure set out in 
Annex A. 

b) A roll-over test on a body section or sections 
representative of a complete vehicle in 
accordance with Annex B. 


c) A pendulum test on a body section or sections 


in accordance with Annex C. 


d) A verification of strength of superstructure by 
calculation in accordance with Annex D. 


7.2 If the methods prescribed in 7.1 (b) to 7.1 (d) cannot 
take account of a significant variation between one 
section of the vehicle and another, for example an air- 
conditioning installation on the roof, additional test 
methods or calculations shall be submitted to the Test 
Agency. In the absence of such additional information 
the vehicle may be required to undergo the method of 
test prescribed in 7.1 (a). 


8 RESIDUAL SPACE 


8.1 For the purpose of 6.1, the residual space means 
the volume within the passenger compartment which 
is swept when the transverse vertical plane defined in 
Fig. | a) is moved in a straight line or lines so that the 
point “R” in Fig. 1 a) passes from the “R” point of the 
rearmost outer seat, through the “R” point of every 
intermediate outer seat to the “R” point of the foremost 
outer passenger seat. 


8.2 The position of the “R” point shown in Fig. 1 b) 
shall be assumed to be 500 mm above the floor under 
the passengers” feet, 300 mm from the inside surface 
of the side of the vehicle and 100 mm in front of the 
seat back in the centre line of the outboard seats. 


9 INTERPRETATION OF TEST RESULTS 


If body sections are tested, the Test Agency for 
conducting the test shall ensure that the vehicle 
complies with the conditions specified in C-5, which 
contains requirements for the distribution of the main 
energy absorbing parts of the superstructure of a 
vehicle. 


10 MODIFICATIONS OF THE VEHICLE TYPE 
AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 


10.1 Every modification of the vehicle type shall be 
notified to the Test Agency which granted the type- 
approval. The Test Agency may then either, 


a) consider that the modifications made are 
unlikely to have an appreciable adverse effect 
and that in any case the vehicle still complies 
with the requirements; or 

b) require a further test report from the Test 
Agency. 

10.2 The criteria for extension of approval (CEA) are 
given in Annex E. 


IS 16332 : 2017 


Templates to be 
fixed on the floor 
of the vehicle 


CENTRE LINE 


OF THE VEHICLE 
> 
CENTRE nde 
OF THE SEAT 


NOTE — Section A-A of the vehicle in the vertical plane of the centre-line of the inboard seats 


1a) Laterally 


The foremost passenger seat of the vehicle 


1 b) Longitudinally 
All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fic. 1 RESIDUAL SPACE 


IS 16332 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
[Clause 7.1 (a)] 
ROLL OVER TEST ON A COMPLETE VEHICLE 


A-1 TEST CONDITION 


A-1.1 While the vehicle need not be in a fully finished 
condition it shall be representative of production 
vehicles in respect of vehicle kerb weight, centre of 
gravity and distribution of mass as declared by the 
vehicle/bus body manufacturer. 


A-1.2 Driver and passenger seats shall be placed with 
their backs, if adjustable, in their most upright position. 
The height of the seats, if adjustable, shall be the highest 
position. 


A-1.3 Every door and opening window of the vehicle 
shall be closed and latched but not locked. Windows 
and glazed bulkheads or screens may be glazed or 
unglazed at the applicant’s discretion. If they are 
unglazed an equivalent weight shall be imposed on the 
vehicle at the appropriate positions. 


A-1.4 Tyres shall be inflated to the pressure prescribed 
by the vehicle manufacturer and, if the vehicle has an 
air-spring suspension system, the air supply to the air 
springs shall be ensured. Any automatic levelling 
system shall be adjusted with the vehicle on a flat, 
horizontal surface to the level specified by the 


AZ 


HORIZONTAL 


TILTING 
PLATFORM 


STARTING PLANE 


manufacturer. Shock absorbers shall operate normally. 


A-1.5 Fuel, battery acid and other combustible, 
explosive or corrosive materials may be substituted by 
other materials provided that the conditions prescribed 
in A-1.1 are met. 


A-1.6 The impact area shall consist of concrete or other 
rigid material. 


A-2 TEST PROCEDURE (see Fig. 2) 


A-2.1 The vehicle shall be placed on a platform in order 
to be rolled over on one side. This side shall be specified 
by the manufacturer. 


A-2.2 The position of the vehicle on the platform shall 
be such that when the platform is horizontal. 


A-2.2.1 The axis of rotation is parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle. 


A-2.2.2 The axis of rotation is 0 - 200 mm from the 
vertical step between the two levels. 


A-2.2.3 The axis of rotation is 0 - 100 mm from the 
side of the tyre at the widest axle. 


AXIS OF TILTING 
0-100 mm 


H=800 mm 


HORIZONTAL 
LOWER PLANE 


CLA RPA AIA LAKE OA 


Fic. 2 ROLL OVER PLATFORM 


A-2.2.4 The axis of rotation is 0 - 100 mm below the 
horizontal starting plane on which the tyres stand. 


A-2.2.5 The difference between the height of the 
horizontal starting plane and the horizontal lower plane 
on which impact takes place shall be not less than 
800 mm. 


A-2.3 Means shall be provided to prevent the vehicle 
moving along its longitudinal axis. 


A-2.4 The test apparatus shall prevent the tyres from 
sliding sideways in the direction of roll-over by means 
of side walls. 


A-2.5 The test apparatus shall ensure the simultaneous 


IS 16332 : 2017 


lifting of the axles of the vehicle. 


A-2.6 The vehicle shall be tilted without rocking and 
without dynamic effects until it rolls over. The angular 
velocity shall not exceed 5° (0.087 rad/s). 


A-2.7 High-speed photography, deformable templates 
or other suitable means shall be used to determine that 
the requirement of 6.1 has been met. This shall be 
verified at not less than two positions, nominally at 
the front and rear of the passenger compartment, the 
exact positions being at the discretion of the technical 
service. Templates shall be fixed to substantially non- 
deformable parts of the structure. 


ANNEX B 
[Clause 7.1 (b)] 
ROLL-OVER TEST ON A BODY SECTION 


B-1 TEST CONDITIONS 


B-1.1 The body section shall represent a section of the 
unladen vehicle. 


B-1.2 The geometry of the body section, the axis of 
rotation and the position of the centre of gravity in the 
vertical and lateral directions shall be representative 
of the complete vehicle. 


B-1.3 The mass of the body section, expressed as a 
percentage of the vehicle kerb weight of the vehicle, 
shall be specified by the vehicle/bus body manufacturer. 


B-1.4 The energy to be absorbed by the body 
section, expressed as a percentage of the total energy 


which would be absorbed by a complete vehicle, shall 
be specified by the vehicle/bus body manufacturer. 


B-1.5 The percentage of total energy described in B-1.4 
shall not be less than the percentage of total kerb mass 
described in B-1.3. 


B-1.6 The test conditions specified in A-1.6 and C-2.1 
to C-2.6 shall apply. 


B-2 TEST PROCEDURE 


The test procedure shall be the same as the procedure 
described in Annex A, except that the body section 
described above shall be used instead of a complete 
vehicle. 


IS 16332 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
[Clause 7.1(c)] 
PENDULUM TEST ON A BODY SECTION 


C-1 ENERGY LEVEL AND DIRECTION OF 
IMPACT 


C-1.1 The energy to be transmitted to a particular body 
section shall be the sum of the energies declared by 
the manufacturer to be allocated to each of the cross- 
sectional rings included in that particular body section. 


C-1.2 The appropriate proportion of the energy 
prescribed in C-4 shall be applied to the body section 
by the pendulum such that at the moment of impact 
the direction of motion of the pendulum makes an angle 
of 2599 to the central longitudinal vertical plane of 
the body section. The precise angle within this range 
may be specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 


C-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


C-2.1 A sufficient number of tests shall be carried out 
for the Test Agency conducting the test to be satisfied 
that the requirement specified in 6.1 has been met. 


C-2.2 For the purpose of the test body sections shall 
have sections of the normal structure fitted between 
the pillars in relation to the floor, under frame, sides 
and roof. Sections of such items as luggage racks, 
ventilation ducting, etc, where fitted, shall also be 
included. 


C-2.3 Every door and opening window of the body 
section shall be closed and latched but not locked. 
Windows and glazed bulkheads or screens may be 
glazed or unglazed at the applicant’s discretion. 


C-2.4 Where appropriate seats may also be included, 
at the option of the manufacturer, in their normal 
positions in relation to the structure of the body section. 
The normal fixings and joints between all members 
and attachments shall be incorporated. The backrests, 
if adjustable shall be in their most upright position and 
the height of the seats, if adjustable shall be the highest 
position. 


C-2.5 The side of the body section to be impacted shall 
be at the discretion of the manufacturer. Where more 
than one body section is required to be tested both shall 
be impacted on the same side. 


C-2.6 High speed photography, deformable templates 
or other suitable means shall be used to determine that 
the requirement specified in 6.1 has been met. 
Templates shall be fixed to a substantially non- 
deformable part of the structure. 


C-2.7 The body section to be tested shall be firmly 


and securely attached to the mounting frame through 
the cross-bearers or parts which replace these in such 
a way that no significant energy is absorbed in the 
support frame and its attachments during the impact. 


C-2.8 The pendulum shall be released from such a 
height that it strikes the body section at a speed of 
between 3 and 8 m/s. 


C-3 DESCRIPTION OF THE PENDULUM 


C-3.1 The striking face of the pendulum shall be made 
of steel, or plywood 20 + 5 mm thick, and the mass of 
the pendulum shall be evenly distributed. Its striking 
face shall be rectangular and flat, having a width of 
not less than the width of the body section being tested 
and a height of not less than 800 mm. Its edges shall 
be rounded to a radius of curvature of not less than 
15 mm. 


C-3.2 The body of the pendulum shall be rigidly 
attached to two rigid bars. The axis of the bars shall be 
not less than 3 500 mm from the geometric centre of 
the body of the pendulum. 


C-4 CALCULATION OF TOTAL ENERGY (E*) 
(see Fig. 3) 


C-4.1 Assumptions 
a) The shape of the cross-section of the body is 
assumed to be rectangular. 
b) The suspension system is assumed to be 
rigidly fixed. 
c) The movement of the body section is assumed 
to be pure rotation about point “A”. 


C-4.2 Calculation of Total Energy (E*) 


If the fall of the centre of gravity (h) is determined by 
graphical methods, E* may be taken to be given by 
the formula: 


E* = 0.75 M.g.h. (Nm) 


Alternatively, E” may be calculated by the formula: 


Es =0.75 M.g. 
2. 
“lm “ŞE 08 408 İİ (Nm) 
2 “DH H 


M = vehicle kerb weight of the vehicle, in kg; 


g = 9.8 m/s’; 
W = overall width of the vehicle, in m; 


H, = height of the centre of gravity of the unladen 
vehicle, in m; and 


H = height of the vehicle, in m. 


C-5 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 
DISTRIBUTION OF THE MAIN ENERGY 
ABSORBING PARTS OF THE 
SUPERSTRUCTURE 


C-5.1 A sufficient number of tests shall be carried out 
for the Test Agency to be satisfied that the complete 
vehicle meets the requirements of 6.1. This shall not 
necessarily require more than one test. 


C-5.2 Calculations based on data obtained from a test 
on a body section may be used to demonstrate the 
acceptability of another body section which is not 
identical with the body section already tested, if it has 
many structural features in common with it. 


C-5.3 The vehicle/bus body manufacturer shall declare 
which pillars of the superstructure are considered as 
contributing to its strength and shall also declare the 
amount of energy (£,) that each pillar is intended to 
absorb. These declarations shall meet the following 
criteria: 


a) 


i=m 


SESE 
izl 


where m is total number of declared pillars. 


b) 
YE, > 0.4E* 
izl 


where n is the number of declared pillars forward of 
the centre of gravity of the vehicle. 


where p is the number of declared pillars to the rear of 
the centre of gravity of the vehicle 


c) 1,2041, 

d) 1,>041, 

525 
dmin 


IS 16332 : 2017 


This shall apply only where d,,,, is greater than 
0.8 x maximum deflection permitted without intrusion 
of the residual space. 


where 


E, = declared amount of energy that can be 
absorbed by ith pillar of the superstructure. 


Ep = declared amount of energy that can be 
absorbed by the ith pillar forward of the 
centre of gravity of the vehicle. 


Eş = declared amount of energy that can be 
absorbed by the ith pillar to the rear of the 
centre of gravity of the vehicle. 


E* = total energy to be absorbed by the complete 
structure of the vehicle. 


daa, = greatest amount of deflection measured in 
the direction of impact of any section of the 
body structure after it has absorbed its own 
declared impact energy. 


d,,,, = least amount of deflection, measured in the 
direction of impact and at the same point on 
the bay as d,,,,, of any section of the body 
structure after it has absorbed its own 
declared impact energy. 
L = pa (Ezlr) 
F izn 
izl El 
VVeighted mean distance of the declared 
pillars in front of the centre of gravity of the 
vehicle 
26657 
R=" Sepp 
2 Exp 
Weighted mean distance of the declared pillars to the 
rear of the centre of gravity of the vehicle 


where 

İş = distance from the centre of gravity of the 
vehicle of the ith pillar forward of the centre 
of gravity. 

İ, = distance from the centre of gravity of the 
vehicle of the ith pillar rearward of the centre 
of gravity. 

İk = distance of the front of the vehicle from the 
centre of gravity of the vehicle. 

I, = distance of the rear of the vehicle from the 


centre of gravity of the vehicle. 


IS 16332 : 2017 


Fic. 3 ROLL OVER PosITION 


Fic. 4 PosITION OF CENTER OF GRAVITY OF VEHICLE 


IS 16332 : 2017 


ANNEX D 
[Clause 7.1.(d)] 
VERIFICATION OF STRENGTH OF SUPERSTRUCTURE BY CALCULATION 


D-1 A superstructure or sections of a superstructure 
may be shown to meet the requirement specified in 6.1 
by a calculation method approved by the Test Agency 
for conducting the tests. 


D-2 If the structure is likely to be subject to deformations 
beyond the elastic limit of the materials used then the 
calculations shall simulate the behaviour of the structure 
when undergoing large plastic deformations. 


D-3 The Test Agency for conducting the tests may 
require tests to be carried out on joints or parts of the 
structure to verify the assumptions made in the 
calculation. 


D-4 PREPARATIONS FOR CALCULATION 


D-4.1 Calculations cannot be started until the structure 
has been analyzed and a mathematical model of it 
produced. This will define the separate members to be 
considered and identify the points at which plastic 
hinges may develop. The dimensions of the members 
and the properties of material used must be stated. 
Physical tests must be made on the hinge points to 
determine the force (moment of rotation) - deformation 
characteristics in the plastic mode as this is essential 
data for the calculations. The strain rate and the 
dynamic yield stress appropriate for this strain rate must 
be determined. If the calculation method will not 
indicate when a significant fracture will occur it will 


be essential to determine, by experiment, separate 
analyses or appropriate dynamic tests that significant 
fractures will not occur. The assumed distribution of 
loading along the length of a vehicle shall be stated. 


D-4.2 The calculation method shall include the 
deformations up to the elastic limits of the materials 
followed by the identification of where plastic hinges 
will form and the subsequent formation of other plastic 
hinges unless the position and sequence of formation 
of plastic hinges is known from previous experience. 
The method shall accommodate the changes of 
geometry of the structure that take place, at least up to 
the stage where the deformations have passed the 
acceptable limits. The calculations shall simulate the 
energy and the direction of impact which would occur, 
if that particular superstructure were to be submitted 
to the roll-over tests prescribed in Annex C. The validity 
of the calculation method shall have been established 
by comparison with the results of physical tests, which 
need not necessarily have been made in connection 
with the vehicle now being approved. 


5 TESTS OF SECTIONS OF SUPER- 
STRUCTURE 


When a calculation method is used for a section of the 
complete superstructure, the same conditions shall 
apply as stated above for the complete vehicle. 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 10.2) 
CRITERIA FOR EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 


E-1 The criteria for extension of approval (CEA) is as given below: 


Parameter Change Test Required (Yes/No) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Roll Over test 
Body mountings on chassis: 
a) Number of mountings a) Decreased a) Yes 
b) Quality of fasteners b) Superior quality or equivalent b) No 
c) Position of mountings c) Any change c) Yes 
Pillar pitch a) Increase a) Yes 
b) Decrease b) No 
Number of gussets at joints Increase No 
Number of reinforcements Increase No 
Cross-sectional area of the body structure Increase No 
Sheet metal thickness with same material Increase No 
Sheet materials Superior quality or equivalent No 
Centre of gravity Increase more than 10 percent Yes 
Total energy Increase more than 10 percent Yes 


9 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 06 (0741). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.I.T. Scheme VIIM, V.I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches; AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


