lS7155(Part6):1990 (Reaffirmed 1999)

YM

6 rrmfti *T am, ~lfgTw~T d? tihv~
( %prr ~;TemJ )

Indian Standard

CODEOFRECOMMENDEDPRACTICE.FOR CONVEYORSAFETY
PART 6 SELECTION, TRAINING ( AND SUPERVISION OF OPERATORS

First Revision )

UDC

621'867'007'2

: 614'8 : 006'76

@

BIS 1990

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1990

Price Group 1

Conveyors,

Vertical Hoists and Bucket Elevators

Sectional Committee,

HMD 06

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 6 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 20 February 1990 after the draft finalized by the Conveyors, Vertical Hoists and Bucket Elevators Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. For safety of operators and those of conveyors it Conveyor safety includes safety of operators. The operators should be shall be necessary that suitable personnel handle/operate the conveyors. selected by a well defined procedure which may vary from one organization to another. After selection the operators may be trained and supervised suitably to achieve the maximum associated The detailed scheme of training, duration, methods which may include with safe WOI king habits. number of trainees in batch, etc, theoretical instructions associated with practical demonstrations, may be decided by the organisation depending upon its needs and requirements. The refresher courses, which may be of shorter duration than the first course, may be provided at suitable intervals. This may keep aware and awake the operators about safe operation of conveyors. IS 7155 : 1974 `Code of practice for conveyor safety' was published in 1974. Based on the experience gained in the field and to incorporate more specific safety requirements for various types of conveyors, the revision of IS 7155 has been taken up in various parts. This Part 6 of the standard is one of the series of Indian Standards for conveyor safety. The other parts of the standard are: Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 4 5 7 General information General safety requirements Belt conveyors and feeders Vibrating conveyors Apron conveyors/apron feeders Inspection and maintenance to AS CZ 15-1971 `SAA conveyor code of recommended practice

In the preparation of this standard reference has been made safety code' issued by the Standards Association of Australia.

IS 7155 ( Part 6 ) : 1990

Indian Standard

CODEOFRECOMMENDEDPRACTICEFOR CONVEYORSAFETY
PART 6 SELECTIQN, TRAINING ( 1 SCOPE 1.1 This AND SUPERVISION OF OPERATORS

First Revision )
3.2 Clear instructions shall be given that guards or safety devices ( electrical and mechanical ) shall not be tampered with, removed or altered in any way, and that adjustable guards shall be readjusted only by an authorised person. The operator's knowledge on the use of the conveyor and the precautions to be taken shall be regularly checked after he has been instructed on the above requirements. 4 SUPERVISION 4.1 A conveyor operator shall be closely supervised by a person with thorough knowledge including the related regulations of the conveyor until the operator shows that he is fully conversant with his duties. Continuing supervision of conveyor operators is also necessary, however, to ensure that safe practices are being followed and the conveyors are working in a safe and proper manner. 5 SAFE OPERATING PROCEDURES

standard ( Part 6 ) covers specific requirements regarding selection, training and supervision of operators for safe operation of conveyors.

1.2 General information and the general safety requirements for conveyors are given in IS 7155 ( Part 1 ) : 1986 `Code of practice for conveyor safety: Part 1 General information' and IS 7155 ( Part 2 ) : 1986 `Code of practice for conveyor safety: Part 2 General safety requirements' respectively and a reference to these standards may be useful during the selection, training and supervision of conveyor operators. 2 SELECTION
2.1 While selecting operators for conveyors, due regard shall be given to the physical condition and maturity of the applicants and their aptitude for the work to be done.

3 TRAINING 3.1 During the training of conveyor operators, particular care shall be taken to ensure that each operator understands the safe operation of the conveyor and the following safety precautions:

5.1 Besides statutory and other requirements relating to safety in general specific attention of the operators shall be drawn to observe the following relating to conveyor installations and where the operator observe any deficiency in these, he shall report to the appropriate authority for immediate remedial action: a) All starting and stopping controls shall be clearly marked. The area around these devices shall be kept free of obstruction to permit ready access to them and a clear view of them at all times. b) The area around all loading and unloading points on the conveyors shall be kept clear of obstructions at all times. c) No `riding' shall be permitted on a conveyor at any time. d) No maintenance or reDair work shall be carried out while a conveyor is in operation. In every case the power shall be disconnected and the starting control shall be positively locked in the open or stop position before such work is commenced. A `shut-down' permission shall be taken prior to commencing any maintenance/repair work. 4 Before restarting a conveyor that has stopped due to an overload, the reason 1

a) The method of stopping and starting
conveyor; the course of normal working; practices,

the

b) The hazards which are known to arise in 4 The hazards
liable to arise from in attention and misuse; bad

d) The purpose of the guard or safety device, 4

f)

and how the guard or device may fail; The necessity for immediately informing the person in charge if any fault(s) or defect(s) arise, and the danger to the operator in attempting to correct any fault; The ability to recognize overloading or abnormal loading conditions and the required corrective actions; and The ability meticulously system. to understand and follow any established reporting

d

IS 7155 ( Part 6 ) : 1990 shall be ascertained and the stoppage cleared before restarting. The starting control shall be locked out before any attempt is made to remove the cause of an overload. No overload or safety control shall be removed from the conveyor. Precautions shall be taken to prevent anyone, excepting a competent authorized person, from adjusting or tampering with the adjustment of such control. All persons working on or near a conveyor shall be instructed regarding the location and operation of stopping control. h) At no time a conveyor be used for a purpose other than one for which it was designed, and neither it shall be loaded in excess of its safe working load. j) Good housekeeping at all times. shall be maintained

f)

d

k) Operators shall not wear loose clothing which may cause a trapping hazard.

I
Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
I

I I

I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institutiou established under the Bureau ofIndian Standards Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. HMD 06 ( 5133 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone t 331 01 31 331 13 79 37 86 62 2 1843 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andhari ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches
: AHMADABAD.

COIMBATORE, HYDERABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANAN

THAPURAM

Printed

at Swatantra

Bhatat Press, Delhi,

India

