Indian Standard 


aema eredi cn fen get ch 

wu H difa EIS Wa sik 

seggen fats sfr cena 
om fem fuferex — farf 


Cylinders for on-Board Storage 
of Compressed Gaseous 
Hydrogen and Hydrogen Blends 
as a Fuel for Automotive 
Vehicles — Specification 


ICS 23.020.30; 43.060.40 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM emu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
9 HAF WS, 9 erue AHL HM, Ae ferct-110002 
vu MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2018 Price Group 11 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


Cylinders for on-board storage of compressed gaseous hydrogen and hydrogen blends as fuels for automotive 
vehicle service are required to maintain or improve the level, of safety currently existing for automotive vehicle 
applications. These requirements are achieved by, 


a) specifying service conditions precisely and comprehensively as a firm basis for both cylinder design and 
use; 


b) usingan appropriate method to assess cyclic pressure fatigue life and to establish allowable defect sizes 
in metal tanks or liners; 


c) requiring design qualification tests; 

d) requiring non-destructive testing and inspection of all production cylinders; 

e) requiring destructive tests on cylinders and tank material taken from each batch of cylinders produced; 
f) requiring manufacturers to specify the acceptable in-service damage levels for their design; and 

g) requiring manufacturers to specify as part of their design, the safe service conditions for their cylinders. 


Designs meeting the requirements of this Indian Standard, 


1) will have a fatigue life that exceeds the expected service; and 

2) will demonstrate appropriate strength and durability for expected service conditions. 
Owners and users of cylinders should note that cylinders should note that cylinders designed to this standard are 
to operate safely, if used in accordance with specified service conditions. It is the responsibility of the owners and 
users to ensure that cylinders are periodically tested as per norms laid down in Gas Cylinder Rules, 2016 as 


amended from time to time and as enforced by the statutory authority. While implementing this standard, the 
manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with statutory regulations. 


In the formulation this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ISO/TS 15869 : 2009 *Gaseous 
hydrogen and hydrogen blends — Land vehicle fuel tanks’. 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
1 kgf/cm?- 98.066 5 kPa (kilopascal) = 10 m of water column (WC) 
0.098 066 5 MPa 


= 0.980 665 bar 
Pressure 1Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard 1s complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


CYLINDERS FOR ON-BOARD STORAGE OF 
COMPRESSED GASEOUS HYDROGEN AND 
HYDROGEN BLENDS AS A FUEL FOR AUTOMOTIVE 
VEHICLES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for 
refillable cylinders of water capacity not exceeding 
500 litre intended only for the on-board storage of high- 
pressure compressed gaseous hydrogen or hydrogen 
blends on automotive vehicles. This standard is 
applicable for cylinders of steel, aluminium or non- 
metallic construction material, using any design or 
method of manufacture suitable for its specified service 
conditions. This standard applies to the following types 
of cylinder designs: 


a) Type1— Metal cylinders; and 


b) Zype3 — Fully wrapped composite 
cylinders with a metal liner. 


1.2 This standard is not applicable for cylinders used 
for solid, liquid hydrogen or hybrid cryogenic high- 
pressure hydrogen storage applications. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

101 Methods of sampling and test of 
paints, varnishes and related 

products 
(Part 3/Sec 2) : Tests on paint film formation, 
1989 Section 2 Film thickness (third 

revision) 
(Part 5/Sec 2) : Mechanical test, Section 2 Flexi- 
1988 bility and adhesion (third revision) 
(Part 8/Sec 2) : Methods of sampling and test for 
1990 paints, varnishes and related 


products — Tests for pigments and 
other solids, Section 2 Pigments 
and non-volatile, matter (third 
revision) 


IS No. Title 
1500 (Part 1) : 2013 Metallic materials — Brinell 
hardness test: Part 1 Test method 
(fourth revision) 
Metallic materials — Tensile 
testing at ambient temperature 
(third revision) 
1757 (Part 1) : 2014 Metallic material — Charpy 
pendulum impact test : Part 1 Test 
method (third revision) 
Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification (third revision) 
Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first 
revision) 
7285 (Part 2): 2017 Refillable seamless steel gas 
cylinders — Specification : Part 
2 Quenched and tempered steel 
cylinders with tensile strength less 
than 1 100 MPa (112 kgf/mm?) 
(fourth revision) 
Transportable gas cylinders — 
Compatibility of cylinder and 
valve materials with gas contents: 
Part 4 Test methods for selecting 
metallic materials resistant to 
hydrogen embrittlement 
Cylinders for on board storage of 
compressed natural gas as a fuel 
for automotive vehicle — 
Specification (first revision) 
Composite cylinders for on board 
storage of compressed natural gas 
(CNG) as a fuel for automotive 
vehicle — Specification 
Refillable transportable seamless 
aluminium alloy gas cylinders — 
Specification (first revision) 
Non-destructive examination of 
polymer based composite 
materials — Code of practice 
Hydrogen fuel — Product 
specification : 


1608 : 2005 


3224 : 2004 


7241 : 1981 


IS/ISO 11114 
(Part 4) : 2005 


15490 : 2017 


15935 :2011 


15660 : 2017 


15643 : 2006 


16061 


IS 16735 : 2018 


IS No. 
(Part 1) : 2013 


Title 
All applications except proton 
exchange membrane (PEM) fuel 
cells for road vehicles 
Proton exchange membrane 
(PEM) fuel cell applications for 
road vehicles 
Paints and varnishes — Bend test 
(cylindrical mandrel) 
Paints and varnishes — Cross-cut 
test 
Paints and varnishes — Pull-off 
test for adhesion 
Plastics — Methods of exposure 
to laboratory light sources — 
Part 1: General guidance 
Corrosion tests in artificial 
atmospheres — Salt spray tests 
Paints and varnishes — Rapid- 
deformation (impact resistance) 
tests — Part 2: Falling-weight test, 
small-area indenter 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


(Part 2) : 2016 


ISO 1519 : 2011 
ISO 2409 : 2013 
ISO 4624 : 2016 


ISO 4892 (Part 1) : 
2016 


ISO 9227 : 2017 


ISO 6272 (Part 2) : 
2011 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms given in 
IS 7241 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Authorized Inspection Authority — An inspection 
agency having qualification and wide experience in the 
field of design, manufacture and testing of gas cylinders 
and recognized by the Statutory Authority for inspection 
and certification of gas cylinders. 


3.2 Autofrettage — Pressure application procedure 
used in manufacturing composite cylinders with metal 
liners, which strains the liner past its yield point 
sufficient to cause permanent plastic deformation. This 
results in the liner having compressive stresses and the 
fibres having tensile stresses at zero internal pressure. 
Autofrettage is a part of the manufacturing operation 
and is conducted on the metal lined filament wound 
cylinders prior to hydrostatic pressure testing. 


3.3 Autofrettage Pressure — Pressure within the over- 
wrapped cylinder at which the required distribution of 
stresses between the liner and the over-wrap is 
established. 


3.4 Batch (of Composite Cylinders) — Group of 
cylinders successively produced from qualified liners 
having the same size, design, specified material of 
construction and process of manufacture. A batch shall 
bea group of not more than 200 cylinders plus cylinders 
for destructive testing. 


3.5 Batch (of Metallic Liners) — Group of liners 
successively produced having the same heat number, 
nominal diameter, wall thickness, design, specified 


material of construction, process of manufacture, 
equipment for manufacture and heat treatment, and 
conditions of time, temperature and atmosphere during 
heat treatment. The batch shall be a group of not more 
than 200 liner plus liners for destructive testing. 


3.6 Batch (of Non-Metallic Liners) — Group of non- 
metallic liners successively produced having the same 
nominal diameter, wall thickness, design, specified 
material of construction, process of manufacture. A 
batch shall be a group of not more than 200 liner plus 
liners for destructive testing or one shift of successive 
production, whichever is greater. 


3.7 Burst Pressure — The highest pressure reached 
in a cylinder during a burst test. 


3.8 Bursting Disc — A pressure relief device consisting 
of a disc that is in direct contact with the gas in cylinder 
and is designed to rupture between the pre-determined 
pressure limits. 


3.9 Commercial Heavy-duty Vehicles — Vehicles 
designed and constructed primarily for the carriage of 
goods etc. other than persons (for example trucks and 
trailers). 


3.10 Composite Cylinder — Cylinder made of resin- 
impregnated continuous filament wound over a metallic 
liner. 


NOTE — Composite cylinders using non-metallic liners are 
referred to as all-composite cylinders. 


3.11 Controlled Tension Winding — Process used in 
manufacturing hoop-wrapped composite cylinders with 
metal liners by which compressive stresses in the liner 
and tensile stresses in the over-wrap at zero internal 
pressure are obtained by winding the reinforcing 
filaments under significant high tension. 


3.12 Design Change — Change in the selection of 
structural materials, pattern of winding in Type 3 
cylinders or dimensional changes exceeding the 
tolerances as on the design drawings. 


3.13 Finished Cylinders — Completed cylinders 
which are ready for use, typical of normal production, 
complete with identification marks and external 
insulation, as specified by the manufacturer, but free 
from non-integral insulation or protection. 


3.14 Full Wrapped Cylinder — Cylinder with an 
overwrap having filament wound reinforcement both 
in the circumferential and axial direction of the cylinder 
over the entire liner including the domes. 


3.15 Gas Temperature — Temperature of gas in a 
cylinder 


3.16 Hydrogen Blend — A mixture of natural gas and 
more than 2 percent by volume of hydrogen. 


3.17 Hydrogen and Hydrogen-Blend Storage 
System — System on an automotive vehicle comprised 
of the cylinder and all closure devices (for example, 
shut-off valves, check valves and pressure activated and 
thermal activated pressure relief devices), as well as 
piping that contains hydrogen and hydrogen-blend at 
the working pressure. The pressure relief device and 
thermal relief device should be activated independently. 


3.18 Leakage — Release of gas through a crack, pore, 
unbounded or similar defect. 


3.19 Liner — Gas-tight inner shell, on which 
reinforcing fibres are filament wound to reach the 
necessary strength. Two types of liner are described in 
this Standard; metallic and non-metallic liners. Metallic 
liners are designed to share the load with the 
reinforcement and non-metallic liners do not carry any 
part of the load. 


3.20 Manufacturer — Person or organization 
responsible for the design, fabrication and testing of 
the cylinders. 


3.21 Overwrap — Reinforcement system of filament 
and resin applied over the liner. 


3.22 Passenger Vehicles — Vehicles designed and 
constructed primarily for the carriage of persons (for 
example, cars and buses). 


3.23 Pre-stress or Pre-stressing — The process of 
applying auto-frettage or controlled tension winding. 


3.24 Service Conditions — Conditions that the cylinder 
will experience in service and that include on-road 
exposure to environmental factors (road salt, acids, 
alkalies, temperature extremes) and expected usage (gas 
composition, impurities in the gas and any odorizing agent 
added in the gas as well as pressure cycles associated with 
filling and discharge during service and driving, static 
pressure associated with vehicle parking, etc). 


3.25 Service Life — Life, in years, during which the 
cylinders may safely be used in accordance with the 
standard service conditions. 


3.26 Settled Pressure — Gas pressure when a given 
settled temperature is reached. 


3.27 Settled Temperature — Uniform gas temperature 
after the dissipation of any change in temperature 
caused by filling. 


3.28 Stress Ratio — Stress in fibre at specified 
minimum burst pressure divided by stress in fibre at 
working pressure. 


3.29 Test Pressure — Test pressure means the internal 
pressure required for the hydrostatic test or hydrostatic 
stretch test of the cylinder. It shall be 1.5 x Working 
Pressure of cylinder except for Type 1 cylinders 


IS 16735 : 2018 


manufactured conforming to IS 7285 (Part 2). 


3.30 Thermally Activated Pressure Relief Device — 
Device that activates by temperature to release pressure 
and prevent a cylinder from bursting due to fire effects 
and that will activate regardless of cylinder pressure. 


3.31 Working Pressure — Settled pressure of 200 
bar at a uniform temperature of 15?C. 


4 SERVICE CONDITIONS 


4.1 General 


The specified service conditions provide the basis for 
the design, manufacturing, inspection, and testing of 
cylinders that are to be mounted on automotive vehicles 
and used to store compressed gaseous hydrogen or 
hydrogen blends at ambient temperatures for use as a 
fuel for these vehicles. 


The specified service conditions are also intended to 
provide information on how cylinders made in 
accordance with this standard may safely be used by, 


a) manufacturers of cylinders; 

b) owners of cylinders; 

c) users of cylinders. 

d) designers or contractors responsible for the 
installation of cylinders; 

e) designers or owners of equipment used to 
refuel automotive vehicle cylinders; 

f) suppliers of gaseous hydrogen and hydrogen 
blends; 

g) regulatory authorities that have jurisdiction 
over cylinder use; and 

h) cylinder mounting arrangement considered by 
the manufacturer at the time of design. 


The service conditions do not cover external loading 
that may arise from vehicle collisions, etc. 


For cylinders involved in collision or fire, guidance 
may be taken from Annex A. 


4.2 Service Life 


The service life for which cylinders are safe shall be 
specified by the cylinder manufacturer on the basis of 
use under service conditions specified therein. Periodic 
testing and recertification of cylinders to be done as per 
statutory requirements. Service life shall not be less than 
15 years. The maximum service life shall be 20 years. 


For metal cylinders and metal-lined cylinders, the 
service life shall be based upon the rate of fatigue crack 
growth. The ultrasonic inspection, or equivalent, of each 
cylinder or liner shall ensure the absence of flaws which 
exceed the maximum allowable size. The method shall 
as per Annex B. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


For composite cylinders with non-metallic, non-load 
bearing liners the service life shall be demonstrated by 
appropriate design methods, design qualification testing 
and manufacturing controls. 


4.3 Maximum Filling Pressure 


This standard is based upon a working pressure of 
200 bar settled at 15?C for hydrogen and hydrogen 
blends as a fuel with a maximum filling pressure of 
250 bar. Other working pressures may be 
accommodated by adjusting the relevant test pressures 
by the appropriate factor (ratio); for example, a 250 bar 
working pressure system will require test pressures to 
be multiplied by 1.25. Except where pressures have 
been adjusted in this way, the cylinder shall be designed 
to be suitable for the following pressure limits: 


a) A pressure that would settle to 200 bar at a 
settled temperature of 15?C; and 

b) The maximum pressure shall not exceed 250 
bar regardless of filling conditions or 
temperature. 


4.4 Filling Cycles 
4.4.1 General 


Cylinders shall be designed for filling gas at least 
1 000 cycles per year for maximum service life of 
20 years. For more stringent duty the number of cycles 
per year to be decided between user and manufacturer. 
For Calculation guidance may be taken from Annex C. 


4.5 Design Temperature 


Cylinders shall be designed to be suitable for use in 
the material temperature range —40?C to 85?C during 
filling and discharge. Charpy (V-notch) Impact test shall 
be conducted for steel cylinders and steel liners for 
cylinders, at —50 °C. 


4.6 Gas Composition 


Cylinders shall be designed to be filled with compressed 
gaseous hydrogen and/or hydrogen blends containing 
more than 2 percent hydrogen by volume, combined 
with dry natural gas. The gas composition shall comply 
with the following: 


a) Compressed hydrogen gas shall comply with 
the composition specified in IS 16061 (Part 1) 
or IS 16061 (Part 2); and 

b) Compressed natural gas (CNG) used in 
hydrogen blends shall comply with the dry gas 
composition limits specified in IS 15490. 


4.7 External Surfaces 


Cylinder external surfaces shall be designed to 
withstand mechanical and chemical exposure 


conditions as reflected in the type tests specified in 9. 
It shall also be designed to withstand inadvertent 
exposure to the following, consistent with installation 
being carried out in accordance with the instructions 
to be provided with the cylinder: 


a) Water, either by intermittent immersion or 
road spray; 

b) Salt, due to the operation of the vehicle near 
the ocean or where ice-melting salt used; 


c) Ultra-violet radiation from sunlight; 

d) Impact of gravel; 

e) Solvents, acids and alkalis, fertilizers; 

f) Automotive fluids, including petrol, hydraulic 
fluids, battery acid, glycol and oils; and 

g) Exhaust gases. 


4.8 Fire Effects 


Cylinders shall be protected from fire effects using non- 
reclosing thermally activated pressure relief devices or 
non-reclosing pressure-activated relief device. Non- 
reclosing pressure-activated pressure relief devices 
shall only be used in parallel with thermally activated 
pressure relief devices. Under no circumstances shall 
a thermally activated pressure relief device require the 
operation of the pressure activated pressure relief 
device in order to function. 


The fire protection of cylinders may also be 
supplemented by the use of thermal insulation. This 
arrangement shall be such that bare cylinders are 
available for periodic inspection. 


5 APPROVAL AND CERTIFICATION 


5.1 Inspection and Testing 


In order to ensure that the cylinders are in compliance 
with this standard they shall be subjected to design 
approval in accordance with 5.2.2, and inspection and 
testing in accordance with 9.2 or 9.4 as appropriate. 


5.2 Type Approval Procedure 
5.2.1 General 
Type approval consists of following parts: 


a) The design submission comprising of 
information furnished by the manufacturer to 
the inspector for appraisal/scrutiny and further 
recommendations to the statutory authority for 
approval, as detailed in 5.2.2. 

b) Prototype testing, comprising testing carried 
out under the supervision of the inspector. The 
cylinder material, design, manufacture and 
examination shall be proved to be adequate 
for their intended service by meeting the 


requirements of the prototype tests specified 
in 9.2 or 9.4 as appropriate for the particular 
cylinder design. or 

c) Alternative prototype testing may be carried 
out as per Annex D. 


The test data shall also document the dimension, wall 
thicknesses and weights of each of the test cylinders. 


5.2.2 Design Approval 


Cylinder designs shall be approved by the statutory 
authority. The following information shall be submitted 
by the manufacturer to the inspector for examination 
and further approval by statutory authority: 


a) Statement of service, in accordance with 5.2.3; 

b) Design data, in accordance with 5.2.4; 

c) Manufacturing data, in accordance with 5.2.5; 

d) Fracture performance and NDE (non- 
destructive examination) defect size, in 
accordance with 5.2.6; 

e) Specification sheet, in accordance with 5.2.7; 

f) Additional supporting data, in accordance 
with 5.2.8; and 

g) Quality system, in accordance with 5.2.9. 


5.2.3 Statement of Service 


The purpose of this statement of service is to guide the 
user and the installer of cylinders as well as to inform 
the inspector. The statement of service shall include, 


a) the name and address of the cylinder 
manufacturer; 

b) adescription ofthe cylinder design, including 
cylinder identification, working pressure 
(MPa), cylinder type, diameter (mm), length 
(mm), internal volume (1), empty weight (kg) 
and valve thread type; a statement that the 
cylinder design is suitable for use in the service 
conditions provided in 4; 

C) astatement of the maximum number of filling 
cycles for which the cylinder is designed; 

d) a statement of the service life; 

e) a specification for minimum in-service 
inspection and testing requirements; 

f) aspecification for the pressure relief devices; 

g) a specification for the support methods, 
protective covering and any other items 
required but not provided; 

h) adescription of the cylinder design; 

j) information regarding approval including date 
and approving agency. Periodic retesting 
interval; and 

k) any other information necessary to ensure the 
safe use and inspection of the cylinder. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


5.2.4 Design Data 
5.2.4.1 Drawings 
Drawings shall show at least the following: 


a) Title, reference number, date of issue, and 
revision numbers with dates of issue, 1f 
applicable; 

b) Reference to this standard and the cylinder 
type reference as Type 1 or Type 3 design; 

c) All dimensions complete with tolerances, 
including details of end closure shapes with 
minimum thicknesses and of openings; 

d) Mass, complete with tolerance of cylinders; 

e) Material specifications, complete with 
minimum mechanical and chemical properties 
or tolerance ranges and, for metal liners, the 
specified hardness range; 


f) Gas or gas blends that the cylinder is designed 
to carry; 

g) Working pressure of the; and 

h) Other data such as, auto-frettage pressure 
range, minimum test pressure details of the 
fire protection system and of any exterior 
protective coating. 


5.2.4.2. Stress analysis report 


When a stress analysis is required to be carried out, the 
stress analysis report shall be kept on file and shall 
include a table summarizing the calculated stresses. 


NOTE — Verification of the stress ratios shall be performed 
using strain gauges or an equivalent method. An example of an 
acceptable method is provided in Annex B. 


5.2.4.3 Material property data 


A detailed description of the materials and tolerances 
of the materials properties used in the design shall be 
provided. Test data shall also be presented 
characterizing the mechanical properties and the 
suitability of the materials for service under the 
conditions specified in 4. 


5.2.4.4 Fire protection 


The arrangement of the non-reclosing thermally 
activated pressure relief devices, and insulation, if 
provided, that will protect the cylinder from sudden 
rupture when exposed to the fire conditions in H-9 shall 
be specified by the cylinder manufacturer. Test data 
shall substantiate the effectiveness ofthe specified fire 
protection system. 


5.2.5 Manufacturing Data 


Details of all fabrication processes, tolerances, non- 
destructive examinations, type tests, batch tests and 
production tests shall be specified and kept on file by 


IS 16735 : 2018 


the cylinder manufacturer. The tolerances for all 
production process such as heat treatment, end forming 
resin-mix ratio, filament tension and speed for 
controlled tension winding, complete winding details, 
curing times and temperatures, and auto-frettage 
procedures, surface finish, thread details, acceptance 
criteria for ultrasonic scanning (or equivalent) and 
maximum lot sizes for batch tests shall also be specified. 


The manufacturer shall specify the burst pressure range 
for the design. In no case shall the minimum specified 
burst pressure be less than the minimum burst pressure 
specified in this standard. 


5.2.6 Fracture Performance and Non-destructive 
Examination (NDE) Defect Size 


The manufacturer shall specify the maximum defect 
size for non-destructive examination which will ensure 
leak before break (LBB) fracture performance and will 
prevent failure of the cylinder during its service life 
due to fatigue, or failure of the cylinder by rupture. 


The maximum defect size shall be established by a 
method suitable to the design; an example of a suitable 
method is given in Annex E. 


5.2.7 Specification Sheet 


A summary of the documents providing the information 
required in 5.2.2 shall be listed on a specification sheet 
for each cylinder design. The title, reference number, 
revision numbers and dates of original issue and version 
Issues of each document shall be given. All documents 
shall be signed or initialled by the issuer. The 
specification sheet shall be given a number and revision 
numbers if applicable, that can be used to designate 
the cylinder design and shall carry the signature of the 
engineer responsible for the design. Space shall be 
provided on the specification sheet for a stamp 
indicating registration of the design. 


5.2.8 Additional Supporting Data 


Additional data which would support the application, 
such as the service history of material proposed for 
use, or the use of a particular cylinder design in other 
service conditions shall be provided where applicable. 


5.2.9 Quality Management System 


The manufacturing plant shall operate a quality 
management system in compliance with national or 
international standards. 


5.3 Type Approval Certificate 


If the results of the design approval according to 5.2 
and the prototype testing according to 9.2 or 9.4 are 
satisfactory, the inspector shall foreword the test report 
for approval of the statutory authority (a typical 
example is given in the Annex F). 


6 MATERIALS 


6.1 Compatibility 


Materials used shall be suitable for the service 
conditions specified in 4. The design shall not have 
incompatible materials in contact with each other. All 
metallic materials in contact with hydrogen and 
hydrogen blends shall be compatible with hydrogen 
according to H-2. 


6.2 Metallic Cylinders and Liners 
6.2.1 Steel 


Steels for cylinders and liners shall conform to the 
materials requirements of 5.1 to 5.7 of IS 15490. 
Stainless steels are not considered for cylinders and liners. 


6.2.2 Aluminium 


Aluminium alloy shall conform to the material 
requirement of 5.1 of IS 15660. 


Aluminium alloys not covered by above may be used, 
provided that Hydrogen compatibility is demonstrated 
according to the method specified in H-2 


6.3 Resins 


The material for impregnation may be thermosetting 
or thermoplastic resins. Examples of suitable matrix 
materials are epoxy, modified epoxy, polyester and 
vinylester thermosetting plastics, as well as 
polyethylene and polyamide thermoplastic. 


The glass transition temperature of the resin material 
shall be determined in accordance with IS 15935. 


6.4 Fibre 


Structural reinforcing filament material types shall be 
glass fibre, aramid fibre or carbon fibre. If carbon fibre 
reinforcement is used, the design shall incorporate 
means to prevent galvanic corrosion of metallic 
components of the cylinder. 


The cylinder manufacturer shall keep on file for the 
intended life of the cylinder design the published 
specifications for composite materials and the material 
manufacturer's recommendations for storage conditions 
and shelf life. The cylinder manufacturer shall keep on 
file, for the intended life of each batch of cylinders, the 
fibre manufacturer's certification that each shipment 
conforms to the manufacturer's specifications for the 
product. 


7 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
7.1 General 


This standard neither provides design formulae nor lists 
permissible stresses or strains, but requires the 
adequacy ofthe design to be established by appropriate 


calculations and demonstrated by cylinders being 
capable of consistently passing the materials, design 
qualification, production and batch tests specified in 
this standard. However, cylinders manufactured in 
conformance with IS 15490 and IS 15660 may be used 
as Type 1 cylinders, or as metal liners for Type 3 
cylinders. 


During pressurization, this type of cylinder design 
exhibits behaviour in which the displacements of the 
composite overwrap and the metal liner are linearly 
superimposed. Due to different techniques of the 
manufacture, this standard does not give definite 
method for design. 


The design shall ensure a ‘leakage-before-break’ failure 
mode under feasible degradation of pressure parts 
during normal services. If leakage of the metal liner 
occurs, it shall be only by the growth of a fatigue crack. 


7.2 Test Pressure 


The minimum test pressure used during manufacturing 
shall be 1.5 times the working pressure. 


7.3 Burst Pressure and Fibre Stress Ratio 
7.3.1 Cylinder 


The minimum actual burst pressure of the finished 
cylinder shall not be less than the values given in 
Table 1. The composite overwrap shall be designed for 
high reliability under sustained loading and cyclic 
loading. This reliability shall be achieved by meeting 
or exceeding the composite reinforcement stress ratio 
values given in Table 1. 


Stress ratio is defined as the stress in the fibre at the 
specified minimum burst pressure divided by the stress 
in the fibre at working pressure. 


The burst ratio is defined as the actual burst pressure 
of the cylinder divided by the working pressure. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


Composite reinforcement used on cylinders shall also 
meet the minimum stress ratio requirements of 
Table 1. Verification of the stress ratios may be done 
by calculation. When the calculation method is used, 
the stress ratio calculations shall include the 
following: 


a) An analysis method with capability for non- 
linear materials, such as a special purpose 
computer program or a finite element analysis 
program; 

b) Correct modeling of the elastic-plastic stress- 
strain curve for the liner material; 


c) Correct modeling of the mechanical properties 
of the composite materials; 


d) Calculations at auto-frettage pressure, zero 
pressure after auto-frettage, working pressure 
and minimum burst pressure; 

e) Account for the pre-stresses from the winding 
tension; 


f) Minimum burst pressure, chosen such that the 
calculated stress at minimum burst pressure 
divided by the calculated stress at the working 
pressure meets the stress ratio requirements 
for the fibre used and 

g) When analyzing cylinders with hybrid 
reinforcement (two or more different fibre), 
consideration of the load share between the 
different fibres based on the different elastic 
moduli of the fibres. The stress ratio 
requirements for each individual fibre type 
shall be in accordance with the values given 
in Table 1. Verification of the stress ratios may 
also be performed using strain gauges. An 
acceptable method is provided in Annex B. 


7.4 Stress Analysis 


A stress analysis shall be performed to justify the 


Table 1 Minimum Stress Ratios and Burst Pressures 
(Clauses 7.3.1 and 9.2.5) 


SI Construction Minimum Stress Minimum Actual Burst Pressure? 
No. Ratio A 
For Types For Type 1 For Type 3 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) All-metal 2.25 

ii) Glass 3:5 34 

iii) Aramid 3.0 2.9 

iv) | Carbon (working pressures less than 35 MPa) 225 2.25 

v) Carbon (working pressures greater than or equal to 35 MPa) 2.0 2.0 


vi) Hybrid 


P Burst pressures are expressed as a factor of the working pressure. 


2) 


? Stress ratios and burst pressures shall be calculated in accordance with 7.3.1 g). The stress ratio requirements for each individual fibre 


type shall be in accordance with the values given above. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


minimum design wall thickness. It shall include the 
determination of the stresses in the liners and fibres of 
composite designs for a given pattern of winding. 


For Type 3 design, the stresses in the composite and in 
the liner after pre-stress shall be calculated at zero 
pressure, working pressure, test pressure and design 
burst pressure. The calculations shall use suitable 
analysis techniques taking account of non-linear 
material behaviour of the liner to establish the stress 
distributions. 


For Type 3 design using auto-frettage to provide pre- 
stress, the limits within which the auto-frettage pressure 
shall fall shall be calculated and specified. For Type 3 
design using controlled tension winding to provide pre- 
stress, the temperature at which it shall be performed, 
the tension required in each layer of the composite and 
the consequent pre-stress in the liner shall be calculated. 


For Type 3 design, the stresses in the composite shall 
be calculated in the tangential and longitudinal direction 
of the cylinder. The pressures used for these calculations 
shall be zero pressure, working pressure, test pressure 
and design burst pressure. The calculations shall use 
suitable analysis techniques to establish the stress 
distribution throughout the cylinder. 


7.5 Maximum Defect Size 


For Type | and Type 3 designs, the maximum defect 
size for non-destructive examinations (NDE) shall be 
established by a method suitable for the design. This 
method shall demonstrate that a cylinder with defects 
of the specified defect size will meet the ambient 
temperature pressure cycling requirements of H-5. The 
NDE method shall be capable of detecting the 
maximum defect size allowed. 


NOTE — An example of a suitable method for establishing the 
maximum defect size is given in Annex E. 


7.6 Fire Protection 


The cylinder design shall be protected with pressure 
relief devices. The cylinder, its materials, non- 
reclosing thermally activated pressure relief devices 
and any added insulation or protective material or non- 
reclosing pressure-activated pressure relief devices, 
shall be designed collectively to ensure adequate 
safety during fire conditions of the test specified 
in H-7. In no case shall a pressure relief device be 
composed of thermally activating and pressure- 
activating functions acting in series such that both 
functions are required to activate to prevent a cylinder 
from bursting due to fire effects. 


Provided that the finished cylinder with its fire 
protection system has passed the requirements of the 
bonfire test in H-7, alternative installation 


configurations for the fire protection system can be used 
if it can be demonstrated to provide the same or an 
improved level of safety. The final fire protection 
system used for vehicle installations involving multiple 
cylinders may require a different arrangement or 
number of non-reclosing thermally activated pressure 
relief devices. 


This whole clause is deleted because in India each 
cylinder must have a valve with its associated PRD. 


In case of additional PRD to be placed along the 
length, that is multiple PRDs in parallel for single 
cylinder each PRD shall be capable of relieving the 
gas contents and prevent bursting of cylinder during 
bonfire test. 


NOTES 


1 The non-reclosing thermally activated pressure relief device 
that is part of the cylinder manufacturer specified fire protection 
system is not necessarily provided with the cylinder. It is, 
however, required that the effectiveness of this fire protection 
system be demonstrated by subjecting the same to the bonfire 
test with that cylinder model. 


2 It should not be possible to isolate the non-reclosing thermally 
activated pressure relief device from the cylinder by the 
operation or failure of another component. 


8 CONSTRUCTION AND WORKMANSHIP 


8.1 Materials 


Type 1 designs shall be of seamless construction using 
steel that comply with the materials requirements 
in 6.2. Type 3 liners shall be constructed from steel 
that comply with the materials requirements in 6.2 
or 6.3, as appropriate. 


8.2 Type 3 Metal liner 


For Type 3 designs, the compressive stress in the liner 
at zero pressure and the design temperature range shall 
not cause the liner to buckle or crease. 


For Type 3 liners subjected to cold-forming or cryo- 
forming processes, heat treatment of the pre-form 
component is not required. Liners that have been cold- 
formed or cryo-formed shall not be subjected to any 
subsequent heat treatment or to additional heat 
application, such as welding. 

NOTE — During pressurization, a Type 3 design has a 


behaviour in which the displacements of the composite 
over-wrap and the 


metal liner are linearly superimposed. Due to different 
manufacturing techniques, this standard does not give 
a definite method for design. 


8.3 Neck Threads 


The cylinder neck shall be threaded to suit the type of 
valves as given in IS 3224 or any other specification as 


approved by the statutory authority. The threads shall 
be full form, clean cut, even and without surface 
discontinuities, to gauge, and concentric with the axis 
of the cylinder. 


8.4 Forming 


For Type 1 cylinders and liners, a forming process such 
as gas / arc welding shall not be used to fully close and 
seal the ends. The base ends of Type 1 steel cylinders 
that have been closed by forming shall be inspected 
using NDE, methods in 7.2 of IS 15490 or other 
equivalent techniques). Metal shall not be added in the 
process of closure at the end. Each cylinder shall be 
examined before end forming operations for thickness 
and surface finish. 


After end forming, the cylinders shall be heat treated 
to the hardness range specified for the design. Localized 
heat treatment shall not be used. 


8.5 Fibre Winding 


Type 3 cylinders shall be fabricated from a liner over- 
wrapped with continuous filament windings. Fibre 
winding operations shall be computer controlled. The 
fibre shall be applied under controlled tension during 
winding. 


During winding, the significant variables shall be 
monitored to demonstrate that they remain within 
specified tolerances. The results shall be documented 
ina winding record that shall be retained by the cylinder 
manufacturer for the intended life of each batch of 
cylinders. These variables can include but are not 
limited to the following: 


a) Fibre type, including sizing; 

b) Manner of impregnation; 

c) Winding tension; 

d) Winding speed; 

e) Number of rovings; 

f) Band width; 

g) Type of resin and composition; 
h) Temperature of the resin; 

j) Temperature of the liner; 

k) Winding angle; and 

m) Winding program reference number. 


8.6 Curing of Thermosetting Resins 


Ifa thermosetting resin is used, the resin shall be cured 
after the fibre winding is complete. Thermosetting 
resins shall be cured by heating, using a predetermined 
and controlled time-temperature profile. During the 
curing, the curing cycle (that is the time-temperature 
history) shall be documented and retained by the 


IS 16735 : 2018 


cylinder manufacturer for the intended life of each batch 
of cylinders. 


The maximum curing time and temperature for 
cylinders with aluminium alloy liners shall not 
adversely affect metal, resin and fibre properties. 


8.7 Autofrettage 


Autofrettage, if used, shall be carried out before the 
hydraulic test specified in 10.2 d). The autofrettage 
pressure shall be within the limits established in 7.4. 
The cylinder manufacturer shall establish the method 
to verify that the appropriate pressure is applied. 
Records of autofrettage pressure shall be retained by 
the cylinder manufacturer for the intended life of each 
batch of cylinders. 


8.8 Exterior Environmental Protection 


Exterior protection may be provided by using any one 
of the following: 


a) Asurface finishes giving adequate protection 
(for example, metal sprayed on aluminum, 
anodizing); 

b) A suitable fibre and matrix material (for 
example, carbon fibre in resin); and 

c) A protective coating (for example, organic 
coating, paint). 


Ifa protective coating is part of the design, the coatings 
shall be evaluated using the test methods in H-1. 


Any coatings applied to cylinders shall be such that 
neither the coating nor the application process 
adversely affects the mechanical properties of the 
cylinder. The coating shall be designed to facilitate 
subsequent in-service inspection, and the 
manufacturer shall provide guidance on coating 
treatment during such inspection to ensure the 
continued integrity of the cylinder. 


9 TYPE APPROVAL PROCEDURE 


9.1 Qualification of New Designs 


A technical specification of each new design of cylinder 
including design drawing, design calculations, material 
details and heal treatment, shall be submitted by the 
manufacturer to the statutory authority, through the 
inspection agency The test detailed in 9.2 shall be 
carried out on each new design under the supervision 
of the inspector. 


The cylinder manufacturer shall retain the proto type 
test results for the intended service life of the cylinder 
design. The test data shall also document the 
dimensions, wall thickness and weights of each of the 
tested cylinder. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


9.2 Prototype Tests 
9.2.1 General Requirement 


A minimum of 50 cylinders or liners which are 
guaranteed by the manufacturer to be representative of 
the new design shall be made available for prototype 
testing. However, if for special applications the total 
number of cylinders or liners required is less than 50, 
enough cylinders or liners shall be made to complete the 
prototype tests required, in addition to the production 
quantity. All cylinders subjected to prototype tests shall 
be made unserviceable after the tests. 


In the course of the type approval process, the inspector 
shall select the necessary cylinders or liners for testing 
and supervise the following tests on the cylinders or 
liners selected. 


Unless otherwise permitted by 9.3, Type 1 and Type 3 
designs shall be subjected to the applicable prototype 
tests listed in Table 2. 


9.2.2 Material Tests for Steel Cylinders and Liners 


If the cylinder or liner is made of steel, appropriate 
material tests in accordance with 8.3 of IS 15490 shall 
be carried out on one liner. The tensile strength shall 
meet the manufacturer’s design specifications. For Type | 
design, the steel elongation shall be at least 14 percent. 
For Type 3 designs, the tensile strength and elongation 
shall meet the manufacturer’s design specifications. 


The hydrogen compatibility of steels in contact with 
hydrogen shall be demonstrated in accordance with B-2. 
Steels that conform to 5.5 and 5.3 of IS 15490 are 
exempted from this test. 


9.2.3 Material Tests for Aluminium Alloy Fuel Tanks 
and Liners 


For Type | fuel tanks, 10.2 and 10.3, as well as Annex G 


and Annex H shall be carried out on one cylinder or 
liner. The materials properties shall meet the 
manufacturer’s design specifications. . 


For Type 3 liners using aluminium alloy, materials tests 
as required in IS 15660 and Annex H shall be carried 
out on one liner. The materials properties, including 
elongation, shall meet the manufacturer’s design 
specifications as well as Annex G and Annex H. 


The hydrogen compatibility of aluminium alloys in 
contact with hydrogen shall be demonstrated in 
accordance with B-2. Aluminium alloys that conform 
to 6.1 and 6.2 of IS 15660 are exempted from this test. 


9.2.4 Resin Properties Tests 


For Type 3 designs, samples representative of the 
composite over-wrap shall be tested in accordance 
with B-3. Resin materials shall meet the requirements 
therein. 


9.2.5 Hydrostatic Burst Pressure Test 


For all designs, three cylinders shall be hydrostatically 
pressurized to failure in accordance with H-4. For each 
cylinder, the burst pressure shall exceed the specified 
minimum burst pressure given in Table 1. In no case 
shall the burst pressure be less than the value necessary 
to meet the stress ratio requirements in Table 1. The 
average of the burst pressure results of the three 
cylinders shall be recorded for future reference. 


9.2.6 Ambient Temperature Pressure Cycling Test 


For all designs, two cylinders shall be pressure cycled 
at ambient temperature in accordance with H-5 and 
meet the requirements therein. 


9.2.7 Leak-Before-Break (LBB) Test 


For all designs, three cylinders shall be tested in 
accordance with H-6 and shall meet the requirements 
therein. 


Table 2 Summary of Prototype Tests 
(Clause 9.2.1) 


SI Type of Test 
No 
(1) Q) 


1 Material tests for steel cylinders and liners (see 9.2.2) 
ii) Material tests for aluminium cylinder and liners (see 9.2.3) 
ii) Resin properties (see 9.2.4) 
iv) Hydrostatic burst pressure (see 9.2.5) 
v) | Ambient temperature pressure cycling (see 9.2.6) 
vi)  Leak-before-break (LBB) (see 9.2.7) 
vii) Bonfire (see 9.2.8) 
vii) ^ Chemical exposure (see 9.2.9 ) 
ix) | Composite flaw tolerance (see 9.2.10) 
X) Accelerated stress rupture (see 9.2.11) 
xi) Extreme temperature pressure cycling (see 9.2.12) 


xi) Impact damage (see 9.2.13) 


NOTE — “V” indicates that the test to be performed. 


Number of Cylinders For Type 1 For Type3 
Required for Testing 


(3) (4) (5) 

1 Cylinder or liner 4 N 
1 liner 

composite samples 


3 plus 1 liner 


uer ur A 


DO RE MEC NO COME AME ERU E a 


10 


9.2.8 Bonfire Test 


For all designs, one or two cylinders as appropriate 
shall be tested in accordance with H-7 and meet the 
requirements therein. 


9.2.9 Chemical Exposure Test 


For Type 3 designs, one cylinder shall be tested in 
accordance with H-9 and meet the requirements therein. 


9.2.10 Composite Flaw Tolerance Test 


For Type 3 designs, one cylinder shall be tested in 
accordance with H-10 and meet the requirements therein. 


9.2.11 Accelerated Stress Rupture Test 


For Type 3 designs, one cylinder shall be tested in 
accordance with H-11 and meet the requirements therein. 


9.2.12 Extreme Temperature Pressure Cycling Test 


For Type 3 designs, one cylinder shall be tested in 
accordance with H-12 and meet the requirements therein. 


9.2.13 Drop Test 


For Type 3 designs, one or more finished cylinders shall 
be tested in accordance with H-13 and meet the 
requirements therein. 


9.3 Exemptions to Type Tests 


As an alternative to the requirements in 9.2, Type 1 
steel design meeting the requirements of IS 15490 and 
the additional requirements specified in 7.6 and 8.8 may 
only be subjected to the bonfire test in 9.2.8 and the 
hydrogen compatibility tests in H-2. 


As an alternative to the requirements in 9.2, Type 1 
aluminium alloy design meeting the requirements of 
IS 15660 and the additional requirements specified 
in 7.6 and 8.8 may only be subjected to the bonfire test 
in 9.2.8 and the hydrogen compatibility tests in H-2. 


9.4 Prototype Tests for Design Changes 


A cylinder shall be considered to be a new design, 
compared with an existing approved design, when, 


a) itis manufactured in a different factory; 

b) itis manufactured by a different process; 

c) it is manufactured from a steel of different 
specified chemical composition; 

d) itis given a different heat treatment beyond 
the stipulated limit; 

e) ends or ends profile has changed for example 
convex, hemispherical, torispherical, 
ellipsoidal or also, if there is a change in base 
thickness to cylinder diameter ratio; 

f) overall length of the cylinder has changed 


more than 50 percent (cylinders with a length- 
diameter ratio less than three shall not be used 
as reference cylinders for any new design with 
this ratio greater than three); 


11 


IS 16735 : 2018 


g) nominal outside diameter has changed more 
than 5 percent; 

h) hydraulic test pressure has been increased 
(where a cylinder is to be used for lower 
pressure duty than that for which design 
approval has been given, it shall not be 
deemed to be a new design; 

k) itis manufactured using a different fibre; 

m) its manufactured using a different resin; and 

n) the winding pattern is changed. 


The cylinder material, design, manufacturing process 
and examination shall be proved to be adequate for 
their intended service by meeting the requirements of 
the prototype tests specified in 9.2 for generic 
automotive vehicle use. 


Design changes may be qualified through a reduced 
test program as given in Table 3. Design changes that 
exceed the changes defined in Table 3 shall be qualified 
by a complete test program. 


A fibre shall be considered to be of a new fibre type 
when any of the following conditions apply: 


1) 


The fibre is of a different classification, for 
example, glass, aramid, carbon; 

2) The fibre is produced from a different 
precursor (starting material), for example, 
Polyacrylonitrile (PAN), pitch for carbon; 

3) The nominal fibre modulus specified by the 
fibre manufacturer differs by more than + 5 
percent from that defined in the prototype- 
tested design; and 

The nominal fibre strength specified by the fibre 
manufacturer differs by more than 4 5 percent 
from that defined in the prototype-tested design. 


4) 


A resin material shall be considered to be a new resin 
type when any of the following conditions apply: 

1) The resin is of a different specification for 
example, thermosetting or thermoplastic. 
ii) The resin is of a different type of some 
classification of resin, for example, epoxy, 


polyester, polyethylene, polyamide. 


A design approved by a reduced series of tests (a design 
change) shall not be used as a basis for a second design 
change approval with a reduced set of tests (that 1s, 
multiple changes from an approved design are not 
permitted). If a test has been conducted on a design 
change (X) that falls within the testing requirements 
for a second design change (Y), then the result for (X) 
can be applied to the new design change (Y) test 
program. However, design change (X) cannot be used 
as the reference for determining the testing required 
for any new design change 


cl 


Table 3 Prototype Tests for Design Changes 


(Clause 9.4) 

SI Clause Test Design Change 

No. No. I —————————————— ——————M9—————————————————————————————— 
Fibre Materials Length Diameter" Working Dome Opening Coating Fire Manufacturer? 
Manufacturer, ————— — —^—— — —— —.  ,——M — M L———M^——————. Pressure P! shape size protection 
2 
Fibre ^ Resin Metal <50 — 550 «20 >20 <20 system? 
Cylinder or Percent Percent Percent Percent Percent 
Liner 

(Q0) Q) G) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (1) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) 

i) 9.2.5 Burst X X X X X X X X X X 

ii) 9.2.6 Ambient cycle X X X X X X X X X 
iii) 9.2.7 LBB X X 

iv) 9.2.8 Bonfire X X Xa Xa X X X 

v) 9.2.9 Chemical exposure X X x X 

vi) 9.2.10 Composite flaw X X X X 
vii) 9.2.11 Accelerated stress X X X Ko 

rupture 
viii) 9.2.13 Impact damage X X x X. X X X 
ix) B-2 Hydrogen X 
compatibility 


X indicates test is applicable. 


* indicates test not required for Type 1 cylinders. 

Xa indicates test only when length increases. 

D Only when thickness changes proportional to diameter and/or pressure change; otherwise qualify as a new design. 

d Change in fire protection system, non-reclosing thermally activated pressure relief device or location of non-reclosing thermally activated pressure relief device. 
d Any deviation from the manufacturing parameters specified in 5.2.7 is a change in the manufacturing process. Test not required on Type 1 metal cylinders. 


8107 : SELOT SI 


10 BATCH TESTS AND TESTS ON EVERY 
CYLINDER 


10.1 Batch Tests 
10.1.1 General Requirements 


Batch tests shall be carried out on each batch of 
cylinders or liners. 


Batch tests shall be conducted on finished liners and 
cylinders that are representative of normal production, 
complete with identification marks. The cylinders and 
liners required for testing shall be randomly selected 
from each batch. If more cylinders are subjected to the 
tests than are required, all results shall be documented. 


Batches of cylinders shall be proved to be adequate 
for their intended service by meeting the requirements 
of the batch tests specified in 10.1.2. The cylinder 
manufacturer shall retain the batch test results and 
relevant data for each batch (for example cast number) 
for the intended life of the cylinders in the batch. All 
cylinders subjected to batch tests shall be made 
unserviceable after the tests. 


10.1.2 Required Tests 


One cylinder shall be subjected to the hydrostatic burst 
pressure test in accordance with B-6. The cylinder burst 
pressure shall exceed the specified minimum burst 
pressure and stress ratio requirement given in Table 1. 


Onecylinder shall be subjected to pressure cycle testing 
in accordance with the requirements in 10.1.3. The 
cylinder used for the pressure cycle test in 10.1.3 may 
also be used for the burst pressure test. 


For Type 1 and Type 3 designs, a further cylinder, liner 
or sample representative of a finished cylinder or liner 
shall be subjected to the following tests: 


a) Verification of the critical dimensions of the 
design; 

b) Tensile tests for steel cylinders or liners, in 
accordance with 8.3.1 of IS 15490 or tensile 
tests for aluminum alloy cylinders or liners, 
in accordance with 8.1.3 of IS 15660. The 
tensile test shall be carried out in accordance 
with IS 1608. The test results shall satisfy the 
requirements of the design; 

c) Impact tests for steel cylinders or liners, in 
accordance with 8.3.3 of IS 15490 or as 
appropriate and meet the requirements therein. 
Impact test shall be carried out in accordance 
with IS 1757 (Part 1). 


When a protective coating according to 8.8 is 
a part of the design, a coating batch test shall 
be performed in accordance with H-18. Where 
the coating fails to meet the requirements of 


d) 


13 


IS 16735 : 2018 


H-18, the batch shall be 100 percent inspected 
to remove similarly defectively coated 
cylinders. The coating on all defectively 
coated cylinders shall be stripped using a 
method that does not affect the integrity of 
the composite wrapping and recoated. The 
coating batch test shall then be repeated. All 
cylinders and liners represented by a batch test 
that fails to meet the requirements specified 
shall follow the procedures specified in 10.3. 


10.1.3 Ambient Temperature Pressure Cycling Test 


The following test shall be carried out on finished 
cylinders at a test frequency defined as follows: 


Initially, one cylinder from each batch shall be 
pressure cycled from not more than 2 MPa to not 
less than 1.25 times the working pressure at a rate 
not to exceed 10 cycles per min for the number of 
filling cycles specified in 4.4. 


10.2 Test on Every Cylinder 


Production verifications and tests shall be carried out 
as follows on all cylinders produced in a batch. Non- 
destructive examinations shall be carried out in 
accordance with a standard acceptable to the inspector. 


Each cylinder shall be examined during manufacture 
and after completion as follows: 


a) By NDE of metallic cylinders and liners in 
accordance with Annex B of IS 15490 to 
confirm that the maximum defect size does 
not exceed the specified in the design as 
determined in accordance with 7.5. The NDE 
method shall be capable of detecting the 
maximum defect size allowed; 

b) Hardness tests or equivalent tests of metallic 
cylinders and liners in accordance with H-18, 
carried out after the final heat treatment. The 
values thus determined shall be in the range 
specified for the design; 

c) Hydraulic test of finished cylinders in 
accordance with H-19. For Type 1, and Type 3 
designs, the permanent volumetric expansion 
shall not exceed the limit of permanent 
volumetric expansion specified by the cylinder 
manufacturer for the test pressure used. In 
addition, in no case shall the permanent 
expansion exceed 10 percent of the total 
volumetric expansion measured under the test 
pressure; 

d) Toverify that critical dimensions and mass of 
the completed cylinders and of the liners and 
over wrapping are within design tolerances; 


e) 


To verify compliance with specified surface 


IS 16735 : 2018 


finish with special attention to deep drawn 
surfaces and folds or laps in the neck or 
shoulder of forged or spun end enclosures or 
openings; and 


f) 
10.3 Failure to Meet Test Requirements 


To verify the markings. 


In the event of failure to meet test requirements, re- 
testing or re-heat treatment and re-testing shall be 
carried out as follows: 


a) If there is evidence of a fault or an error of 
measurement in carrying out a test, a further 
test of the same kind shall be performed. If 
the result of this test is satisfactory, the first 
test shall be ignored; 

b) Ifthetest has been carried out in a satisfactory 
manner, the cause of test failure shall be 
identified; 
1) ifthe failure is considered to be due to 
the applied heat treatment, the 
manufacturer may subject all the metal 
cylinders or liners implicated by the 
failure to a further heat treatment, that is 
if the failure is in batch test, the test failure 
shall require re-heat treatment of all the 
represented metal cylinders or liners prior 
to re-testing; however, if the failure occurs 
sporadically in a production test, then 
only those metal cylinders or liners which 
fail the test shall require re-heat treatment 
and re-testing. 
2) only the appropriate batch tests needed 
to prove the acceptability ofthe new batch 
shall be performed again. If one or more 
tests prove unsatisfactory, all metal 
cylinders or liners of the batch shall be 
rejected. 

3) ifthe failure is due to a cause other than 

the heat treatment applied, all defective 

metal cylinders or liners shall be either 
rejected or repaired. Repaired metal 
cylinders or liners that pass the test(s) 
required for the repair shall be treated as 
a separate new batch. 


11 MARKINGS 


11.1 On each cylinder, the manufacturer shall provide 
clear, permanent markings not less than 6 mm high. 


Marking shall be made either by labels incorporated 
into resin coatings, labels attached by adhesive, low 
stress stamps used on the thickened ends of Type 1 
designs or any combination of the above. Multiple 
labels are allowed and should be located such that they 
are not obscured by mounting rackets. Multiple labels 


14 


may be used and should be located such that they are 
not obscured by mounting brackets. 


Each cylinder shall be permanently marked with the 
following information: 


a) 'H,ANDH, BLENDS ONLY’; 

b) ‘DO NOT USE AFTER XX/XXXX', where 
XX/XXXX identifies the month and the year 
of expiry. The period between the dispatch 
date and the expiry date shall not exceed the 
specified service life. The expiry date may be 
applied to the cylinder at the time of dispatch, 
provided that the cylinder have been stored in 
a dry location without internal pressure. 
Manufacturer’s identification; 

Cylinder identification (a serial number unique 
for every cylinder); 

Working pressure (MPa) at temperature (°C); 
Reference to this Indian Standard, ‘IS xxxx : 
2011’, along with cylinder type and statutory 
authority’s approval numbers; 

The words ‘USE ONLY MANUFACTURER- 
APPROVED PRESSURE RELIEF 
DEVICE’; 

Month and year of hydrostatic test such as 
MM/YYYY (month in two digits and year in 
four digits); 

Water capacity (litre); 

Periodical retesting on xx — xx — Xxxx : 


g) 


h) 


j 

k) 
m) If labels are used, there is an additional 
requirement for a unique identification number 
and the manufacturer's identification to be 
permanently marked on an exposed metal 
surface in order to permit tracing in the event 
that the label is destroyed; and 


Ifthe cylinder has a reduced number of filling 
cycles according to 4.4, and qualified 
according to 9.2, then the cylinder shall 
additionally be marked ‘USE ONLY WITH 
TAMPER-PROOF FILLING CYCLE 
COUNTER SYSTEM’. 


n) 


The expiry date may be applied to the cylinders at the 
time of dispatch, provided that the cylinders have been 
stored in a dry location without internal pressure. The 
period between the dispatch date and the expiry date shall 
not exceed the specified service life. For Type 3 cylinders 
the label shall be permanently attached to the cylinder. 


The markings shall be placed in the listed sequence, 
but the specific arrangement may be varied to match 
the space available. The following is an acceptable 
example. 


1) H,ANDH,BLENDS ONLY 


DO NOT USE AFTER XX /XXXX 
Manufacturer/Cylinder identifications 
XXX.X | 
IS xxxxx : 20xx, Type x 
USE ONLY MANUFACTURER- 
APPROVED PRESSURE RELIEF DEVICE 
6) Manufacture date 03/2005 
7) 20 MPa/15 °C 
WARNING — Vehicles with HCNG-4 cylinder shall not be 
parked in enclosed space for extended periods of time. leakage 


between the end connections and the liner shall be considered 
in the design. 


2) 
3) 


4) 
5) 


11.2 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


Each cylinder may also be marked with the standard 
mark 


11.2.1 The use of the standard mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 


IS 16735 : 2018 


details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to the 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


12 PREPARATION FOR DISPATCH 


12.1 Preparation of Dispatch from the 


Manufacturer’s Shop 


Every cylinder shall be internally cleaned and dried. 
Cylinders which are not immediately closed by the 
fitting of a valve and safety devices, if applicable, shall 
have plugs, which will prevent entry of moisture and 
protect threads, fitted to all openings. 


The manufacturer’s statement of service and all 
necessary information and instructions to ensure the 
proper handling, use and in-service inspection of the 
cylinder shall be supplied to the purchaser. The 
statement of service shall be accordance with 5.2.3. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.1) 
CYLINDERS INVOLVED IN COLLISION OR FIRE 


A-1 CYLINDERS INVOLVED IN COLLISIONS 


Cylinders which have been involved in vehicle collision 
should be re-inspected by the manufacturer. Cylinders 
which have not experienced any impact damage from 
the collision may be returned to service, otherwise the 
cylinder should be returned to the manufacturer for 
evaluation. 


15 


A-2 CYLINDERS INVOLVED IN FIRES 


Cylinders which have been subject to the action of fire 
should be re-inspected by the manufacturer or 
condemned and removed from service. 


A-3 Periodic inspection of cylinders shall be done as 
per the requirements of statutory authority 


IS 16735 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
[Clauses 4.2, 5.2.4.2, 7.3.1 g) and 10.2 a)] 
VERIFICATION OF STRESS RATIOS USING STRAIN GAUGES 


B-1 The following describes a procedure that may be 
used to verify stress ratios by using strain gauges: 


a) Stress-strain relationship for fibre is always 
elastic; therefore, stress ratios and strain ratios 
are equal. 

b) 


c) 


High elongation strain gauges are required. 
Strain gauges should be oriented in the 
direction of the fibres on which they are 
mounted (that is with hoop fibre on the outside 
of the cylinder, mount gauges in the hoop 
direction). 
d) Method 1 (applies to cylinders that do not use 
high tension winding), 
1) prior to autofrettage, apply strain gauges 
and calibrate; 
2) measure strains at autofrettage pressure, 
Zero pressure after autofrettage, working 
pressure and minimum burst pressure; 
3) confirm that the strain at minimum burst 
pressure divided by the strain at working 
pressure meets the stress ratio 
requirements. For hybrid construction, 
the strain at working pressure is compared 
with the rupture strain of cylinders 
reinforced with a single fibre type. 


e) Method 2 (applies to all cylinders), 


1) at zero pressure after winding and 
autofrettage, apply strain gauges and 
calibrate; 

2) measure strains at zero pressure, working 
pressure and minimum burst pressure; 
3) at zero pressure, after strain 
measurements are taken at working 
pressure and minimum burst pressure and 
with strain gauges monitored, cut the 
cylinder section apart so that the region 
containing the strain gauge is 
approximately 125 mm long. Remove the 
liner without damaging the composite. 
Measure the strains after the liner is 
removed; 
4) adjustthe strain readings at zero pressure, 
working pressure and minimum burst 
pressure by the amount of strain measured 
at zero pressure with and without the 
liner; and 
5) confirm that the strain at minimum burst 
pressure divided by the strain at working 
pressure meets the stress ratio 
requirements. For hybrid construction, 
the strain at working pressure is compared 
with the rupture strain of cylinders 
reinforced with a single fibre type. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.4.1) 
RATIONALE FOR NUMBER OF FILLING CYCLES 


C-1 RATIONALE FOR NUMBER OF FILLING 
CYCLES 

C-1.1 PERSONAL VEHICLES 

C-1.1.1 General 


The number of filling cycles that a cylinder should be 
capable of performing requires consideration of two 
scenarios of risk for material and system degradation, 


16 


expected service and extended durability as shown 
in C-1.1.2 and C-1.1.3. 


C-1.1.2 Expected Service 


The extreme stress case where the vehicle sustains only 
the most stressful (empty-to-full) fillings throughout 
its entire lifetime should be considered. 


The maximum number of empty-to-full fillings in 
expected service is given by the following equation: 


F;= (L/R) 
where 
F; = maximum number of empty-to-full fillings 
in expected service; 
L = vehicle lifetime mileage in the expected 
service scenario; and 
R = vehicle driving range with a full cylinder. 


Cylinders are required to demonstrate the capability to 
sustain this maximum number of lifetime empty-to-full 
filling events. 


Under no circumstances should the maximum number 
of empty-to-full fillings in expected service be allowed 
to be less than 500 empty-to-full fillings, which is based 
on a vehicle lifetime mileage of 161 000 km and a 
vehicle driving range with a full cylinder of 322 km. 


C-1.1.3 Extended Durability 


The high usage case, where the vehicle sustains 
exposure to more severe (physical and chemical) 
environmental stresses and experiences a higher number 
of partial fillings throughout its entire lifetime, should 
also be considered. 


Environmental stresses include abrasions and cuts 
associated with wear from vehicle attachments and from 
chemical exposures to chemically active constituents 
encountered in service (for example, acid rain slush, 
battery acid). 


Cylinders are required to demonstrate the capability to 
sustain a minimum number of lifetime partial filling 
events. 


The minimum number of partial fillings is given by the 
following equation: 


Fy-[L/(RXYV)] 


where 

Fp = maximum number of partial fillings in 
service; 

L = vehicle lifetime mileage in extended 
durability scenario; 

R = vehicle driving range with a full cylinder; 
and 

V = average fill volume fraction. 


The minimum number of 5 500 filling cycles specified 
in 4.4.1 is based on the following assumptions: 


a) A vehicle lifetime mileage in extended 
durability scenario of 590 000 km; 


b) A vehicle driving range with a full cylinder of 
322 km; and 


c) Anaverage fill volume fraction of 0.33. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


An evaluation by the Sierra Research for the California 
Air Resource Board (2001) of vehicle lifetime mileage 
showed all scrapped vehicles had mileage 
below 563 000 km (the 3-sigma value, the 99.8 
percentile, was 418 000 km; the 6-sigma value 
was 590 000 km). This is why the value of 590 000 km 
was selected for the vehicle lifetime mileage in 
extended durability scenario. 


At present, all on-road vehicles produced by high 
volume vehicle manufacturers have a vehicle range with 
a full cylinder greater than 322 km. 


Reliable statistics on current fill volume fraction are 
not available; statistics for hydrogen-fuelled vehicles 
will be influenced by the availability of hydrogen re- 
fuelling stations. The assumption was based on the fact 
that a lifetime of fillings needing less than 33 percent 
of full cylinder capacity provides a high-frequency 
extreme associated with a lifetime average of fillings 
on intervals of 106 km to 161 km travelled. 


C-1.1.4 Robustness (Safety Margin) of Extended 
Durability Design-qualification Requirement 


The probability of a cylinder encountering the specified 
number of fillings is given by the multiplication of the 
probability that the vehicle lifetime mileage exceeds 
or is equal to 590 000 km (Prob,) by the probability of 
having a vehicle driving range with a full cylinder equal 
to or less than 150 km (Prob,) by the probability of 
having an average fill volume fraction of 0.33 for the 
vehicle lifetime (Prob,). Estimates from data cited 
above indicate that Prob, and Prob, are each lower than 
10-6, ensuring that the result is below 10°. 


A vehicle with a modest driving range of 150 km with 
a full cylinder would have to be driven over 
825 000 km to require 5 500 empty-to-full fillings. 


Low-volume partial fills cause markedly lower swings 
in temperature and pressure and, consequently, 
markedly lower stresses than empty-to-full filling 
stresses. Comprehensive data is not available (stresses 
an order of magnitude lower than empty-to-full fillings 
have been seen). Therefore, conducting the high- 
frequency filling pressure cycle tests using the reduced 
number of filling cycles specified in 4.4.1 with empty- 
to-full filling pressure swings provides a margin of 
robustness potentially in the order of 10. 


C-1.2 Commercial Heavy-Duty Vehicles 


Two factors distinguish the design qualification of 
cylinders for commercial heavy-duty (high usage) 
service. 


Firstly, commercial fleet vehicles may experience 
extensive maintenance (such as engine and transmission 
overhauls) that significantly extend the vehicle lifetime 
mileage (vehicle range) and thereby increase the 


IS 16735 : 2018 


number of fillings during expected service. 


Secondly, commercial fleet vehicles commonly remain 
in high-usage service for periods of 15 years or more. 
Fleet managers have requested certification of storage 
systems for 20 to 25 years of service life. Additionally, 
commercial fleet vehicles may routinely experience daily 
empty-to-full fillings followed by immediate (overnight) 
parking such that the fuel pressure and temperature are 
not immediately relieved by subsequent driving. 


Reflecting these differences, the requirements for 
pressure cycle testing for commercial heavy-duty 
vehicles assume the following: 


a) Themaximum number of empty-to-full fillings 
in expected service should be calculated using 
the equation given in D-3.2; however, this 
value may not be less than 1 000 cycles. This 
provides for commercial vehicles with twice 
the vehicle lifetime mileage in the expected 
service scenario of personal vehicles. If firm 
statistics on commercial vehicle lifetime 
mileage become available, this value may be 
revised in future editions of this document. 

b) In the extended durability scenario, the 
number of filling cycles should be calculated 
as according to the equation defined in D-3.2, 
but it should not be less than 11 250. In order 
to allow for unconstrained usage per year, the 
extreme condition of 2 empty-to-full fillings 
per day were assumed for continual full-day 
bus service. The minimum certification for 
commercial vehicles is specified as 15 years; 
hence, the minimum number of filling cycles 
is 2 empty-to-full fillings per day x 365 days 
per year x 15 years = 11 000. The robustness 
of this specification is assured by recognition 
that 11 000 filling cycles x 322 km/filling 
cycle exceeds 3.2 million km driven. 


C-2 RATIONALE FOR PERMEATION RATES 


The permeation value for light duty vehicles 
results from a European Commission Network of 
Excellence — HySafe — activity to estimate an 
allowable hydrogen permeation rate for automotive 
legal requirements and standards. The allowable 
permeation rate for hydrogen has been estimated based 
on a number of key assumptions: 


a) A structure should be safe regardless of the 


18 


vehicle that enters it (although what vehicle 
can physically enter the structure is a limit in 
Itself). 


b) The allowable permeation rate should be set 
so the vehicle is safe throughout its intended 
service life. 

c) Theallowable permeation rate should not rely 


on regulations affecting the structure to ensure 
safety, that 1s safety be assured independent 
of the combination of vehicle and structure. 


Accordingly, the specific assumptions used in the 
analysis includes the following: 


1) Permeated hydrogen can be considered to 
disperse homogeneously. 

2) Worst credible natural ventilation rate for a 
domestic garage is 0.03 air change per hour. 

3) Maximum permitted hydrogen volume 
fraction in air 1 percent , that is 25 percent 
LFL. 

4) Maximum long term material temperature is 
55 °C. 

5) New container, with a factor of 2 to convert 


from the worst case end of life condition. 
For a test conducted at a temperature of 20 °C, a factor 
of 3.5 is used to convert from the maximum prolonged 
material temperature to the test temperature (factor of 
4.7 at 15 °C). 


Based on the above assumptions, scenarios and 
methodology, the theoretical allowable permeation rates 
to give hydrogen volume fraction in air of less than 
1 percent is 6.0 ml/h/l water capacity at a 15 °C 
minimum testing temperature. 


C-3 CARBON FIBRE STRESS RATIO 
CONSIDERATIONS 


Itis considered safe to reduce the stress ratio for carbon 
fibre to as low as a factor of 2.0 for higher pressure 
designs based on a review of stress rupture data, in- 
service experience, and the fact that higher pressure 
tanks can tolerate a greater amount of external damage. 
For example, an examination of stress rupture data or 
composite strands (for example Robinson, 1991, 
Aerospace Corp Rpt 92 (2743)-1; Chiao et al., 1976, 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) 
UCRL 78367) shows that the probability of stress 
rupture at nominal working pressure stress is in the 
order of a billion years. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


ANNEX D 
[Clause 5.2.1 c)] 
ALTERNATIVE PROTOTYPE TESTS 


D-1 GENERAL 


These tests, designed to be performed on hydrogen 
storage systems, are intended to demonstrate the 
suitability of cylinders for application as a permanent 
mounted fuel storage system in on-road four-wheel 
passenger vehicles. Based on the manufacturer's 
designation of the intended vehicle use, the cylinders 
shall be qualified for personal vehicle use or 
commercial heavy-duty vehicle use. 


One cylinder shall be subjected to the series of tests 
listed in Table 4 in the sequence specified in D-2. 


D-2 TEST SEQUENCE 


Halfofthe extreme temperature gas pressure cycle test 
specified in D-3 (50 percent of the pressure cycles 
defined in D-3.2) shall be conducted before the start of 
the accelerated static stress test (see D-4). 


The remaining extreme temperature gas pressure cycle 
test specified in D-3 (the remaining 50 percent of the 
pressure cycles defined in D-3.2) shall be conducted 
after the first 500 h exposure in the accelerated static 
stress test (see D-4). 


The first 500 h of the accelerated static stress test 
(see D-4) shall be performed after the first half of the 
extreme temperature gas pressure cycle test specified 
in D-3 (50 percent of the pressure cycles defined 
in D-3.2) has been conducted. The remaining 500 h of 
exposure shall occur after the completion ofthe extreme 
temperature gas pressure cycle test (see D-3). 


The leak/permeation test (see D-5), the proof pressure 
test (see D-6) and the residual strength burst test 
(see D-7) shall be conducted in that order on the cylinder 
after the completion of the extreme temperature gas 
pressure cycle test (see D-3) and the accelerated static 
stress test (see D-4). The leak/permeation test may be 
conducted in conjunction with the final 500 h of the 
accelerated static stress test (see D-4). 


D-3 EXTREME TEMPERATURE 
PRESSURE CYCLE TEST 


GAS 


D-3.1 Pressure Cycles 


The cylinder shall be pressure cycled using compressed 
hydrogen gas between 20 bar and 260 bar for the 
number of filling cycles specified in D-3.2. All of the 
simulated fillings shall occur under normal fast-fill 
conditions specified by the vehicle manufacturer. All 
simulated discharges shall occur at a rate of not less 
than the discharge rate for maximum-load vehicle 
operation as specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 


D-3.2 Number of Pressure Cycles 


The number of pressure cycles that the cylinder shall 
be subjected to during the extreme temperature gas 
pressure cycle test shall be representative of the 
maximum number of empty-to-full fillings in expected 
service and calculated as follows: 


F;= L/R 
where 
F; = maximum number of empty-to-full fillings 
in expected service; 
L = vehicle lifetime mileage in the expected 
service scenario; and 
R = vehicle driving range with a full cylinder. 


In no case shall the number of pressure cycles be less 
than 500 for cylinders qualified for personal vehicle 
use (see Annex G). In the case of cylinders qualified 
for commercial heavy-duty vehicle use, the minimum 
number of pressure cycles shall not be less than 1 000 
(see Annex G). 


D-3.3 Description of Test 


The first 25 percent of the number of pressure cycles 
specified in D-3.1 and in D-3.2 shall be conducted with 


Table 4 Individual Tests 
(Clause D-1) 


SI Name of Test 
No. 
i) Extreme temperature gas pressure cycle test (Fuelling/De-Fuelling) (see D-3) 
ii) Accelerated static stress test (Parking) (see D-4) 
iii) Leak/permeation test (see D-5) 
iv) Proof pressure test (see D-6) 
v) Residual strength burst test (see D-7) 


19 


IS 16735 : 2018 


hydrogen gas at —35°C or lower in an external 
environment stabilized at —40°C. If the manufacturer 
restricts cylinder use to a different lower ambient 
temperature, then that specified lower temperature shall 
be used. 


The cylinder shall be equilibrated at full fill density at 
—40°C at the onset and between each of the first ten 
pressure cycles. Hydrogen gas at 20?C shall be used 
for fuelling in the first 5 equilibrated pressure cycles. 
Hydrogen gas at —35?C or lower shall be used for 
fuelling in the next 5 equilibrated pressure cycles and 
for fuelling in the remaining cycles, which are not 
equilibrated. 


The second 25 percent of the number of pressure cycles 
specified in D-3.1 and in D-3.2 shall be conducted with 
hydrogen gas at —35?C or lower in an external 
environment stabilized at 50°C and 95 percent relative 
humidity. At least 50 of the simulated discharges shall 
occur at the rate prescribed in the vehicle manufacturer's 
procedures for vehicle maintenance/repair service. The 
cylinder shall be equilibrated unfilled at 50°C and 
95 percent relative humidity at the onset and between 
each of the first five cycles conducted at 50°C. 


The third 25 percent of the number of pressure cycles 
specified in D-3.1 and in D-3.2 shall be conducted with 
hydrogen gas at -35°C or lower in an external environment 
stabilized at 50°C and 95 percent relative humidity. 


The final 25 percent of the number of pressure cycles 
specified in D-3.1 and in D-3.2 shall be conducted with 
hydrogen gas at —35°C or lower in an external 
environment stabilized at —40?C, unless a different 
temperature limit for vehicle use is specified by the 
vehicle manufacturer. 


The cylinder shall not leak or rupture during the test. 


20 


D-4 ACCELERATED STATIC STRESS TEST 


The cylinders that are being qualified for personal 
vehicle use shall be pressurized with hydrogen gas to 
1.25 times the working pressure and held for a total of 
1 000 h at 65°C. Cylinders that are being qualified for 
commercial heavy-duty vehicle use shall be pressurized 
with hydrogen gas to 1.35 times the working pressure. 


D-5 LEAK TEST 


The finished cylinder shall be filled with hydrogen gas 
or hydrogen blends to the working pressure, placed in 
an enclosed sealed chamber at ambient temperature, 
and monitored for leakage for 500 h. The steady state 
hydrogen discharge rate due to leakage shall be less 
than 75 cm?/min (at 20°C and 101.325 kPa) for use in 
standard passenger cars. For cylinders to be used in 
larger vehicles, such as buses, the allowable leakage 
may be increased in proportion to the enclosure volume 
for the vehicle. 


This test may be conducted coincidentally with the last 
half of the accelerated static stress test in D-4. The 
cylinder shall be sectioned and the internal surfaces 
inspected for any evidence of cracking or deterioration. 


D-6 PROOF PRESSURE TEST 


The cylinder shall be pressurized with hydrogen gas to 
1.8 times the working pressure and held 30 s without 
burst. This test may be performed hydraulically. 


D-7 RESIDUAL STRENGTH BURST TEST 
(HYDRAULIC) 


The cylinder shall be pressurized hydraulically to burst 
to verify that the burst pressure exceeds 90 percent of 
the average burst pressures obtained during the 
hydrostatic burst tests of 9.2.7. 


ANNEX E 
(clauses 5.2.6 and 7.5) 
NDE DEFECT SIZE BY FLAWED CYLINDER CYCLING 


IS 16735 : 2018 


E-1 The following procedure can be used to determine artificial defects to failure in accordance with 
the non-destructive examination (NDE) defect size for, the test method specified in H-5. 


Type 3 designs: 


If the cylinders do not leak or rupture in less than the 


a) Introduce internal and external flaws. Internal number of filling cycles specified in 4.4, then the 


flaws may be machined prior to the heat allowable defect size for NDE 


is equal to or less than 


treatment and closing of the end of the the artificial flaw size at that location. 


cylinder. 


b) Size these artificial defects to exceed the 
defect length and depth detection capability 
of the NDE inspection method. 


c) Pressure cycle three cylinders containing these appropriate data. 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 5.3) 
TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 


In all cases, the reduction of cycle life due to the effect 
of hydrogen exposure should be considered. This could 
involve using the hydrogen gas cycling test procedure 
in XX.XXX.XX or a calculation approach using 


F-1 This annex provides an example of a suitable form of a type approval certificate. Other formats also acceptable. 


TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 
Issued by 
(Authorized Inspection Authority) 
applying IS Standard 


concerning 

SEAMLESS STEEL GAS CYLINDERS 
Approval No. : ............... Dates sts 
Type dud d" "———————— € 
(Description of the family of cylinders (Drawing No,) which has received type approval) 
Pusuuueesn een bar, sc eeu beue 1101 00 GN Beeler eerste naih MIMS AA esse aii mm 
Shape of base: i. sisse D Ls eed e ERU mm 
D» s aut Rari Inn; £z suck dt e TM, V, roii Lite; Je sette: litre 
Materialandiheat treatment? oo RRES deed ER daeeduukea es 
Material and characteristics ; Material............................... Roos Ed s. MP ay Re sni op d gU MPa 


Manufacturer or. agents ueste eb m NR NG RII ek 
(Name and address of manufacturer or its agent) 
All information may be obtained from 
(Name and address of approving body) 
Dale: 4: 


21 


(Signature Inspector) 


IS 16735 : 2018 


ANNEX G 
(Clauses 9.2.3 and D-3.2) 
REQUIREMENTS FOR HYDROGEN BLENDS SERVICE 


G-1 GENERAL 


Tanks used for hydrogen blends service shall comply 
with all requirements of this standard, except as 
modified in G-2 through G-5. 


G-2 GAS COMPOSITION 


Fuel tanks shall be designed to be filled with 
compressed gaseous hydrogen blends containing more 
than 2 percent hydrogen by volume, combined with 
dry natural gas. The gas composition shall comply with 
the composition given in 4.6. 


G-3 HYDROSTATIC BURST PRESSURE TEST 


For the hydrostatic burst pressure test in 9.2.5, the liner 


burst pressure shall exceed 1.3 times the nominal 
working pressure. 


G-4 BONFIRE TEST 


The bonfire test shall be carried out as per H-7 except 
that under H-7.2, the cylinder shall be pressurized to 
the nominal working pressure with a hydrogen blend 
applicable to the design. 


G-5 NATURAL GAS CYCLING TEST 


The hydrogen gas cycling test in H-14 shall instead be 
conducted using compressed natural gas complying 
with the composition specified in IS 15490. 


ANNNEX H 
(Clause 9.2.3) 
TEST METHODS AND ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA 


H-1 COATING TESTS 


Coatings shall be evaluated in accordance with the 
following procedure: 


a) Adhesion testing in accordance with 
ISO 2409. A minimum rating of 4 shall be 
obtained when measured using Method A or 
B, as appropriate; 

b) Flexibility in accordance with ISO 1519, using 
test Method B with a 12.7 mm mandrel at the 
specified thickness at 20 °C. Samples for the 
flexibility test shall be prepared in accordance 
with ISO 1519. There shall be no visually 
apparent cracks; 

c) Impact resistance in accordance with 

ISO 6272-2. The coating at room temperature 

shall pass a forward impact test of 18 J; 

d) Chemical resistance in accordance with IS 101 

(Part 8/Sec 2) except as identified in the 

following. The tests shall be conducted using 

the open spot test method and 100 h exposure 
to a 30 percent sulphuric acid solution (battery 

acid with specific gravity of 1.219 and 24 h 


22 


exposure to a polyalkalene glycol (for 
example, brake fluid). There shall be no 
evidence of lifting, blistering or softening of 
the coating. The adhesion shall meet a rating 
of 3 when tested in accordance with ISO 4624; 
Light and water exposure using a UVA-340 
lamp in accordance with ISO 4892-1 for a 
minimum of 1 000 h. There shall be no 
evidence of blistering, and adhesion shall meet 
a rating of 3 when tested in accordance with 
ISO 4624. The maximum gloss loss shall be 
less than or equal to 20 percent; 


e) 


Salt spray exposure in accordance with 
ISO 9227 for a minimum 500 h. Undercutting 
shall not exceed 3 mm at the scribe mark. 
There shall be no evidence of blistering and 
adhesion shall meet a rating of 3 when tested 
in accordance with ISO 4624; and 


Resistance to chipping at room temperature 
in accordance with. The coating shall have a 
rating of 7A or better, and there shall be no 
exposure of the substrate. 


g) 


H-2 HYDROGEN COMPATIBILITY TESTS 


Hydrogen compatibility ofthe cylinder or liner material 
shall be demonstrated by one of the following: 


a) Demonstrating the hydrogen compatibility of 
the material in accordance with IS/ISO 
11114-4 for tanks with a nominal working 
pressure of 25 MPa; or 

b) Byconducting a hydrogen pressure cycle test 
with a complete cylinder with pressure cycles 
ranging from less than 3 MPa to 1.25 times 
the nominal working pressure. Hydrogen used 
for the test shall meet the composition 
requirements as in 4.6, and contain a volume 
fraction of oxygen of less than 1 x 10 *. Testing 
shall be performed at an ambient temperature 
of 40 +5 °C. Reduction ofthe internal volume 
of the tank by using filler material is permitted. 
The pressurization rate shall be such that the 
fuel tank pressure shall be raised from the 
minimum to the peak pressure in less than 
5 min. The fuel tank shall be maintained at 
the peak pressure for no less than 2 min during 
each pressure cycle. The cylinder shall not fail 
before reaching the number of filling cycles 
as specified per 4.4. If no leakage occurs 
within the required number of filling cycles 
as specified per 4.4, then the cycling shall 
continue for up to four times the required 
minimum number of filling cycles as specified 
per 4.4. During which time the tank may fail 
by leakage, but not by rupture. 


H-3 RESIN PROPERTIES TESTS 


For, Type 3 designs, resin shear strength shall be tested 
on three sample coupons representative of the 
composite over-wrap in accordance with ISO 15643. 
Following a 24 h water boil, the composite shall have 
a minimum shear strength of 13.8 MPa. For, Type 3 
designs, resin glass transition temperature shall be 
determined in accordance with IS 101 (Part 8/Sec 2) 
or equivalent. The test results shall be within the 
manufacturer’s specifications. 


H-4 HYDROSTATIC BURST PRESSURE TEST 


The cylinder shall be filled with a fluid such as water 
and the pressure shall be gradually increased until 
failure of the cylinder. The rate of pressurization shall 
not exceed 14 bar at pressures in excess of 80 percent 
of the design burst pressure. The rate of pressurization 
at pressures in excess of 80 percent of the design burst 
pressure shall not exceed 3.5 bar/s. It shall be ensured 
that the pressure measuring device is monitoring the 
true cylinder pressure, particularly when the 


23 


IS 16735 : 2018 


pressurization rate exceeds 0.35 MPa/s. Alternatively, 
there shall be a five second hold at the minimum design 
burst pressure. 


Unless different burst test criteria are specified for 
different test methods, the actual cylinder burst pressure 
shall exceed the minimum burst pressure given in 
Table 1 for the applicable cylinder design. In no case 
shall the burst pressure be less than the value necessary 
to meet the stress ratio requirements in Table 1. Actual 
burst pressure shall be recorded. 


A leak or rupture may occur in either the cylindrical 
region or the dome region of the cylinder. 


H-5 AMBIENT TEMPERATURE PRESSURE 
CYCLING 


Pressure cycling shall be performed in accordance with 
the following procedure: 


a) Fill the cylinder with a non-corrosive fluid 
such as oil, inhibited water or glycol; 

b) Cycle the pressure in the cylinder between 

20 bar and 260 bar at a rate not exceeding 


10 cycles per min. 


The cylinder shall be pressure cycled until failure or to 
a minimum of 3 times the number of filling cycles 
specified in 4.4. The cylinders shall not fail before 
reaching the number of filling cycles specified in 4.4. 
Cylinders exceeding the number of filling cycles 
specified in 4.4 shall fail by leakage and not by rupture. 
If failure occurs, the number of cycles to failure shall 
be reported, along with the location and description of 
the failure initiation. 


Cylinders achieving 3 times the number of filling cycles 
specified in 4.4 without failure need not perform the 
leak-before-break (LBB) test in H-6. 


H-6 LEAK-BEFORE-BREAK (LBB) TEST 


The cylinder shall be filled with a non-corrosive fluid such 
as oil, inhibited water or glycol and hydraulically pressure 
cycled from not more than 20 bar to not less than 1.5 times 
the working pressure at a maximum rate of 10 cycles/ 
min. The cylinder shall fail by leakage or shall exceed the 
number of filling cycles specified in 4.4. 


H-7 FIRE TEST 
H-7.1 General 


The fire test is designed to demonstrate that finished 
fuel tanks, complete with the cylinder manufacturer 
specified fire protection system, will not rupture when 
tested under specified fire conditions. 


Precautions shall be taken during fire testing in the event 
that a cylinder rupture occurs. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


H-7.2 Set-Up 
H-7.2.1 Test Procedure 


The cylinder shall be pressurized to the nominal 
working pressure with hydrogen and placed 
horizontally with the cylinder bottom approximately 
100 mm above the fire source. 


For the first part of the test (localized fire), the fire 
source shall be placed so that only the localized fire 
exposure area is exposed. The localized fire exposure 
area is defined as the area of a length of 250+ 50 mm, 
covering the entire diameter of the cylinder (width), 
measured from the point on the longitudinal axis ofthe 
cylinder located furthest from the non-reclosing 
thermally activated pressure relief device, part of the 
cylinder manufacturer specified fire protection system 


For the second part of the test (engulfing fire), the fire 
source shall cover up to a length of 1.65 m. 


In both cases, the fire source shall provide direct flame 
impingement on the cylinder surface across its entire 
diameter (width). Metallic shielding of at least 0.4 mm 
thickness shall be used to prevent direct flame 
impingement on cylinder valves, fittings, and/or 
pressure relief devices. The metallic shielding shall not 
be in direct contact with the cylinder manufacturer 
specified non-reclosing thermally activated pressure 
relief devices. 


A minimum 5 thermocouples shall be used to record 
the cylinder surface temperature on a maximum length 
of 1.65 m. At least 2 thermocouples shall be placed 


within the localized fire area. At least 3 thermocouples, 
equally spaced and not more that 0.5 m apart, shall be 
placed in the remaining area. All thermocouples shall 
be located adjacent to the outside surface ofthe cylinder 
along its longitudinal axis. Metallic shielding of 0.4 mm 
minimum thickness shall be used to prevent direct flame 
impingement on the thermocouples. 


H-7.3 Fire Source 


The fire source, which shall consist of liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) burners, shall produce a uniform 
minimum temperature on the tank surface. Wind shields 
shall be applied to ensure uniform heating. 


The arrangement of the fire shall be recorded in detail 
to ensure the rate of heat input to the cylinder is 
reproducible. 


H-7.4 Test Procedure 


Within 3 min of ignition, the localized fire exposure 
area shall be exposed to a temperature of at least 
600 °C, which shall be maintained for the next 5 min. 
The temperature outside the localized fire exposure area 
Is not specified during the first 8 min of ignition. Then 
within the next 2 minute interval, the cylinder shall be 
exposed to a minimum temperature of 800 °C and the 
fire source shall be extended to produce a fully- 
engulfing fire along the entire length and width of the 
tank (see Fig. 1). 


Thermocouple temperatures and cylinder pressure shall 
be recorded at intervals of every 10 s or less during the 


Elapsed Time After Ignition (Minutes) 
Measured Temperature (^C) 
Localized Fire 

Engulfing Fire 

Localized Fire Exposure Area 


PRONA<~x 


Region Outside the Localized Fire Exposure Area. 
The Temperature Increase Shall be Continuous. It Does not Need to be Linear. 


Fic. 1 SEQUENCE OF THE LOCALIZED FIRE TEST 


test. Temperature requirements shall be deemed to be 
met when the 1 min moving average of recorded 
temperatures for each thermocouple, measured during 
periods of constant heat input, meets the specified 
temperature requirements. Any failure to maintain the 
specified temperature requirements during a test shall 
invalidate the result and the test shall be repeated. 


H-7.5 Acceptable Results 


The cylinder content shall vent through the non- 
reclosing thermally activated pressure relief device, part 
of the cylinder manufacturer specified fire protection 
system, continually (without interruption) until the 
pressure falls to less than 1 MPa. Alternatively, the 
cylinder shall be held at temperature (engulfing fire 
condition) for 30 min. In both cases, the cylinder shall 
not rupture. An additional release through leakage (not 
including release through the non-reclosing thermally 
activated pressure relief device) that results in a flame 
with length greater than 0.5 m beyond the perimeter of 
the applied flame shall be cause for rejection. 


H-8 CHEMICAL EXPOSURE TEST 


H-8.1 Pre-Conditioning 


The following chemical exposure test procedure shall 
be performed on a finished cylinder, including the 
coating 1f applicable: 


The upper section of the cylinder shall be divided into 
five distinct areas and marked for pendulum impact 
preconditioning and fluid exposure (see Fig. 2). The 
five areas shall each be nominally 100 mm in diameter. 
The five areas do not need to be oriented along a single 
line, but they shall not overlap 


The approximate centre of each of the five areas shall 


IS 16735 : 2018 


be preconditioned by the impact of a pendulum body. 
The steel impact body of the pendulum shall have the 
shape of a pyramid with equilateral triangle faces and 
a square base, the summit and the edges being rounded 
to a radius of 3 mm. The centre of percussion of the 
pendulum shall coincide with the centre of gravity of 
the pyramid; its distance from the axis of rotation of 
the pendulum being 1 m and the total mass of the 
pendulum referred to its centre of percussion shall be 
15 kg. The energy of the pendulum at the moment of 
impact shall not be less than 30 J. During pendulum 
impact, the cylinder shall be held in position by the 
end bosses or by the intended mounting brackets. The 
cylinder shall not be under pressure during 
preconditioning. 


H-8.2 Exposure to Chemicals 


Each of the five preconditioned areas shall be exposed 
to one of five solutions (each solution shall be used 
and applied to only one preconditioned area). The five 
solutions are the following: 


a) Volume fraction of 19 percent sulphuric acid 
1n water; 

b) Mass fraction of 25 percent sodium hydroxide 
1n water; 

c) Volume fraction of 5 percent methanol in 
gasoline; 

d) Mass fraction of 28 percent ammonium nitrate 
in water; and 

e) Volume fraction of 50 percent methyl alcohol 


in water (that is windscreen washer fluid). 


During the exposure, orient the test cylinder with the 
fluid exposure areas on top. Place a pad of glass wool 
approximately 0.5 mm thick and 100 mm in diameter on 


Fic. 2 FUEL TANK ORIENTATION AND LAYOUT OF EXPOSURE AREAS 


25 


IS 16735 : 2018 


each of the five preconditioned exposure areas. Apply 
an amount of the test fluid to the glass wool sufficient to 
ensure that the pad is wetted evenly across its surface 
and through its thickness for the duration of the test. 


H-8.3 Pressure Cycling 


The cylinder shall then be filled with a non-corrosive 
fluid such as oil, inhibited water or glycol and 
hydraulically pressure cycled between 20 bar and 
260 bar for at least 0.6 times the number of filling cycles 
specified in 4.4. After pressure cycling, the cylinder 
shall be pressurized to 1.25 times the working pressure 
and held at that pressure for a minimum of 24 h. 


H-8.4 Acceptance Criteria 


When burst tested in accordance with H-4, the cylinder 
shall have a burst pressure that exceeds 1.8 times the 
working pressure. 


H-9 COMPOSITE FLAW TOLERANCE TESTS 
H-9.1 Flaw Cuts 


One finished cylinder, complete with protective coating, 
shall have flaws cut into the composite in the 
longitudinal direction. The flaws shall be greater than 
visual inspection limits as specified by the 
manufacturer. As a minimum, one flaw shall be 25 mm 
long and 1.25 mm in depth, and another flaw shall be 
200 mm long and 0.75 mm in depth, cut in the 
longitudinal direction into the cylinder sidewall. 


H-9.2 Test Procedure 


The flawed cylinder shall then be filled with a non-corrosive 
fluid such as oil, inhibited water or glycol and pressure 
cycled between 20 bar and 260 bar at ambient temperature 
for the number of filling cycles specified in 4.4. 


H-9.3 Acceptance Criteria 


The cylinder shall not leak or rupture within the first 
0.2 times the number of filling cycles specified in 4.4, 
but may fail by leakage during the last 0.8 times the 
number of filling cycles specified in 4.4. 


H-10 ACCELERATED STRESS RUPTURE TEST 


The cylinder shall be hydrostatically pressurized to 260 bar 
at 65?C. The cylinder shall be held at this pressure and 
temperature for 1 000 h. The cylinder shall then be 
pressurised to burst in accordance with the procedure 
specified in H-4, except that its burst pressure shall exceed 
80 percent of the average of the results obtained during 
the hydrostatic burst test as specified in 9.2.5. 


H-11 EXTREME TEMPERATURE PRESSURE 
CYCLING 


The finished cylinder, with the composite wrapping free 
of any protective coating, shall be cycle tested in 
accordance with the following procedure: 


26 


Condition for 48 h at zero pressure, 65?C or 
higher and 95 percent or greater relative 
humidity. The intent of this requirement shall 
be deemed met by spraying with a fine spray 
or mist of water in a chamber held at 65?C; 
b) Hydrostatically pressurize for 0.5 times the 
number of filling cycles specified in 4.4 
between 20 bar and 260 bar at 65?C or higher 
as measured on the cylinder surface and 95 
percent or greater relative humidity; 
Condition the cylinder and fluid at —40°C or 
lower as measured in the fluid and on the 
cylinder surface; and 


c) 


Pressurize from 20 bar to 200 bar for 0.5 times 
the number of filling cycles specified in 4.4, at 
—40?C or lower. Adequate recording 
instrumentation shall be provided to ensure the 
minimum temperature ofthe fluid is maintained 
during the low temperature cycling. 


d) 


The pressure cycling rate of H-11 b) shall not exceed 
10 cycles/min. The pressure cycling rate of H-11 d) 
above shall not exceed 3 cycles/minute unless a pressure 
transducer is installed directly within the cylinder. 


During this pressure cycling, the cylinder shall show 
no evidence of rupture, leakage or fibre unraveling. 


Following pressure cycling at extreme temperatures, 
cylinders shall be hydrostatically pressured to failure 
in accordance with H-4 and achieve a minimum burst 
pressure that exceeds 85 percent of the minimum design 
burst pressure. 


H-12 DROP TEST 
H-12.1 Test Procedure 


One or more finished cylinders shall be drop tested at 
ambient temperature without internal pressurization or 
attached valves. All drop tests may be performed on 
one cylinder, or individual impacts on a maximum 
of 3 cylinders. A plug may be inserted in the threaded 
ports to prevent damage to the threads and seal surfaces. 


The surface on to which the cylinders are dropped shall 
be a smooth, horizontal concrete pad or flooring or 
similar rigid surface: 


a) One cylinder shall be dropped in a horizontal 
position with the bottom 1.8 m above the 
surface on to which it is dropped; 

b) One cylinder shall be dropped vertically on 

each end at a sufficient height above the floor 

or pad so that the potential energy is 488J, 
but in on case shall the height of the lower 

end be greater than 1.8 m. 

c) One cylinder shall be dropped at a 45° angle 

on to a dome, from a height such that the centre 


of gravity 1s at 1.8 m; however, if the lower 
end is closer to the ground than 0.6 m, the 
drop angle shall be changed to maintain a 
minimum height of 0.6 m and a centre of 
gravity of 1.8 m; above the impact surface. 


No attempt shall be made to prevent the bouncing of 
cylinder, but the cylinders may be prevented from falling 
over during the vertical drop test described in H-12.1 b). 


H-12.2 Acceptance Criteria 


Following the drop impact, the cylinders shall then be 
pressure cycled between 20 bar and 260 bar at ambient 
temperature, for the number of filling cycles specified 
in 4.4. 


The cylinder(s) shall not leak or rupture within 0.2 times 
the number of filling cycles specified in 4.4, but may 
fail by leakage during the remaining test cycles. All 
cylinders which complete this test shall be destroyed. 


H-13 HYDROGEN GAS CYCLING TEST 


Special consideration shall be given to safety when 
conducting this test. Prior to conducting this test, cylinders 
ofthe same design shall have successfully passed the test 
requirements of H-4 (hydrostatic burst pressure test), H-5 
(ambient temperature pressure cycling) and. The cylinder 
to be used in the test shall have successfully passed the 
test requirements of H-15 (hydraulic test). 


The finished cylinder shall be pressure cycled using 
compressed hydrogen gas between 20 bar and 200 bar 
for 1 000 cycles, The filling time shall be less than or 
equal to five minutes, and the total cycle time shall be 
less than or equal to one hour. Every 100 cycles, there 
shall be a 24 h hold period at the working pressure. 


Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer, 
temperatures during the test shall be monitored using a 
thermocouple attached to the metal end boss at both 
ends of the cylinder. If only one boss end is exposed, 
the second temperature shall be obtained by inserting 
a probe into the cylinder to measure the gas temperature 
at the opposite end. Care shall be taken to ensure that 
temperatures during filling and venting do not exceed 
the defined service conditions. 


H-14 HARDNESS TEST 


Hardness tests shall be carried out at three places on 
the parallel wall, at the centre and nearer to domed ends 
of each cylinder or liner in accordance with IS 1500 
(Part 1) or using an equivalent method. The test shall 
be carried out after the final heat treatment and the 
hardness values thus determined shall be in the range 
specified for the design. 


H-15 HYDRAULIC TEST 


Any internal pressure applied after autofrettage and 


27 


IS 16735 : 2018 


prior to the hydraulic test shall not exceed 90 percent 
of the hydraulic test pressure. 


The hydraulic test shall be performed in accordance 
with the following procedure: 


a) Option I— volumetric expansion test: 

1) The cylinder shall be hydrostatically 
tested to at least 5/3 times working 
pressure. In no case shall the test pressure 
exceed the autofrettage pressure. 


Pressure shall be maintained for 30 s or 
sufficiently longer to ensure complete 
expansion. Any internal pressure applied 
after autofrettage and prior to the 
hydrostatic test shall not exceed 90 
percent of the hydrostatic test pressure. 
If the test pressure cannot be maintained 
due to failure of the test apparatus, it is 
permissible to repeat the test at a pressure 
increased by 7 bar. No more than 2 such 
repeat tests are permitted. 


2) 


3) Any cylinders not meeting the defined 
rejection limit shall be rejected and 
rendered unserviceable 

b) Option 2— proof pressure test: 

The hydrostatic pressure in the cylinder shall 
be increased gradually and regularly until the 
test pressure, at least 5/3 times working 
pressure is reached. The cylinder test pressure 
shall be maintained for at least 30 s to establish 


that there is no leak. 
H-16 LEAK TEST 


Cylinder designs shall be leak tested in accordance with 
the following procedure: 


a) 
b) 


Thoroughly dry the cylinder; and 

Pressurize the cylinder to working pressure 
with hydrogen or nitrogen containing a 
detectable gas such as helium. 

Any leakage detected shall be cause for rejection. 


H-17 COATING BATCH TESTS 


H-17.1 Coating Thickness 


The thickness of the coating shall be measured in 
accordance with IS 101 (Part 3/Sec 2) and shall meet 
the requirements of the design. 


H-17.2 Coating Adhesion 


The coating adhesion strength shall be measured in 
accordance with IS 101 (Part 5/Sec 2) and shall have a 
minimum rating of 4 when measured using either test 
Method A or B, as appropriate. 


IS 16735 : 2018 


ANNEX J 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


GSPC Gas Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Inox India Limited, Vadodara 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


RDCIS, Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


28 


Representative(s) 
Suri N. T. SHanu (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri Vep PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


Suri Sumit Roy 
SHRI A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
Suri RAJNEESH Chorra (Alternate) 


Suri P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KuaMkan (Alternate T) 
Suri H. D. KuaTRI (Alternate II) 


SHRI K. S. R. PRASAD 


SHRI ALOK K. GUPTA 
Suri P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RamBuat (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIkHILESH K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK PATWARDHAN 
Suri DEEPAK AcHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri S. Gorararan (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL K. Dey 
Suri S. B. Borma (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
Suni PRADEEP (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. THAKUR 
Suri A. K. Bera (Alternate) 


Suri S. MURALI 
Suri ArUN Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri Nauzer Dapasuoy (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
Suri Amir Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dn ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 


SHRI M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI SHAILENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16735 : 2018 


Representative(s) 


SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEAN! (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. JAIN 
Suri P. K. MarHun (Alternate) 


Suri S. J. VisPUTE 
Suri A.S LatKe (Alternate) 


SHRI A. RENGARAJAN, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High 
Pressure Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 


LINDE India Limited, Kolkata 
Adani Gas Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Esteem Gases Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


IOC, R&D, Faridabad 
Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Luxfer Uttam India Pvt Ltd, Faridabad 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


29 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


Suri PEEYUSH TRIPATHI 
Suri Amit Mau (Alternate) 


Suri Vay K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


Suri ANISH PATEL 
Suri K. R. SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri VED PRAKASH GAUTAM (Alternate) 


Suri Sumit Roy 
Suri A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
Suri Upay Kamaru (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KuaMkan (Alternate T) 
Suri H. D. Kuarni (Alternate II) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri V. Ramaswamy (Alternate T) 
Suri SUDHIR Jain (Alternate II) 


SHRI ALOK K Gupta 
Suri P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


Suri ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RamBuat (Alternate) 


Suri PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


Sarı D. K. GARG 
Suri N. K. Gana (Alternate) 


SHRI UMISH SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI AsHok K. NIGAM 
Sarı Manu Kumar Nicam (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDGOTHIA 
Suri V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate) 


SHRI KARAN BHATIA 
SHRI SANDEEP BHASIN (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


IS 16735 : 2018 


Organization 


Natural Gas Society, Noida 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Protego India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Rama Cylinders Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


30 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VIPIN CHANDRA CHITTODA 
Suri ViveK Josui (Alternate) 


Suri ASHENDRA SINGH 


SHRI PRASAD JAWAJI 
Suri BAL BHANDAVLE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY S. MANDE 
Suri Pramop W. Sancwal (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Gupta 
Suri Srinivas Rao (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
Suri Amir Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI SHAILENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. Benanı (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri M. K. Cuoupuani (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1293). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


