эла Arch IS 16366 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


paama учан эттей 


Glossary of Terms Used in 
Agrotextile 


ICS 59;01.040 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM чая, 9 етте эъ BÉ we feeei-110002 
Lm МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in | www.standardsbis.in 


October 2015 Price Group 6 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Technical 
Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The history of textiles reveals that specialized trades, users and industry required particular types of fabric, often 
contributing to the manufacture other products, like agrotextiles, such as shade nets, fishing nets, ground covers, 
mulch mats, crop covers, etc. Trade names or chemical names have been given to specialized fibres and fabrics 
and are now often used in addition to or instead of traditional terms. The consumer is now fully informed of the 
fibre content of a cloth and words like as polyester or polypropylene or polyethylene appear regularly on labels. 
In recent years, the use of plastic materials in agricultural and horticultural applications has increased and the 
basic terms related to these materials need to be understood properly. The design and development of new 
fabrics has also, provided consumers with new words. 


The worldwide textile industry is second only in size to agriculture and over the centuries has developed a vast 
array of regional and international technology and terminology. The origin of many terms in the textile industry 
are obscure and often, to the layman, quite mystifying. The terms used in agrotextiles can be interpreted by 
different persons, organizations and end users, etc. in different way and thus can lead to confusion and dispute in 
general and legal terms. As such these terms have to be defined to have a common meaning for all concerned so 
as to avoid misinterpretation and confusion. 


This glossary of textile terms used in agrotech applications is expected to be useful to people who design, produce 
and sell agrotextiles and for those buyers and policy makers who use and regulate such textiles. It sets out to 
avoid too much technical jargon and will help students, producers, retailers and consumers alike and stimulate 
their interest in agrotextiles. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


Indian Standard 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN AGROTEXTILE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes definitions of terms commonly 
used for agro-textiles. 


2 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following terms 
shall apply. 


2.1 General Terms 


2.1.1 Agriculture — It is science, art, or practice of 
cultivating the soil, producing crops, and raising 
livestock and in varying degrees the preparation and 
marketing of the resulting products. 


2.1.2 Agricultural Belting — A conveyor belt usually 
made of rugged PVC, consists of two end pulleys, with 
a continuous loop of material that rotates about them. 
The pulleys are powered, moving the belt and the 
product on the belt forward. Conveyor belts are 
extensively used to transport agricultural materials, 
such as grain, fodder and various farm equipment. 


NOTE — With a narrow window of opportunity when the crop 
must be harvested, timing is vital in agriculture. As the crops 
are taken up from the fields and moved through various 
processing stages, belting plays a key role. 


2.1.3 Agro-net House — Agro-net house is a framed 
structure covered by shade nets of different shade 
factors or any other woven material to allow required 
sunlight, moisture and air to pass through the gaps. It 
creates an appropriate micro-climate conductive to the 
plant growth. It is also referred as shade house or net 
house 


2.1.4 Agro-textiles — Any textile material used in 
agriculture, horticulture, forestry, animal husbandry 
and aquaculture such as fabrics (woven, non-woven 
or knitted), nets, crop covers, mulch, mats, ropes, etc. 


2.1.5 Air Laid Non-woven — An air laid web that has 
been bonded (see 2.1.7) by one or more techniques to 
provide fabric integrity. 


2.1.6 Anti-insect Fabric — It is a closely woven UV 
stabilized monofilament polypropylene biomesh used 
for a variety of applications. It has a strand density of 
32 strands per square inch. This provides an average 
opening between the strands of only half a millimetre. 
Sheets of biomesh may be used outdoors over a simple 
framework to effectively guard against pest as small 
as 0.5 mm. It can also be used in horticultural and 
agricultural structures covering ventilation openings 
to block out insects. 


2.1.7 Bonding — The process of combining fibres in 
webs into sheets by means of self adherence, solvent- 
based adhesives, thermally softened plastics, or by 
mechanical entanglement. 


NOTES 


1 Bonding is a critical step in the production of non-wovens, 
and the choice of the method and the material used is at least as 
important to ultimate functional properties as the basic fibres 
in the web. The bonding may be all over or restricted to 
predetermined, discrete sites. 


2 Bonding can be done in many ways: 

a) Binder fibres — Specially engineered low melting point 
fibres are blended with other fibres in a web, so that a 
uniformly bonded structure can be generated at low 


temperature by fusion of the binder fibre with adjacent 
fibres. 


b) Point bonding — The process of binding thermoplastic 
fibres into a non-woven fabric by applying heat and pressure 
so that a discrete pattern of fibre bonds is formed. This is 
also called spot bonding. 


c) Print bonding — The process of binding fibres into a non- 
woven fabric by applying an adhesive in a discrete pattern. 


d) Saturation bonding — A web bonding technique that 
saturates a web with an adhesive binder followed by drying 
and curing. 


e) Spray bonding — The process of binding fibres into a non- 
woven fabric involving the spray application of a binder. 


f) Stitch bonding — A bonding technique for non-wovens in 
which the fibres are connected by stitches sewn or knitted 
through the web. This is also known as quilting. 


2.1.8 Calender Bonding — Thermally bonding a web 
of loose fibres by passing them through the nip of a 
pair of calender rollers, of which one or both are heated. 
Plain or patterned rollers may be used (see Point 
Bonding). 


2.1.9 Cross Laid Non-woven — A cross laid web that 
has been bonded by one or more techniques to provide 
fabric integrity. 


2.1.10 Dry Laid Non-woven — The dry laid web of 
fibres that has been bonded by one or more bonding 
techniques to produce a fabric with integrity. 


2.1.11 Flexible Silos — Flexible textile silos, made of 
active-breathing, dust-tight, very strong and durable 
polyester fabric, guarantee constant grain quality and 
healthy livestock. Contrary to solid silos, flexible silos 
will also limit condensation, which means that the 
formation of mould is effectively prevented. Finally, 
the galvanized steel frame and the jacket and roof cover 
made of PVC coated polyester fabric, insure the silos 
are weather-resistant. 


2.1.12 Flexible Tanks — Flexible tanks are ideal for 


IS 16366 : 2015 


storing and transporting liquids (drinking water, 
hydrocarbons, chemical solutions, foodstuffs, 
industrial or agricultural waste, sludge, etc) and are 
manufactured using elastomer or plastomer materials, 
depending on the application, and reinforced with a 
high strength fabric insert (usually PVC). These are a 
simple and economic solution for several farming 
applications, thus replacing costly stainless steel tanks, 
and expensive glass or lead linings. 


2.1.13 Frost Cover Fabrics — Used primarily by 
professional growers for the protection of plants and 
golf course greens and tee boxes, frost cover fabrics 
help protect vegetation in winter time, or from sudden 
drops in temperature during unseasonable weather, 
which can cause extensive damage to landscaping and 
crops. 


2.1.14 Geo-membrane — Geo-membranes are very 
low permeability synthetic liners used to control fluid 
or gas migration within soil, rock, earth or any other 
geo-technical material, as integral part of a man-made 
product, structure or system. 


2.1.15 Greenhouse — A framed or inflated structure 
covered with transparent or translucent materials and 
large enough to walk in and grow crops under partial 
or fully controlled environmental conditions. 


NOTES 


1 The climatic conditions normally controlled are light, 
temperature, carbon dioxide level, relative humidity etc. 


2 UV stabilized cladding material mostly used in greenhouse 
are polyethylene film, glass, multi wall sheet of poly carbonate, 
poly methyl mac acrylate acrylic glass etc. 


3 Structural frames of greenhouse are generally made of GI 
pipe or MS angle, or wood or bamboo. 


2.1.16 HDPE Vermibed — HDPE Vermibed is a 
portable vermibed used in producing organic 
compost for organic farming. Vermicompost is made 
from farm waste and cowdung using earthworms. 


2.1.17 Horticulture — The science or art of cultivating 
fruits, vegetables, flowers, or ornamental plants, 
medicinal plants and their processing and preservation. 
Etymologically, horticulture can be broken down into 
two Latin words: hortus (garden) and colere (cultivate). 


2.1.18 Knitting — A method of producing a fabric by 
interlocking a series of loops of yarns or filaments. 
There are two basic knitting methods: 


a) Warp knitting — A method of knitting in 
which the yarns or filaments run in the 
machine direction. 


b) Weft knitting — A method of knitting in which 
one yarn or filament is interlooped with the 
previous course of loops made by the yarn. 
Circular knitting is acommon method of weft 
knitting. 


2.1.19 Knitted Fabric — A fabric made by interlocking 
yarns or filaments in a series of connected loops. 


2.1.20 Laminate Non-woven — A laminate of two or 
more layers of material in which the essential 
component is a non-woven material. 


2.1.21 Leno Bag — A bag made from leno fabric (for 
example PP, HDPE, etc) generally used for packaging 
and storage of fruits and vegetables and other 
perishable commodities. 


2.1.22 Leno Fabric — A fabric in which warp threads 
are made to cross one another, between the picks, 
during leno weaving. The crossing of the warp threads 
may be a general feature of plain leno fabrics (as in 
marquisette and some gauzes and muslins) or may be 
used in combination with other weave (as in some 
cellular fabrics). Leno weave is also called as gauze or 
doup weave. 


2.1.23 Low Tunnel Greenhouse — A miniature 
greenhouse. 


2.1.24 Meltblown Fabric — Non-woven fabric made 
by the conversion of molten polymer into a web. The 
molten plastic is blown with hot, high-velocity air 
through extruder die lips. The filaments exiting from 
the extruder are attenuated during their formation until 
they break. The fibres break into short lengths rather 
than being continuous, as those formed from the 
spinneret used in spun bonding. The short fibres, 
thereby created, are spread with cool quench air onto 
a moving belt called a forming fabric, or onto a drum, 
where they bond to each other on cooling to form a 
white, opaque, fine-fibred web. 


2.1.25 Meltblowing — The formation of a non-woven 
by extruding molten polymer through a die then 
attenuating and breaking the resulting filaments with 
hot, high-velocity air or steam. This results in short 
fibre lengths. The short fibres are then collected on a 
moving screen where they bond during cooling. 


2.1.26 Needle Punching — Mechanically binding a 
web to form a fabric by penetrating the web with an 
array of barbed needles that carry tufts of the web's 
own fibres in a vertical direction through the web. 


2.1.27 Nonwoven Fabric — A fabric made directly 
from a web of fibre, without the yarn preparation 
necessary for weaving and knitting. 


NOTES 


1 In a non-woven, the assembly of textile fibres is held together, 
a) by mechanical interlocking in a random web or mat; b) by 
fusing of the fibres, as in the case of thermoplastic fibres; or c) 
by bonding with a cementing medium such as starch, casein, 
rubber latex, a cellulose derivative or synthetic resin. Initially, 
the fibres may be oriented in one direction or may be deposited 
in a random manner. This web or sheet is then bonded together 
by one of the methods described above. 


2 Fibre lengths can range from 6 mm to 150 mm for crimped 
fibres up to continuous filament in spunbonded fabrics. 


3 The major technologies used to manufacture nonwoven fabric 
materials are hydroentangling or needling, carded thermal 
bonding, spunbonding and meltblowing. 
2.1.28 Polyhouse — A structure covered with 
polyethylene film is a polyhouse. 


2.1.29 Sealing Sheets — These urethane blend flexible 
membranes prevent leakage from under the tank and 
avoid costly and/or contaminated fluids from escaping 
into the soil. 


NOTE — Tanks for fluid products, whether it be water or liquid 
manure, usually have a bottom and resistant side walls composed 
of juxtaposed prefabricated panels. To better contain fluids and 
effluents, some of these are lined with special sealing sheets, 
or tank liners. Sealing sheets have proven to be a successful 
and economical method of solving a large variety of liquid 
containment problems. They are adaptable to nearly all shapes, 
sizes and types of tanks, and are resistant to a wide range of 
chemicals, industrial effluents and other liquids. 


2.1.30 Shade-net House — A framed structure made 
up of either GI pipe, or MS angle, or wood or bamboo 
or GI wire or RCC pole and covered with UV stabilized 
polyethylene monofilaments in woven and knitted form 
and is used in saving food grains, plants from sun, UV 
rays. Shade nets have different shading area 
percentages depending upon the type of plant grown 
to permit controlled sunlight sufficient for growth of 
plant by creating partially controlled climatic 
conditions of light intensity and heat during the day 
time to provide plants a comfortable stress free growth. 


2.1.31 Spunbond, Spunbonded — Spunbond fabrics 
are produced by depositing extruded, spun filaments 
onto a collecting belt in a uniform random manner 
followed by bonding the fibres. 


NOTES 


1 The fibres are separated during the web laying process by air 
jets or electrostatic charges. The collecting surface is usually 
perforated to prevent the air stream from deflecting and carrying 
the fibres in an uncontrolled manner. Bonding imparts strength 
and integrity to the web by applying heated rolls or hot needles 
to partially melt the polymer and fuse the fibres together. 


2 Since molecular orientation increases the melting point, fibres 
that are not highly drawn can be used as thermal binding fibres. 
Polyethylene or random ethylene-propylene copolymers are used 
as low melting bonding sites. Spunbond products are employed 
in carpet backing, geotextiles, and disposable medical/hygiene 
products. Since the fabric production is combined with fibre 
production, the process is generally more economical than when 
using staple fibre to make non-woven fabrics. 


2.1.32 Spunbond Non-woven, Spunbonded Non- 
woven — A fabric formed from spunbonded process 
that has been bonded by one or more methods to 
provide fabric integrity. 


2.1.33 Spunbond/Melt Blown Composite — A multiple 
layer fabric that is generally made of various alternating 
layers of spunbond and melt blown webs: SMS, 
SMMS, SSMMS, etc. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


2.1.34 Spunlace Bonding, Spunlaced Bonding — The 
method of bonding a web by interlocking and 
entangling the fibres about each other with high 
velocity streams of water (synonymous with 
hydroentangling). 
NOTE — Spunlacing, not to be confused with spunlaid, is 
generally produced from a web made up of staple fibres from a 
dry formed, carded system, but small quantities of spunlace 
bonding are done on production lines that use a wet laid forming 


process. A recent technical development is the production of a 
spunlaced non-woven from a spunlaid, continuous filament web. 


2.1.35 Spunlace Non-woven, Spunlaced Non-woven — 
A fabric produced by the spunlace technology. 


NOTE — Spunlace is synonymous with hydroentangling. 


2.1.36 Stitch Bond Non-woven — A non-woven 
produced by the stitch bonding process. 


2.1.37 Tarpaulins — A tarpaulin, or tarp, is a large 
sheet of strong, flexible, water-resistant or waterproof 
material, usually coated with plastic or latex. Tarps 
have multiple uses, including shelter from the elements 
(that is wind, rain, or sunlight), use as a ground sheet 
for equipment, or covering for protecting vehicles or 
wood piles. They are also used on outdoor market stalls 
to provide some protection from the weather. Tarps 
often have reinforced grommets at the corners and 
along the sides to form attachment points for rope. 


2.1.38 Thermal Bonded/Thermobonded — A web of 
fibres bonded by a thermal bonding (thermobonding) 
process. 


2.1.39 Thermal Bonding/Thermobonding — A 
technique for bonding a web of fibres in which a heat 
or ultrasonic treatment, with or without pressure, is 
used to activate a heat-sensitive material. The material 
may be in the form of homofil fibres, bicomponent 
fibres, fusable powders, as part of the web. The bonding 
may be applied all over (for example through or area 
bonding) or restricted to predetermined, discrete sites 
(for example point bonding). 


2.1.40 Trellising Twine — It is a twisted multifilament 
or fabricated tape twines for gently holding up the 
plants without the need of additional stake. 


NOTE — The twines wound on pulley with hanging and 
stopping bracket allows changing the effective length of twine 
as the plant grows. 


2.1.42 Wet Laying or Wet Forming — Wet laid non- 
wovens are produced in a process similar to paper 
making. The non-woven web is produced by filtering 
an aqueous suspension of fibre onto a screen conveyor 
belt or perforated drum. Many wet laid non-wovens 
are made with wood pulp or other natural fibres 
blended with synthetic fibres or fibreglass 


2.1.43 Wet Laid Non-woven — A wet laid web bonded 
by one or more techniques to provide fabric integrity. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


2.1.44 Woven Fabric — It is generally used to refer to 
fabric composed of two sets of yarns, warp and filling, 
that is formed by interlacing of these sets of yarns. 
However, there are woven fabrics in which three sets 
of yarn are used to give a tri-axial weave. In two- 
dimensional woven fabrics, there may be two or more 
warps and fillings in a fabric, depending on the 
complexity of the construction. 


NOTE — The manner in which the two sets of yarns are 
interlaced determines the weave. By using various combinations 
of the three basic weaves, plain, twill, and satin, it is possible 
to produce an almost unlimited variety of constructions. Other 
effects may be obtained by varying the type of yarns, filament 
or spun, and the fibre types, twist levels, etc. 


2.2 Textile Terms Used in Fishing 


2.2.1 Anchor Seine — An encircling net shot in the 
open sea using very long ropes to lay out the net and 
ropes on the seabed prior to hauling from a boat at 
anchor. 


2.2.2 Aquaculture Liners — Usually made of 
reinforced polypropylene used in tanks or ponds, which 
house fish in order to provide a controlled environment, 
with clear water that can be treated to minimize disease 
and nuisance weeds. 


NOTE — The material of liners must not emit any harmful 
chemicals. It must have excellent puncture and tear resistance, 
especially for farming applications where it will have to hold 
up to harvesting and cleaning, or where the liner is installed 
over a rocky surface. The liner must be fabricated and installed 
so that it is watertight-preventing seepage can be a major cost 
savings. 


2.2.3 Beach Seine — An encircling net shot from a 
small boat then drawn ashore by ropes. This is 
sometimes called a dragnet. 


2.2.4 Beam Trawl — A trawl towed on the seabed in 
which the net is held open by a wood or steel beam. 


2.2.5 Braided Fishing Line — It is one of the of earliest 
types of fishing line, made from natural and synthetic 
fibres is known for its high knot strength, lack of 
stretch, and great overall power in relation to its 
diameter. Braided fishing lines tend to have good 
resistance to abrasion. Their actual breaking strength 
will commonly well exceed their pound-test rating. 


2.2.6 Cast or Throw Net — A small round net with 
weights on the edges which is thrown by the fisher. 
Sizes vary up to about 4 m in diameter. The net is 
thrown by hand in such a manner that it spreads out on 
the water and sinks. Its use on the high seas is 
prohibited, but still occurs. 


2.2.7 Demersal Gear — A collective term for fishing 
gear that is used on the seabed. 


2.2.8 Dragnet — This is a general term which can be 
applied to any net which is dragged or hauled across a 


river or along the bottom of a lake or sea. The fishing 
depth of this net can be adjusted by adding weights to 
the bottom. 


2.2.9 Dredge — A rigid structure towed on the seabed 
usually for shellfish. 


2.2.10 Drift Net — Panel of gill nets set perpendicular 
to the surface, allowed to drift with the tide or current 
to catch fish. The drift net is a net that is not anchored, 
but is drifting with the current. It is usually a gill or 
tangle net, and hang vertically in the water column 
without being anchored to the bottom. The nets are 
keep vertical in the water by floats attached to a rope 
along the top of the net and weights attached to another 
rope along the bottom of the net. Drift nets generally 
rely on the entanglement properties of loosely affixed 
netting. Folds of loose netting, much like a window 
drapery, snag on a fish's tail and fins and wrap the fish 
up in loose netting as it struggles to escape. However, 
the nets can also function as gill nets, if fish are captured 
when their gills get stuck in the net. The size of the 
mesh varies depending on the fish being targeted. 


2.2.11 Drive-in Net — A drive-in net is another fixed 
net, dustpan-shaped, resembling a trawl net with long 
wings. The front part of the net is laid along the seabed. 


2.2.12 Entangling Nets — Nets with large meshes set 
on the seabed to capture shellfish and large whitefish 
such as monk, ray and turbot (also known as ray nets). 


2.2.13 Fishing Lines — Ropes and lines made of fibre 
lengths, twisted or braided together to provide tensile 
strength. They are used for pulling, but not for pushing. 
The availability of reliable and durable ropes and lines 
has had many consequences for the development and 
utility of fishing nets, and influences particularly the 
scale at which the nets can be deployed. 


2.2.14 Fishing Net — A net used for fishing and 
consists of usually meshes formed by knotting a 
relatively thin thread. Modern nets are usually made 
from monofilament or multifilament of nylon, 
polyester or HDPE although nets of organic 
polyamides such as wool or silk thread are also used. 


2.2.15 Fixed Nets — Panel of gill nets anchored 
perpendicular in the water to catch fish. 


2.2.16 Fyke Net — Is a conical shaped trap net with a 
circular or D shaped opening often with a guide panel/s 
of netting often used to catch eels. Fyke nets are bag- 
shaped nets which are held open by hoops. These can 
be linked together in long chains, and are used to catch 
eels in rivers. If fyke nets are equipped with wings and 
leaders, they can also be used in sheltered places in 
lakes where there is plenty of plant life. Hundreds of 
these nets can be connected into systems where it is 
not practical to build large traps. 


2.2.17 Gill Nets — Single wall of netting which can 
either be fixed or allowed to drift. They catch fish by 
enmeshing or entangling them usually around their gill 
covers. 


2.2.18 Handlines — Fishing with a single fishing line 
by hand. Handlines is also a term used for 'gurdy' 
fishing for mackerel (a large hand operated reel). 


2.2.19 Heavy Otter Trawl — Any otter trawl that uses 
any of the following: 


a) Sheet netting of greater than 4 mm twine 
thickness, 

b) Rockhoppers or discs of 200 mm or above 
diameter, and 

c) A chain for the foot/ground line (instead of 
wire). 


2.2.20 Industrial Trawl — Small mesh towed net used 
to catch fish (such as sandeels, blue whiting or horse 
mackerel) for purposes other than human consumption. 


2.2.21 Jigging — It is a type of fishing with a rod or 
machine and is a type of fishing lure. A sinker with 
hooks on a single or multiple lines is jerked to attract 
many species of fish in both fresh and saltwater. 
Trolling is a method of towing artificial lures to attract 
fish. 


2.2.22 Light Otter Trawl — Any otter trawl that uses 
anything less than the definition of a heavy otter trawl. 


2.2.23 Longlines — Longlines that can be anchored 
or drifting, comprising backing lines, of variable 
lengths, to which are attached a series of baited hooks 
on snoods. 


2.2.24 Mid-water Trawl — Trawl towed by one vessel 
using a set of otter boards (trawl doors) designed for 
the midwater to open the net horizontally. The position 
within the water column is controlled by the speed of 
the vessel and the amount of weight on the wing ends. 


2.2.25 Mid-water Trawl (Pair) — As above but towed 
by two vessels. 


2.2.26 Monofilament Fishing Line — It is fishing line 
made from a single fibre of plastic. Most fishing lines 
are now monofilament because monofilament fibres 
are cheap to produce and are produced in a range of 
diameters which have different tensile strengths. 
Monofilament line is also manufactured in different 
colours, such as clear, white, green, blue, red, and 
fluorescent. 


Monofilament is made by melting and mixing polymers 
and then extruding the mixture through tiny holes, 
forming strands of line, which is then spun into spools 
of various thicknesses. The extrusion process controls 
not only the thickness of the line but its test as well. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


2.2.27 Multifilament Fishing Line — Multifilament 
Line (also referred to as The Super Lines) is a type of 
fishing line. It is a braided line which is made up of a 
type of polyethylene, an extremely thin line for its 
strength. By weight, polyethylene strands are five to 
ten times sturdier than steel. Multifilament line is 
almost similar to braided dacron in terms of sensitivity 
but a diameter about one-third that of monofilament. 


Multifilament works best on conventional and 
baitcasting reels. On spinning and spincasting reels, 
the line's limpness can make sure for awkward 
manipulation, as it doesn't spring off the reel like 
monofilament. Consequently, knot-tying is more 
difficult with multifilaments. Certain knots work better 
with superline, like the palomar knot. Applying a type 
of super glue will help to prevent other types of knots 
from slipping. 


This type of fishing line is expensive, sometimes four 
times the cost of equivalent monofilament. This can 
become a considerable expense, especially considering 
that the line is so thin that you need more of it to fill a 
reel spool. Sometimes, a backing of monofilament or 
other line is used under the braided line on the spool. 


2.2.28 Multi-rig Trawl/Outrig Trawl — The method 
of towing two or more otter trawls side by side. 


2.2.29 Otter Trawl — A trawl towed on the seabed, 
held open by a pair of otter boards (trawl doors). 
Typically allows greater ground cover than a beam 
trawl. There are a wide variety of otter trawl varieties 
depending upon the nature of the ground to be fished 
and the target species. This includes light and heavy 
otter trawl designs. Heavy otter trawls include rock- 
hopper ground rope designs. 


2.2.30 Pair Seine — A trawl towed between two boats 
but longer lengths (as much as 3 500 m) of seine net 
ropes and combination wire. Used to fish large areas 
of clean ground and can cover a swept area of 300 to 
750 metres. 


2.2.31 Pair Trawl — A trawl towed between two 
boats, either on the seabed or in mid-water, held open 
by the distance apart of the two vessels. Covers small 
areas of hard seabed and can cover a swept area of 
250 to 450 metres between boats with/without otter 
boards (trawl doors). 


2.2.32 Pelagic Fishing — Fishing for targeted fish in 
the water column rather than on the sea floor. 


2.2.33 Pulse Beam Trawl — An innovative new 
whitefish beam trawl method using electric current. 


2.2.34 Pump Scoop Dredging — A small shallow 
drafted boats tow or drag metal baskets along the 
seabed to collect cockles and clams. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


2.2.35 Purse Seine — A large net used to surround a 
shoal of pelagic fish, the bottom of which is then drawn 
together to enclose them. 


2.2.36 Ring Net — Net operated by surrounding a 
shoal of pelagic fish with a wall of netting, often 
operated by two boats. Works in a similar manner as a 
purse seine. 


2.2.37 Scottish/Fly Seine — An encircling net shot in 
the open sea using very long ropes to lay out the net 
and ropes on the seabed prior to towing the net closed 
and hauling from a boat under its own power. 
Sometimes called fly dragging, fly shooting or Danish 
seine. 


2.2.38 Semi Pelagic Trawling — Towing a trawl close 
to the seabed but not in contact with it. 


2.2.39 Shrimp Push-Nets — A triangular shape hand 
net with wooden or metal frame used to collect shrimp. 
A handle is attached to the frame and pushed along 
the surface of sand in order to collect the shrimp. 


2.2.40 Stake Nets — Is a net fixed by stakes generally 
in rivers or where the sea ebbs and flows in shallow 
intertidal zones. 


2.2.41 Static/Passive Gear — A collective term for 
gear set to allow fish to swim into it, or they are 
attracted to it by bait and consequently become caught 
by the gear, specifically nets, longlines and traps. 


2.2.42 Suction Dredging — The use of hydraulic 
dredger to collect cockles. 


2.2.43 Seine Net — A seine is a large fishing net that 
may be arranged in a number of different ways. In purse 
seine fishing the net hangs vertically in the water by 
attaching weights along the bottom edge and floats 
along the top. A simple and commonly used fishing 
technique is beach seining, where the seine net is 
operated from the shore. 


2.2.44 Shore Operated Stationary Lift Nets — These 
are held horizontally by a large fixed structure and 
periodically lowered into the water. Huge mechanical 
contrivances hold out horizontal nets with diameters 
of twenty metres or more. The nets are dipped into the 
water and raised again, but otherwise cannot be moved. 
The nets may hold bait or be fitted with lights to attract 
more fish. The most famous examples are found at 
Kochi, India, where they are known as Chinese fishing 
nets (Cheena vala). 


2.2.45 Shrimp Net — A dredge net fixed upon a pole, 
or a sweep net dragged over the fishing ground. 


2.2.46 Stake Net — A stake net is a form of net for 
catching fish in shallow inter-tidal zones. It consists 
of a sheet of network stretched on stakes fixed into the 


ground, generally in rivers or where the sea ebbs and 
flows, and is used for catching the fish. 


2.2.47 Surrounding Net — A surrounding net 
surrounds fish on all sides. It is an evolution of the 
seine, and is typically used by commercial fishers. 


2.2.48 Tangle Net — It is also known as tooth nets, 
are similar to gillnets, except that they have a smaller 
mesh size designed to catch the fish by the teeth or 
upper jaw bone instead of by the gills. 


2.2.49 Trammel — A trammel is a fishing net with 
three layers of netting that is used to entangle fish or 
crustacea A slack central layer with a small mesh is 
sandwiched between two taut outer layers with a much 
larger mesh. The net is kept vertical by the floats on 
the head rope and weights on the bottom rope. 


2.2.50 Trawl Net — A large net, conical in shape, 
designed to be towed along the sea bottom. The trawl 
is pulled through the water by one or more boats, called 
trawlers or draggers. The activity of pulling the trawl 
through the water is called trawling or dragging. 


2.2.51 Twine — A light string or strong thread 
composed of two or more smaller strands or yarns 
twisted together. More generally, the term can be 
applied to a cord. Natural fibres used for making twine 
include cotton, sisal, jute, hemp, henequen, and coir. 
A variety of synthetic fibres may also be used. 


2.2.52 Towed Gear — The gear is towed through the 
water, either on or off the seabed, to overrun the target 
species or herd them into the net. 


2.2.53 Trammel Nets — It consists of three parallel 
panels of nets with different mesh sizes which can be 
used to catch a much wider variety of species. 


2.2.54 Traps — A collective term for structures into 
which fish or shellfish are guided or enticed through 
funnels that encourage entry but limit escape. Pots, 
creels, fish traps. 


2.2.55 Wing Beam Trawl — Uses sumwing and tickler 
chains to fish for whitefish. 


2.3 Textile Terms Used for Plant Protection Nets 


2.3.1 Bird Protection Nets — UV stabilized nets made 
from polyester or light weight polypropylene 
monofilaments, polyethylene tape yarns and sometimes 
knitted nylon nets, used to protect crops against damage 
caused by aerial bird raids and attacks from larger 
ground animals such as pigeons, butterflies and other 
similar birds. 


NOTE — The netting apertures allow smaller essential 
pollinating insects through. 


2.3.2 Braided Netting Twine — The product of 


braiding or plaiting netting yarns and/or netting twines. 


2.3.3 Cabled Netting Twine — The product of further 
twisting operations embracing two or more netting twines. 


2.3.4 Cherry Covers — They are polypropylene nets 
used for protection of cherry crop throughout the 
season from frost, rain, hail and wind. 


2.3.5 Circular Bale and Pallet Nets — Lightweight 
polyethylene nets used for securing circular hay bales 
and for stabilising pallets and piles of boxes so that 
they can be transported safely. 


2.3.6 Deer Fencing Netting — A very high strength, 
lightweight 1.8 m high fence netting manufactured 
from UV stabilised and rot proof polypropylene. 


NOTE — The deer netting shall be installed by battening to 
the fencing posts to ensure the mesh filaments are not damaged. 


2.3.7 Hails Protection Nets — UV stabilised 
polyethylene monofilament nets in woven/knitted form 
used to cover plants and fruit orchards usually of small 
mesh size to protect them from being damaged by 
hailstones, but does not restrict their growth. 


2.3.8 Harvesting Nets — Nets usually made from 
polyethylene or polyester monofilaments or 
polyethylene tape yarns used for collecting fruits which 
fall off the tree when they are ripe, or which have to be 
shaken off the tree. 


NOTE — The nets are placed underneath the trees until the 
harvesting period is over. This simplifies and rationalises the 
harvesting process considerably. The size of openings in the 
net can be varied, depending on the size of the fruit. The holes 
are produced by varying the pillar stitch/inlay lapping. 


2.3.9 Insect Protection Nets — A light hand net made 
of fine woven screens generally made of synthetics 
fibres such as nylon, polyester, etc, used to protect 
plants from pests attack or for catching insects 


2.3.10 Insect Mesh /Fine Screening Netting — It is a 
high quality extruded HDPE plastic fine screening 
mesh, with a fine mesh structure offering effective 
protection from the smallest of insects and debris. The 
mesh provides excellent light transmission and allows 
good air-flow. The fine screening mesh is rigid, so that 
it can be installed in panels and used as insect netting 
in both temporary and permanent applications. 


NOTE — Insect mesh can be used as a fencing or as part of an 
industrial application to keep insects and mosquitos out 
(cladding, eaves, double glazing windows and conservatory 
construction). 


2.3.11 Knotless Netting — Netting constructed by 
joining together the filaments in the twines to form 
meshes without external knots. 


2.3.12 Mesh — A design formed opening, surrounded 
by netting material. There are several types of mesh 
shapes. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


2.3.12.1 Diamond mesh — A mesh composed of four 
sides of the same length. 


2.3.12.2 Square mesh — A diamond mesh in which 
adjacent sides are at right angles. 


2.3.12.3 Hexagonal mesh — A mesh composed of six 
sides, out of which the length of one pair of opposite 
sides can be different from that of the other four sides, 
in case of an irregular hexagon. 


2.3.13 Net — An open fabric made by knotting the 
intersections of thread, cord, or wires to form meshes 
so as to stretch in one or both directions. 


NOTE — Net can be made by hand or machine in a variety of 
mesh sizes and weights matched to varying end uses, that is 
veils, curtains, fish nets, and heavy cargo nets. 


2.3.14 Netting — A meshed structure of indefinite 
shape and size composed of one yarn or of one or more 
systems of yarns interlaced or joined, or obtained by 
other means, for example by stamping or cutting from 
sheet material or by extrusion 


2.3.15 Netting Twine — The product of one twisting 
operation embracing two or more single yarns or 
monofilaments. 


2.3.16 Netting Yarn — All types of yarns suitable for 
the manufacture of netting. 


NOTES 


1 The principal types of netting yarns are twines. The latter are 
defined below. The size of netting yarn is indicated by its linear 
density expressed in the unit tex of the Tex system. The size of 
the final product is expressed by the resultant linear density. 


2 The resultant linear density is the reciprocal of runnage which 
expresses the length per unit mass, in metres per gram or per 
kilogram. 


2.3.17 Percentage Open Area — The percentage of 
light that passes through the fabric i.e. the ratio of the 
open area in the fabric to the total fabric area expressed 
as a percentage. 


2.3.18 Percentage Shading Area — 100 minus 
percentage open area. For example, a 40 percent shade 
net is equivalent to having 60 percent of the light 
passing through it. 


2.3.19 Plant Net — A vertical or tiered net made from 
polyethylene or polypropylene monofilaments to keep 
the fruits, which grow close to the ground, away from 
the damp soil by allowing them to grow through 
vertical or tiered nets in order to keep the amount of 
decayed fruit to a minimum. 


2.3.20 Plant Support Netting / Pea and Bean Net — 
A high strength, yet lightweight polypropylene mesh 
netting designed to support all climbing plants, 
vegetables and long-stemmed ornamental flowers 
encouraging healthy growth from seedling to maturity. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


NOTE — Plant support nets can be used vertically to support 
and encourage the growth of climbing vegetable crops including 
garden peas, runner beans, cucumbers, marrows, courgettes, 
tomatoes, sweet peas and clematis by providing the crops with 
lateral support. The netting is usually stretched or draped over 
a support frame, bamboo canes or against a wall. The plastic 
mesh netting is UV stabilised and rot resistant 


2.3.21 Root Ball Net — Nets generally made of 
synthetic fibres used for protection of young plants so 
that root system is not damaged when they are dug up, 
transplanted or replanted. 


2.3.22. Shade-house — A green-house style structure, 
covered in porous shade-cloth for the sole purpose of 
provided shade for the contents. 


2.3.23 Shade Nets — It is generally made of UV 
stabilized PP or HDPE in knitted and woven form used 
for growth of plants in horticulture, floriculture and 
sericulture. 


2.3.24 Shelter Shade Fence/Garden Fencing Mesh — 
A heavy duty UV stabilised polyethylene barrier 
fencing mesh for many applications in horticulture and 
gardening such as garden fence, or keeping pets like 
dogs confined or as windbreak fencing. It can be used 
as a snow fence and sand fencing in extreme conditions. 


2.3.25 Sun Protection Nets — Warp-knitted nets made 
from UV resistant synthetic fibres used in hot countries 
for protecting plants and people from harmful UV rays 
and heat by placing over play areas, car parks, patios 
and terraces. 


NOTE — The low weight of nets makes it easy for them to be 
erected easily over banks of seats and play areas and they can 
be even disassembled with ease. They are a cheap and flexible 
alternative to traditional, static sun-screens. 


2.3.26 Throwover Net — Net or shade cloth placed 
over an item or plant for a short-term only; usually 
there is very little supporting structure other than the 
item or plant itself. Intended to be easily removed after 
it has served its purpose. 


2.3.27 Windbreak Fencing Mesh/Windbreak 
Cladding — A UV stabilised and rot resistant high 
strength extruded HDPE fencing mesh designed to 
offer essential protection for crops, nurseries, house 
farmed animals and gardens from destructive winds, 
driving rain and drifting snow. 


NOTE — The Windbreak mesh should be erected by battening 
to wooden fence posts, or by battening to existing chain link 
fencing around sports grounds. Battening ensures that the forces 
exerted onto the wind break mesh filaments are spread evenly 
ensuring that the mesh will not tear. The windbreak mesh will 
offer maintenance free protection. 


2.3.28 Wind Protection Nets/Wind-Breaks — Nets 
generally made of monofilaments (PP or polyester) or 
polyethylene tape yarns, used to protect fields of young 
plants, trees or the harvest from being damaged by the 
wind. 


NOTE — Erecting wind-breaks at right angles protects the 
young seedlings and the mature plants from dying out and being 
broken. The nets used here reduce the effects of high winds and 
even help to keep out airborne sand and salt in areas close to 
the sea. Protecting plants from high winds also encourages plant 
growth and reduces the number of irrigation cycles required. 


2.4 Textile Terms Used for Ground Covers 


2.4.1 Composite Turf Reinforcement Mat (C-TRM) — 
A rolled erosion control product composed of non- 
degradable synthetic fibres, filaments, nets, wire mesh 
and/or other elements, processed into a permanent, 
three-dimensional matrix of sufficient thickness. 
Composite Turf Reinforcement Mats (C-TRM), which 
may be supplemented with degradable components, 
are designed to impart immediate erosion protection, 
enhance vegetation establishment and provide long- 
term functionality by permanently reinforcing 
vegetation during and after maturation. 


NOTE — C-TRMs are typically used in hydraulic applications, 
such as high flow ditches and channels, steep slopes, stream 
banks and shorelines, where erosive forces may exceed the limits 
of natural, un-reinforced vegetation or in areas where limited 
vegetation establishment is anticipated. 


2.4.2. Erosion Control Blanket (ECB) — A temporary 
degradable rolled erosion control product composed 
of processed natural or polymer fibres mechanically, 
structurally or chemically bound together to form a 
continuous matrix to provide erosion control and 
facilitate vegetation establishment by reducing seed 
and soil loss. 


NOTE — Organic erosion control blankets range from 
lightweight straw blankets to heavier, slower degrading coconut 
blankets. Each blanket stitched together using biodegradable 
thread and held together using photodegradable plastic netting. 
For longer-term protection, turf reinforcement mats, made from 
polypropylene are used. 


2.4.3 Floating Row Cover — A fibre sheet that is 
placed over a row or bed of plants for protection from 
heat, cold, or insects. 


2.4.4 Flower and Vegetable Support Mesh — A high 
strength polypropylene flower and vegetable support 
mesh provides crop row stability and assists in 
preventing stem and bloom damage. Plastic netting can 
offer less stem abrasion than traditional wire netting 
andis cost-effective and easily disposed of. Distinctive 
mesh colour is essential to make the netting highly 
visible amongst dense crop foliage for improved 
handling and reduced accidental cuts. 


2.4.5 Grass Protection Matting — A reusable heavy 
duty HDPE reinforcement mesh bonded to a strong 
needle punched nonwoven fabric used to provide two 
functions for the temporary protection and access 
requirements on grass surfaces depending whether the 
mesh or fabric is laid upwards. 


NOTE — It is particularly necessary in wet and muddy 


conditions. It protects the grass surface and allows pedestrian 
and vehicle access on wet and muddy grass. 


2.4.6 Grass Reinforcement Matting — A flexible 
polypropylene mesh designed for applications around 
children play areas, playgrounds and for equestrian 
surfaces where a softer mesh is required in case of a 
fall. 


NOTE — When used on grass, the mesh allows the grass sward 
to grow through the mesh apertures, producing a reinforced 
natural looking grass surface with the benefit of a critical fall 
height cushioning. This mesh structure design increases slip 
resistance and the soft flexible elastomeric polymer blend 
behaves similar to rubber matting further increasing slip 
resistance 


2.4.7 Grass Reinforcement Protection Mesh — A 
heavy duty thick polyethylene grid for reinforcing and 
protecting grassed surfaces prone to wear, rutting and 
smearing which can result in a muddy surface 
incapable of withstanding vehicular or pedestrian 
applications. 


2.4.8 Greenhouse Light Reflective Flooring — This 
bright white flooring cover manufactured from a 
heavy-duty commercial grade of UV stabilized 
polypropylene provides excellent available light 
reflectivity from the floor back into dense crop foliage. 
Greenhouse flooring will resist heavy foot traffic and 
wear from greenhouse trolleys and is usually highly 
breathable in order to limit the likelihood of the covered 
soil going sour. 


2.4.9 Ground Cover Fabric — It refers to any plant 
material low to the ground, made from PP/Polyester 
that can be used to cover areas where grass will not 
grow or is not desired. Ground cover fabrics are made 
up of natural or synthetic materials that are either 
woven or non woven products, spun bonded or needle 
punched used to suppress weed growth around the crop 
by covering the soil, blocking extreme climatic 
conditions of sunlight or cold. 


2.4.10 Insulation Nets — They are near transparent 
knitted nets used in protecting crops from heavy rain, 
pests and frosts. Their permeable construction allows 
air and moisture to travel through them at a reduced 
and controlled rate. Insulation nets are often used as 
a horizontal curtain within a structure to create an 
overhead thermal barrier. They usually provide 
minimal shading to the crop for improved crop 
performance in duller and cooler winter/spring 
months. 


2.4.11 Landscape Fabric — A loosely woven or spun 
bonded non-woven synthetic fabric placed over the 
soil, but under the mulch. It allows the movement of 
air, water, and fertilizers into the soil. It provides a 
barrier for weeds to germinate. This is then dressed 
with mulch of any kind. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


NOTES 


1 Fabric may be woven or spun bonded, and shall be a product 
specifically designed for weed control. Geotextiles with a high 
percentage of closed space have been found to be most effective. 


2 Black plastic is not a suitable substitute for landscape fabric 
as it does not permit air and water to pass to the growing 
medium. 
2.4.12 Mat — A covering of straw or fabric, for 
hotbeds and coldframes, to protect the plants against 
injurious cold. 


2.4.13 Mulch — Itis an aesthetic ground cover applied 
to planted areas at the time of planting to suppress weed 
growth. It covers the soil, blocks light and prevents 
the competitive weed growth around seed links. Mulch 
is not intended to replace vegetation as an exclusive 
ground cover, nor is it to be utilized as a growing 
medium in the landscape. 


2.4.14 Mulch Control Netting (MCN) — A planar 
woven natural fibre or extruded fabric mesh used as a 
temporary degradable rolled erosion control product 
to anchor loose fibre mulches. 


2.4.15 Mulch Mats — A mat used to cover soil around 
a plant root zone with a view to modify soil 
environment favorably to conserve soil moisture, 
moderate soil temperature and suppress weed growth 
in horticultural crop production. 
NOTE — Materials such as plant leaves, hay, paddy straw, 
paddy husk, jowar trash, saw dust, dry grass, dry sugarcane 
leaves, dry coconut leaves, coconut hush, paper, crop residue 


or the like including synthetic fibre, plastic films, nets or jute 
fibre can be used as mulch mat. 


2.4.16 Plastic Mulch Mat — It is generally made from 
polyethylene monolayer/multilayer films of various 
thicknesses. 


2.4.17 Permanent Rolled Erosion Control Products 
— Products used for applications where natural 
vegetation alone will not sustain expected flow 
conditions and/or provide sufficient long-term erosion 
protection, furnish a permanent rolled erosion control 
product with the necessary performance properties to 
effectively control erosion and reinforce vegetation 
under the expected long-term site conditions. 


2.4.18 Rolled Erosion Control Products (RECP) — 
A temporary degradable or long-term non degradable 
material manufactured or fabricated into rolls designed 
to reduce soil erosion and assist in the growth, 
establishment and protection of vegetation. 


2.4.19 Sunscreen — UV stabilised warp-knitted nets 
used to protect fields and greenhouses from the intense 
solar radiation for healthy plant growth and good 
harvest. Sunscreen nets with open mesh construction 
are used to control sunshine and amount of shade 
required. These net fabrics allow the air to flow freely. 
So the excess heat does not build up under the screen. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


The percentage of shadow varies according to the 
density of threads. 


2.4.20 Turf Protection Net — A protective soil cover 
of straw, wood, coconut fibre or other suitable plant 
residue, or plastic fibres formed into a mat, usually 
with a plastic or biodegradable mesh on one or both 
sides. Erosion mats are rolled products available in 
many varieties and combination of materials and with 
varying life spans. 


2.4.21 Turf Reinforcement Mesh — An extruded 
HDPE mesh for the protection and reinforcement of 
grass and turf. The turf reinforcement mesh stabilises 
the grass and enables the grass to intertwine with the 
plastic mesh filaments creating a strong stable 
reinforced grassed surface. The grass protection mesh 
is ideal for pedestrian and light vehicle use, overflow 
car parks, and airport taxi-ways. 


2.4.22 Turf Reinforcement Mat (TRM) — A rolled 
erosion control product composed of non-degradable 
synthetic fibres/filaments (polyester or polypropylene), 
nets, wire mesh and/or other elements, processed into 
a permanent, three-dimensional matrix of sufficient 
thickness to greatly reinforce the root system of the 
desired vegetation for permanent erosion protection 
in high flow channels and on critical slopes. TRMs, 
which may be supplemented with degradable 
components, are designed to impart immediate erosion 
protection, enhance vegetation establishment and 
provide long-term functionality by permanently 
reinforcing vegetation during and after maturation. 


NOTE — TRMs are typically used in hydraulic applications, 
such as high flow ditches and channels, steep slopes, stream 
banks, and shorelines, where erosive forces may exceed the 
limits of natural, unreinforced vegetation or in areas where 
limited vegetation establishment is anticipated. 


10 


2.4.23 Temporary Rolled Erosion Control Products 
— Products used for applications where natural 
vegetation alone will provide sufficient permanent 
erosion protection, furnish a temporary rolled erosion 
control product with the necessary longevity and 
performance properties to effectively control erosion 
and assist in the establishment of vegetation under the 
anticipated immediate site conditions. 


2.5 Textile Terms Used for Animal Husbandry 


2.5.1 Identification Belts — It is made of nylon and 
polyester used for cows identification. 


2.5.2 Livestock Ground Fabric — A high-strength, 
long-lasting ground fabric used to keep cattle and other 
agricultural animals off wet and soft soil patches. 
Livestock fabrics are used for aggregate roads and 
paths and under feed lots, as well as for the protection 
of livestock in stalls or holding areas in farming 
operations. 


2.5.3 Milk Filters — Non-woven fabrics are used to 
filter the milk in automatic milking systems. 


2.5.4 Poultry Curtains — Curtains made from 
polyester fibres/filament used to protect precious flocks 
of farm fowl, which offer light control, thermal 
protection and ventilation control, even at sub-freezing 
temperatures. 


2.5.5 Tether — A rope, chain, or similar restraint for 
holding an animal in place, allowing a short radius in 
which it can move about. 


2.5.6 Udder Nets — Textile nets are used to support 
the large baglike organ containing the mammary 
glands, characteristic of certain female mammals, such 
as cows, sheep, and goats, etc, known as udders. 


IS 16366 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 
The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Co-ordination House Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, Mumbai 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 


Ahmedabad 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET), Bhopal 


Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 
CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Department of Jute & Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies & Disposal, New Delhi 
Flora Agrotech, Vapi 


Garware Wall Ropes Limited, Satara 

Gujarat Green Revolution Company Limited, Vadodara 
Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 

Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 
Lamifab & Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 

Maharashtra State Horticulture & Medicinal Plant Board, Pune 
National Committee on Plasticulture Applications in 
Agriculture & Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Navsari Agricultural University, Navsari, 


Neo Corp International Limited, Pithampur 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 
Dr U. К. GancopapHyay (Chairman) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI КІТІКА Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr S. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Dr В. GuruprasaD (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri P. К. SAHoo 
Dn Ajay Kumar Neema (Alternate) 


DR AsHOK KUMAR 
Dr JrrENDRA YApav (Alternate) 


SHRI Amit AGARWAL 
SHRIMATI JYOTI AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr SwaAPAN KumMAR GHOSH 
Pror S. C. Ray (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 
SHRI SANJAY LOHIYA 


SHRI SANJAY RAUT 
Suri S. G. PALUSKAR (Alternate) 


Dn Y. P. SINGH 
Suri P. D. Korak (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
Suni ЅАМРАТ YADAV (Alternate) 


Dn T. V. S. RAJPUT 
Dn NEELAM РАТЕІ, (Alternate) 


Dr SANJAY CHATTOPADHYA 
Dr TANWEER ALAM (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri D. K. Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SHASHI SINGH 
Ms PRIYANKA PRAJAPATI (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH Юноот 
Suri KisHort LAL Duoot (Alternate) 


SHRI JEEVAN RAGHUNATH BUNDE 


SHRI KRISH S IYENGAR 
Suri K. K. Kausnar (Alternate) 


SHRI TAPOBRATA SANYAL 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Kuasraair (Alternate) 


Dr B. G. SALANKI 
Dr V. P. Uspapia (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
SHRI SHRICHAND SANTANI (Alternate) 


IS 16366 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 


Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRIMATI JYOTIKA NAGRI 
SHRIMATI ANUJA MALviya (Alternate) 


Texel Industries Limited, Kalol SHRI SHAILESH R MEHTA 
SHRI SUSHIL PACHISIA (Alternate) 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai Suri K. V. Rao 
Suri К. CHANDRAN (Alternate) 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai Suri V. K. PATIL 
Suni RAVIKANT (Alternate) 


The Synthetic & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai Dr МАМЅНА MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SuDAM (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. К. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (1023). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


