**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10444 (1983): Specification for Hammer Mills [MED 17: 
Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621*926*46 IS : 10444 - 1983 




Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
HAMMER MILLS 



( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



1-. Scope — Covers hammer mills commonly used for crushing rocks, minerals, coke, coal and similar 
materials. 

2. Nomenclature — For the purpose of this standard the various components of the hammer mill 
-shall be designated as in Fig. 1 . 

2.1 Hammer Mill — A machine essentially for crushing rocks, mineral, coal, coke and similar materials, 
mainly by impact imparted by hammers rotating at high speed making the material lumps to hit 
against grinding wall and resulting in the breaking or crushing of the material fed. 

3. Classification — The hammer mills shall be classified as follows : 

a) Depending on the direction of rotation: 

1) Reversible hammer mill — A mill where the hammer arm may be rotated in either direction 
that is, clockwise as well as anti-clockwise; and 

2) Non-reversible hammer mill — A mill where the direction of rotation is non-reversible. 

b) Depending on the power consumption: 

1) Light duty hammer mill — A crusher which has a power consumption less than 200 kW, 

2) Medium duty hammer mill — A crusher which has a power consumption between 200 and 
500 kW, and 

3) Heavy duty hammer mill — A crusher which has a power consumption above 500 kW. 

4. Marking — Hammer mills shall have the following data affixed suitably: 

a) Name and address of the manufacturer, 

b) Rotor diameter at the hammer tip, 

c) Hammer arm width at the tip, 

d) Duty performance, 

e) Reversibility, 

f) No. of hammers, 

g) No. of rows, and 
h) Weight per piece. 

5. Balancing — The degree of imbalance shall essentially depend on the speed of rotation of the 
crusher. A good statically balanced hammer mill with hammers symmetrically placed along the 
circumference shall be sufficient if the speed of the rotor is below 1 000 r/m. 

5.1 Allowable variation in the weight of a pair of hammers put diametrically opposite shall be in the 
range of ± 10g. 

6. Designation — The designation of a hammer mill shall include: 

a) Commonly used name, 

b) Rotor diameter, and 

c) Width of the hammer arm. 

Example : 

A hammer mill with 1 000 mm dia and width 1 200 mm shall be designated as: 

Hammer Mill 1 000 X 1200 mm, IS : 10444 



Adopted 27 January 1 983 



© April 1983, ISI 



Gr2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



w 



FEED INLET 



ROTOR 
SHAFT 




GRIND ING 
WALL 

INSPE CTION 
DOOR 




HAMM ER 

HAMMER 
ARM 



CO 
00 
CO 



/GAP A DJUSTING 
MECHANISM 



DISC HARGE GRINDING GIB 

OUTLET (WEARING PLATE) ' 



\L0WER 
HOUSING 



FIG. 1 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF HAMMER MILL (REVERSIBLE) 



IS: 10444-1983 

7. Supply — The manufacturer shall supply a certificate to the purchaser along with each machine 
certifying that the hammer mill has been inspected for freedom from visible defects and the mill has 
satisfactorily withstood the trial run. Items to be covered under this certificate are given in 
Appendix A. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 7 ) 

Information to be given in the certificate by the manufacturer to the purchaser at the time of 
supplying the machine: 

a) Inspection — The inspection report shall state that each part of the machine has been 
inspected to ensure that it is free from any visible defects; 

b) Test run — The test run report shall state: 

1) the number of hours the hammer mill has been run continuously at designated r/m under 
no load which shall be 8 hours after completion of assembly, and 

2) that after dismantling the crusher subsequent to thB trial run, inspection has been carried 
out to ensure that 

— the construction of the crusher is satisfactory, 
—lubricating condition is satisfactory, 

— there is no slackness or unusual wear on any component, and 
—the bearings are evenly loaded; 

c) For large size crushers load test shall be carried out at purchaser's end; and 

d) Crusher shall generally meet the application data provided by the purchaser and agreed to by 
the supplier. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi India 



