**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 15474 (2004) : Dependability Management - Application 
Guide - Life cycle costing [LITD 2: Reliability of 
Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 15474:2004 

Indian Standard 

DEPENDABILITY MANAGEMENT — 
APPLICATION GUIDE — LIFE CYCLE COSTING 



ICS 29.020 



©BIS 2004 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

November 2004 Price Group 7 



Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee, LTD 03 



FOREWORD 

Thi^ Indian Stiindard was adopted by the Bureau oflndian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Reliability 
of HIectronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 

It is intended for general application by both customers (users) and suppliers of products. It explains the purpose 
and value of life cycle costing and outlines the general approaches involved. It also identifies typical life cycle 
cost elements to facilitate project and programme planning. 

For the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from lEC 600300-3-3 (1996) ^Dependability 
management — Part 3 : Application guide ■— Section 3 : Life cycle costings issued by the International 
Electroteehnical Commission (lEC). 

The composition of the Coiumittee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 



IS 15474 : 2004 



Indian Standard 
DEPENDABILITY MANAGEMENT 



APPLICATION GUIDE — LIFE CYCLE COSTING 



1 SCOPE 

This standard provides a general introduction to the 
concept of life cycle costing. Although the life cycle 
costs consist of many contributing elements, this 
standard particularly highlights the costs associated 
with dependability of the prcxluct. 

General guidance for conducing a life cycle cost 
analysis, including life cost model development, is 
provided, 

2 REFERENCE 

The following standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
Indicated below: 

IS No. Title 

18H5 (Part39) : Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 
1999 39 Reliability of electronic and 

electrical items {second revision) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given below and those given in IS 1885 
(Part 39) shall apply. 

3,1 Life Cycle — Time interval between a products 
conception and its disposal. 



3.2 Life Cycle Cost (LCC) 

product over its life cycle. 



Cumulative cost of a 



3J Life Cycle Costing — Process of economic 

analysis to assess the life cycle cost of a product over 
its life cycle or a portion thereof. 

3.4 Cost Driver — LCC element which has a major 

impact on the LCC, 

3.5 Cost Profile — Graphical or tabular 

representation showing the distribution of costs over 
the life cycle (or portion thereof) of a product. 

3.6 Life Cycle Cost Breakdown Structure — 

Ordered breakdown of the elements of cost to arrive 
at a products total life cycle cost. 



4 LIFE CYCLE COST CONCEPT 

4.1 Objectives of Life Cycle Costing 

The primary objective of life cycle costing is to 
evaluate and/or optimise a product's life cycle costs 
while satisfying specified performance, safety, 
reliability, maintainability and other requirements. 
The aim is to provide input to decision-making in all 
phases (especially in the early phases) of a product's 
life cycle. The more common types of decisions to 
which the life cycle costing process is used to provide 
input include^ for example: 

a) Evaluation and comparison of alternative 
design approaches; 

b) Assessment of economic viability of projects/ 
products; 

c) Identification of cost drives and cost effective 
improvements; 

d) Evaluation and comparison of alternative 
strategies for product use, operation, test, 
inspection, maintenance, etc; 

e) Evaluation and comparison of different ap- 
proaches for replacement, rehabilitation/life 
extension or retirement of ageing facilides; 

f) Allocation of available funds among the com- 
peting priorities for product development/ im- 
provement; 

g) Assessment of product assurance criteria 
through verification tests and its trade-off; and 

h) Long-term financial planning. 

4.2 Product Life Cycle Phases and LCC 

Fundamental to the concept of life cycle costing is a 
basic understanding of a product life cycle and the 
activities that are performed during these phases. Also 
essential is an understanding of the relationship of 
these acuvities to the product performance, safety, 
reliability, maintainability and other characteristics, 
and resulting life cycle costs. 

There are six major life cycle phases of a product: 

a) Concept and definition; 

b) Design and development; 

c) Manufacturing; 

d) Installation; 

e) Operation and maintenance; and 

f) Disposal. 



IS 15474 : 2004 



1 he total costs incurred during the above piiases can 
be divided into two niajor areas, namely, acquisition 
costs and ownership costs. Hence, by definition: 

LCC == Cost ol^ acquisition + Cost of ownership 

Acquisition costs are incurred generally during the 
first four life cycle phases and are of concern both to 
the supplier and to the customer. Ownership costs are 
incurred during the last three phases. Although the 
latter costs are of prime concern to the product user, 
that is the customer, they are increasingly becoming a 
concern of the supplier as well, through the use of 
extended warranty type agreements and other 
contractual arrangements. The acquisition costs are 
generally visible, and can be readily evaluated before 
the acquisition decision is made. However, the 
ownership costs, which often are a major component 
of LCC, and in many cases exceed acquisition costs, 
aie not readily visible and are difficult to predict. Lack 
of visibility of these costs (which include costs 
associated with safety, reliability, maintainability, 
maintenance support performance) in early design 
phases creates uncertainty and risk in the decision- 
making process. 

The life cycle phases identified above apply to new 

products and do not necessarily apply to those that are 
well developed. Therefore, for estimating life cycle 



cost, the life cycle phases for the product under 
consideration should be clearly defined to allow 
identification of various activities that involve costs 
over the various life cycle phases. 

Figure 1 shows the life cycle phases of a product, 
together with some of the topics that should be 
addressed by a life cycle costing study. 

4.3 Timing of Life Cycle Costing 

Life cycle cost analysis can be carried out in any and 
all phases of a products life cycle to provide input to 
decisions regarding product concept, design, 
manufacture, installation, operation, maintenance and 
disposal. However, early identification of acquisition 
and ownership costs enables the decision maker to 
balance performance, reliability, maintainability, 
maintenance support and other goals against life cycle 
costs. Decisions made early in a products life cycle 
have a much greater influence on LCC than those 
made later in a products life cycle. Experience has 
shown that by the end of the concept and definition 
phases, more than half of product LCC may be 
determined by decisions made with respect to product 
features, performance, reliability, technology and 
support resources. By the end of the design and 
development phase, even more of product LCC may 
be fixed. The product is locked into a fairly rigid 



Life cycle phases 



Concept and 
definitiori 




Design and 
development 




Wanufaciuri 



ingXs, 



Installation 




Operation and ^> 
maintenance^^^ 



Disposal 



New prod jct apportunities 

Analysis of syslem 
cionuepl and option 

Product selection 

TccKnalogyse lectiwt 

.Make/buy decisions 

Identify cost drivers 

Constoiction 3£se&smem 

ManLfacturabilily 
assesmonts 

Wan-anty tncentive 
Schemes 



-Design tra<Je-offs 

-Source selection 

-CDnriguralion and changs 
conlrols 

Test Strategies 

.Repair/lhrowaway 
{Jecisions 

Pedomance tailoring 

.Support strategies 

New product ioiroduction 



SyAiem 4nt«gratbn and 
verification 

-Cos I avo*dar>ce/co5t 
reducbon benefits 

-Operating and 
nuintananca cost 
monitoring 

-Product nfiodifica lions and 

sarvioa ftfihartcements 

-M«in1«n[;e Kipport 
nSQuro* allocation arid 
Optimization 



.Retiremem cost impact 

Replacement/renewaJ 
schemes 

.DJsposaJ and salvage 
value 



FiG. 1 Sample Applications of LCC 



IS 15474 : 2004 



system of hardware and software configuration, 
operation, and maintenance support. This clearly 
implies that the timing of the LCC analysis is very 
crucial to optimise the product and its associated costs. 
The Hexibility in design trade-offs and options 
becomes increasingly limited as the product advances 
in its life cycle. 

The life cycle costing process can be applied to the 
whole life cycle of a product or to a part of it. In the 
latter case, a partial estimate of the overall life cycle 
cost will be obtained, although it will not provide for 
LCC optimisation. Such estimates are useful as they 
permit specific focus on comparative studies where 
only the cost differentials in various alternatives are to 
be assessed and compared. The period of life over 
which the hfe cycle costing analysis is made should be 
tailored to suit a particular product/project in order to 
obtain the maximum benefit from the analysis effort. 

5 DEPENDABILITY AND LCC 
RELATIONSHIP 

5J General 

Dependability of a product is a collective term which 
is used to describe the products availability 
performance and its influencing factors, such as 
reliability performance, maintainability performance 
and maintenance support performance. Performance 
in all these areas can have a significant impact on the 
LCC. Higher initial costs may result in improved 
reliabiUty and/or maintainability, and thus improved 
availability with resultant tower operating and 
maintenance costs. For example, it may be less 
expensive to use higher quality parts or part dcra tings 
in order to incur lower failure and maintenance costs 
during its operation phase. 

f'leliabiiity, maintainability and other dependability 
management considerations should be an integral part 
of the design process and LCC evaluations. These 
considerations should be critically reviewed when 
preparing product specifications, and be continually 
evaluated throughout the design phases in order to 
optimise product design to the lowest life cycle cost. 

Costs associated with product safety, reliability, 
maintainability and maintenance support 
performance, which are not that apparent, but need to 
be accounted for a life cycle cost models^ may include 
the following, as appropriate: 

a) Unavailability costs (including costs as- 
sociated with loss of product function); 

b) Warranty costs and costs for warranty- type 
agreements; and 

c) Liability costs. 

These costs are explained below. 



SJ, Unavailability Costs 

Unavailability of a product is influenced by its 
reliability, maintainability and maintenance support 
resources. The product may be unavailable because 
of a hardware or software failure or a human error, or 
because of preventive maintenance (which requires 
the product to be taken out of service). There are 
labour, materials and other support costs associated 
with these activities. The costs of unavailability may 
include: 

a) Cost of corrective maintenance; 

b) Cost of preventive maintenance; and 

c) Cost associated with the loss of products func- 
tion during the period of its unavailability. 

The latter cost, sometimes also referred to as 
consequential costs, can be quite significant in 
the case of products performing critical func- 
tions where the penalties for loss of the 
products function are very high. The penalties 
consist of either loss of income to the user 
through failure of the product to deliver its 
output or additional costs arising from the user 
having to take actions to compensate for the 
loss of the products output. In some instances, 
the cost actions to compensate for the loss of 
the producLs output. In some instances, the 
cost associated with loss of product function 
may be significantly influenced by the fre- 
quency of failures (that is reliability) whereas 
for some other products, both failure frequency 
(reliability) and restoration time (main- 
tainability and maintenance support) may be 
important. The factors that affect the cost as- 
sociated with the loss of the products function 
include: 

d) Differences in the pattern and extent of actual 
failures and downtimes, and those for which 
the individual user had planned and catered 
for; 

e) Actual circumstances in which the failure and 
downtime occur, especially in regard to the 
demand placed on the user for the output of that 
product and all other alternative sources open 
to him; 

f) Ability or otherwise to restore the output of the 
product; and 

g) Consequences to, and the reaction by, the 
users own customer(s) as a result of delay to 
the product, 

NOTE — Unavailability costs could also include costs related 
to the loss of image and prestige of the company or the loss of 
clients, caused by some specific failures. In most cases, these 
costs are difficult to assess, but sometimes it is possible to 
quantify them. For example, these costs n:iay be estimated based 
on publicity campaign costs and costs of marketing efforts or 
compensations in order to retain the clients Where applicable, 
these co&Ls should be accounted for. 



IS 15474 : 2004 



The unavailability ofa product can significantly affect 
its LCC. Therefore, the availability performance of a 
product needs lo be optimised in order to obtain the 
lowest LCC. This conceptual relationship between 
availability (reliability, maintainability and 
inaijitenance support) and the LCC in a simplified 
form is illustrated in Fig. 2. It shows that with 
increasing reliability (all other factors held constant), 
the acquisition costs will generally increase but 
increase in acquisition costs due to reliability 
improvements equals the incremental savings in 
maintenance and supports costs, and in consequential 
costs. At a certain point, an optimum product 
reliability which corresponds to the lowest life cycle 
cost is achieved. 

5.3 Warranty Costs 

Warranties provide protection to the customers, 
guarding them from the cost of correcting product 
failure, in particular during the early stages of product 



Increasing 



operations. The cost of warranties is usually borne by 
the suppliers, and depends on reliability, 
maintainability and maintenance support 
characteristics of the product. Suppliers can exercise 
significant control over these characteristics during 
design and development, and manufacturing phases 
thus influencing the warranty costs. 

Warranties usually apply to a limited period of time 
and a number of conditions generally apply. 
Warranties rarely include protection against the 
service losses incurred by the customer (that is the 
consequential costs) due to product unavailability. 

Warranties may be supplemented or replaced by 
service contracts whereby the supplier performs » in 
addition to any arrangements made by the customer, 
all preventive and corrective maintenance for a fixed 
period of time which can be extended for monetary 
consideradons for any period up to the whole product 
lifetime. In the latter case, the burden for the major 



Minimum costs 



Costs 




Acquisition costs 



Ownership costs 



Maintenance and product support, 
warranty costs, consequential costs 



Operating costs 



Reliability 



Increasing 



Fig. 2 Simplified Relationship Befween Reliability and Life Cycle Costs 



IS 15474 : 2004 



paft of life cycle costs is placed on the supplier who, 
to maximize his profit, is motivated to build an 
optimum level of reliability and maintainability into 

his product, probably at higher acquisition costs. 

5,4 Liability Costs 

Cost of liabilities due to product failure and their 
injurious effects need to be considered as part of the 
LCC. This is especially important in the case of 
products which have a high potential to cause human 
injury and/or environmental damage. Liability costs 
are also important for new products for which risks 
involved may not be fully apparent and/or well 
understood. These costs are generally difficult to 
quantify. Where required, a risk analysis, together 
with past experience and expert judgement, may be 
used to provide an estimate of these costs. 

6 LCC MODELLING 

6.1 General 

An LCC model, like any other model, is a simplified 
representation of a the real world. It abstracts the 
salient features and aspects of the product and 
translates them into cost figures. In order for the 
model to be realistic, it should: 

a) Represent the characteristics of the product 
being analysed, including its intended use en- 
vironment, maintenance concept, operating 
and maintenance support scenarios, and any 
constraints or limitations; 

b) Be comprehensive in order to include and 
highlight all factors that are relevant to LCC; 

c) Be simple enough to be easily understood and 
allow for its timely use in decision-making, 
and future update and modification; and 

d) Be designed in such a way as to allow for the 
evaluation of specific elements of LCC inde- 
pendent from other elements. 

A simple LCC model is basically an accounting 
structure which contains terms and/or factors which 
allow for the estimation of cost associated with each 
of the cost elements constituting the LCC, 

In some cases, a model may need to be specifically 
developed for the problem understudy, while for some 
other cases, commercially available models may be 
used, Each LCC model has its own flexibility and 
application. Knowledge of the contents and the 
conditions under which they apply are important in 
order to assure adequacy of their use. Before selecdng 
a model the amount of information needed should be 
identified together with the results expected from 
using the model. Someone familiar with the details of 
tlie model is needed to review it so as to determine the 
applicability of all cost factors, empirical 
relationships, elements, and other constants and 



variables in the model {see 6,3). Therefore, before 
using any existing LCC model, it should be suitably 
validated for the life cycle costing study under 
consideration. To go this, the cost factors and other 
parameters from a known example, along with the 
operational scenario should be used to assess the 
extent to which the model provides realistic results. 

Many products are designed to have very long life, for 
example buildings. For such products, a number of 
costs will occur at intervals during the life of the 
product and techniques to deal with these should be 
incorporated in the model. 

6.2 LCC Breakdown into Cost Elements 

In order to estimate the total life cycle costs, it is 
necessary to breakdown the total LCC into its 
constituent cost elements. These cost elements should 
be individually identified so that they can be distincUy 
defined and estimated. The identification of the 
elements and their corresponding scope should be 
based on the purpose and scope of the LCC study. 

One approach, often used to identify the required cost 
elements, involves the breakdown of the product to 
lower indenture levels (work breakdown structure), 
cost categories and life cycle phases. This approach 
can best be illustrated by the use of a three- 
dimensional matrix shown in Fig, 3. 

This matrix involves identification of the following 
aspects of the product: 

a) Breakdown of the product to lower indenture 
levels (that is the product/work breakdown 
structure); 

b) Time in the life cycle when the work/activity 
is to be carried out (that is the life cycle 
phases); and 

c) Cost category of applicable resources such as 
labour, materials, fuel/energy, overhead, 
transportation/ travel, etc (that is, the cost 
categories). 

This kind of approach has the advantage of being 
systematic and orderly, thus giving a high level of 
confidence that all cost elements have been included. 

Annex A identifies typical activities the costs of which 
should be addressed. 

Costs associated with LCC elements may be further 
allocated between recurring and non-recurring costs 
so that the sum of all recurring and non-recurring costs 
equals LCC. LCC elements may also be estimated in 
terms of fixed and variable costs. The latter costs, for 
example, will vary with the number of copies of the 
product to be produced and put into use. 

To facilitate control and decision-making, and to 
support the life cycle cost process, the costs 



IS 15474 : 2004 




u 

o 
U 



O 






IS 15474 ; 2004 



information should be collected and reported to be 
consistetit with the defined LCC breakdown structure. 
A data base should be established and maintained to 
capture results of previous LCC studies, in order to 
serve as a source of experience feedback. 

6.3 Methods for Estimating Cost Elements 

Cost estimating relationships (CERs) are used to 
estimate the cost related to individual elements of LCC 
breakdown structure. CERs are either based on 
analytical models or rules of thumb. They contain 
variables describing resource consumption, and 
parameters reflecting prices, conversion factors, or 
empirical relationships relating various categories of 
cost to cost prices, generating activities/tasks. These 
relationships range from simple averages and 
percentages to complex equations, resulting from 
statistical regression analysis, which relate cost (the 
dependent variable) to the products physical features, 
and such characteristics as performance, reliability, 
maintainability, etc. 

In general, there are thr e basic methods that are 

commonly used to estimate cost or to develop CHR. 
They are: 

a) Engineering cost method, 

b) Analogous cost method, and 

c) Parametric cost method. 

63.1 Engineering Cost Method 

This method involves the direct estimation of a 
particular cost element by examining the product 
component'by -component or part-by-part. It uses 
standard established cost factors, for example finn 
engineering and manufacturing estimates to develop 
the CERs. Any old estimates available should be 
updated to the present time by the use of annual 
discounting and escalation factors (see 6.4). 

63.2 Analogous Cost Method 

This method involves cost estimation based on 
experience with a similar product and technology in 
the past. It utilises historical data from a dependability 
information system, updated to reflect cost escalation 
and effect of technology advances. 

63.3 Parametric Cost Method 

This method uses significant parameters and variables 
to develop CERs which are usually in the form of 
equations. A parameter in CERs reflects a conversion 
factor from one system of units to another. It may be 
a price or an empirically derived ratio. A price like 
cost per man hour, for example, converts person hours 
into costs. An example of an empirical ratio is the 
number of maintenance person-hours per failure of a 
given component, which may be obtained as a 
statistical average. 



A variable in the CER of parametric cost methods 
generally characterizes resource consumption over 
time and generates cost. It may be a physical or 
performance measure, such as failure rate, preventive 
maintenance person-hours per unit of item or 
component. 

The CER equation reflects analysts assessment of how 
costs are generated, Often when a detailed theoretical 
or analytical relationship cannot be developed, a 
statistically derived relationship, for example via 
regression analysis, may be used, 

6.4 Impact of Discounting^ Inflation and Taxation 

6A1 General 

Several factors complicate the process of LCC 
analysis; for example, the real value of money changes 
constantly and factors such as opportunity costs, 
inflation and taxation may need to be taken into 
account, 

6,4,2 to 6.4-5 introduce some of these effects and 
briefly indicate the methods that may be used to take 
account of them. 

6,4.2 Discounting 

The value of money is not constant. For example, a 
dollar today is worth more than a collar in ten years 
time. Similarly, the present value of a dollar that will 
be spent ten years from now is less than the value of 
todays dollar. Discounting is a process for taking 
account of the changing value of money. Since LCC 
analysis considers costs that will be incurred some 
time in the future, it is necessary to discount all 
revenues and expenditures to a specific decision point. 
This point may be either in the present or in the future. 
This process allows direct comparison of the life cycle 
costs of various alternatives. 

The most common method of discounting involves 
calculation of net present value (NPV), 

T 

where 

NPV ~ net present value of future case flows; 

Cn = nominal cash flow in nth year; 

n = specific year in the life cycle costing 

period; 
X = discount rate; and 

T - length of time period under 

consideration, in years. 

6A3 Escalating 

Escalating lakes account of the charge in price levels 
over time. The common formula for determining the 



IS 15474 : 2004 



cscalaLion lactor (EF) in year considering the 
escalation rate in that year to be /Tj is: 

£F= (1 + El) X (1 + Ez) x(l + Ey^ . . . (1 + E^) 

Standard Lables of discounting and escalation factors 
are available in most engineering and economic 
tcxi books to facilitate the calculations. 

6.4.4 Opportunity Costs 

In order lu improve a product, it is often necessary to 
provide additional resources early in the life cycle. 
Thus, to achieve improved dependability and its 
consequent benefits, it may be necessary to provide 
extra resources, such as prototypes and test facilities, 
in the early stages of the project life cycle. However, 
il is important to realise that these resources represent 
iunds that could, at least in theory, have been invested 
to earn a return on capital. The opportunity to earn this 
return is lost by the investment made to improve 
dependability. The lost return is known as an 
opportunity cost. The LCC analysis should take 
account of the lost opportunity cost when considering 
the benefits of improved dependability. 

6.4.5 Inflation 

Due to the difficulties of accurately predicting 
inllation, it is usual for LCC analysis to be prepared at 
'constant prices' . Somen mes, however, for example in 
the case of the short life cycle, it may be possible to 
predict or agree a rate of inflation to be included in the 
LCC analysis. 

1 1 i s i mportan t to ensure that al 1 cost elements and Lhcir 
dependencies that arc alTected by inflation are fully 
addressed, and that they are addresses only once in 
order to avoid double counting, 

6.4*6 Taxation 

Taxes and subsidies can affect relative prices. Market 
prices which include them may not reflect opportunity 
costs or benefits, for this and other reasons. 

The adjustment of market prices for taxation in LCC 
analysis is appropriate only where the adjustment may 
make u ntatcrial difference. This is a matter for case 
by case judgement, but it is important to adjust for any 
differences between options in the incidence of tax 
arising from different contractual arrangements, such 
as in-house supply versus buying -in, or lease versus 
purchase. 

7 LIFE CYCLE COSTING PROCESS 

7.1 General 

Life cycle cost (LCC) analysis is the process of 
identify!; g and evaluating the costs associated with 
acquisition and ownership of a product during its life 
cycle. In order to produce results which can be 
usefully and correctly employed, any LCC analysis 



should be conducted in a structured and 
well-documented manner using the following steps: 

a) LCC analysis plan (including problem defini- 
tion and analysis objective); 

b) LCC model development; 

c) LCC model analysis; 

d) LCC analy si s documen tation ; 

e) Review of LCC results; and 

f) LCC analysis update. 

The above steps may be carried out in an iterative 
fashion if efforts at any stage indicate a need to revisit 
and modify work accomplished at earlier stages. 
Assumptions made at each step should be rigorously 
documented to facilitate such iterations and to aid in 
interpretation of the results of the analysis. 

LCC analysis is a multidisciplinary activity. The 
analysts should be familiar with the philosophy which 
underlies LCC (including typical cost elements, 
sources of cost data and financial principles), and 
should have a clear understanding of the methods of 
assessing the uncertainties associated with cost 
estimation. Depending upon the scope of the analysis, 
it will be important to obtain cost inputs from 
individuals who are familiar with all phases of the 
product life cycle. This may include representatatives 
of both the supplier(s) and the customer(s). 

7.2 LCC Analysis Plan 

The LCC analysis should begin with development of 
a plan which addresses the purpose and scope of the 
analysis. The plan should address the following 
elements: 

a) Define the analysis objectives in terms of the 
outputs that should be provided by the 
analysis, and the decisions which outputs will 
be used to support. Typical objectives are: 

1) determination of the LCC for a product, 
in order to support planning, contract- 
ing, budgeting or similar needs; 

2) evaluation of the impact of alternative 
courses of action (such as design ap- 
proaches, product acquisition or support 
policies or alternative technologies) on 
the LCC of a product; or 

3) identification of cost elements which act 
as cost drivers for the LCC of a product, 
in order to focus design, development, 
acquisition or product support efforts. 

b) Delineate the scope of the analysis in terms of 
the product(s) being studies, the time period 
(life cycle phases) to be considered, the use 
environment, the operating and maintenance 
support scenario to be employed; 

c) Identify any underlying conditions, assump- 
tions, limitations and constraints (such as min- 
imum product performance or availability 



8 



IS 15474 : 2004 



requirements, or maximum capital cost limita- 
tions) which might restrict the range of accept- 
able options to be evaluated, 

d) Identify alternative courses of action to be 
evaluated (if this forms part of the analysis 
objective). The list of proposed alternatives 
may be refmed as new options arc identified, 
or as existing options are found to violate the 
problem constraints; and 

e) Provide an estimate of resources required, and 
a reporting schedule for the analysis, to ensure 
that LCC analysis results will be available to 
support the decision-making processes for 
which they are required. 

The analysis plan should be documented at the 
beginning of the LCC analysis process to provide a 
focus for the rest of the work. The plan should be 
reviewed by the intended users of the analysis results, 
both from customer and a supplier perspective, to 
ensure tiiat their needs have been correctly interpreted 
and clearly addressed, 

73 [.CC Model Development 

An LCC model, of sufficient detail to meet the 
objectives of the analysis, should be developed in 
accordance with the following procedure; 

a) Create or adopt a cost breakdown structure 
(CBS) that identifies all relevant cost 
categories in all appropriate life cycle phases 
which will generate costs. Cost categories 
should be broken down into smaller com- 
ponents (activities, sub-activities, etc.) until a 
required level is reached in the CBS where a 
cost can be readily estimated for each in- 
dividual cost element. Where available, an 
existing cost breakdown structure may provide 
a useful starting point for development of the 
LCC breakdown structure (see 6.2); 

b) Identify cost elements which will not have a 
significant impact on the overall LCC of the 
prodLict(s) under consideration; these ele- 
ments may be eliminated from further con- 
sideration. Similarly, for comparative studies 
of alternative courses of action, identify cost 
elements which will not vary between alterna- 
tives; these elements may be eliminated as they 
effect all options similarly; 

c) Select a method (or methods) for estimating 
the cost associated with each cost element to 
be included in the model (see 6*3); 

d) Determine the data required to develop these 
estimates, and identify possible sources for the 
data; 

e) Identify any uncertainties which are likely to 
be associated with the estimation of each cost 
element; 



f) Integrate the individual cost elements into a 
unified LCC model which will provide the 
LCC outputs required to meet the analysis 
objectives, such as total LCC figures at the 
system level (and at lower levels, if required) 
and/or LCC figures over time. The model 
should take into account the time value of 
money; and 

g) Review the LCC model to ensure that it is 
adequate to address the objectives of the 
analysis. Ensure that all cost elements have 
been included, that the elements are correctly 
rolled-up into higher-level totals, and that the 
time value of money is accurately reflected. 

The LCC model including ail assumptions should be 
documented to guide and support the subsequent 
phases of the analysis process. 

7.4 LCCModel Analysis 

The LCC analysis which involves the generation and 
analysis of LCC model results should include that 
following steps: 

a) Obtain data and develop cost estimates for all 
of the basic cost elements in the LCC model; 

b) Validate the LCC model with available histori- 
cal data, if possible; 

c) Obtain the LCC model results from each 
relevant combination of operating and support 
scenarios defined in the analysis plan; 

d) Identify cost drivers by examining LCC model 
inputs and outputs to determine the cost ele- 
ments which have the most significant impact 
on the LCC of the product(s); 

e) Quantify any differences (in performance, 
availability or other relevant constraints) be- 
tween any alternatives being studies, unless 
these differences are directly reflected in the 
LCC model outputs (for example, through the 
evaluation of the cost of unavailability); 

Categorize and summarize LCC model outputs 
according to any logical groupings (for ex- 
ample, fixed or variable costs, recurring or 
non-recurring costs, acquisition or ownership 
costs, direct or indirect costs) which may be 
relevant to users of the analysis results; 

g) Conduct sensitivity analyses to examine the 
impact of assumptions and cost element uncer- 
tainties on LCC model results. Particular at- 
tention should be focused on cost drivers, 
assumptions related to product usage, and as- 
sumption related to the time value of money; 
and 

h) Review LCC outputs against the objectives 
defined in the analysis plan to ensure Ihal all 
goals have been fulfilled, and that sufficient 
information has been provided to support the 



IS 15474 : 2004 



required decision. If the objectives have not 
been met, additional evaluations and/or 
modifications to the LCC model may be re- 
quired, 

The LCC analysis (including all assumptions) should 
be dt)cumented to ensure that the results could be 
verified and readily replicated by another evaluator, if 
necessary. 

7,5 LCC Analysis Documentalion 

The results of the LCC analysis should be documented 
in a report which allows users to clearly understand 
both the outcomes and the implications of the LCC 

analysis, including the limitations and uncertainties 
associated with the results. The report should contain 
the following: 

a) Executive summary^ — A brief synopsis of the 
objectives, results, conclusions and recom- 
mendations of the analysis. This summary is 
intended to provide an overview of the analysis 
to the decision makers, users and other inter- 
ested parties; 

b) Purpose and scope — A statement of the 
analysis objective, product description, includ- 
ing a definition of intended product use en- 
vironment, operating and support scenarios; 
assumptions, constraints, and alternative cour- 
ses of action considered in the analysis plan, 
this p 1 an may be inc 1 uded in the doc umentati on 
as reference; 

c) LCC model description — A summary of the 
LCC model, including relevant assumptions, a 
depiction of the LCC breakdown structure, an 
explanation of the cost elements and the way 
in which they were estimated, and a descrip- 
tion of the way in which cost elements were 
integrated (including methods of accounting 
for the time value of money), as discussed in 
7.3; 

d) LCC model analysis — A presentation of the 
LCC model results, including the identifica- 
tion of cost drivers, the results of sensitivity 
analysis, and the output from any other related 
analysis activities, as discussed in 7.4; 

e) Discussion — A thorough discussion on and 
interpretation of the analysis results, including 
any uncertainties associated with the results, 
and of any other issues which will assist the 
decision makers and/or users in understanding 
and using the results; 

Conclusions and recommendations — A 
presentation of conclusions related to the ob- 
jectives of the analysis, and a list of recommen- 
dations regarding the decisions which are to be 
based on the analysis results, as well as an 



identification of any need for fuither work or 
revision of the analysis. 

7.6 Review of LCC Results 

A formal review of the analysis process may be 
required to confirm the correctness and integrity of the 
results, conclusions and recommendations presented 
in the report. If such a requirement exists, then the 
review should be conducted by someone other than the 
original analysis, to ensure objectivity. The following 
elements should be addressed: 

a) Review of the objectives and scope of the 
analysis to ensure that they have been ap- 
propriately stated and interpreted; 

b) Review of the model (including cost element 
definitions and assumptions) to ensure that it 
is adequate for the purpose of the analysis; 

c) Review of the model. evaluation to ensure that 
the inputs have been accurately established, 
that the model has been used correctly, that the 
rCvS ul ts (i ncl udi ng those of sen si ti V i ty an al y si s) 
have been adequately evaluated and dis- 
cussed, and that the objectives of the analysis 
have been achieved; and 

d) Review of ail assumptions made during the 
analysis process to ensure that they are 
reasonable, and that they have been adequately 
documented. 

7.7 Analysis Update 

It is advantageous in many life cycle costing studies to 
keep the LCC model current so that it can be exercised 
throughout the life cycle of the product. For example, 
it may be desirable to update LCC analysis results 
(which were initially based on preliminary or 
estimated data) based on more detailed data as it 
becomes available later in the product life cycle. 
Maintaining and updating the LCC model may involve 
modifications to the LCC breakdown structure, 
changes to cost estimating methods as additional 
information sources become available, and alterations 
in assumptions embodied in the model. 

The updated LCC analysis should be documented and 
reviewed to the same extent as the original. 

8 UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS 

LCC is basically a quantitative measure reflecdng an 
estimate of the cost of acquisition and ownership of a 
product over its life cycle. As emphasized throughout 
this standard, the confidence in the results of life cycle 
cost analysis depends on the availability and use of the 
relevant information, the assumptions (about the 
product and future) made in the LCC model, and the 
input data used in the analysis. 

Items such as lack of information at the beginning of 
the product, introduction of new technology/product. 



10 



1815474:2004 



use of optimistic estimates (in order to justify the 
project), use of unattainable schedules, long research 
and development projects with unpredictable results, 
undue optimism/pessimism, etc all contribute to 
uncertainly and risk. Elements such as predicted 
inflation rates, labour, material and overhead costs to 
be incuiTed over a long period of time in the future can 
also cause considerable uncertainty in the results of 
LCC analysis. Therefore, eironeous conclusions may 
be drawn and wrong decisions made due to the use of 
incorrect models, incorrect data, or the omission of 
some cost significant items. 

The uncertainty and risk are further compounded by 
the fact that many important factors relevant to a 
decision may not be quantifiable in tem^s of costs. 
Value judgements based on experience should be used 
to account for such factors. Such value judgements 
are generally qualitative. In practice, the decision- 
making based on life cycle cost of a product often 
involves a combination of quantitative and qualitative 
considerations. The quantitative results provide a 



baseline reference, whereas qualitative assessments 
provide reinforcement for further support of the 
recommendations and decisions. 

In order to reduce the risks involved in quantitative 
assessment, sensitivity analysis should be performed 
with a range of potential values considered primarily 
for parameters of cost drivers and other important 
variables. The results of such sensitivity studies 
should be assessed in detail and the possible range of 
variation in life cycle costing analysis results be 
provided. The degree of verification of the analysis 
should be commensurate with the seriousness of the 
impact of analysis results and the value of the decision. 
For example, for supporting decisions which are very 
cost intensive, the life cycle cost analysis may require 
verification by independent experienced personnel. 

It is important that the specific risks involved and the 
possible range of variation of life cycle cost analysis 
results are brought to the attention of the decision 
maker for consideration. 



11 



IS 15474 : 2004 



ANNEX A 

(Clause 6,2) 
TYPICAL COST GENERATING ACTIVITIES 



A-1 GENERAL 

Each phase of the life cycle includes activities tliat 
contribute to the costs for that phase. This Annex lists 
some typical activities for each phase for which the 
costs should be identified. Costs for additional 
activities should be identified as appropriate at the 
time the analysis is conducted. 

A-2 TYPICAL COSTS IN THE PRODUCT LITE 
CYCLE PHASES 

A'2.1 Concept and Definition 

Concept and definition costs are attributed to various 
activities conducted to ensure the feasibility of the 
product under consideration. These typically include 
costs for: 

a) Market research; 

b) Project management; 

c) System concept and design analysis; and 

d) Preparation of a requirement specification of 
the product. 

A-2.2 Design and Development 

Design and development costs are attributed to 
meeting the product requirements specification and 
providing proof of compliance. These typically 
include costs for: 

a) Project management; 

b) System and design engineering, including 
reliability, maintainability and environmental 
protection activities; 

c ) Design doc umen tation ; 

d) Prototype fabrication; 
c) So itware development; 

f) Testing and evaluation; 

g) Producibility engineering and planning; 
h) Vendor selection; 

j) Demonstration and validation; and 
k) Quality management, 

A -23 Manufacturing and Installation 

Manufacturing and installation costs are attributed to 
making the necessary number of copies of the product, 
or providing the specified service on a continuous 
basis. The activities (costs) in this phase are 
subdivided between those that are non-recurring and 
those that recur with each product or service provided. 
These typically include costs for: 

a) Non-recurring: 

1) Industrial engineering and operations 
analysis; 



2) Construction of facilities; 

3) Production tooling and test equipment; 

4) Special support and test equipment; 

5) Initial spares and repair parts; 

6) Initial training; 

7) Documentation; 

8) Software; and 

9) Testing (qualification testing). 

b) Recurring: 

1) Production management and engineer- 
ing; 

2) Facility maintenance; 

3) Fabrication (labour, materials, etc); 

4) Quality control and inspection; 

5) Assembly, installation and checkout; 

6) Packaging, storage^ shipping and 
transportation; and 

7) Ongoing training. 

A -2.4 Operation and Maintenance 

The costs of operation, maintenance, and supply 
support of systems and support equipment are incurred 
over the expected life of the system/product. These 
costs typically include: 

a) Operation: 

1) Labour/training; 

2) Materials and consumables; 

3) Power; 

4) Equipment and facilities; 

5) Engineering modifications; and 

6) New software releases. 

b) Maintenance: 

1 ) Labour/training; 

2) Facilities; 

3) Contractor services; and 

4) Software maintenance. 

c) Supply: 

i) Labour/training; 

2) Spare parts and repair material; 

3) Warehousing facilities; and 

4) Package, shipping and transportation. 

A*2.5 Disposal 

This category includes the costs of retiring older 
versions of the products or its eventual disposal. In 
some service industries, such as the chemical and 
nuclear industries, the disposal of products can 
become a significant cost factor, and may incur 
substantial penalties. 



12 



IS 15474 : 2004 



The cosls of a products disposal typically include costs 
for: 

a) System shutdown; 

t>) Disassembly and removal; and 

c) Recycling or safe disposal. 

A-3 COST ELEMENTS EXPLANAl ION 

Costs for: 

a) Project management — The costs for manage- 
ment functions to accomplish overall project 
objectives during any phase of the life cycle. 
Examples of these activities are configuration 
management, quality management, 
cost/schedule management, data management, 
contract management, liaison, arid product 
support management. 

b) Engineering — Direct labour, materials, 
overhead, and other direct costs associated 
with die design and development function, in- 
cluding costs of product engineering and in- 
tegration, design engineering, and design 
support, 

c) Froducibiiity en^^vueering and planning — 
Costs associated with the planning and en- 
gineering required to ensure the timely and 
cost effective economic producibility of the 
product prior to release for production. It in- 
cludes the efforts required to study the 
producibility of the product as well as the 
development of production process. These 



costs can recur if there is a change in contrac- 
tor, design, or production process. 

d) Fabrication — The direct costs for labour, 
materials and overheads associated with 
materia) acquisition and handling, tooling and 
test equipment in support of production, 
fabrication, assembly, integration and test. 

c) Facilities — The costs for plant construction, 
maintenance and modernization, and tooling 
for production. 

f) Special support and test equipment — The 
costs for standard and unique equipment and 
tools required to maintain and care for any 
portion of the product or the entire product. 

g) Initial training — Costs incurred to ensure that 
properly trained personnel are available to 
operate and maintain the product when it ar- 
rives in the field, including the training of 
instructors. 

h) Initial spares and repair parts — The one time 
costs for items to be used for maintenance 
purposes to operate and maintain the product 
during the initial period of product service. 

j) Consumables — The costs of material con- 
sumed in the operation of the product. Ex- 
amples include paper, lubricants, fuel, and 
cleaning materials. 

k) Contractor sennces — The costs for ass is* 
tance, advice, instruction, training, operation 
and maintenance provided by separate con- 
tract. 



U 



IS 15474 : 2004 

ANNEX B 

( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Reliability of Electronic and BleclricLil Components and Equipment Sectional Connmittee. LTD 03 



OrgOfiizaSiofi 

jnciian Institute (^fTechnology, Kharagpur 
Ail Indiii R^idio, New Delhi 

I3hahiia Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 

B(>C:oiTiponents India Pvt. Ltd, Pune 

Bharat Blccironics Lid, Bangalore 

Centre for Development of TclemuLicH (C-DOT), New Delhi 

Department of Tclccotnmmii cation (TEC), Bangalore 
Electronic Cojporation of Jndia Ltd, Hyderabad 

bLClNA, New Delhi 

Hindustan Acrunautics Ltd, Bangalore 

lETE, New Delhi 

Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

KSRO (Depiirtmcni of Space), Bangalore 

ITl Lrd, Bnngalore 

Ministry of Communication & Information Technology. New Delhi 

Ministry of Defence , DGQA(L), Chciinai 

ONiDA, Mumbai 

RDSO, Lijcknow 

Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (DepartJiicnt of Atomic Energy), 

Kolkata 
BIS Directorate General 



Re pre sen tativeis) 

pROr K. B, MiSRA {Chairman) 
Shri a, B. Mathur 

Shri J. R TltAKUR {Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Saraf 

DrJ. S, Bora (Alternaie) 
Shrj R. a. Wjluams 

Shri B. Devjcharan (Alternate) 
Shri Rvjdra Manuel 

SHKJMATt Meena Parameshwaran (Alternate) 
SHRr Y. K. Pandey 

Shr] a. K. Ahuja (Alternate) 
Shri V, A. Ramarao 
ShriRRamdev 

ShriB, Bhaskar Rao {Alternate} 
Shri V, K.^EKHR] 
Shrj V. Ram Mohan Rao 

Shri S. C. H. Jacannath Rao (Alternate) 
Maj-Gen Yeshwant Deva 

Maj Gen K. B. Jhaldiyal (Alternate) 
Shri A. P. Padarha 

Shri Raj[V Srivastava (Alternate) 
Shrj S. Satish 

Shr] G. LAKSHMrPATH] (Alternate) 
Shri V.Muthjah 

Shrf B. N. Gnanesmwar (Alternate) 

ShR! a, K. SiNHA 

Shri S. K. Kimothi (AUemate) 
Shr[ K. L, Chug 

Shri Kalyan Roy (Alternate) 
ShriT. C Gosaua 

Shri P. D, Shastri (Altermxte) 
JojNT Director Standards (Lab) 

Joint Djrectoer Standards (Alternate) 
Shri R. De 

Shri D. Sarkar (Aliemate) 
Shri VtJAi, Director & Head (LTD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 



Member Secretary 

Skri Praveen Kumar 

Deputy DireclO! (LTD), B[S 



14 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act. 1986 to promote 
h!irmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
:)nd attending to connected matters in the country. 

BiS has die copyright of ait its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations, 
t* nquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Ajiiendnicnts are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also review^ed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if ihe review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
*BiS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. LTD 3 (1800), 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BURHAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Vlanak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75. 2323 9402 

Regiojial Offices ; 

C^entral ; Manak Bhavan^ 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 1 10 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marolj Andheri (East) 

MUMBA1400 093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

/ 2323 7617 
\ 2323 3841 

r2337 8499,2337 8561 
\2337 8626, 2337 9120 



{ 



60 3843 
60 9285 



r2254 1216,2254 1442 
\2254 2519. 2254 2315 

r2832 9295, 2832 7858 
\2832 7891, 2832 7892 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GIIAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNH. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Prmtcd at Prabhat Offset Ptii5;s, New DL^thi-2 



