Indian Standard

ls:5896(Pmt ill).1915 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

CODE OF `PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FIRE FIGHTiNG APPLIANCES
PART 111 TURNTABLE LADDER

( First Reprint MAY 1989 )

UDC

614.847.15

@ copytight 1975 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 58963( Part III ) - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FIRE FIGHTING APPLIANCES
PART III
Fire
Chairman SHKI P. N. MEHROTRA Members Shri P. N. Mehrotra ) Da G. N. BADAMI

TURNTABLE
Sectional

LADDER
BDC 22

Fighting

Committee,

Representing

Ministry of Home Affairs

SHRI G. B. MENON (Alternate to
Central Building Roorkee Research Institute (CSIR),

SHRI GOPAL KRISHAN( Alternate ) Avon Services ( Production & Agencies ) Private Ltd, SHRI P. R. BALDOTA New Delhi DR D. S. JAISWAR ( Alternate ) Insurance Association of India, Bombay SHRI P. K. BHARUCHA SHRI A. CHATTERJI( Alternate) SHRI M. B. CHAKANKAR Air Foam Industries, New Delhi SHRI R. MEHTA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. C. CHATTERJEE West Brngal Fire Services, Calcutta SHRI D. K. BANERJEE ( A&ma/e ) SHRI R. R. DHOBLEY Bhaba Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Home ( Police ) Department, Government of Andhra DIRECTOR,FIRE SERVICE Pradesh Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. N. GHOSH SHRI A. N. AHLUM'ALIA ( AIternote ) Bombay Fire Brigade, Bombay SHR~A. S. KULKARN~ Steelage Industries Limited ( Minimax Division ), SHRI R. K. KULKARNI Bombay SHRI S. C. DUTTA ( Alternate ) SHRI D. K. MAJUMDER Allen Richards & Co, Calcutta SHRI A. K. MITRA ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SHRI S. P. NAG National Safety Council, Bombay SHRIJ. R. OVALEKAR SHRI K. SRIDHAR ( Alternate ) SHRI H. C. RAI CHOUDHARY Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL B. N. S. RAO ( Conrzilued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1975

BUREAU OF This publication is protected under reproduction in whole or in part by publisher shall be deemed to be an

INDIAN STANDARDS the Indian Copyrighr' Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and any means except with written permission of the infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 5896 ( Part III ) - 1975
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI KKAMAKRISHNA

Representiq RAO Directorate General of Technical Development Fire Service, Government of Tamil Nadu

SHRI I. RATI~INASAMI SHRI U. NARAYANA( Alternate ) Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Iiehra Dun SHRI P. L. SEBASTIN SHRI V. V. KIMMWKAR ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi SHRI G. C. SENAPATI SHRI P. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Kooverii Devshi & Co Pvt Ltd. Bombay SHRI P. H. SETHNA &RI N. T. PANJWANI ( Alternate) Newage Industries, Surendranagar SHRI J. V. SHAH SHRI B. J. SHAH (dltcrnate ) DGL Private Limited, New Delhi SHRI V. N. SHARUA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI C. R. SIRCAR Synthetics 8r Chemicals Ltd, Bombay SI~RI D. K. SIRKAR Delhi Fire Service, Delhi SIIRI R.S. SUNDARAM Sur Enamel & Stamping Works Private Ltd, SHRI TARIT SUR Calcutta SHRI S. SUR ( Alterna#e ) Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited, Ranchi SARI N. P. VERGHE~E Fire Adviser, Government of Maharlshtra, Bombay SHRI.B. V. WAQLE SHRI R. R. RAO ( Ahnate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Mdbcr ) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHUR Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Code of Practice
Convener SHRI P. N. GHOSH Members

for Fire Fighting

Equipment

Subcotiniittee,

BDC 22 : 4

Ministry of Defence ( R & D )

4 to
The Insurance Association of India, Bombay Hindustan Steel Limited, Ran& West Bengal Fire Services, Calchtta Bombay Fire Brigade, Bombay Ministry of Home Affairs Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi ( Delhi Fire Service ) Fire Adviser, Government of Maharashtra; Bombay

SHRI A. N. AHLUWALIA( Alternate Shri P. N. Ghosh ) SHRI P. K. BHARUCHA SHRI P. CHATTERJEE SHRI S. C. CHATTERJEE SHRI A. S. KULKARNI SHRI P. N. MEHROTRA SHRI S. GHOSH ( Altcrnafc) SHRI H. C. RAT CHOUDHURY SHRI R. S. SUNDARAM SHRI B. V. WAGLE

2

IS : 5896( Part III ) - 1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FlRE FIGHTiNG APPLIANCES
t'ART III TURNTABLE LADDER

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 May 1975, after the draft finalized by the Fire Fighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Even

the best designed power/mcchauically opcratedihydraulic turntable ladder will not serve the purpose for which it is iutended unless it is correctly employed and operated and regularly maintained. This fact emphasizes enormous care and gives greater importance for the appliance which is meant ~OF special use as a water tower, or for rescue purpose either as a staircase by lowering a pcrsou in a string from the head of the ladder. Turntable is one of such appliances. 0.3 Although there are several makes of turntable ladders in use in this country, those widely used are cithcr mechanically operated or hydralLli_ tally operated turntable ladders. Where as the principles for the selection, operation and maintenance of all such appliances are more or less based on the same prihciplcs, though details vary. The recommendations in this standard have, therefore, been framed particularly for the turntable ladder mechanically -operated and in general hydraulic turntable ladder. Keeping in view the necessity of adequate manpower requiring handling of such appliance, necessary recommendations for this has been included in this standard. 0.4 This standard is formulated in four parts: Part 1 covers Cornbilled foam CO, crash tender, Part II Escape, Part III Turntable ladder and Part IV Other equipments like hose pipe, extension ladder, etc ( U/Z&Y preparation ).

0.5 In the formulation

of this standard due weightage has bccu given to international co-qrdination auron g the standards and practices prcvailiug in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country.

3

IS : 5896 ( Part III ) - 1975 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the recommended practice and procedures for the selection, operation and maintenance of combined mechanically operated turntable ladder and hydraulic turntable ladder. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Turntable
ladders shall be provided in metropolitan cities or at other places for fighting the fires in high rise/tall/multi-storeyed buildings, oil installations where water or foam is intended to be used as the principal fire extinguishing medium as a water/foam tower. It may also be used for rescue purposes either as ` staircase ' or by lowering a person in a sling craddle from the head of the ladder where means of escape are blocked by smoke heat and fire or otherwise.

3. SCALE 3.1 Turntable
ladders shall be provided according to the size of fire risk as described under 2.1 in any of fire stations jurisdiction subject to minimum two numbers. 4. HOUSING

4.1 Turntable
storeyed

ladders shall be housed at the fire station and or oil installations above ground tire risk.

covering

multiexcept

4.2 Turntable ladders shall not be stationed exposed to weather for the duration of drills demonstrations or operational purposes.

5. MANPOWER
men shall be provided The crew shall comprise one oficer-in-charge firemen and one driver operator.

5.1 A crew of six trained

to man each appliance. of the appliance, four

NOTI< - Training should include complete fimilinrization with the working of the appliance, its capabilities, operation and maintenance, emergency procedures, fire, fighting techniques and topography of the multi-storeyed buildings, oil tanks and involved water resources for the purpose of fire lighting.

5.2 It shall be ensured that the full crew recommended in 5.1 is available for instantaneous turn-out round the clock, when the appliance is required. 6. WATER

SUPPLY

6.1 Adequate water supply in the shape of static water tanks and hydrants shall be provided for boosting pumps to be operated for a required duration, without interruption to its full rated output/capacity.
4

IS:5896(PartlII)-1975 6.1.1 Additional water supply for the purpose of 6.1 shall be carried water tenders. on

6.1.2 Each water tender skall be manned by its full complement of crew who shall be available for instantaneous turnout at all times when the turntable ladder is turned out. 6.2 The static tanks shall be designed and sited to ensure -that : a) the capacity of each tank is of at least 200 000 litres, of b) there are adequate arrangements for speedy replenishment each tank at the rate of 2 275 l/min, c) manhole of each tank shall be within direct approach of fire engines without any kind of obstruction, d) the coverage of the tank shall be weight of at least 12 tonnes, and capable of withstanding the

c) no tank shall be more than 100 m away from the risk it is intended to cover. 6.3 The fire hydrants shall be conforming to IS : 908-1975*. 6.4 Supplies of adequate foam compound conforming to IS : 4989-1974t shall be provided for replenishing the foam equipment by water tenders or other transport. 7. SPARE PARTS

7.1 Adequate spare parts for the maintenance of the chassis, engine pump, ratio telephone and life saving equipment shall be ladder mechanism, provided at each station. 8. ACCESS ROADS

8.1 For a turntable ladder to be effective in fire fighting and rescue operations of multi-storeyed buildings, it should be able to reach the building, oil tank sites as near a3 possible and as expeditiously as possible. This can be achieved by providing sufficient open space of at least 8.5 m width around the object necessary for clear and speedy manoeuverability of the appliance. At least 4 m wide entrance and exitways shall also be provided. 9. OPERATION 9.1 The turntable ladder may be operated for any of the following: a) As a water tower taking water from additional water tenders, static tank, hydrants; *Specificationfor fire hydrant, stand post type ( secondreuision).
tspecification revision ) . for foam compound for producing mechanical foam for fire fighting (Jrsl

5

IS

I

5896 ( Part III ) - 1975 b) Delivery
of foam jets taking water and foam compounds with available mechanical foam producing apparatus; to carry the rescued person down; for rescue purposes; and the trapped persons from heat to down mixed

c) For bridging d) As a `staircase' f) As a string ground.

e) As a crane to lift the loads; for taking

9.2 General - The following shall be checked tour of duty by the incoming crew:

at the beginning

of each

4 b) 4

Engine Radiator Tank Fuel Tank -

These

shall be kept full.

It shall be kept full.

The correct Tyres - These shall be checked for correct inflation. pressure given in the instruction manual for the chassis shall be painted on the outside of mudguards, above the tyres, in white paint, so as to ensure correct and ready means for checking. Oil Level in Engine Sump level on the dip stick.

4 4

It shall be up to the mark for correct

Battery - It shall be topped up with distilled water and the specific gravity of the electrolyte shall be checked. Connections between the battery terminals and the electrical circuits shall be checl.ed to ensure that these are tight.

f 1 Lights, Horn, Fire Bells - These shall be put in good working order. 9) Auxiliary, Awllary and Optional Equipment - It shall be ensured
that all the equipment Rotation Work Box the dipstick. is in efficient workingcondition.

h) 3
k)

Turntable Rotatiw Kings -

Lubrication by grease be ensured.
oil level mask on up

It shall be up to correct

Extension Winch Gear Box - The oil level shall be maintained to the oil level plug provided on the casing.

4

allowed to wear or damaged. All wire ropes and pulleys shall be seen for any broken strands which will show up in the form of ` needling `. If it be so ensure that the rope has been replaced with correct diameter and construction.

Ladders - It shall be ensured that the ladders are free from rust and paint work is undamaged. The ring covers shall not be

4

Ladder Rollers and Pulley -

Correct lubrication shall be carried out.

P) Hydraulic Oil Tank -

It shall be kept full up to filler pipe, 6

IS : 5896 ( Part III ) - 1975 First-Aid Hose-Reel -The first-aid hose-reel shall be checked to ensure that it rotates freely and that the tubing is correctly wounded. Ancillary hpi~ment - It shall be checked with the inventory lists for correctness of quantity and stowage. 9.3 Other Factors The turntable ladder operator should work to the inclinometer. The elevation should be restricted to 70 dcgrecs when the ladder is in use water to\ver to reduce the backward thrust caused by jet reaction. The plumbing, extension, elevation and dcprcssion, extension and housing, rotation of the turntable ladder should be carried out in accordance with manufacturer's instructions. The following principal factors for siting the appliance should be as follows: 1) The safety limits of the ladder; 2) The clearance around the heel of, and above, the ladder; and 3) The condition of the ground.
NOTE -It should also be remembered that the first objective to which the ladder is pitched may not be the only one required, and a site should therefore be chosen which will allow as many other movements as possible to be carried out.

4

W cl

4

Workine Clearance 1) Th&e must be sufficient rooms on each side of the chassis for the jacks to be lowered to the ground. It should be remembered that out-rigger jacks, when put down, will extend beyond the wheel base. Two metre on each sicle is usually sufficient. 2) There must be sufficient clearance all round the rear of the appliance for the heel of the ladder to travel round at its maximum projection. 3) There must also be clearance above the ladder for it to be elevated from the nearest. Some buildings have projections on their lower floors, such as balconies and porticoes, which may make it impossible for the ladder to be elevated, although there is otherwise adequate clearance all round.
NOTE - A turntable ladder should only be operated on firm ground. The ground all round the ladder should be examined, even when it is being operated upon a made-up road, to ensure that there are no hydrant pits, telephone or manhole covers, or similar plates beneath either the road wheels or the jacks. This is particularly important when working in the forecourts of the factories or the drives of private houses. There are invariably several covers in such places ( to provide inspection pits to the various domestic services ), and these are often partially covered by gravel or other surfacing material, thus making them difficult to distinguish.

7

IS : 5896 ( Part III ) - 1975

9

Getting to Work: Prior to getting to work ensure that the jacks are The varilowered to the ground firmly and the axles are locked. ous operations entailed in getting the turntable ladder to work follow a definite sequence, which must always be adhered to This is as follows: irrespective of the type of ladder employed.

1) Elevate the ladder to the required angle. 2) Train the ladder to the ground position.
3) When
the head of the ladder is aimed correctly at the objective the plumbing must be checked and the ladder plumbed as necessary if the plumbing is not automatic. the training and elevation to ensure that the ladder is aimed correctly at its objective, and read off the maximum permissible extension from the inclinometer scale. It is essential to get the elevation as correct as possible before extending, in order that the correct maximum extension may be seen. If the ladder is extended to its maximum and has suhsequently to be depressed it may have to be shortened to keep it within permissible limits. It is therefore desirable to obtain a correct angle of elevation before extending. the ladder. When the required rest the ladder on the pawls. extension is achieved

4) Check

5) Extend 6) Adjust

training, elevation and extension to obtain the exact position required. These fine adjustments should be carried out in slow speed ( as must all operations at or near maximum extension ). If the head of the ladder is out of the operator's sight a man should be stationed in a position from which he can see the head, and the operator should work under his instructions. Alternativeiy, if the head of the ladder is out of sight from the ground ( if it is hidden by smoke, for example ) a man may be sent to the telephone. Delicate adjustments can, if necessary, `,e carried out by means of manual gears. sequence should be followed in making up

f-1 Make

Ujx A similar the ladder :

1) Bring the head of the ladder

clear of the building, normally by training, but if neCessary ( as for example, when the head of the ladder has been inserted into a narrow opening) by elevating.

2) House the ladder by first extending the ladder lightly to trip the pawls. The operation should be commenced in slow speed, but as soon as it is apparent that the pawls on all three extensions have cleared correctly, the lever may be gradually depressed, thus releasing the brake, and allowing the ladder to descend more rapidly. 8

IS:5896(PartIII)-1975 3) Train the ladder into the central position over the appliance. 4) Depress the ladder to within a few metres of the headrest ( these last two operations are usually carried out simultaneously ). 5) Bring the table on the central point before depressing gallows. it on the

6) Depress the ladder on to the headrest, watching carefully to see If it appears that it does not foul the horns on either side. likely to foul, it should be elevated, trained slightly in the required direction and then depressed again. 9.4 Using as a Water Tower; Taking Water from the Tender Static Tank Hydrant - This operation may be necessitated when fighting fire in high rise buildings or when carrying out routine drills at the fire station. It-may also be required to apply foam to the oil tankers with a view to prevent an outbreak of fire while normal operations are in progress. When fighting a high rise building fire the appliance shall be parked according to the procedure given in 8 and the engine shall be kept running. When carrying out the drill, it may be parked as required. In any case, jacks and axle along mechanism shall be applied to the appliance before commencing the operations, unless it is necessary to move for the purpose of obtaining the more advantageous position for attacking the fire. 9.5 When the pump is engaged the revlmin facturer's instructions laid m their manual. should not exceed the manu-

9.6 A pressure of 0.7 MN/m2 ( 7 kgf/ cm2 ) shall be built up on the pump and shall be maintained at this level, as the delivery is opened up by manipulating the throttle. 9.7 The delivery mdnitor shall be opened to the fire as necessary. hoses

9.8 At close of operations ( see Table 1 and 9.2 ) the used delivery and other equipments shall be thoroughly washed with fresh water. 9.9 The pump delivery cutlets adequate pressure at the pump. size of nozzle in use. 9.10 Weekly maintenance routine

in use shall be opened after building up The actual pressure will depend on the is given in Table 1.

9.11 Where First-Aid Hose-Reel is Used - This operation may be necessitated when fighting class `A' fires ( see IS : 2 190-1971* ) where indiscriminate use of water is likely to cause water damage or where the size of fire is so small that it does not warrant the use of full sized jets. It may also be useful for producing the desired effect on the public by getting a jet to work within a couple of seconds of the arrival of the crash *Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of portable first-aid fire appliances (firrt feubion ). 9

ISt5896(P8rtIII)-1975 tender at the scene of fire ( particularly jets could be got to work. a building fire ) and till the larger

9.11.1 Turntable ladder shall be positioned at the static water supply and necessary length of suction hoses connected up with the strainer attached to the last length. The suction hoses shall be secured with a rope and its strainer and lowered into the water. 9.11.2 Pump shall be engaged and primed with the engine running in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
TABLE `1 WEEKLY MAINTENANCE AT THE FIRE ( Chses Day ROUTINE STATION TO BE CARRIED OUT

9.8 nud 9.10)
Details of Task

of Week

Monday

with grease gun, oil can or by hand as required. b) Telephone working system shall be checked, tested and cleaned. Ladder rollers, head rollers, paw1 boxes, pulleys, plumbing guides, cables, sliding surfaces, chains gears elevation, cross shaft, drum bearings, gear drive to drum guide rods, bevel gear, worm gears, throttle control, ladder lock, jacks, etc, shall be checked and cleaned and lubricated by at rained person. a) All locker doors, hinges, cab doors, bonnet hinges and catches shall be lubricated using light machine oil. b) Search and spot lights shall be checked for free movement and lubricated as necessary. Cables shall also be checked at the same time. Fire bells shall be checked for correct operation. a) Delivery hosts shall be laid out for airing and all hoses shall be replaced with fresh hoses from the stock. After airing, hoses shall be cleaned, made up and kept in store. b) L der shall be checked. Pa& and pulleys shall be lubricated with li g t machine oil. a) Particular attention shall be paid to the presence of stones between tyre treads and mud between the twin rear tyres. b) Ladder shall bc tested by portions. a) First-aid host reel tubing shall be checked and wounded properly and shall be treated with french chalk if necessary. b) Pump shall be tested for priming from the open source of water. c) Engine shall be cleaned. d) All hoses on the appliance shall be replaced with fresh hoses and the ones which are removed shall be tested. All defective hoses shall be repaired. e) Weekly summaries shall bc cutercd in the vehicle history book and records shall be completed.

a) All nipples, cross shafts plug, etc, shall be lubricated

Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

Saturday

10

IS : 5896 ( Part IlI ) - 1975 10. FAULTS 10.1 Mechanical Faults If instructions given in 11 and 12 are followed carefully and regularly, there shou!d be no major mechanical defect on the However, minor defects may sometimes occur and the driverfireground. operator should be able tr, trace the fault and rc;tify it on the spot. lubrication ing chart, conversant 10.2

10.1.1 The driver-operator

shall thoroughly st!tdy the electrical, fuel and system of the engine, with particu!ar reference to the fault-tracnormally given in the instruction m ...~ual. till he becomes fully with these.

Other Faults
a) Mechanism will not start - operator should check that take off gear and transfer gear if it is or engaged correctly. b) Mechanism operators continues power le,;er to operation is engaged. when levers are returned to c) Mechanism neutral. e) Faults f) Faults power

d) FauIts during extension. during housing. during training. faults. control. bend side ways. of impact

g) Plumbing h) Failure j ) Ladders

11. LADDER TESTS 11.1 Turntable monthly, after necessary.
a) Ladder b) Cables c) Sheaves ladders shall be examined and tested by a trained operator use at fire and on such other occasions as are considered Pawls --- To see that they function Should be inspected for wear. for free running. and guides shall be checked correctly.

d) Ladder Tests 1) Load test-The unloaded ladder should be elevated to 40 degrees in line with the chassis, over the bonnet and extended to the maximum permissible extension for one-man loading. When in this position, the weight of two men should be gradually applied to the rescue line attached to head of the ladder. 2) Cut-out tests be rehoused After the load test, the unloaded ladder should and extended again at the same elevation ( 40 11

IS : 5896 ( Part III ) - 1975
degrees ) to the normal cut-out point for the particular ladder. Jf the cut-out fails to operate at his point the ladder should be extcndcd a further one paw1 position only, and if the cut-out is still not operating, extension should`be stopped. The ladder should then be elevated to 75 degrees and extended to maximum extension in order to test the maximum extension cutout ( this test should be carried out in reasonably calm weather ). /es/ - The load and cut-out test procedure will 3) Mecha~~i.sn~ automatically check all ladder operations except training and plumbing. The ladder should therefore be trained through 180 degrees and back again, and at the same time the satisfactory operating of the plumbing gear should be checked. e) &z&y Belts- Safety belts should be tested at the same time as the turntable ladder by buckling up the belt, clipping the hook on to a ring bolt or other immovable object and submitting the belt to the weight of two men suspended from it. Belts should then be carefully examined for any signs of perishing. Any belt showing undue signs of wear should be sent for repans. f > Rescue Slings - Rescue slings should be tested by securing the ring on to ringbolt or other immovable object and submitting each loop of the sling to the weight of three men suspended from it. The slings should then be carefully examined for any signs of wear.

g)

Guy Lines - Guy lines should be tested and inspected monthly and One end of the line should be secured and two after use at a fire. men should apply a steady pull as near as possible to the free end of the line. This should be maintained for about 30 seconds and then reversed and the test repeated. On completion of the test the line should be carefully inspected for evidence of deterioration, and that the whippings, splices and fittings, such as snap hooks, etc, are free from defects. ladder shall be examined, special attention

11.2 General - The turntable being paid to the following :

a) That
b) That c) That

moving parts are clean and adequately pulleys are running the axle-locking load indicators freely; correctly;

lubricated;

cables show no sign of excessive kinking or needling; ladder parts are operating mechanism

4

That

4 That f 1 That !d That h) That

is functioning

correctly; correctly;

of the dial type are operating

communications equipment is functioning correctly; and on hydraulically-powered ladders, there are no fluid leaks from the mechanism or from hydraulically operated jacks ( where fitted ). 12

BUREAU
Headquarters: Man&

OF

INDIAN

~WANDARDS

Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Dffiies) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 1375 36 24 99

Telephones:

Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : i/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road. Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern twestern

21843 I 3 16 41 41 24 42 : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 I 41 2916 : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 g2 g5 BOMBAY 400093

Branch Offices: l PJshpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I SPeenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road :I ii ii BANGALORE 560058 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor. Bhadbhada Road, T. 1. Nagar, 667 16 BHDPAL 462003 Plot No. 82;83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 53j5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barus Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 1083 HYDERABAD 500001 6 34 71 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 1 6 98 32 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035 /nspection Office8 ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 _ ~.. Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 2 51 71 6 24 35 ( ;: 6ef 3; 6 23 05 f6 21 04 1621 17

*S&OS Office in C8lcurta is l S Chowringhea Appforch, P. 0. rrincr~ 27 w 00 &oar. Carcuwa 700072 :Salu Orlico in Bangalorois at Uniw Building. Narasimhuaja 8qwre. 22 # 71 Bang8tofeS60OOZ

