IS:1893-1984 ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

lndian Standard
CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES

(Fourth
First Reprint

Revision )
JULY 1999

UDC 699.841

: 624.042.7

0 Copyright

1986

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI

110002

Gr 14

June 1986

IS t 1893 - 1984

Indian Standard
CRITERlA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES

( Fourth Revision )
Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, BDC 39
Chairman DR JAI KRISHNA 61 Civil Lines, Roorkee M#mb.ws
SHRI A. ANANTHAKRISRNAN

Rcprssenting

Ministry of Shipping and Transport ( Develop_ ment Wing j SRRI T. R. SUBRAM~NYAM ( Alternate) University of Roorkee, Roorkee DR A. S. ARYA DR A. R. CHANDRASEKARAN ( Alternate I ) DR BRIJESH CHANDRA ( Alternate II ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport ( Roads SHRI S. P. CHAKRABORTI Wing ) SHRI M. K. MUKHE~JEF: ( Alternate ) SIIRI T. A. E. D'SA Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI N. Cl. DU~UAL ( Alternate ) Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune DIRECTOR SHRI J. G. PADALE ( Alternate ) M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SERI D. S. DESAI Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay SERI V. S. GOWAIKAR SHRI R. PATNAIK ( Alternate ) Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltdi Dhanbad SHRI A. D. GUPTA SHRI N. S. DANI ( Alternate) North Eastern Council, Shillong SHRI INDER MOHAN SHRI C. VASWANI ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR STANDARDS Railway Board (RDSO), Lucknow JOINT ( B & S ) PSC DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( B & S ) CB ( Alternate ) Tata, Consulting Engineers, Rombay SHRI M. Z. KURIAN SHRI K. V. SUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI T. K. D. MUNSI SHRI R. K. GROVER (Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1966
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 1893 - 1984
( Continued from page Members

1)
REpresEnting

Public Works Department, Government of SERI C. RAMA RAO Arunacbal Pradesh SHRI S. N. KRISRNAN ( Alfernate) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SERI R. V. CR_~LAPATHI RAO SHRI N. B. G. TILA~ ( Alternnte ) International Airport Authority of India, R~PRERENYATIVE New Delhi Structural Engineering Research Centre, Roorkee REPRESENTATIVE Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd (Research and REPRESENTATIVE Design Division ), Hyderabad Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee REPRESENTATIVE Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI ht. P. v. SHENOY New Delhi SHRI D. K. DINKER ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVASAN India Meteorological Department, New Delhi Dn H. N. SRIVASTAVA SHRI S. K. NAQ ( Alternate ) Structural Engineering Research Centre, Madras DR P. SRINIVASULU Dn N. LAKSHMANAN ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( B-7150 Safdarjung Enclave, Dn A. N. TANDON flew Delhi ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI N. VE~XBU SHI~I A. K. MITTAL ( Alternote ) Metallurgical & Engineering Consultants ( India ) SRI~I S. N. VERMA Ltd, Ranchi SHRI S. PASUPATI ( Allernalc) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Member) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SERI N. Cl. BANDYOPADHYAY Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Maps Subcommittee, BDC 39 : 4
DR S. N. BHATTACHAZ~YA SHRI A. N. DATTA SHRI A. GHOSH SHRI D. R. NANDY ( Alternate )

India Meteorological Department, New Delhi Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun Geological Survey of India, Calcutta National Geophysical Hyderabad Research Institute (CSIR ),

DR HARI NARAIN

DR K. L. KAILA ( Allcrnate ) Survey of India, Dehra Dun G. S. OBEROI SHRI K. N. SAXENA ( AltErnate `) , Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune Dn P. C. SAXENA SEIRI I. D. GUPTA ( Alternate ) University of Roorkee, Roorkee SERI L. S. SRIVASTA~A In personal capacity ( B-7150 Safdarjung Enclave, DR A. N. TANDON New Delhi )
SHRI

2

IS:1893 - 1984

Indian Standard
CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES

( Fourth Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard. ( Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 16 November 1981, after the draft finalized by the Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. plain, Western India, 0.2 Himalayan-Nagalushai region, Indo-Gangetic Kutch and Kathiawar regions are geologically unstable parts of the country and some devastating earthquakes of the world have occurred there. A major part of the peninsular India has also been visited by strong earthquakes, but these were relatively few in number and had considerably lesser intensity. The earthquake resistant design of structures taking into account seismic data from studies of these Indian earthquakes has become very essential,. particularly in view of the heavy construction programme at present all over the country. It is to serve this purpose that IS : 1893-1962 `Recommendations for earthquake resistant design of structures' was published and subsequently revised in 1966. 0.2.1 As a result of additional seismic data collected in India and further knowledge and experience gained since the publication of the first revision of this standard, the Sectional Committee felt the need to revise the standard again incorporating many changes, such as revision of maps showing seismic zones and epicentres, adding a more rational approach for design of buildings and substructure of bridges, etc. These were covered in the second revision of IS : 1893 brought out in 1970. 0.2.2 As a result of the increased use of the standard, considerable amount of suggestions were received for modifying some of the provisions of the standard and, therefore, third revision of the standard was brought out in 1975. The following changes were incorporated in the third revision: 3

IS: 1893 - 1984
The a> standard incorporated seismic zone factors ( previously given as multiplying factors in the second revision ) on a more rational basis. for the varying

b) 4

Importance factors were introduced to account degrees of importance for various structures.

In the clauses for design of multi-storeyed building the coefficient of flexibility was given in the form of a curve with respect to period of buildings. A more rational formula was used to combine for determination modal shears. New clauses were introduced pressures in elevated tanks. of hydrodynamic

4

e>
f)

Clauses on concrete and masonry account their dynamic behaviour formulae for design forces were extensive studies carried out since was published.

dams were modified, taking into during earthquakes. Simplified introduced based on results of second revision of the standard

0.3 The fourth revision has been prepared to modify some of the provisions of the standard as a result of experience gained with the use of this standard. In this revision a number of Important basic modifications with respect to load factors, field values of N, base shear and modal analysis have been introduced. A new concept of performance factor depending on the structural framing system and brittleness or ductility of construction has been incorporated. Figure 2 for average acceleration spectra has also been modified and a curve for zero percent damping has been incorporated. 0.4 It is not intended in this standard to lay down regulations so that no structure shall suffer any damage during earthquake of all magnitudes. It has been endeavoured to ensure that, as far as possible, structures are able to respond, without structural damage to shocks of moderate intensities and without total collapse to shocks of heavy intensities. While this standard is intended for earthquake resistant design of normal structures, it has to be emphasized that in the case of special structures detailed investigation should be undertaken, unless otherwise specified in the relevant clauses. 0.4.1 Though the basis for the design of different types of structures is covered in this standard, it is not implied that detailed dynamic analysis should be made in every case. There might be cases of less importance and relatively small structures for which no analysis need be made, provided certain simple precautions are taken in the construction. For example, suitably proportioned diagonal bracings in the vertical panels of steel and concrete structures add to the resistance of frames to withstand earthquake seismic areas, construction of a type which forces. Similarly in highly

IS : 1893- 1984
entails heavy debris and consequent loss of life and property, such as masonry, particularly mud masonry and rubble masonry, should be avoided in preference to construction of a type which is known to withstand seismic eflects better, such as construction in light weight materials and well braced timber-framed structures. For guidance on piecautions to be observed in the construction of buildings, reference may be made to IS : 4326-1976*. 0.5 Attention is particularly drawn to the fact that the intensity of shock due to an earthquake could greatly vary locally at any ~given place due to variation in the soil conditions. Earthquake forces would be affected by different types of foundation system in addition to variation of ground motion due to various types of soils. Considering the effects in a gross manner, the standard gives guidelines for arriving at design seismic coefficients based on type of soil and foundation system. 0.6 Earthquakes can cause damage not only on account of the shaking which results from them but also due to other chain effects like landslides, floods, fires and disruption to communication. It is, therefore, important to take necessary precautions in the design of structures so that they are safe against such secondary effects also. 0.7 It is important to note that the seismic coeficient, used in ihe design of any structure, is dependent on many variable factors and it is an extremely dificult task to determine the exact seismic coefficient in each given case. Tt is, therefore, necessary to indicate broadly the seismic coeficients that could generally be adopted in different parts or zones or the country though, of course, a rigorous analysis considering all the factors involved has got to be made in the case of all important projects in order to arrive at suitable seismic coefficients for design. The Sectional Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has attempted to include a seismic zoning map ( see Fig. 1 ) for this purpose. The object of this map is to classify the area of the country into a number of zones in which one may reasonably expect earthquake shock of more or less same intensity in future. The Modified Mercalli Intensity ( see 2.7 ) broadly associated with the various zones is V or less, VI, VII, VIII and 1X and above for zones I, II, III, IV and V respectively. The maximum seismic ground acceleration in each zone cannot be presently predicted with accuracy either on a deterministic or on a probabilistic basis. The design value chosen for a particular structure is obtained by multiplying the basic horizontal seismic coefficient for that zone, given in Table 2, by an appropriate Importance Factor as suggested in Table 4. Higher value of importance factor is usually adopted for those structures, consequences of failure of which, are serious. However, even with an importance factor of unity, the probability is that
*Code of practice for earthquake resistant design (Jr& revision ). and construction of buildings

5

IS t 1893 - 1984 a structure which is properly designed and detailed according to good construction practice, will not suffer serious damage. It is pointed out that structures will normally experience more severe ground motion than the one envisaged in the seismic coefficient specified in this standard. However, in view of the energy absorbing capacity available in inelastic range, ductile structures will be able to resist such shocks without much damage. It is, therefore, necessary that ductility must be built into the structures since brittle structures will be damaged more extensively. 0.7.1 The Sectional Committee has appreciated that there cannot be. an entirely scientific basis for zoning in view of the scanty data available. Though the magnitudes of different earthquakes which have occurred in the past are known to a reasonabIe amount of accuracy, the intensities of the shocks caused by these earthquakes have so far been mostly estimated by damage surveys and there is little instrumental evidence to corroborate the conclusions arrived at. Maximum intensity at different places can be fixed on a scale only on the basis of the observations made and recorded after the earthquake and thus a zoning map which is based on the maximum intensities arrived at, is likely to lead in some cases to an incorrect conclusion in the view of (a) incorrectness in the assessment of intensities, ib) human error in judgement during the damage survey, and (c) variation in quality and design of structures causing variation in type and extent of damage to the structures for the same intensity of shock. The Sectional Committee has, therefore, considered that a rational approach to the problem would be to arrive at a zoning map based on known magnitudes and' the known epicentres (see Appendix A) assuming all other conditions as being average, and to modify such an average idealized isoseismal map in the light of tectonics ( see Appendix B ), lithology ( see Appendix C) and the maximum intensities as recorded from damage surveys, etc. The Committee has also reviewed such a map in the light of past history and future possibilities and also attempted to draw the lines demarcating the different zones so as to be clear of important towns, cities and industrial areas, after making special examination of such cases, as a little modification in the zonal demarcations may mean considerable difference to the economics of a project in that area. Maps shown in Fig. 1 and Appendices A, B and C are prepared based on information available up to 1986. 0.8 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country.

6

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 1893 - 1984 0.8.1 In the preparation of this standard considerable help has been given by the School of Research and Training in Earthquake Engineering, University of Roorkee; Geological Survey of India; India Meteorological Department and several other organizations.

0.9 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standrd.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with earthquake resistant design of structures and is applicable to buildings; elevated structures; bridges, concrete, masonry and earth dams; embankments and retaining walls.

1.2 This standard does not deal with the construction features relating to earthquake resistant design in buildings and other structures. For guidance on earthquake resistant construction of buildings, reference may be made to IS : 4326-1976T. Further, provisions of this standard shall be used along with IS : 4326-1976t. 2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions
NOTE - For the definition of terms pertaining to soil mechanics mics, reference may be made to IS : 2809-19721 and IS : 2810-1979s. 2.1

shall apply.
and soil dyna-

Centre

of Mass

-

masses of system.

a system acts.

The point through which the resultant This corresponds to centre of gravity

of the of the

2.2 Centre of Rigidity -- The point through restoring forces of a system acts. 2.3 Critical Damping not be oscillatory.
-

which the resultant of the will

The damping beyond which the motion

2.4 Damping - The effect of internal friction, imperfect elasticity of 0` etc, in reducing the amplitude of vibration and material, slipping, slidin,, is expressed as a percentage of critical damping.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tCode of practice for earthquake resistant design and construction of buildings (first reo1sion ) . fGlossary of terms and symbols relating to soil engineering (Jirst rcvisio~t ). �Glossary of terms relating to soil dynamics (Jitst revision ).

IS : 1893-1984
2.5 Epicentre - The geographical above the focus of the earthquake. 2.6 Focus - The shaking of ground. originating point on the surface of earth vertically of the elastic waves which cause

source

2.7 Intensity of Earthquake - The intensity of an earthquake at a place is a measure of the effects of the earthquake, and is indicated by a number according to the Modified Mercalli Scale of Seismic Intensities ( see Appendix D ). 2.8 Liquefaction - Liquefaction is a state in saturated cohesionless soil wherein the effective shear strength is reduced to negligible value for all engineering purposes due to pore pressures caused by vibrations during an earthquake when they approach the total confining pressure. In this condition the soil tends to behave like a fluid mass. 2.9 Lithological Features - The nature of the geological formation the earth's crust above bed rock on the basis of such characteristics colour, structure, mineralogic composition and grain size. of as

2.10 Magnitude of Earthquake ( Richter's Magnitude ) _- The magnitude of an earthquake is the logarithm to the base 10 of the maximum trace amplitude, expressed in microns, with which the standard short period torsion seismometer ( with a period of 0.8 second, magnification 2 800 and damping nearly critical ) would register the earthquake at an epicentral distance of 100 km. The magnitude hf is thus a number which is a nieasure of energy released in an earthquake. 2.11 Mode Shape Coefficient - When a system is vibrating in a normal mode, the amplitude of the masses at any particular instant of time expressed as a ratio of the amplitude of one of the masses is known as mode shape coefficient. 2.12 Normal Mode - A system is said to be vibrating in a normal mode or principal mode when all its masses attain maximum values of displacements simultaneously and also they pass through equilibrium positions simultaneously. of the maximum res2.13 Response Spectrum - The representation ponse of idealized single degree freedom systems having certain period and The maximum response is plotted damping, during that earthquake. against the undamped natural period and for various damping values, and can be expressed in terms of maximum absolute acceleration, maximum relative velocity or maximum relative displacement,

IS: 2.14 Seismic Coefficients and Seismic Zone Factors

1893 - 1984

2.14.1 Basic Seismic Coejicient (a,) seismic zone to give the basic design acceleration due to gravity. 2.14.2 Seismic <one Factor (F,) mic zone along with the average

- A coeficient acceleration as

assigned a fraction

to each of the seis-

- A factor acceleration

to be used for different spectra.

2.14.3 Importance Factor (I) - A factor to modify the basic seismic coefficient and seismic zone factor, depending on the importance of a structure. 2.14.4 Soil-Foundation System Factor (/3) A factor to modify the basic seismic coefficient and seismic zone factor, depending upon the soil foundation system. 2.14.5 Average Acceleration Coejicient expressed as a fraction of acceleration Average specturm due to gravity. acceleration

2.14.6 Design Horizontal Seismic Coejkient (cq,) - The seismic coefficient taken for design. It is expressed as a function of the basic seismic coefficient (a,) or the seismic zone factor together with the average acceleration coefficient, the importance factor (I) and the soil-foundation system factor (6). 2.15 Tectonic Feature - The nature of geological formation of the bed rock in the earth's crust revealing regions characterized by structural features, such as dislocation, distortion, faults, folding, thrusts, volcanoes with their age of formation which are directly involved in the earth movement or quakes resulting in the above consequences. 3. GENERAL 3.1 General PRINCIPLES Principles AND DESIGN CRITERIA

3.1.1 Earthquakes cause random motion of ground which can be resolved in any three mutually perpendicular directions. This motion causes the structure to vibrate. The vibration intensity of ground expected at any location depends upon the magnitude of earthquake, the depth of focus, distance from the epicentre and the strata on which the structure stands. The predominant direction of vibration is horizontal. Relevant combinations of forces applicable for design of a particular structure have been specified in the relevant clauses. 3.1.2 The response of the structure to the ground vibration is a function of the nature of foundation soil; materials, form, size and mode of construction of the struture; and the duration and the intensity of ground motion. This standard specifies design seismic coefficient for structures standing on soils or rocks which will not settle or slide due to Ioss of strength during vibrations. 11

IS:1893

- 1984

3.1.3 The seismic coefficients recommended in this standard are based on design practice conventionally followed and performance of structures in past earthquakes, It is well understood that the forces which structures would be subjected to in actual earthquakes, would be very much larger than specified in this sta.ndard as basic seismic coefficient. In order to take care of this gap, for special cases importance factor and performance factor ( where necessary ) are specified in this standard elsewhere. 3.1.4 In the case of structures designed for horizontal seismic force only, it shall be considered to act in any one direction at a time. Where both horizontal and vertical seismic forces are taken into account, horizontal force in any one direction at a time may be considered simultaneously with the vertical force as specified in 3.4.5. 3.1.5 The vertical seismic coefficient shall be considered in the case of structures in which stability is a criterion of design or, for overall stability, analysis of structures except as otherwise stated in the relevant clauses. 3.1.6 Equipment and systems supported at various floor levels of structures will be subjected to motions corresponding to vibrations at their support points. In important cases, it may be necessary to obtain floor response spectra for design. - The following assumptions shall be made 3.2 Assumptions earthquake resistant design of structures: in the

Earthquake causes impulsive ground motion which is complex a> and irregular in character, changing in period and amplitude each

lasting for small duration. `Therefore, resonance of the type as visualized under steady state sinusoidal excitations will not occur as it would need time to build up such amplitudes.

b)
Cl

Earthquake is not likely to occur simultaneously with wind or maximum flood or maximum sea waves. The value of elastic modulus of materials, wherever required, may be taken as for static analysis unless a more definite value is available for use in such condition. Increase in Stresses and Load Factors

3.3 Permissible

3.3.1 Permissible hcrease in Material Stresses Whenever earthquake forces are considered along with other normal design forces, the permissible stresses in materials, in the elastic method of design, may be increased by one-third. However, for steels having a definite yield stress, the stress be limited to the yield stress; for steels without a definite yield point, the will stress will be limited to 80 percent of the ultimate strength or 0.2 percent proof stress whichever is smaller and that in prestressed concrete members, the tensile stress in the extreme fibres of the concrete may be permitted so as not to exceed 213 of the modulus of rupture of concrete. 12

IS : 1893- 1984
3.3.2 Load Factors - Whenever earthquake forces are considered along with other normal design forces, the following factors may be adopted:

a) For ultimate load design of steel structures: UL = where
UL = the ultimate

1*4(DL+LL+EL)

load for which the structure or its elements should be designed according to the relevant Indian Standards for steel structures;

DL = the dead load of the structure; LL =

the superimposed load on the structure considering its modified values as given in the relevant clauses of this standard; and load adopted for design, and prestressed concrete

EL = the value of the earthquake

b)

For limit state structures.

design

of reinforced

The partial safety factors for limit states of serviceability and collapse and the procedure for design as given in relevant Indian Standards ( ste IS : 456-1978* and IS : 1343-1980t ) `may be used for earthquake loads combined with other normal loads, The live load values to be used shall be as given in the relevant clauses of this standard.
NOTE I.-- The members of reinforced or prcstressed concrete shall be under Further, it should be suitably designed so reinforced so as to cause a tensile failure. that premature failure due to shear or bond may not occur subject to the provisions of IS : 456-1978* and IS : 1343-1980t.
NATE 2 - The members and their connections in steel structures should be so proportioned that high ductility is obtained avoiding premature failure due to elastic or inelastic buckling of any type. NOTE 3 Appropriate details to achieve ductility are given in IS : 4326-1976#.

3.3.3 Permissible Increase in Allowable Bearing Pressure of Soils - When earthquake forces are included, the permissible increase in allowable bearing pressure of soil shall be as given in Table 1, depending upon the type of foundation of the structure.
*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third reuision ). TCode of practice for prestressed concrete (first revision ). $Code of practice for earthquake resistant design and construction of buildings revision ) ,

(Jirsl

13

NOTE I1888-1982s. NOTE 2 total increase above.

The allowable

bearing

pressure shall be determined

in accordance

with

IS

: 6403-1981$

or IS:

If any increase in bearing pressure has already been permitted for forces other than seismic forces, the in allowable bearing pressure when seismic force is also included shall not exceed the limits specified

values less NOTE 3 - Submerged loose sands and soils falling under classification SP with standard penetration than the values specified in Note 5 below, .the vibrations caused by earthquake may cause liquefaction or excessive total and differential settlements. In important projects this aspect of the problem need be investigated and appropriate methods of compaction or stabilization adopted to achieve suitable JY Alternatively, deep pile foundation may be provided and taken to depths well into the layer which are not likely to liquefy. Marine clays and other sensitive clays are also known to liquefy due to collapse of soil structure and will need special treatment according to site conditions. NOTE 4 liquefy. NOTE 5 <one III, IV and V The piles should be designed for lateral loads neglecting laterel resistance of soil layers liable to

Desirable

field values of N are as follows: Depth below ground level in mdres IJpto5 up to `j" 10 N Values 15 l? 20 Remarks For values of depth between 5 to 10 m linear interpolation is recommended

I and II ( for important structures only )

*See IS : 1498-1970 Classification and identification of soils for general engineering purposes (Jirsf reuision ). t&`ee IS : 2131-1981 Method of standard penetration test for soils (first reoision ). $Code of practice for determination of bearing capacity of shallow foundations (Jirst revision ). �Method of load tests on soils ( second revision ).

IS : 1893 - 1904 3.4 Design Seismic Coefficient for Different Zones 3.4.1 For the purpose of determining the seismic forces, the country is classified into five zones as shown in Fig. 1. 3.4.2 The earthquake force experienced by a structure depends on its own dynamic characteristics in addition to those of the ground motion. Response spectrum method takes into account these characteristics and is recommended for use in case where it is desired to take such effects into account. For design of other structures an equivalent static approach employing use of a seismic coefficient may be adopted. 3.4.2.1 Unless otherwise stated, the basic seismic coefficients ( a,, ) and seismic zone factors ( F, ) in different zones shall be taken as given in Table 2 and Appendices E and F.
TABLE 2 VALUES OF BASIC SEISMIC COEFFICIENTS ZONE FACTORS IN DIFFERENT ZONES (Clauses 3.4.2.1, 3.4.2.3 and3.4.5) AND SEISMIC

i%.

ZONE No.

METHOD ---_---h-__-_-_---_~ r---Response Spectrum Method Seismic Coefficient ( see Appendix F ) Method h_____~ r___h-_-Y r----Basic horizontal Seismic zone factor for average acceleration seismic coefficient, spectra to be used a0 with Fig. 2, F, (3) 0'08 0'05 0'04 0'02 0'01 (4) 0'40 0.25 0'20 0.10 0'05

(1) i) ii) iii) iv) v)

(2) V IV III II I

NOTE - For under ground structures and foundations at 30 m depth or below, the basic seismic coefficient may be taken as 0'5 a,; for structures placed between ground level and 30 m depth, the basic seismic coefficient may be linearly interpolated between a,, and 0.5 a,. The seismic coefficients according are given in Appendix E. to 3.4.2.1 for some important towns and cities

3.4.2.2 The design seismic forces shall be computed on the basis of importance of the structure and its soil-foundation system.
Seismic Coeficient and Resflonse Spectrum methods shall be computed as given

3.4.2.3

The design values of horizontal seismic coefficient,

CQ-, in the

by the following expressions: a) In Seismic Co@cient Method the design value of horizontal seismic coefficient Mh shall be computed as given by the following expression: clh = p I&,

IS:1893

- 1984

0 96 2 vi

DAMPING

NATURAL

PERIOD

OF

VIBRATION

IN

SECONDS

Fro. 2

AVERAGE ACCELERATION SPECTRA

3.4.5 The vertical seismic coefficient where applicable ( see 3.1.5 ) may be taken as half of the horizontal seismic coefhcient as indicated in 3.4.2. In important structures where there is a possibility of amplification of vertical seismic coefficient, dynamic analysis is preferable. In that case F, values in Table 2 should be multiplied by 0.5. 4. BUILDINGS 4.1 Design Live Loads 4.1.1 For various loading classes as specified in IS : 875-1960*, thehorizontal earthquake force shall be calculated for the full dead load and the percentage of live loads as given below: Load Class 200, 250 and 300 400, 500,750 and 1 000
*Code of practice for structural safety of buildings

Percentage of Design Live Load 25 50 : Loading standards (revised ).

18

IS : 1893 - 1984

TABLE

3

VALUES

OF f3 FOR DIFFERENT

SOIL-FOUNDATION

SYSTEMS

( Clause 3.4.3 ) SL No. TYPE OB SOIL MAINLY CONSTITUTING
THEFOUNDATIO~~

VALUES OF @ BOR *_-----_----_~ r---------Piles Piles Not Raft Combined Isolated Well FoundaPassing Covered Founda- or Isolated RCC tions Footings Through Under tions RCC Any Soil, Co1 3 Footings Without but Restwith Tie Tie Beams or Unreining on Soil Beams forced Strip Type I Foundations (3) (4) 1'0 1.2 (5) 1.0 1'0 1-o (6) 1'0 1.0 1'2 (7) 1'0 1.2 l-5 (8) 1'0 1.2 1'5

(1) i) ii) iii)

(2) Type I Rock hard soils or

1'0 1-O 1.0

Type II Medium soils Type III soils NOTE Soft

The value of 3 for dams shall be taken as 1'0.

TABLE

4 VALUES

OF IMPORTANCE

FACTOR,

Z

( Clauses 3.4.2.3 and 3.4.4 ) SL No. (1) i) ii) iii) Dams ( all types ) Containers liquids of inflammable or poisonous gases or STRUCTURE VALUEO~ IMPORTANCE FACTOR, Z ( see Note ) (3) 3.0 2'0 l-5

(2)

Important service and community structures, such as hospitals; water towers and tanks; schools; important bridges; important power houses; monumental structures; emergency buildings like telephone exchange and fire bridge; large assembly structures like cinemas, assembly halls and subway stations All others

iv)

1'0

NOTE - The values of importance factor, Z given in this table are for guidance. A designer may choose suitable values depending on the importance based on economy, strategy and other considerations.

19

IS:1893

- 1984

NOTE 1 - The percentage of live loads given above shall also be used for calculating stresses due to vertical loads for combining with those due to earthquake forces. Under the earthquake condition the whole frame except the roof may be assumed loaded with live load proportions specified above, without further reductions in live load as envisaged in IS : 875-1964". NOTE 2 - The proportions of the live load indicated above for calculating the horizontal seismic forces are applicable to average conditions. Where the probable loads at the time of an earthquake are more accurately assessed, the designer may alter the proportions indicated or even replace the entire live load proportions by the actual assessed load. NOTE 3 - If the live load is assessed instead of taking the above proportions for calculating. horizontal earthquake force, only that part of the live load shall be considered which possesses mass. Earthquake force shall not be applied on impact effects.

4b1.2 For calculating not be considered. 4.2.1 The
follows: criteria

the earthquake

force

on roofs,

the live load may

4.2 Design Criteria for Multi-storeyed
for design

Buildings
buildings

of multi-storeyed

&ail

be as

a) In case of buildings with floors capable of providing rigid horizontal diaphragm action, a separate building or any block of a building between two separation sections shall be analyzed as a whole for seismic forces as per 3.1.4. The total shear in any horizontal plane shall be distributed to various elements of lateral forces resisting system assuming the floors to be infinitely rigid in the horizontal plane, In buildings having shear walls together with frames, the frames shall be designed for at least 25 percent of the seismic shear. b) In case of buildings where floors are not able to provide the diaphragm action as in (a) above the building frames behave and may be analyzed frame by frame with independently; tributory masses for seismic forces as per 3.1.4.' C) The following methods are recommended buildings in various zones: Building Greater 40 m Height than Seismic <ones III, V IV and for various categories Recommended Method of

-_
*Code of practice for structural

Detailed dynamic analysis ( either modal anaylsis or time history analysis based on expected ground motion for which special studies are required ). For preli( revised ).

safety of buildings: Loading standards

IS:1893
Building Height Seismic <ones Recommended

- 1984

Method

minary design, modal analysis using response spectrum method may be employed Greater 90 m than I and II All zones Modal analysis using response spectrum method Modal analysis using response spectrum method. Use of seismic coefficient method permitted for zones I, II and III

Greater than 40 m and up to 90 m

Modal analysis using response spectrum method. Use of seismic coefficient method permitted in all zones d) Check for drift and torsion according to 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 is desirable for all buildings, being particularly necessary in cases of buildings greater in height than 40 m. Less than 40 m All zones
NOTE 1 -For buildings having irregular shape and/or irregular distrikttion of mass and stiffeners in horizontal and/or vertical plane it is desirable to carry out modal analysis using response spectrum method ( see also Note 2 below 4.2.1.1 ). NOTE 2 - For multi-storeyed buildings, it is assumed that the storey heights are more or less uniform ranging between 2'7 and 3.6 m. In exceptional cases where one or two-storey heights have to be up to 5 m, the applicability of the clause is not vitiated.

4.2.1.1 where

The base shear VB is given by the following formula:

performance factor depending on the structural framing system and brittleness or ductility of construction ( see Table 5 ), c = a coefficient defining the flexibility of structure with the increase in number of storeys depending upon fundamental time period I ( see Fig. 3 ), ah = design seismic coefficient as defined in 3.4.2;3 (a), total dead load + appropriate amount of live load as w= defined in 4.1, and fundamental time period of the building in seconds ( see 7-I Note 1 ). X= 21

IS : 1893 - 1985
NOTE 1 - The fundamental time period may either be established by experimental observations on similar buildings or calculated by any rational method of analysis. In the absence of such data T may be determined as follows for multistoreyed buildings: a) For moment resisting the lateral loads frames without T=O'ln where o = b) For all others ~ = where H = too;1 height of the main structure d = of the building in metres, in a direc0'09 H 2/r number ofstoreys including basement storeys. bracing or shear walls for resisting

maximum base dimension of building in metres tion parallel to the applied seismic force.

NOTE 2 - The above clause shall not apply to buildings having irregular shape and/or irregular distribution of mass and stiffness in horizontal and/or vertical plane. A few buildings of this type are shown in Fig. 4. For such buildings modal analysis shall be carried out.

2.0

2.4

2.8

3.0

PERIOD
FIG. 3

IN SECONDS

C Versus PERIOD

22

1s : 1893 - 1984

PLAZA
(BUILDING WITH

TYPE

BUILDING
CHANGES IN STIFFNESS)

SUDDEN

BUILDING WITH FLEXIBLE FIRST STOREY
[INCLUDING BUILDINGS LIKE ASSEMBLY HALLS AND CINEMA THEATRES WHERE THE CENTRA p AUDITORIUM (IN ONE STOREY) COVERS UPTO THREE STOREYS OF THE SIDE FLANKS]

,

BUILDING IN HILLY AREA

Fro. 4

BUILDINGS IN WHICH CLAUSE4.2.1.1 23

SHALL NOT

BE APPLICABLE

IS r1893

- 1984
TABLE 5 VALUES OF PERFORMANCE (Clause4.2.1.1 ) FACTOR, K

SL No.

STRUCTURAL

FRAMINQSYSTEM

VALUES OB PERWOR~I~AN~E FACTOR,X (3) 1'0

REXARKS

(1) i)

(2)
a) Moment resistant frame with appropriate ductility details as given in IS: 437.6-1976* in reinforced concrete or steel b) Frame as above with R. C. shear walls or steel bracing members designed for ductility

(4) -

ii)

a) Frame as in (i) (a) with either steel

bracing members or plain or nominally reinforced concrete infill panels

These factors will apply only if the steel bracing members and the infill panels are taken into consideration in stiffness as well lateral strength calculations provided that the frame acting alone will be able to resist
at least 25 percent of seismic the design forces

b) iii)

Frame as in (i) (a) in combination with masonry infills Reinforced concrete framed buildings [ Not covered by (i) or (ii) above ]
1'6

*Code of practice for earthquake resistant design and construction of buildings ( jirst revision ) .

4.2.1.2 Distribution of forces along with the height given by the following formula:

of the building

is

where Qi wi = lateral forces at roof of floor base shear as worked i,

VB =

out in 4.2.1.1,

= load ( dead load + appropriate amount of live load ) of the roof or any floor i ( see Note below ),

1s

I

1893

-

1984
or

hi

=

height measured from the base of building any floor i; and

to the

roof

n =

number of storeys including the basement floors, where the basement walls are not connected with ground floor deck or the basement walls are not fitted between building columns, but excluding the basement floors where they are so connected.

Wi, the weight of walls and columns in any storey is NOTE - In calculating, assumed to be shared half and half between the roof or floor at top and the floor or ground at bottom, and all weights are assumed to be lumped at the level of the roof or any floor i.

4.2.1.3 The force and shear are illustrated in Fig. 5.
STOREY No Wr

distributions

for at en-storeyed

building

i

5A

Frame

56

Distribution of Forces

5C

Distribution

of Shears

Fro.5

FORGE AND SHEARDISTRIBUTION

FORTEN-STOREYEDBUILDING

For a ten-storeyed VB = CUhK(Wr+

building 9 Wt) 25

in Fig. 5:

IS:1893

- 1984

where
Vi = shear injth NOTE-For

storey.
see 4.2.1.1 and 4.2.1.2.

other notations,

4.2.2 Modal Analysis - The lateral load Qi(r) acting at any floor level i due to rth mode of vibration is given by the following equation:

QP = xw, +p c, ah(r)
where
Wi = weight of the floor i as given in 4.2.1.2,

X = performance factor depending upon the type of buildings as given in Table 5, 4,(r) = mode shape coefficient at floor i in rth mode obtained from free vibration analysis, C, = mode participation factor, and vibration

u,,(r) = design horizontal seismic coefficient as defined in 3.4.2.3 corresponding to appropriate period and damping in !l?? rth mode . 4.2.2.1 The mode participation ing equation:
i=n Z Wi#*) c, = g

factor C, may be given by the follow-

i=l

s Wi r #P)

I"

26

IS : 1893 - 1984
where
i, W&@) n =

are same as defined in 4.2.2, and

total number of storeys as defined in 4.2.1.1.

4.2.2.2 The shear force, Vi, acting in the ith storey may be obtained by superposition of first three modes as follows: v, = ( 1 where
V,(r) =

3 y) L: vi(r) + y Y/ r=l

3 r=l
B { Vp)}a

absolute value of maximum shear at the ith storey in the rth mode; the value of y shall be as given below:
Height, H Y

up t?*O 40 60 90
NOTE - For intermediate linear interpolation.

0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
heights of buildings, value of y may be obtained by

4.2.2.3 The total load at Qn and Qr acting at roof level n and floor level i will be computed from the following equations respectively:
Qn = Vn Vl vi $1

QI =

The overturning moments at various levels of the building may be computed by using the above roof and floor level forces. 4.2.3 Drift - The maximum horizontal relative displacement due to earthquake forces between two successive floors shall not exceed 0.004 times the difference in IeveIs between these floors. 4.264 Torsion of Buildings - Provision shall be made for the increase in shear resuhing from the horizontal torsion due to an eccentricity between the centre of mass and the centre of rigidity. The design eccentricity shall be taken as 1.5 times the computed eccentricity between the centre of mass and the centre of rigidity. Negative torsional shears shall be neglected.

29

IS : 1893 - 1984
4.3 Type of Construction - For different types of construction adopted the constructional details and the appropriate design criteria to be adopted shall be according to 5 of IS : 4326-1976*. 4.4 Miscellaneous 4.4.1 Towers, tanks, parapets, smoke stacks ( chimneys ) and other vertical cantilever projections attached to buildings and projecting above the roofs shall be designed for five times the horizontal seismic coefficient specified in 3.4.2.1. However, compound walls need not be designed for increased seismic coefficient except where the environmental circumstances indicate that their collapse may lead to serious consequences, 4.4.2 Ail horizontal projections like cornices and balconies shall be designed to resist a vertical force equal to five times the vertical seismic coefficient specified in 3.4.5 multiplied by the weight of the projection.
NOTE - The increased seismic coefficients specified in 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 are for designing the projecting part and its connection with the main structure. For the design of the main structure such increase need not be considered.

4.4.3 For industrial structures and frame structures of large spans and heights, modal analysis using response spectrum method is recommended. 5. ELEVATED 5.1 General 5.1.1 The elevated structures covered by these provisions include elevated tanks, refinery vessels and stacklike structures, such as chimneys of normal pro.portions. In the case of the elevated structures of unusual proportions, more detailed studies shall be made. 5.2 Elevated Tower-Supported Tanks STRUCTURES

5.2.1 For the purpose of this analysis, elevated tanks shall be regarded as systems with a single degree of freedom with their mass concentrated at their centres of gravity. 5.2.2 The damping in the system may be assumed as 2 percent of the critical for steel structures and 5 percent of the critical for concrete ( including masonry ) structures. 5.2.3 The free period T, in seconds, calculated from the following formula: of such structures shall be

*Code ofpractice revision ) .

for earthquake

resistant design and construction

of buildings (Jrsl

28

IS: 1893.1984
where A = the static horizontal deflection at the top of the tank under a static horizontal force equal to a WCight W acting at the centre of gravity of tank. In calculating the period of steel tanks, the members may be assumed to be pinjoined with only the tensile members of the bracing regarded as active in carrying the loads. No pre-tension shall be assumed in the bracing rods; and g = acceleration due to gravity. 5.2.4 The design shall be worked out both when the tank is full and when empty. When empty, the weight W used in the design ( see 5.2.3 ) shall consist of the dead load of the tank and one-third the weight of the staging. When full, the weight of contents is to be added to the weight under empty condition. 5.2.5 Using the period T as calculated in 5.2.3 and appropriate damping, the spectral acceleration shall be read off from the average acceleration spectra given in Fig. 2. The design horizontal seismic coefficient, Q shall be calculated as in 3.4.2.3 (b). 5.2.6 The lateral force shall be taken equal to: UbW alI W =

where

design horizontal seismic coefficient as given in 5.2.5, and weight as defined in 5.2;4.

Thisforce shall be assumed to be applied at the centre of gravity of the tank horizontally in the plane in which the snucture is assumed to oscillate for purposes of carrying out the lateral load analysis. 5.2.7
E?_ydodyrzamic Pressure in Tanks 5.2.7.1 When a tank containing fluid vibrates the fluid exerts impulsive and convective pressures on the tank. The convective pressures during earthquakes are considerably less in magnitude as compared to impulsive pressures and its effect is a sloshing of the water surface. For the purpose of design only the impulsive pressure may be considered.

5.2.7.2 Rectangular container The pressure at any location x ( see Fig. 6 ) is given by:

29

IS : 1893- 1984

t`-----"

------j

I

RECTANGULAR

TANK

(PLAN)

CIRCULAR

TANK

(PLAN)

(
+---FIQ. 6

x 21 OR 2R-------4 E LE VAT ION 30

RECTANGULAR AND CIRCULAR WATER TANKS

IS :1893 The pressure on the wall would be:

-1984

The pressure on the bottom of the tank would be:

where x, y, 1 and h are as defined in Fig 6 and w is the unit weight of water, and a1 for tanks located on towers is to be taken as per response spectrum method and for those located on ground corresponding to seismic coefficient method [ see 3.4.2.3 (a) 1. 5.2.7.3
Circular container -

The pressure on the wall would be : and
of width 2 I! ( see

PI = ah wh ~/~cosI$'

[$-+(f)"]tanh,/r(%),

The pressure on the bottom of the tank on a strip Fig. 6 ), would be:

where x, y, I', R and h are as defined in Fig. 6 and w and ah are as defined in 5.2.7.2. 5.3 Stacklike
Structures

5.3.1 Stacklike structures are those in which the mass and stiffness is more or less uniformly distributed along the height. Cantilever structures like chimneys and refinery vessels are examples of such structures ( see Note).
NOTE - Such structures ing towers, refinery columns necessary in such cases. will not include structures like bins, hyperbolic coolresting on frames or skirts. Modal analysis will be

31

IS : 1893 - 1984 5.3.2 Period of free vibration, T, of such structures when fixed at base, shall be calculated from the following formula:

where C, = coefficient depending upon the slenderness structure given in Table 6, wt = total weight of structure contents above the base, h' 1 ratio of the

including weight of lining and

height of structures above the base,

Es = modulus of elasticity of material of the structural shell, A = area of cross-section at the base of the structural shell, and
g = acceleration
of structural

due to gravity.

-5.3.2.1

For circular structures, A = 2 x rt where r is the mean radius shell and t its thickness. seismic Fig. 2

5.3.3 Using the period 2; as indicated in 5.3.2, the horizontal coefficient uh shall be obtained from the spectrum given in and as in 3.4.2.3 (b).
TABLE 6 VALUES OF C, AND Cv )
COEFFICIENT
CV

( Clazrses5.3.2 nnd 5.3.4 R*Tro
k COEFFIClENL' CT

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 or more where k = ratio, h'/re; and re = radius of gyration

14'4 21'2 29'6 38.4 47'2 56.0 65.0 73'8 82'8 1'8k

1'02 1'12 l-19 l-25 1.30 1'35 l-39 1'43 1'47 1'50

of the structural

shell at the base section.

32

IS:1893

- 1984

5.3.4 The design shear force V, for such structures at a distance x' from the top, shall be calculated by the following formula: 5 x' 2 x' *
V= Cvah Wt

where C, = coefficient Table 6,
ah =

L F

--h'

-i3 ( h

)I

depending

on slenderness

ratio k given

in

design horizontal seismic coefficient dance with 5.3.3, and

determined

in accor-

Wt and h' are same as defined in 5.3.2. 5.3.5 The design bending moment M at a distance x' from top shall be calculated by the following formula: M = a,Wig[ where h = height of centre of gravity of structure above base. Other notations are the same as given in 5.3.2 and 5.3.4. 6. BRIDGES 6.1 General 6.1.1 Bridge as a whole and every part of it shall be designed and constructed to resist stresses produced by lateral forces as provided in the standard. The stresses shall be calculated as the effect of a force applied horizontally at the centres of mass of the elements of the structure into which it is conveniently divided for the purpose of design. The forces shall be assumed to come from any horizontal direction. 6.1.2 Masonry and plain concrete arch bridges with spans more than 10 m shall not be built in zones IV and V. 6.1.3 forces. Slab, box and pipe culverts need not be designed for earthquake 0.6 ($)l'* + 0.4 ($ >`I

6.1.4 Bridges of length not more than 60 m and spans not more than 15 m need not be designed for earthquake forces other than in zones IV and V. 6.1.5 Modal analysis shall be necessary, in the following case, in zones IV and V: a) in the design of bridges of type, such as, suspension bridge, bascute bridge, cable stayed bridge, horizontally curved girder bridge and reinforced concrete arch or steel arch bridge; and 33

IS : 1893 - 1984

b) when the height of substructure from base of foundations to the top of pier is more than 30 m or when the bridge span is more than 120 m. 6.1.6 Earthquake force shall be calculated on the basis of depth of scour caused by the discharge corresponding to the average annual flood [ see IS : Earthquake and maximum flood shall be 4410 ( Part P/Set 5 )-1977]*. assumed not to occur simultaneously. 6.2 Seismic Force - In seismic coefficient be resisted shall be computed as follows: method, the seismic force to

where

Fh - horizontal seismic force to be resisted,
ah = design horizontal in 3.4.2.3 (a), and seismic coefficient as specified ignoring

W,,, = weight of the mass under consideration
reduction due to buoyancy or uplift.

b) Fv =
where

uv

w,

F, = vertical seismic force to be resisted, and uv = design vertical seismic coefficient. 6.3 Live Load on Bridges 6.3.1 The seismic force due to live load shall be ignored when acting in the direction of the traffic but shall be taken into consideration when acting in the direction perpendicular to traffic as specified in 6.3.2. 6.3.2 The seismic force due to live load shall be calculated for 50 percent of the design live load excluding impact for railway bridges and 25 percent of the design live load excluding impact for road bridges specified in the relevant Indian Standards. These percentages are only for working out the magnitude of seismic force. For calcu!ating the stresses due to live load, 100 percent of the design live load for railway bridges and 50 percent of the design live load for road bridges specified in the relevant Indian Standards shall be considered at the time of earthquake. *Glossary of terms relating
Floods. to

river valley 34

projects:

Part 2 Hydrology,

Section

5

Ii:18936.4 Superstructure

1984

6.4.1 The superstructure shall be designed for horizontal seismic coefficient specified in 3.4.2.3 and vertical seismic coefficient according to 3.4.5 due to the dead load and the live load as specified in 6.3.

6.4.2 The superstructure of the bridge shall be properly secured to the piers ( particularly in zones IV and V ) to prevent it from being dislodged off its bearings during an earthquake by suitable methods. 6.4.3 The superstructure shall have a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 against overturning in the transverse direction due to simultaneous action of the horizontal and vertical accelerations. 6.5 Substructure
6.5.1 The seismic forces on the substructure depth ( see 6.1.6 ) shall be as follows:

above the normal scour

Horizontal and vertical forces due to dead, live and seismic loads as specified in 6.4 transferred from superstructure to the substructure through the bearings as shown in Fig. 7. Horizontal and vertical seismic forces according to 3.4.2.3 and 3.4.5 due to self-weight applied at the centre of mass ignoring reduction due to buoyancy or uplift. Hydrodynamic force as specified in 6.5.2 acting on piers and modification in earth pressure due to earthquake given in 8.1.1 to 8.1.4 acting on abutments.
6.5.1.1 Piers shall be designed for the seismic forces given in 6.5.1 assuming them to act parallel to the current and traffic directions taken separately.

6.5.1.2 In the case of piers, oriented skew either to the direction of current or traffic, they shall be checked for seismic forces acting parallel and perpendicular to pier direction. 6.5.1.3 The substructure shall have a minimum factor of safety of 1.5 due to simultaneous action of the horizontal and vertical accelerations. 6.5.2 For submerged portions of the pier, hydrodynamic force (in addition to earthquake force calculated on the mass of the pier) shall be assumed to act in a horizontal direction corresponding to that of earthquake motion. The total horizontal force F shall be given by the following formula: FCe Uh w, 35

IS t 1893- 1985
where G = ah = a coefficient ( see Table 7 ), as given cylinder
LOADS

dcns$n horizontal

seismic coefficient of the enveloping

in 3.4.2.3

(a),

W&l = weight of the water

(see 6.5.2.2).

A-

ROLLING

Rl
7A GIRDER

R2

LROCKER

SPAN

".#,
V-

V' 76 ARCH SPAN
after being modified due to move-

RI and RP are reactions at the two supports ment (Fe). Change in vertical reactions = f Fe/L'

Fl = pR1 ( if ,W1<F'/2
FI = F'/2

) ( if pLR1> F'/2 )

F2 = F' - Fl

Frc.7

TRANSFER OF

FORCES FROMSUPERSTRUCTURETO SUBSTRUCTURE
TABLE 7 VALUES OF C,

HEIUET~~SIJBMERCJED PORTION OB PIER ( H) RADIUS OF ENVELOPI~ CYLINDER 1'0 2'0 3'0 4'0

Ce

0.390 0.575 0'675 0'730

36

IS:1893 -1984 6.5.2.1 The pressure distribution will be as shown in Fig. 8. Values of coefficients Cr, G's, Cs and Cd for use in Fig. 8 are given below:
Cl G G G

o-1 o-2 0.3 o-4 o-5 O-6 0.8 1.0

6,410 O-673 O-832 o-922 0,970 o-990 0.999 1.000

O-026 o-093 0.184 0,289 0,403 0.521 0.760 1 a000

0.934 0.871 0.810 0.751 O-694 0.639 0.532 0.428

5 2 3 5 5 0 0 6

L

r
c2pb
J-

.
1.2F t-_Pb'H-a FIG. 8

I
portions of piers and the

DIAGRAM SHOWING PRESSURE DISTRIBUTION

6.5.2.2 Some typical cases of submerged enveloping cylinders are illustrated in Fig. 9. 37

IS:1893

-1984

(`7)
/

/
i \

-

DIRECTION OF SEISMIC FORCE

\,

FIG. 9

CASES OF ENVELOPINGCYLINDER

6.5.2.3 The earth pressure on the back of abutments be calculated as in 8 (see Note ).

of bridge shall

NOTE - The hydrodynamic suction from the water side and dynamic increment in earth pressures from the earth side shall not be considered simultaneously. The water level on earth side may be treated as the same as on the river side.

6.6 Submersible

Bridges

-

ble bridges, the hydrodynamic ing equation:

For submerged superstructure of submersipressure shall be determined by the follow;

P
where

= 875 ah 4%

P= hydrodynamic pressure in kg/ms; ah = design horizontal seismic coefficient as given in 3.4.2.3 (a); H= height of water surface from the level of deepest scour
( see 6.1.6 ) in m; and

Y=

depth of the section below the water surface in m.

6.6.1 The total horizontal shear and moment per metre width about the centre of gravity of the base at any depth J, due to hydrodynamic pressure are given by the following relations:

vh = 213 PY
Mh= 4115

PYa

where vh = hydrodynamic Mh = hydrodynamic shear in kg/m, and moment in kg.m/m. 38

1s : 1893 -1984 7. DAMS AND EMBANKMENTS
7.1 General -- In the case of important dams ic is recommended that detailed investigations are made in accordance with IS : 4967-1968* for estimating the design seismic parameters. However, where such data are not available and in the case of minor works and for preliminary design of major works, the seismic forces specified in 7.2 and 7.3 or 7.4, as the case may be, shall be considered. 7.2 Hydrodynamic Effects Due to Reservior

7.2.1 Effects of Horitontal Earthquake Acceleration - Due to horizontal acceleration of the foundation and dam there is an instantaneous hydrodynamic pressure ( or suction ) exerted against the dam in addition to hydrostatic forces. The direction of hydrodynamic force is opposite to the direcBased on the assumption that water is tion of earthquake acceleration. incompressible, the hydrodynamic pressure at depth y below the reservoir surface shall be determined as follows:

where p := hydrodynamic Cs = ah = w = coefficient 7.2.1.1 ), pressure varies in kg/ma at depth y, with shape and depth (b) ( see and which

design horizontal 7.3.1 1,

seismic coefficient and

[ see 3.4.2.3

unit weight of water in kgims, in m.

h = depth of reservior

7.2.1.1 The variation of the coefficient Cs, with shapes and depths, is iIIustrated in Appendix G. For accurate determination, these values may be made use of. However, approximate values of C, for dams with vertical or constant upstream slopes may be obtained as follows :

where c, = y = h = maximum depth value of C, obtained and from Fig. 10, depth below surface, of reservoir.

*Recommendations for seismic instrumentation for river valley projects.

39

I8 :1893-

1984

For darns with combination of vertical and sloping faces, an equivalent slope may be used for obtaining the approximate value of C,. The equivalent slope may be obtained as given in 7.2.1.2.

0.6

0.5 E & 0.4

w
a

3

0
0*

I I
26 48 SO'

I
60'

INCLINATION
FIG. 10

OF

FACE

FROM

THE

VERTICA

`L (6)

MAXIMUM VALUES OF PRESSURE COEFFICIENT ( C,,, ) FOR CONSTANT SLOPINO FACES

18 : 1893- 1984
7.2.1.2 If the height of the vertical portion of the upstream face of the dam is equal to or greater than one-half the total height of the dam, analyze it as if vertical throughout. If the height of the vertical portion of the upstream face of the dam is less than one-half the total height of the dam, use the pressure on the sloping line connecting the point of intersection of the upstream face of the dam and the reservoir surface with the point of intersection of the upstream face of the dam with the foundation. 7.2.1.3 The approximate values of total horizontal shear and moment about the centre of gravity of a section due to hydrodynamic pressure are given by the relations:
V,, =

0.726)~y
0.299 by=

Mh =

where
Vh = hydrodynamic

shear in kg/m at any depth, and force at any

ikfh -

moment depth y.

in kg.m/m due to hydrodynamic

7.2.2 EJect of Horizontal Earthquake Acceleration on the Vertical Component of Reservoir and Tail Water Load - Since the hydrodynamic pressure ( or

suction ) acts normal to the face of the dam, there shall, therefore, be a vertical component of this force if the face of the dam against which it is acting is sloping, the magnitude at any horizontal section being:
Wh = ( Vz VI ) tan 6

where
Wh =

increase ( or decrease ) in vertical kg due to hydrodynamic force,

component of load in

V2 = total

shear in kg due to horizontal component of hydrodynamic force at the elevation of the section being considered,

VI = total shear in kg due to horizontal component of hydrodynamic force at the elevation at which the slope of the dam face commences, and angle between the face of the dam and the vertical. 8= The moment due to the vertical component of reservoir and tail water load may be obtained by determining the lever arm from the centroid of the pressure diagram. 41

JS :

1893- 1984
Gravity and Buttress Darns

7.3 Concrete or Masonry

7.3.1 Earthquake Forces In the design of concrete and masonry dams, the earthquake forces specifi.ed in 7.3.1.1 to 7.3.1.4 shall be considered in addition to the hydrodynamic pressures specified in 7.2. For dams up to 100 m height the horizontal seismic coefficient shall be taken as 1.5 times seismic coefficient, Q in 3.4.2.3 (a) at the top of the dam Vertical seismic coefficient shall reducing linearly to zero at the base. be taken as 0.75 times the value of tch at the top of the dam reducing linearly to zero at the base. For dams over 100 m height the response spectrum method shall be used for the design of the dams. Both the seismic coefficient method ( for dams up to 100 m height ) and response spectrum method ( for dams greater than 100 m height ) are meant only for preliminary design of dams. For final design dynamic analysis is desirable. For design of dam using the approach of linear variation of normal stresses across the cross-section, tensile stresses may be permitted in the upstream face up to 2 percent of the ultimate crushing strength of concrete. 7.3.1.1 ration a) Seismic coe&cient method ( dams uj to 100 m height ) The horizontal inertia force for concrete or masonry weight due to horizontal earthquake acceleration shall be determined corresponding to the horizontal seismic coefficient specified in 7.3.1. This inertia force shall be assumed to act from upstream to downstream or downstream to upstream moment to get the worst combination for design. It causes an overturning about the horizontal section adding to that caused by hydrodynamic force. b) Response spectrum method ( dams greater than 100 m height ) 1) The fundamental assumed as: T = where H = Bheight of the dam in m, base width of the dam in m, of the material due to gravity of dam in kg/ms, in m/s", and in kg/ms. period of vibration of the dam may be Concrete or masonry inertja force due to horizontal earthquake accele-

5.55 g

2/-

zOm_ IL+%

Wm = unit weight g = acceleration E, = modulus

of elasticity

of the material

2) Using the period in (1) and for a damping of 5 percent, the design horizontal seismic coefficient CQ shall be obtained from 3.4.2.3 (b). 42

1s : 1893 - 1984
3) The base shear, by the following VB and base formulae: moment MB may be obtained

where

w=

total weight in kg,

of the masonry

or concrete of the dam

in the dam above the

height of the centre base in m, and
ah =

of gravity

design seismic coefficient

as obtained

in 7.3.1.1

(b) (2).

section at a depth y below top of the dam 4) For any horizontal shear force, V, and bending moment M, may be obtained as follows:

where C'V and C',

are given in Fig.

11.

RESERVOIR VY = c; vg

EMPTY

MY = c;,

t.40 OR MY

g--l/-VY

DL I `h 0.6

0.8 .

I.0 0

0.1

0.2

I
0.3 0.6

I
0.5

I
0.6

I
0.7

I
0.E

w
0.9

COEFFICIENTS

C;

AND

C;n

FIG. 11

VALUES OF Cv AND Cm ALONG THE HEIGHT OF DAM

lS:1893-1984 7.3.1.2 Efict of vertical earthquake acceleration - The effect of vertical earthquake acceleration is to change the unit weight of water and concrete or masonry. An accrlrration upwards increases the weight and an acceleration downwards decrcascs the weight. To consider the effect of vertical earthquake acceleration, the vertical seismic coefficient would be as follows: a) For seismic coeficient method of design - At the top of the dams it would be 0'75 times the ah value given in 3.4.2.3 (a) and reducing linearly to zero at the base. b) For response spectrum method of design - At the top of the dam it would be 0.75 times the value of c(h given in 7.3.1.1 (b) (2) and reducing linearly to zero at the base. 7.3.1.3 Effect of earthquake acceleration on upl;ft forces - Effect of earthquake acceleration on uplift forces at any horizontal section is determined as a function of the hydrostatic pressure of reservoir and tail-water against the faces of the dam. During an earthquake the water pressure is changed by the hydrodynamic effect. However, the change is not considered effective in producing a corresponding increase or reduction in the uplift force. The duration of the earthquake is too short to permit the building up of pore pressure in the concrete and rock foundations. 7.3.1.4 Effect of earthquake acceleration on dead silt loads - It is sufficient to determine the increase in the silt pressure due to earthquake by considering hydrodynamic forces on the water up to the base of the dam and ignoring the weight of the silt. 7.3.2 Earthquake Forces for Ouerjow Sections - The provisions for the dam as given in 7.3.1 to 7.3.1.4 will be applicable to over-flow sections as well. In this case, the height of the dam shall be taken from the base of the dam to the top of the spillway bridge for computing the period as well as shears and moments in the body of the dam. However, for the design of the bridge and the piers, the horizontal seismic coefficients in either direction may be taken as the design seismic coefficient for the top of the dam worked out in 7.3.1 and applied uniformly along the height of the pier. 7.4 Earth and Rockfill Dams and Embankments 7.4.1 General - It is recognized that an earth dam or embankment vibrates when subjected to ground motion during an earthquake requiring thereby a dynamic analysis of the structure for its design. Nevertheless, currently accepted design procedure is based on the assumption that the portion of the dam above the rupture surface is rigid. Therefore, the method given in 7.4.2 which assumes additional horizontal and vertical loads on the soil mass within the rupture surface shall be adopted. It is, however, desirable to carry out dynamic analysis for final design of important dams in order to estimate deformations in dams in probable future earthquakes. 44

IS 2 1893 - 1984
7.4.2 Seismic Force on Soil Mass

7.4.2.1 The procedure for finding out the seismic coefhcient which will depend upon the height of the dam and the lowest point of the rupture surface shall be as follows:

a) Determine formula:

the

fundamental

period

of the structure

from the

where T = fundamental period of the earth dam in s, Ht = height of the dam above toe of the slopes, P = mass density of the shell material, and G = modulus of rigidity of the shell material. NOTE- The quantity +fGT. p ISthe shear wave velocity through the material of the dam and may be used if known instead of p and G. b) Determine S,/g for this period T and 10 percent damping from average acceleration spectrum curves given in Fig. 2. c) Compute design seismic coefficient ah using 3.4.2.3 (b).

7.4.2.2 For checking slope failure with the lowest point of the rupture surface at any depth y below top of dam, the value of equivalent uniform seismic coefficient shall be taken as:

where
H =

total height of the dam.

7.4.3

Stability of the Upstream Slope

7.4.3.1 The stability of the upstream slope of an earth or rockfill dam shall be tested with full reservoir level with horizontal forces due to earthquake acting in upstream direction and vertical forces due to earthquake ( taken as one half of horizontal ) acting upwards.

7.4.3.2 For preliminary design, a factor of safety of unity shall be accepted as being adequate for ensuring stability of upstream slope. The factor of safety need be tested only for failure surface which passes through the lower half of the dam. 45

fS : 1893- 1984
7.4.4 Stability of Downstream Slope - The provision of 7.4.3 shall also apply in determining stability of the downstream slope except that the horizontal force due to earthquake should be considered acting in the downstream direction. 7.4.5 Miscellaneous - Earthquake forces shall not be normally included in stability analysis for the construction stage or for the reservoir empty condition. Hocvever, where the construction or operating schedule requires the reservoir empty condition to exist for prolonged periods, earthquake forces may be included and may be calculated based on 50 percent of the value obtained from 7.4.3 or 7.4.4. Provisions in 7.4.3 and 7.4.4 modified to suit the conditions of empty reservoir shall apply for testing the stability of the upstream and downstream s!opes. Junctions between spillways and abutments great care in view of the damage that may vibrations of the dam and the spillway. 8. RETAINING WALLS shall be constructed with be caused by differential

8.1 Lateral Earth Pressure - The pressure from earthfill behind retaining walls during an earthquake shall be as given in 8.1.1 to 8.1.4. In the analysis, cohesion has been neglected. This assumption is on conservative side. 8.1.1 Active Pressure Due to Earthfill - The general conditions ed for the design of retaining walls are illustrated in Fig. 12A. pressure exerted against the wall shall be: Pa where P,
W

encounterThe active

& zoh2 C,

=
=

active earth

pressure

in kg/m length

of wall,

unit weight of soil in kg/ms, height of wall in m, and
x

h
c,=

-

(1 &av)cos"(~---a)
cos h

tossa cos (

6 + a -j- h )
1 l+ sin(++6)sin(#---t--A - L)cOs(a+a+h { cos(a

[
the maximum

of the two being the value for design,

II
3

a

IS : 1893 - 1984 ocI = vertical seismic coefficient - its direction bemg taken consis ten+ throughout the stability analysis of wall and equal to IJ = t all angle of internal -.E.L_ 1 f Qv face of the wall makes with the vertical, the wall and earthfill, [ see 3.4.2.3 (a) 4. and friction of soil,

A = tan-1

a. = angle which earth

1-

slope of earthfill, between seismic coeficient

6 = angie of friction CQ,= horizontal

12A Fro. 12

Active

Piessure

12B

Passive

Pressure

EARTII PRESSURE I)LJP, TO EARTHQUAKE ON RETAINING WALLS
graphically by means

8.X.1.1 The active pressire may be determined of the method desc ribcd in Appendix H.

8.1.1.2 Point of ap/dication -. Prom the total pressure computed as above subtract the static active pressure obtained by putting tlh = ccV = h = 0 in the expression given in 8.1.1. The remainder is the dynamic increment. The static component of the total pressure shall be applied at an elevation h/3 above the base of the wall. The point of application of the dynamic increment shall bc assumed to be at mid-height of the wail. 8.1.2 Passive Pressure Due to EarthJill -- The general conditions ~encountered in the design of retaining walls are illustrated in Fig. 12B. The passive pressurt. against the walls shall be given by the following formula :

I', =- 4wh=cp
47

IS: 1893 - 1984 where
P, =

passive earth pressure in kg/m length of wall;

C

( 1 f av ) Co@( # + a - h 1 p=
cos A co@ a cos ( 6 -

a + A)

'
s 4

the minimum of the two being the value for design; w, h, a, fi and L are as defined in 8.1.1; and hc tan-l
ah

L
l-

1 sin($+G)sin($+L-_ - __~._ t- cos ( dc - c ) cos

(b -a +A II
graphically by

1 f

av

8.1.2.1 The passive pressure may be determined means of the method described in Appendix J.

8.1.2.2 Point of application - From the static passive pressure obtained by putting ah = ap = r\= 0 in the expression given in 8.1.2, subtract the total pressure computed as above. The remainder is the dynamic decrement The static component of the total pressure shall be applied at an elevation h/3 above the base of the wall. The point of application of the dynamic decrement shall be assumed to be at an elevation 0.66 h above the base of the wall. 8.1.3 Active Pressure Due to UnifTorm Surcharge - The active pressure against the wall due to a uniform surcharge of intensity q per unit area of the inclined earthfill surface shall be:

Psh =

qh cos a C co.3 ( a - C) '

8.1.3.1 Point of application - The dynamic increment in active pressures due to uniform surcharge shall be applied at an elevation of 0.66 h above the base of the wall, while the static component shall be applied at mid-height of the wall. 8.1.4 Passive Pressure Due to Uniform Surcharge - The passive pressure against the wall due to a uniform surcharge of intensity q per unit area of the inclined earthfill shall be:

IS : 1893 - 1984
8.1.4.1 Point of afifilication - The dynamic decrement in passive pressures due to uniform surcharge shall be applied at an elevation of 0.66 h above the base of the-walls while the static component shall be applied at mid-height of the wall. 8.2 Effect of Saturation on Lateral Earth Pressure 8.2.1 For saturated earthfill, the saturated unit weight of the soil shall be adopted as in the formulae described in 8.1. 8.2.2 For submerged earthfill, the dynamic increment ( or decrement ) in active and passive earth pressure during earthquakes shall be found from expressions given in 8.1.1 and 8.1.2 with the following modifications: a) The value of 6 shall be taken as 4 the value of 6 for dry backfill. b) The value of A shall be taken as follows:
A=

tan-l-$.-)(% 8l 1 *

uv

where w, = saturated unit weight of soil. in gm/cc, CQ,= horizontal seismic coefficient [, see 3.4.2.3 (a) 1, and av = vertical seismic coefficient which is 3 ah. c) Buoyant unit weight shall be adopted. d) From the value of earth pressure found out as above, subtract the value of earth pressure determined by putting @h=MV=h=O but The remainder shall be dynamic using buoyant unit weight. increment. 8.2.3 Hydrodynamic pressure on account of water contained in earthfill shall not be considered separately as the effect of acceleration on water has been considered indirectly. 8.3 Partially Submerged Backfill

8.3.1 The ratio of the lateral dynamic increment in active pressures to the vertical pressures at various depths along the height of wall may be taken as shown in Fig. 13. The pressure distribution of dynamic increment in active pressures may be obtained by multiplying the vertical effective pressures by the coefficients in Fig. 13 at corresponding depths.
NOTE - The procedure may also be used for determining dynamic pressure increments in 8.1.1.2 and 8.1.3.1. the distribution of

49

IS:1893 - 1984

+-3(C,-

K,) 1

Ca is computed C'a is computed

as in 8.1.1 for dry ( moist ) saturated as in 8.1.1 and 8.2.2 for submerged

backfills. backfills.

Ka is the value of Ca when ah =aV = h = 0. K'a is the value of C'a when @h = av = h = 0. h' is the height of submergence h is the height of the retaining above the base of the wall. wall.

FIG. 13

DISTRIMJTION OF THE RATIO

LATERAL DYNAMICINCREMENT VP,RTICAL EFFECTWEPRESSURE

WITH HEIGIIT OF WALL

50

IS : 1893 - 1984
8.3.2 A similar procedure as in 8.3.1 may be utilized for determining the distribution of dynamic decrement in passive pressures.

8.4 Concrete or Masonry Inertia Forces - Concrete or masonry inertia forces due to horizontal and vertical earthquake accelerations are the products of the weight of wall and the horizontal and vertical s&mic coefficients respectively ( see 3.4.2 and 3.4.5 ).
the NATE - To ensure adequate factor of safety under earthquake condition, design shall be such that the factor of safety against sliding shall be 1'2 and the resultant of all the forces including earthquake force shall fall within the middle three-fourths of the base width provided. In addition, bearing pressure in soil should not exceed the permissible limit.

9. NOTATIONS

AND

SYMBOLS

the body of the standard shall have the meaning as given in Appendix K.

9.1 The various notations and letter symbols used in the formulae and in

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 1893- 1981

APPENDIX ( &"St? 0 7

A
I )

MAP OF INDIA
SHOWING EPlCiNTRES

MAGNITUDE

MORE THAN 6.0 DEEP FOCUS SHOCKS NUMBER OF SHOCKS (n) FROM THE SAME ORIGIN EPICENTRES AND MAGNlTUDES SHOWN BY DOTTEDCIRCLESARE APPROXIMATE

53

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 1893 . 1984

APPENDIX ( Clause 2.7
EARTHQUAKE D-l. MODIFIED MERCALLI )

D

INTENSITY INTENSITY
Remarks

SCALES SCALE ( ABRIDGED )

Class of Earthquake I II III

Not felt except by a very few under stances Felt only buildings;

specially

favourable

circumof

by a few persons at rest, specially on upper floors and delicately suspended objects may swing

Felt quite noticeably indoors, specially on upper floors of buildings but many people do not recognize it as an earthquake; standing motor cars may rock slightly; and vibration may be felt like the passing of a truck During the day felt indoors by many, outdoors by a few, at dishes, windows, doors disturbed; walls night some awakened; make creaking sound, sensation like heavy truck striking the building; and standing motor cars rocked noticeably Felt by nearly everyone; many awakened; some dishes, windows, etc,. broken; a few instances of cracked plaster; unstable objects overturned; disturbance of trees, poles and other tall objects noticed sometimes; and pendulum clocks may stop Felt by all, many frightened and run outdoors; some heavy furniture moved; a few instances of fallen plaster or damaged chimneys; and damage slight negligible in buildings of Everybody runs outdoors, damage slight to moderate in well built good design and construction; ordinary structures; considerable in poorly built or badly designed structures; and some chimneys broken, noticed by persons driving motor cars Damage slight in specially designed structures; considerable in ordinary but substantial buildings with partial collapse; very heavy in poorly built structures; panel walls thrown out of frafalling of chimney, factory stacks, columns, med structures; monuments, and walls; heavy furniture overturned, sand and mud ejected in small amounts; changes in well water; and disturbs persons driving motor cars

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

IS :

1893- 1984
Remarks Damage considerable in specially designed structures; well designed framed structures thrown out of plumb; very heavy in substantial buildings with partial collapse; buildings shifted off foundations; ground cracked conspicuously; and underground pipes broken Some well built wooden structures destroyed; most masonry and framed structures with foundations destroyed; ground badly cracked; rails bent; landslides considerable from river banks and steep slopes; shifted sand and mud; and water splashed over banks Few, if any, masonry structures remain standing; bridges destroyed; broad fissures in ground, underground pipelines completely out of service; earth slumps and landslips in soft ground; and rails bent greatly

Class of Earthquake IX

X

XI

Total damage; waves seen on ground surfaces; lines of sight and levels distorted; and objects thrown upward into the air D-2. COMPREHENSIVE INTENSITY SCALE D-2.1 The scale was discussed generally at the inter-governmental meeting convened by UNESCO in April 1964. Though not finally approved, the scale is more comprehensive and describes the intensity of earthquake more precisely. The main definitions used are as follows: a) ,Ty@eof Structures ( 23uildings ) : Structure A Buildings in field-stone, rural structures, unburntbrick houses, clay houses. Structure B Ordinary brick buildings, buildings of the large block and prefabricated type, half timbered structures, buildings in natural hewn stone. Structure C Reinforced b) Definition of Quantity: Single, few Many Most About 5 percent About 50 percent About 75 percent buildings, well built wooden structures.

XII

c) ClassiJication ef Damage to Buildings: Fine cracks in plaster; fall of small Grade 1 Slight damage pieces of plaster Grade 2 M o d e r a t e Small cracks in walls; fall of fairly large pieces of plaster, pantiles slip damage off; cracks in chimneys; parts of chimney fall down

58

Grade Grade

3 4

Heavy

damage

Large and deep cracks of chimneys

in walls;

fall

Destruction

Gaps in walls; pal'ts of buildings may collapse; separate parts of the building lose their cohesion; and inner walls collapse Total collapse of buildings

Grade I

5

Total

damage

d) Intensity Scale: Not noticeable. The intensity of the vibration is below the limit of sensibility; the tremor is detected and recorded by seismographs only II Scarcely Vibration especially III noticeable .( very slight ). at rest in houses, is felt only by individual people on upper floors of buildings observed only.

Weak , partially

The earthquake is felt indoors by a few people, outdoors only in favourable circumstances. The vibration is like that due to the passing of a light truck. Attentive observers notice a slight swinging of hanging objects, somewhat more heavily on upper floors IV Largely observed.

The earthquake is felt indoors by many people, outdoors by few. Here and there people awake, but no one is frightened. ,The vibration is like that due to the passing of a heavily loaded truck. Windows, doors and dishes rattle. Floors and walls crack. Furniture begins to shake. Hanging objects swing slightly, Liquids in open vessels are slightly disturbed. In standmg motor cars the shock is noticeable V Awakening:

,

a) The earthquake is felt indoors by all, outdoors by manyMany sleeping people awake. A few run outdoors. Ani. mals become uneasy. Buildings tremble throughout. Hanging objects swing considerably. Pictures knock against walls or swing out of place. Occasionally pendulum clocks stop. Unstable objects may be overturned or shifted. Open doors and windows are thrust open and slam back again. Liquids spill in small amounts from well-filled open containers. The sensation of vibration is like that due to heavy object falling inside the buildings 59

IS:1893

-

1984
b) Slight damages in buildings of Type A are possible

c) Sometimes VI Frightening:

change

in flow of springs

a)

Felt by most indoors and outdoors. Many people in buildings are frightened and run outdoors. A few persons lose their balance. Domestic animals run out of their stalls. In few instances dishes and glassware may break, books fall down. Heavy furniture may possibly move and small steeple bells may ring

b)

Damage of Grade 1 is sustained in single buildings of Type Damage in few buildings of B and in many of Type A. Type A is of Grade 2. C>In few cases cracks up to widths of I cm possible in wet ground; in mountains occasional landslips; change in flow of springs and in level of well water are observed Damage of buildings: a) Most people are frightened and run outdoors. Many find it difficult to stand. The vibration is noticed by persons driving motor cars. Large bells ring b) In many buildings of Type C damage of Grade 1 is caused; in many buildings of Type B damage is of Grade 2. Most buildings of Type A suffer damage of Grade 3, few of Grade 4. In single instances landslips of roadway on steep slopes; cracks in roads; seams of pipelines damaged; cracks in stone walls of buildings: Fright and panic; also persons driving motor cars are disturbed. Here and there branches of trees break off. Even heavy furniture moves and partly overturns. Hanging lamps are damaged in part Most buildings of Type C suffer damage of Grade 2, and few of Grade 3. Most buildings of Type B suffer damage of Grade 3, and most buildings of Type A suffer damage of Grade 4. Many buildings of Type C suffer damage of Grade 4. Occasional breaking of pipe seams. Memorials and monuments move and twist. Tombstones overturn. Stone walls collapse. Small landslips in hollows and on banked roads on steep slopes; cracks in ground up to widths of several centimetres. Water in lakes becomes turbid. New reservoirs come into existence. Dry wells refill and existing wells becomes dry. In many cases change in flow and level of water is observed, 60

VII

VIII

Destruction

4

b)

c)

IS:1893
IX

- 1984

General damage to buildings: a) General panic; considerable damage to furniture. Animals run to and fro in confusion and cry b) Many buildings of Type C suffer damage of Grade 3, and a few of Grade 4. Many buildings of Type B show damage of Grade 4, and a few of Grade 5. Many buildings of Type A suffer damage of Grade 5. Monuments and columns fall. Considerable damage to reservoirs; underground pipes partly broken. In individual cases railway lines are bent and roadway damaged c) On flat land overflow of water, sand and mud is often observed. Ground cracks to widths of up to 10 cm, on slopes and river banks more than 10 cm; furthermore a large number of slight cracks in ground; falls of rock, many landslides and earth flows; large waves in water. Dry wells renew their flow and existing wells dry up

X

General destruction of buildings: a) Many buildings of Type C suffer damage of Grade 4, and a few of Grade 5. Many buildings of Type B show damage of Grade 5; most of Type A have destruction of Grade 5; critical damage to dams and dykes and severe damage to bridges. Railway lines are bent slightly. Underground pipes are broken or bent. Road paving and asphalt show waves

b)

In ground, cracks up to widths of several centimetres, sometimes up to 1 metre. Parallel to water courses occur broad fissures. Loose ground slides from steep slopes. From river banks and steep coasts, considerable landslides are possible. In coastal areas, displacement of sand and mud; change of water level in wells; water from canals, lakes, rivers, etc, thrown on land. New lakes occur

XI

Destruction: 4 Severe damage even to well built buildings, bridges, water dams and railway lines; highways become useless; underground pipes destroyed b) Ground considerably distorted by broad cracks and fissures, as well as by movement in horizontal and vertical directions; numerous landslips and falls of rock. The intensity of the earthquake requires to be investigated specially Landscape changes: a) Practically all structures above greatly damaged or destroyed 61 and below ground are

XII

IS : 1893 - 1984 b) `lhe surface of the ground
is radically changed. Considerable ground cracks with extensive vertical and horizontal movements are observed. Falls of rock and slumping of river banks over wide areas, lakes arc da.mmed; waterfalls appear, and rivers are deflected. The intensity of the earthquake requires to be investigated specially.

APPENDIX E ( Clause 3.4.2.1 and Table 2 )
BASIC HORIZONTAL SEISMIC COEFFICIENTS SOME IMPORTANT TOWNS Town FOR

5one

Basic Horizontal Seismic Coe$icient ,4;4 o-04 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.05 0 04 o-01 0.05

Town

5one

Basic Horizonto Seismic Coeficient
a0

Agra Ahmadabad Ajmer Allahabad Almora Ambala Amritsar Asansol Aurangabad Bahraich Bangalorc Barauni Bareilly Bhatinda Bhilai Bhopal Bhubaneswar Bhuj

III III I II IV IV IV III I IV I IV III III I II III V

Bikaner Bokaro Bombay Burdwan Calcutta Calicut Chandigarh Chitrgaurad Coimbatore Cuttack Darbhanga Darjeeling Dehra Dun Delhi Durgapur Sangtok Sauhai Zaya

III III III III III III IV I III III V IV IV IV III IV V 111

0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.04 (1.05 0.01 0.04 .0:04 0.08 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.04 0.05 0.08 0 04

0.01
o-05 o-04 0.04

0.01
0.02 0.04 0.08

62

IS : 1893 - 1984 Town
zone

Basic Horizontal Seismic Coeficient
a0

Town

5 OUZ

Basic Horizontal Seismic CoejSient
a0 o-04 0.04 o-05

Gorakhpur Hyderabad Imphal Jabalpur Jaipur

IV I V III II II I I V III V V I III IV II II V III IV IV I II IV III II

o-05 0.01 O-08 o-04 0.02 0.02 0.01 0.01 O-08 0.04 0.08 0.08 0.01 0.04 0.05 0.02 o-02 0.08 0.04 0 -05 0.05 o-01 0.02 0.05 0.04 0.02

Panjim Patiala Patna Pilibhit Pondicherry Pune Raipur Raj kot Ranchi Roorkee Rourkela Sadiya Simla Sironj Srinagar Surat Tezpur Thanjavur Tiruchirapalli Trivandrum Udaipur Vadodara Varanasi Vijayawada Visakhapatnam

III III IV IV II III I III II IV I V IV I V III V II II III II III III III II

0.05 0.02 0.04 0 01 o-04 0.02 0.05 0.01 0.08 0.05 0.01 0.08 o-04 0.08 0.02 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.04 0.04 o-04 0.02

Jamshed pur
Jhansi Jodhpur Jorhat Kanpur Kathmandu Kohima Kurnool Lucknow Ludhiana Madras Madurai Mandi Mangalore Monghyr Moradabad Mysore Nagpur Nainital Nasik Nellore

NOTE- 7'he coefficients given are according to 3.4.2.1 and should be suitably modified fc,r iqlortant structures in accordance with 3.4.2.3, 4.4 and 7.1 and should be read along with other provisions of the standard. 63

APPENDIX

F

( Clnuse 3.4.2.1 and Table 2 )
SPECTRA F-l. F-l.1 GENERAL OF EARTHQUAKE

Spectrum of an earthquake is the representation of the maximum dynamic response of idealized structures during an earthquake. The idealized structure is a single degree of freedom system having a certain period of vibration and damping. The maximum response is plotted against the natural period of vibration and can be expressed in terms of maximum absolute acceleration, maximum relative velocity or maximum relative displacement, For the purpose of design, acceleration spectra are very useful, as they give the seismic force on a structure directly by multiplying it with the generalized or modal mass of the structure. F-2. AVERAGE SPECTRA

F-2.1 Prof. G. W. Housner has proposed average spectra on the basis of studies on response spectra of four strongest earthquakes that have occurred in USA ( see Fig. 2 which shows the average acceleration spectra ). F-2.2 To take into account the seismicity of the various zones, the ordinate of the average spectra are to be multiplied by a factor F,. This factor F. depends on the magnitude, duration and form of the expected earthquake, distance of the site from expected epicentre, soil conditions and resistance deformation characteristics of the structure, etc. For elastic design with permissible increase in stresses or load factors as given in 3.3, approximate values of this factor are given in Table 2.
NOTE - It may be pointed out that during the expected maximum intensity of earthquake in the various seismic zones, structures will be subjected to a bigger force. But the capacity of the structure in plastic range will be available for absorbing the kinetic energy imparted by the earthquake. Therefore, the structural details are to be worked out in such a manner that it can undergo sufficient plastic deformations before failure [see 1.2 and3.3.2 (b) ( Note 3 ) 1.

F-3. DAMPING F-3.1 The variety made the choice largely a matter indicate the order
a) Steel b) Concrete

IN STRUCTURES
of damping displayed in different types of structures has of a suitable damping coefficient for a given structure of judgement. However, some values are given below to of damping coefficient in various types of structures: 2 to 5 percent 5 ,, 10 ,> of critical 7, >, structures

structures

64

c) Brick structures d) Timber e) Earthen

in cement mortar

5 to 10 percent 2 ,, 5 10 ), 30 ::

of critical :: ::

structures structures

NOTE - It may be mentioned here that in the elastic range, damping displayed by structures is much lower than that given above. It may lie between 1 and 4 percent for the above type of structures at low stresses. The values given thus presume some inelastic deformations or fine cracking to take place when this order of damping will occur. However, for obtaining design seismic coefficient, the values of damping mentioned in relevant clauses shall apply.

F-4.

METHOD

OF USING

THE

SPECTRA the damping 5 pergive factor, B = 1.2 = 1.5. Referring to structure has mass the design horizon-

F-4.1 Let the period of a structure be 0.8 second and cent critical. Further let the soil-foundation system and let the structure have an importance factor, I Fig. 2, the spectral acceleration, S, is O-12 g. If the M= 12.0 kg sets/cm and is to be located in Zone V, tal seismic coefficient ah would be [ see 3.4.2.3 (b)]:
ah = = P IF, (&/id

1.2 0,086

x 1.5 4

x 0.4

x 0.12

= Therefore, P = =

horizontal tLh Mg

seismic force x 981

= 0.086 4 x 12.0
1 017.1 kg

APPENDIX G ( Clause 7.2.1.1 )
VARIATION OF THE COEFFICIENT AND DEPTHS C, WITH SHAPES

G-l. The increase zontal earthquake with depth. In the the magnitude and

in water pressure on the surface of dam due to horiforces depends upon the shape of the dam and varies equation specified in 7.2.1.1, the coefficient C, defines distribution of the increased pressure. of the mag-

G-2. G's is a function of the shape of dam and, is independent nitude and intensity of the earthquake.

G-3. The magnitude of C, for various shapes of dams, illustrated in Fig. 14 to 18, assuming water as incompressible, has been established by laboratory experiments. For more detailed analysis, these values may be adopted. 65

WATER

SURPPCE

SHAPE

A-1

SHAPE

A-2

WATER

SURPACE

WATEP

SURFACE

SHAPE

A-3

SHAPE

A-4
SURFACE

WATER

T-Jj-=
0

0.2 1 t

0.1 DISTANCE DEPTH

O-6 BELOW OF

O-8

1.0

h

SURFACE

RESERVOIR

VERTICAL p = CS ah wh

where p = Cs = orb = w = h = hydrodynamic pressure at depthy, coefficient which varies with shape and depth, horizontal seismic coefficient ( ~8s 7.1 ), unit weight of water, and maximelm depth of reservoir.

FIG. 14

VALUES OF C, FOR COMBJNATION SLOPES IN WHICH THE INCLUSIVE ANGLE IS 15" AND VERTICAL PORTION OF UPSTREAM FACE IS VARIABLE

SHAPE

C-l
SURFACE

SHAPE

C-2

WATER

WATER

SURFACE

SHAPE

C-3

.- --* BtfyVERTICAL

SHAPE

C-4

1

_ DISTANCE

h-

DEPTH OF

BELOW

SURFACE

RESERVOIR

fi = Cs ah wh
where p = Cs = ah = w = h = FIG. hydrodynamic pressure at depthy, coefficient which varies with shape and depth, horizontal seismic coefficient ( sc.s7.1), unit weight of water, and maximum depth of reservoir.

16

VALUES OF C, FOR COMBINATION SLOPES IN WHICH THE INCLUSIVE ANGLE IS 45' AND VERTICAL PORTION OF UPSTREAM FACE IS VARIABLE

0.7

O-6

s

0.5

SHAPE

E-l

SHAPE

E-2

0.6

0 *:

0.2

SHAPE

E-3

SHAPE
WATER

E-4
SUNPACE

O.!

r-J-=
0'4

0

o-6

0.s

1=

DISTANCE

h

DEPTH

BELOW SURFACE OF RESLRVOlR

VERTICAL

where
Cg = ah = UI = h =

p = hydrodynamic

pressure at depthy, coefficient which varies with shape and depth, basic horizontal seismic coefficient (set 7.1 ), unit weight of water, and maximum depth of reservoir.
AP;D

FIG. 18

VALUES OF C, FOR COMBIXATION SLGPES IN WHICH THE INCLUSIVE ANGLE IS 75" VERTICAL PORTIOXOF UPSTREAMFACE IS VARIABLE

IS : 1893 - 1984

APPENDIX H ( Clause 8.1.1.1 )
GRAPHICAL H-1. METHOD H-l.1 Make the following construction ( see Fig. 19 ): Draw BB' to make an angle ( 4 - A ) with horizontal. Assume planes of rupture Ba, Bb, etc, such that Aa = ab = bc, etc. Make Ba' = a'b' = b'c' etc, on BB' equal to Aa, ab, bc, etc, in length. Draw active pressure vectors from a', b', etc, at an angle ( 90' 6-- a - h ) with BB' to intersect corresponding assumed planes of rupture. Draw the locus of the intersection of assumed planes of pressure vector ( modified rupture and corresponding active Culmann's line ) and determine the maximum active pressure vector X parallel to BE.
t-ASSUME0 PLANE

DETERMINATION

OF ACTIVE

EARTH

PRESSURE

LINE

`$5 MAXIMUM PRESSURE ACTIVE VECTOR

X

Fro. 19 H-l.2

DETERMINATION OF ACTIVE EARTH PRESSUREBY GRAPHICALMETHOD

The active earth pressure shall be calculated as follows: P, = 4 where X = BC = active pressure vector, prependicular distance from B to AA' as shown in Fig. 19, and P,, UJ, uV and h are as defined in 8.1.1. 71

( `,;

y"' ) w

XBC

gsr1&I93-1984

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.1.2.1 )
GRAPHICAL J-1; METHOD J-l.1 DETERMINATION

J

OF PASSIVE EARTH PRESSURE

Make the following construction ( see Fig. 20 ): Draw BB' to make an angle ( + - h ) with the horizontal, Assume planes of rupture Ba, Bb, etc, such that Aa - ab = bc, etc. Make Ba' = a'b' - b'c', etc, on BB' equal to Aa, ab, bc, etc, in length. Draw passive pressure vectors from u', b', etc, at an angle ( 90" - u + 6 + A ) with BB' to intersect corresponding assumed planes of rupture. Draw the locus of the intersection of assumed planes of rupture and corresponding passive pressure vector ( modified Culmann's line ) and determine the minimum passive pressure vector X parallel to BE.
M'IDIFIED CIILMANN'S

LINE

/-ASSUMED PLANE OF RUPTURE

MINIMUM PASSIVE PRESSURE VECTOR x

FIG. 20

DETERMINATION OF PASSIVEEARTH PRESSURE BY GRAPHICAL METHOD

12

IS:lt333-l!m4 J-1.2 The passive pressure shall he calculated as follows:

where X = passive pressure vector, BC = f;rnnddicular distance from B to AA` as shown in Fig.

P,, w, av Hnd /\ are as defined in 8.1.2.

APPENDIX ( Clause 9.1 )
NOTATIONS

K

AND SYMBOLS

K-l. The following notations and letter symbols shall have the meaning indicated against each, unless otherwise specified in the body of the standard: A = Area of cross-section at the base of the structure stacklike structures B = Base width of the dam
shell in

C = Coefficient defining flexibility of structure C, = Coefficient for determining active earth pressure ( for dry-moist-saturated backfills) CB = Coefficient for determining active earth pressure ( for submerged backfills ) C, - Coefficient depending on submerged portion of pier and enveloping cylinder C, C', = Maximum value of C, 5 Coefficient to determine bending moment from base moment in dams at any section

CrJ - Coefficient for determining C, = Mode participation factor C, = Coefhcicnt

passive earth pressure

which varies with shape and depth of dam 73

IS:1893

- 1984 C, = Coefficient depending on slenderness used for determining T Cv = Coefficient mining P ratio of structure, used for deterfrom base

depending on slenderness ratio, shear at any

C'v = Coefficient to determine shear in dams

section

d = Dimension of building in a direction parallel seismic force DL = Dead load on the structure EL = Value of earthquake load adopted for design

to the applied

En = Modulus of elasticity of the material of the structure F = Total horizontal force for submerged portion of pier F, = Seismic zone factor Acceleration due to gravity g

et
h
ST= L=

Modulus of rigidity of the shell material of earth and rockfill dam Height of water stored in tank, or Depth of reservoir, or Height of retaining wall Height of stacklike structure above the base, or Height of submergence above base of retaining walls Height of centre of gravity of stacklike structure or dam above base Height measured from the base of the building to the roof or any floor, i Total height of the main structure of the building, or Height of submerged portion of pier, or Height of water surface from the level of deepest scour, Height of dam
07

h'

f =

j&
hi

= =
c
=

H=

Ht = Height of dam above toe of the slopes I = Importance factor k = Slenderness ratio of stacklike structure ET= Performance factor for buildings KB = Value of C, for static active earth pressure conditions X', = Value of C', for static active earth pressure conditions 1 = Half the ( longer ) length of the rectangular 74 tank

IS : 1893 - 1984
1' = Half the width of strip in circular tank LL = Superimposed ( live ) load on the structure M = Design bending moment at a distance x' from top, in a stacklike structure MB = Base moment Mh = Hydrodynamic moment in submersible bridges My = Bending moment at depth y below top of dam n = Number of storeys including basement storeys PHydrodynamic pressure in submersible bridges or dams, OY = Hydrodynamic pressure at any location, x, from the centre of rectangular tank pb = Pressure on the bottom of the tank or bottom of submerged portion of the pier Pw = Pressure on the wall of the tank P, = Active earth pressure due to earthfill P, Passive earth pressure due to earthfill (Pi&) Cl= Active earth pressure due to uniform surcharge (Pr)a = Passive earth pressure due to uniform surcharge q = Intensity of uniform surcharge Qt =, Lateral forces at any roof or floor, i Q,(r) a Load acting at any floor level, i, due to mode of vibration Mean radius of structural shell of circular stacklike structures r, = Radius of gyration of structural shell at the base section of stacklike structures
r =

R = Radius of circular tank 8, = Spectral acceleration t = Thickness of structural shell of circular stacklike structure I = Fundamental time period of vibration of structure UL = Ultimate load for which the structure or its element should be designed V = Design shear force in stacklike structure at distance X' from the top Vr = Total shear due to horizontal component of hydrodynamic force at the elevation at which the slope of the dam face commences 75

iSr1893 - 1984

V s = Total shear due to horizontal component of hydrodynamic
force at the elevation of the section being considered Base shear Hydrodynamic shear in submersible Shear force acting at floor, level, i bridges VB Vh = VI = v, tr) -

Absolute value of maximum shear at the ith storey, in the rth mode

VY = Shear force at depth y below top of the dam w = Unit weight of water, OY Unit weight of soil Wm = Unit weight of material of dam WE= Saturated unit weight of soil W = Total dead load + appropriate buildings, OY amount of live load in

Total weight of masonry or concrete in the dam

We = Weight of the water of the enveloping cylinder Wh = Increase ( or decrease ) in vertical component of load due
to hydrodynamic force

WI = Dead load + appropriate amount
or auy floor, i

of live load of the roof

W,

Wt = Total

tion due to buoyancy or uplift weight of stacklike structure including weight of lining and contents above base x = Location in a rectangular tank from the centre of the tank

= Weight of bridge mass under consideration ignoring reduc-

x' = Distance from the top of stacklike structure y = Depth of location or section below the water surface or top of the dam a = Angle which earth face of the wall makes with the vertical a0 = Basic seismic coefficient ah = Design horizontal seismic coefficient av = Vertical seismic coefficient = Equivalent uniform seismic coefficient at depth y below top UY of dam p = Soil-foundation system factor Y = Constant used to determine shear force at any floor
76

IS:1893 -1984
6 = Angle of friction between the wall and earthfill n = Static horizontal deflection static horizontal force LSlope of the earthfill at the top of the tank under a

0 = Angle between the face of the dam and the vertical
ah

tan'1 ifav

Mass density of the shell material Angle of internal friction of soil

of earth and rockfill dam tank in plan, free vibration

Angle subtended by centre line of circular with chord width of 2 1' Mode shape coefficient analysis at floor, i obtained from

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Heedquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax : 91 113234062, 91 113239399, 91 113239382 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Con tral Laboratory: Plot No. 2019, Site IV, Sahibabad Regional Central Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 Telephone 8-77 00 32

ornc-:
323 76 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 832 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1;0002 `Eastern : l/l4 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTT,I700054
Northern : SC0 335336, Southern twestern MUMBAI Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East),
400093

Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 550 13 48 839 49 55 55 40 21 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 19 96 54 11 37 20 10 83 37 29 25 21 68 76 23 89 23 26 23 05 621 17 500001

SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore - Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037 121001 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI. Ganga Nagar. BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Savitri Complex, Road, FARIDABAD 201001 116 G. T Road, GHAZIABAD

53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-58C, L. N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD E-52, Chitaranjan Marg. C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 1171418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, LUCKNOW 226001 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T. C. No 14/1421, University THIRUVANANTHAPURAM institution of Engineers P. 0. Palayam, 695034

NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010

52 51 71 32 36 35

( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Approach, F! 0. Princep Street,

`Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA 700072 tSales

27 10 85 Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 309 65 28 222 39 71 Square,

Office is at Novelty Chambers,

*Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja BANGALORE 560002

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurfa, India

AMENDMFNT NO. 1 AUGUST 1987 TO IS:1893-1984 CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES

(Fourth Revision)

(Page 7, Fig. 1, footnotes) - Add the following new sentence in the end: 'Lakshadweep falls under seismic zone III.'

(BDC 39)

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, IIndia

