UDC

660'71COlS

18,: 8057 - ia88
( First Reprint OCTOBER Indian Standard 1996.) ( Reaffirmed 2006 1093') ) ( Reaffirmed

SPECIFICATION F'OR HARD ANODIC COATINGS ON ALUMINIUM AND ALUMINIUM ALLOYS ( First
Revision )

1. scope - Lays down requirements for hard anodic coatings on aluminium and aluminium altoys for Hard engineering applications intended for very good abrasion resistance and corrosion resistance, anodizing intended for decorative purposes is not included. General requirements relating to the supply of material shall be as laid 2. Supply of Materialdown in IS : 1387-1067 ' General requirements for the supply of metallurgical materials ( first revision ) I. :
u

3. Terminology

-

For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. less than 5 percent of copper and moderate amount
and may trap the electrolyte. Hard anodizing of caatlngo IO not

: :

3.1 Alumtnium and its Alloys -containing silicon for hard anodic coatings.
Not. 1 -AvoId
treatment medium

of

of parts which includes deep recesses of treatment should be aulphuric

Noto 2-The recommrnded.

acid.

3.2 Signitkant Surfaces - In general, significant surfaces are those surfaces that are visible and subjected to wear or corrosion or both, or surfaces on which the coating is otherwise functionally necessary. The designation of the significant surfaces shatl be agreed upon by the manufacturer and the purchaser, and may be indicated on ,the drawings. The surfaces on which a controlled deposit ordinarily cannot be obtained, such as holes, recesses and angular~bases are normally exempt from the requirements for significant surfaces, unless they are specifically designated as such. When such areas sre designated as significant surfaces and the thickness requirements are to be met, the manufacturer and the purchaser shall recognize the necessity for either deposits on the more accessible surfaces or special racking. Special racks may involve the use of auxiliary, interior or bi-polar electrodes. 3.3 Hard Anodic Coating A coating having wear and abrasion resistance as a primary characteristic.

4. Information to be Supplied While Enquiring and Order to the Anodizer -When ordering hard anodic coatings of articles in accordance with this standard, the purchaser should furnish the informations given below: a) Chemical, composition of the basis metal; b) State of the material, for example, extruded, forged, etc; c) Condition of the material, for example, heat treatment condition; d) Masking area, if any; e) Significant surfaces; f) Thickness of coating required; g) Special properties required, for example, electrical resistance and hardness; h) Whether sample parts of the material are being supplied to the anodizer for trials; j) Any metal other than aluminium assembled on the part; and k) Permitted area for jig contacts. i. Finish and Appearance

5.1 Basis Meta/Surfaces to be hard anodized should have a finish superior to that required on the iinished part, unless a final finishing operation is to be employed. 5.1.1 The sharp edges of the parts to be hard anodized should be radiused ( see Appendix A ). `adius required depends on the thickness of hard anodic coating. The

Adopted

25 April

1988

Q November 1988, BIS I
BUREAU
MANAK

Or 3 I

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

2 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS ZAFAR

MARG

IS: 6057 - 1966
5.2 Finish of the Coating -The coating shall be smooth, continuous and uniform in appearance, and shall be adherent. It s;lall be free from powdery areas, loose films and discontinuities, such as breaks and scratches. The siz3 and number of contact marks shall be minimum consistent with good practice,
Note 1 -A powdery outer layer shall not be acceptable but superficial surface bloom which may be readily removed by a wipe with a dry cloth shall not be the cause for rejection. Note 2 - Hard anodizing
milling, etc, should should be carried out at the end be done before hard anodizing. of the manufacturing processes; any drilling,

Note 3-Any surface imperfections in the basis metal, such as scratches, dents and nicks are reproduced during the process. Theretore, care shall be taken to prevent damage during and after machining, cutting, polishing, buffing, roughening, stretching, deforming, etching, sand blasting, etc. Note 4 -Assemblies masked.
containing non-aluminium parts of steel, brass, organic substance, etq, may be suitably

5.2.1 Where high surface finishing after hard anodizing is required, surface anodizing shall be of equal finish. Hard anodizing reduces fatigue strength.

finish

prior

to

hard

6. Thickness - For general engineering applications, a coating of thickness 25 to 100 pm is generally ~required. Thickness of hard anodic coatings shall normally be determined by microscopic method specified in IS : 5523-1983 `Methods of testing anodic coatings on aluminium and its alloys (first revision )' or with the help of instruments based on eddy current principle (see IS : 60124970 Methods for measurement of coating thickness by eddy current ) and shall be within f 10 percent of the drawing requirement. fn case of dispute, however, microsection method shall be the referee methods. Note - Growth
dlmensional increase of the surface is normally one-half of the anodic coating thickness. during the process has to be considered in designing closely This phenomenon of toleranced parts (see

Appendix A ). 6.1 In the case of threads, masking may be done, if required, given in IS : 5523-

-When tested in accordance with the relevant method 7. Abrasion Resistance 1983, the quantity of abrasive powder required to penetrate the film shall be 350 g. 7.1 For routine testing,
the following test may be used:

When the coated surface is rubbed two or three times with emery paper or emery cloth with emery conforming to Grit Number 180 to IS : 715 ( Part 1 )-I978 `Specification for coated abrasives: Parr 1 General application ( third revision )' using medium finger pressure, it shall not abrade the surface but shall skid over the surface showing not more than a trace of whitening of the surface. colour of the hard anodic coating varies depending upon-the alloy, thickness of the 6. Colour -The coating and electrolyte. Normally the colour may vary from dark -gray (almost black) to light grey. The film will appear dark grey when wet. Note -If the coated surface is grey, the coating is defective.
after being rubbed with fine abrasive paper ( 00 emery ) and wettlng with watei

6.1 When dry, the~parts shall be uniform in colour. unsatisfactory processing may be acceptable.

Variations

in appearance

that do not arise from

6. Electrical Breakdown Voltage - The breakdown voltage shall be decided between the supplier For low voltage applications, the breakdown voltage shall be not less than 200 V and the customer. and for high voltage applications, it shall not be less than 500 V when tested in accordance with the method given in Appendix B.

10. Hardness - Hardness vary with the composition temperature of the bath.
Note - Sulphuric

of the hard anodic coating, when tested by micro-indentation of the electrolyte, composition of the material, the current
produces hard anodic coating of hardness 400 to 500 HV.

method, may used and the

acid electrolyte

10.1 For routine testing, the fcllowing

test may be used:

When the coated sllrface is rubbed two or three times with five emery paper of Grit Number 180 of IS : 715 (apart 1 )-I976 using medium finger pressure, cloth or paper shall not abrade the A faint trace of whitening on the cloth or paper is permissible. surface. 1-I. post Treatment - Where maximum abrasion resistance is required, hard anodized parts shall be washed in clean cold running water only. 2

IS -: 6057 - 1988
11.1 The coating shall not be sealed when application is concerned only with the maximum-degree of abrasion. When resistance to both abrasion and corrosion is important, as in the case of exterior architectural application, the contract or purchase order shall specify sealing. Sealing shall be accomplished by immersion in boiling de-ionized water, in hot aqueous 5 percent dichromate solution, in hot aqueous solution containing nickel or cobalt acetate, or other suitable chemical solution. 11.2 Hard anodized coatings may be impregnated with oils, silicones or dry lubricants graphite and molybdenum disulphide for improvement of anti-friction properties. 12. Sampling 12.1 Lot -A lot shall consist of all the articles, items, parts or components with hard anodic coating of the same type, approximately the same size, shape, thickness and colour submitted for acceptance at one time. 122 The number of samples to be selected from a lot for ascertaining the conformity specified requirements shall be as agreed upon between the manufacturer and the samples shall be selected at random. of the lot to the purchaser. The like colloidal

12.3 Preparation of Test Specimens - When -the work or articles are of such form, size or value as to prohibit use thereof, or are not readily adaptable to the tests specified in this standard, specimens of the same composition and heat treatment as the work being inspected shall be anodized concurrently and on the same anodizing rack or hook as the articles represented. These specimens shall be used for the required tests. Where aluminium castings are being coated, the specimens may be cut from scrap castings or cast separately. of thickness and weight of anodic coating, 12.3.1 Dimension of specimens - For determination test specimens shall be not smaller than 75 X 75 mm with nominal thickness same as that of production work. For determination of abrasion resistance, the test specimens shall be 100 x 100 and shall be cut from adjacent areas of the same sheet having same nominal thickness as that of production work. 13. Marking 13.1 The anodized articles mark of the manufacturer. 13.1 .l Certification Marking shall be marked with the thickness of the coating and the name or tradethe the mm the

Details available -with the Bureau of Indian

Standards

APPENDIX

A

( Chuses 5.1 .l and 6 )
GUIDELINES IN DESIGNING CLOSELY TOLERANCED HARD ANODIC COATINGS PARTS FOR

On specifying thickness of hard anodic coatings, allowance A-l. Surface Dimension of Partsshould be made for dimensional increase. Both, a machining dimension and a coated dimension should An increase in dimension, equal to one half of the thickness of the be indicated on the drawings. applied coating, may be expected for each surface coated due to surface growth. For example, for a 56 pm coating on close tolerance parts, a pre-machining allowance of -25 t*_m per surface should be made before hard anodic coating. A-l.1 In the case of small blind holes and tapped hole-s, coating thickness may vary from no film to full normafcoating. Unless otherwise specified, any tapped hole nor non-tapped hole 6 mm or less in diameter may be furnished free of anodic coating. A-2. Thread Dimensions - Hard anodic coatings may affect thread dimensions for external and internal threads; the major and minor diameter shall increase 2 times the amount of growth. The pitch diameter for threads, having an included angle of 60", will increase four times the amount of growth. For threads having an included angle other than 60". the pitch diameter will increase 2 times the amount of growth divided by the sine of half the included angle. A-3. Fabrication - Good haI,d anodic coatings depend on proper product design. Anodic coatings Sharp edges and corners are difficult to anodize may develop voids at sharp corners and edges. satisfactorily and, therefore, should be avoided Ail edges and inside corne!s should be radiused prior to anodizing, chamfering should not be used unless sharp edges are radiused. To avoid any uncoated 3

IS : 6057 - 1988
edges, inside corners should comply with radii of curvature not less than 0'75 . radii of curvature for nominal coating thicknesses are given below: Nominal Coating Up to 26 to 51 to Thickness mm. For guidance, the

Radius of Curvature on Edge and Inside Corner 0.75 mm approx 1'60 mm approx 2'40 mm approx 3'20 mm approx

25pm 50 Pm 75 pm

76 to 100 t"rn

A-4. Coating Thickness Tolerance - Hardanodic coating thickness may be controlled to very close tolerances, -as little as -J=2'5 pm. One method that may be employed is to carefully withdraw the coated part while still wet and replace it in the bath for a fixed period of treatment. Calculations based upon a calculated rate of coating per unit of processing time may be used as the basis for determining the exact duration of processing required for the specific alloy being coated.

APPENDIX ( Clause
ELECTRICAL B-l. General 9 )

B

BREAKDOWW

VOLTAGE

TEST

B-1.1 Unless otherwise specified, the test shall not be applied to cut edges or the edges of holes. B-2. Apparatus B-2.1 A suitable 50 Hz source. B-2.2 An ac transformer having an output with a waveform as nearly sinusodial as possible, capable of producing the voltage required. B-2.3 A voltage regulator enabling the test voltage to be increased gradually from any point without interruption, and providing an essentially undistorted waveform so that peak voltage shall be within the limits && 5 percent (that is 1.34 to I.49 I of rms voltage. B-2.4 A current limits resistor of 0'5 Mole in series with the transformer secondary winding and the test electrode probe. B-2.5 A method of measuring the voltage giving rms values. B-2.6 An electrode probe made from a conducting material free to move as required and adequately supported. The contact surface shall be spherical with a diameter of 3 to 6 mm and shall be maintained in a smooth, untarnished condition. The spherical surface is placed on the anodized surface SO that the total force on the film is 0'5 to 1'0 N. B-2.7 A smooth, bright metal supporting surface. B-3. Procedure B-3.1 Unless otherwise specified, the test shall be carried out in air at room temperature with clean, dry test pieces.
Note-The

breakdown voltage acrosscoatingsis affmcred by the relative humidity.

B-3.2 The apex of the electrode is placed on the anodized surface force. The test piece is placed on the support in good electrical contact with the basis metal, for example, by use of an earthing clip. Thereafter, the metal support and the electrode are connected to the scondary winding of the transformer. Starting at zero, the voltage is increased uniformly at a rate not exceeding 25 volts per second till the specified voltage is reached or the voltage drops suddenly ( indicating breakdown of the film). It is necessary to clean the contact surface of the electrode probe after any breakdown has occured. Precautions shall be taken to see that the voltage is returned to zero before this is carried out. B-3.3 The test shall be conducted on at least 5 test pieces. occurs at a voltage lower than that specified. 4 The material shall comply if no breakdown

IS: 6057 - 1688
EXPLANATORY NOTE

This standard was first published in 1970. This has now been revised in the light of the In this revision, guidelines for tolerances on the thickness for experience gained during these years. precision components have been included. The electrical breakdown voltage requirement (200 V 1 has been included for low voltage applications and accordingly the method of testing has been modified. An alternate method for hardness checking has also been included for routine control purposes. Hard anodic coatings electrolyte bath to produce lS : 7088-1973 Recommended these coatings require special specified in IS : 1868-1982 revision )`. are produced by treating aluminium and aluminium alloys anodically in an a dense- and inert aluminium oxide coating on the metal surface (see practice for anodizing of aluminium and its alloys ). The production of anodizing techniques. These coatings are harder and thicker than those `Specification for anodic coatings on aluminium and its alloys (second

The hard anodic coatings are intended to provide wear and -abrasion-resistant surfaces. Hard anodic coatings form an excellent base for all types of paint systems, adhesives and dry film lubricants. Hard coatings may significantly reduce fatigue strengfh. These factors should be considered in proposed Generally, these hard coatings should not be used on parts usage on parts subjected to cyclic loads. or portions of parts which, normally during re-work, would require restoring of dimensional tolerances because of wear of hard-coated surfaces. Hard coatings are used in such applications as valves, sliding parts, hinge mechanisms, gears, swivel joints, pistons, rocket nozzles, insulation plates and blast shields. cams,

5

-Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi-l 10015, India.

