Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


wpa — weary Hag A wT A 
yore cal caraat of few 
feentdst 


Geosynthetics — Guidelines for 
Installation of Geotexiles as 
Pavement Fabric 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF FS, 9 aeee WAL Í, ae feeeit-110002 
l rch a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2015 Price Group 3 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Old and weathered pavements contain transverse and longitudinal cracks that are both temperature and load 
related. Cracks under overlay rapidly propagate through to new surface, a phenomenon called reflective cracking. 
These cracks in the pavement surface cause numerous problems, including: 


a) Riding discomfort for the users; 

b) Reduction of safety; 

c) Infiltration of water and subsequent reduction of the bearing capacity of the subgrade; 

d) Pumping of soil particles through the cracks; and 

e) Progressive degradation of the road structure in the vicinity of the cracks due to stress concentrations. 


The method most often used to rehabilitate these pavements is to overlay the pavements with bitumen/asphalt 
concrete (AC). This temporarily covers the cracks. After the overlay has been placed, any lateral or vertical 
movement of the pavements at the cracks due to load or thermal effects causes the cracks from the existing 
pavement to propagate up through the new bitumen/AC overlay (called reflective cracking). This movement 
causes raveling and spalling along the reflective cracks and provides a path for surface water to reach the base 
and subgrade which decreases the ride quality and accelerates pavement deterioration. 


Geosynthetics (geotextiles, geocomposites, geomembranes and geogrids) under the bitumen/AC overlay can 
provide sufficient tensile strength to relieve stresses exerted by movement of the existing pavement thus acting 
as a stress relieving interlayer which retards the development of reflective cracks. Impregnation of the geotextile 
with bitumen provides a degree of moisture protection for the underlying layers. Thus, it also waterproofs 
pavements that typically allow 30 to 60 percent of precipitation to infiltrate and weaken the road structure. The 
interlayer can also provide reinforcement when it can contribute significant tensile strength to the overlay system. 
The reinforcement limits the movement of the cracked old pavement under traffic loads and thermal stress by 
holding the cracks together. 


The benefits of geosynthetic interlayer include: 


a) Waterproofing the pavement, 

b) Delaying the appearance of reflective cracks, 
c) Lengthening the useful life of overlay, 

d) Added resistance to fatigue cracking, and 

e) Saving up to 50 mm of overlay thickness. 


Pavement geotextile fabrics are non-woven polyester or polypropylene fabrics that are field saturated with an 
asphalt binder and placed as an interlayer beneath a pavement overlay or between pavement layers. When placed, 
the fabric becomes an integral part of the roadway section, forming a barrier to water infiltration and absorbing 
stresses to reduce reflective and fatigue cracking of the new pavement surface layer. Non-woven geotextile 
fabrics are preferred in view of their high elongation and low tensile strength required for stress relief. Paving 
fabrics made of other products (nylon, glass, combinations of materials) can also be used but they are usually 
more expensive. Non-woven paving fabrics typically exhibit relatively low modulus and thus can mobilize only 
limited stress at low strain levels. A thicker fabric results in lower stresses at the tip of a crack than a thinner one 
and thus the thicker layer is more effective in delaying reflection cracking. The full thickness of the non-woven 
fabric shall be saturated with asphalt. Clearly, asphalt retention rate is an important property which is directly 
related to the fabric weight and thickness. Also, a heavier fabric will reduce bleed through during construction 
and reduce the effect of any damage by construction traffic. 


(Continued to Third Cover) 


IS 16343 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GUIDELINES FOR 
INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXILES AS 
PAVEMENT FABRIC 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 The standard prescribes guidelines for installation 
of geotextile as pavement fabric. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provision which, 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics : 
1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties 
3 DEFINITIONS 


3.1 The definitions given in IS 13321 (Part 1) and the 
following shall apply. 


3.2 Minimum Average Roll Value (MARV) —- MARV 
is the average value of roll minus two standard 
deviations. 


4 SURFACE PREPARATION 


4.1 The graded surface shall be dry, thoroughly clean 
from all dirt, water and oil, smooth and free of 
obstructions, depressions and debris. The surface on 
which a moisture barrier interlayer is placed shall have 
a grade which will drain water off the pavement. 
Remove all sharp objects and large stones. Cut trees 
and shrubs flush with the sub-grade. Removal of topsoil 
and vegetation mat is not necessary, but is 
recommended where practical. Excessive soft spots or 
voids may be unsuitable for geosynthetic installation. 


4.2 Prior to using geo-textiles to minimize reflective 
cracks, the existing pavement shall be evaluated to 
determine pavement distress. The size of the cracks 
and joints in the existing pavement shall be determined. 
All cracks and joints larger than 3 mm in width shall 
be cleaned and sealed with bituminous material or by 
a method approved by the site engineer. Differential 
slab movement shall be evaluated, since deflections 
greater than 0.5 mm cause early reflective cracks. 


Crack filling material shall be allowed to cure prior to 
placement of paving fabric. Potholes and other 
pavement distress areas that are structurally deficient 
shall be repaired prior to geo-textile installation. 
Milling of severely cracked and uneven or rutted 
pavement may be required, or a thin layer of bitumen/ 
asphalt called a leveling course may be applied. 
Sections of broken bitumen/asphalt that move under 
traffic loading should be removed down to the sub- 
grade and reconstructed. A profile correction shall be 
laid, wherever required, before placing the paving 
fabric. 


5 APPLICATION OF THE TACK COAT 


5.1 The geo-textile paving fabric generally laid 
between two bituminous layers should be used over 
the entire pavement area affected by cracking and not 
in the form of strips over the pavement cracks. On 
existing cement concrete pavements, a layer of dry 
bitumen/bituminous concrete should be provided 
before laying the paving fabric. 


5.2 Proper installation of the asphalt cement/ 
bituminous tack coat is crucial; mistakes can lead to 
early failure of the overlay. Uncut paving grade asphalt 
cements/bitumen shall be used. The grade of the tack 
coat should be the same as used in the asphalt concrete 
overlay. 


5.3 Minimum air and pavement temperature shall be 
at least 10°C or more for placement of tack coat. The 
distributor tank temperature of the tack coat shall not 
exceed 160°C to avoid damage to fabric and the 
minimum temperature shall be 140 + 2°C to permit a 
uniform spray pattern. For asphalt emulsions, the 
distributor tank temperature shall be maintained 
between 55°C to 70°C. 


NOTE — Polypropylene begins to melt at a temperature of 
about 160°C. Therefore, when using polypropylene products, 
the temperature of the paving mixture should not exceed 150°C 
when it contacts the geosynthetic. 


5.4 Cationic and anionic emulsions may be used 
successfully provided (a) the paving fabric is laid only 
after allowing the specified time for curing of emulsion, 
and (b) no traffic is allowed over the area where tack 
coat has been applied. However, they shall be applied 
at a higher rate to offset the water content of the 


IS 16343 : 2015 


emulsion. Within street intersections, on steep grades 
or in other zones where vehicle braking is common, 
the normal application rate shall be reduced by about 
20 percent as directed by the engineer. Cutbacks and 
emulsions containing solvents shall not be used. The 
tack coat application rate shall be sufficient to saturate 
the fabric and to bond the fabric to the existing 
pavement surface. 


5.5 The tack coat shall be sprayed uniformly using a 
calibrated distributor spray bar. The bar shall be 
adjusted to obtain uniformity and the correct width of 
spray, usually 5 to 7.5 cm past the edge of the 
geotextile. The spray of the nozzles should overlap so 
that uniform double coverage occurs. Heavy spots, 
streaks or gaps will cause problems in the system. Hand 
spraying, squeegee and brush application may be used 
in locations of fabric overlap or places where the 
distributor truck can not reach. Every effort shall be 
made to keep hand application to a minimum. The tack 
coat shall be applied uniformly to the prepared, clean 
and dry pavement surface. 


5.6 The tack coat shall be applied uniformly to the 
prepared dry pavement surface at the rate governed 
by the following equation: 


Q,=0.36+0 +Q, 
where 
Q, = design tack coat quantity (kg/m’); 
Q, = saturation content of the geotextile being 


used (kg/m?) to be provided by the 
manufacturer; and 


Q, = correction based on tack coat demand of the 
existing pavement surface (kg/m’). 


NOTE — The typical values of tack coat demand of existing 
bituminous pavement surfaces are as under: 


Quantity of Liquid 
Bituminous Material 


Type of Surface 


(kg/m?) 
Normal bituminous surface 0.20 — 0.25 
Dry and hungry bituminous surface 0.25 — 0.30 


5.7 The target width of the tack coat application shall 
be equal to the paving fabric width plus 150 mm. Tack 
coat application shall be wide enough to cover the 
entire width of fabric overlaps. The tack coat shall be 
applied only as far in advance of paving fabric 
installation as is appropriate to ensure a tacky surface 
at the time of paving fabric placement. Traffic shall 
not be allowed on the tack coat. Any spillage or excess 
tack coat shall be removed/cleaned from the pavement 
or sand be sprayed over it. 


6 DEPLOYMENT OF GEOTEXTILE PAVING 
FABRIC 


6.1 The geotextile paving fabric shall be placed on a 


dry surface. In case it rains after installing the paving 
fabric, but before placing the overlay over it, all excess 
water should be removed and the fabric should be 
allowed to dry up sufficiently before placing the overlay. 


6.2 Geotextile paving fabric shall be placed with heat 
set side facing up, onto the tack coat using manual or 
mechanical laydown equipment capable of providing 
a smooth installation. In either case, the geotextile shall 
not be allowed to wrinkle or fold. The paving fabric 
shall be placed before the tack coat cools and looses 
its tackiness. Paving fabric shall not be installed in areas 
where the first lift of overlay asphalt tapers to a 
minimum compacted thickness of less than 40 mm. 
Excess paving fabric, which extends beyond the edge 
of existing pavement or areas of tack coat application, 
shall be trimmed and removed. 


6.3 When the asphalt emulsions are used, the emulsion 
shall be allowed to cure properly such that essentially 
no water moisture remains prior to placing the paving 
fabric. 


6.4 Wrinkles severe enough (in excess of 25 mm) to 
cause folds shall be slit and laid flat. Brooming and/or 
pneumatic rolling will be required to maximize paving 
fabric contact with the pavement surface. Additional 
hand-placed tack coat may be required at overlaps and 
repairs to satisfy saturation requirements of the fabric, 
as required by the engineer. 


6.5 Unroll the geotextile in the direction of paving 
operation. Do not drag the geotextile on the ground or 
mishandle in any way. Successive sheets of geotextiles 
shall be overlapped a minimum of 50 to 150 mm. The 
overlap shall be shingled in the direction of the paving 
operation. Overlaps of adjacent rolls may be 150 mm 
to accommodate variation between the width of the 
roadway and paving fabric. Excess fabric shall be cut 
and removed so that overlaps of adjacent rolls do not 
exceed 150 mm. Additional tack coat shall be applied 
to overlaps. 


6.6 In case of slopes, place the geotextile with the 
machine direction oriented up-down. Lap the upper 
sheets over the lower sheets. When the geotextile is 
placed on a slope steeper than 6V:1H, securely anchor 
the laps to the ground surface with pins or stakes as 
necessary to prevent the slippage and tearing of the 
geotextile. 


6.7 On curves, the geotextile shall be folded or cut to 
conform to the curves. The overlap shall be in the 
direction of construction and held in place by pins, 
staples, or piles of fill or rock. 


6.8 In the case of drains, joints or other irregularities, 
the geotextile shall be placed normally and then cut 
around the obstruction. Any wrinkles over 25 mm shall 
be slit open and treated as overlaps. 


6.9 Prior to covering, the geotextile shall be inspected 
by a certified inspector of the engineer to ensure that 
the geotextile has not been damaged during installation. 
Damaged geotextile shall be repaired or replaced 
immediately. 


6.10 The fuzzy side of the paving fabric should be laid 
down into the tack coat leaving the smooth side up. 


7 INSTALLATION OF THE OVERLAY 


7.1 Installation of the geotextile and the bitumen/ 
asphalt concrete overlay shall be done on the same day. 
Paving can commence as soon as the fabric is laid 
down. After laying the paving fabric, some loose 
bituminous concrete should be sprinkled on it in the 
wheel path of the paver and the tipper to ensure that 
the fabric is not picked up between the wheels. 


7.2 Turning of the paver and other vehicles shall be 
done gradually and kept to a minimum to avoid 
movement and damage to the paving fabric. Abrupt 
starts and stops shall be avoided. Damaged fabric shall 
be removed and replaced with same type of fabric and 
a tack coat. Unless otherwise approved by the engineer, 
no traffic except necessary construction traffic shall 
be allowed to drive on the paving fabric. 


7.3 The temperature of the bitumen/asphalt shall be 
between 130°C to 145°C so as to give enough heat to 
the bitumen in the tack coat to rise up into the fabric. 


7.4 The thickness of the AC overlay shall be 
determined from the pavement structural requirements. 
However, the minimum compacted thickness of the 
first lift of the overlay at its thinnest point shall be 40 
mm necessary to produce enough heat to guarantee 
saturation of the paving fabric and bonding of the 
pavement layers. In cold weather, a thicker overlay 
may be necessary to achieve the same objective. 


7.5 Bitumen/asphalt can be placed by any convenient 
means. Compaction should take place immediately 
after dumping in order to ensure that the different layers 
are bonded together. 


7.6 Excess tack coat that bleeds through the paving 
fabric shall be removed by spreading sand on the 


IS 16343 : 2015 


paving fabric. Excess sand shall be removed before 
beginning the paving operation. 


7.7 In the event of rainfall on the paving fabric prior 
to the placement of the asphalt overlay, the paving 
fabric shall be allowed to dry before asphalt concrete 
is placed. 


8 PROTECTION OF GEOTEXTILE 


8.1 Protect the geotextile at all times from ultraviolet 
(UV) rays, contamination by surface runoff and 
construction activities. Traffic or construction 
equipment shall not be permitted directly on the 
geotextile except as directed. 


8.2 During installation, cover the geotextile with 
specified cover material as soon as possible. 


8.3 Place the cover material on the geotextile in such a 
manner that the geotextile is not torn, punctured or 
shifted. Use a minimum 150 mm thick cover layer or 
twice the maximum aggregate size, whichever is 
thicker. 


9 INSPECTION 


9.1 The owner or owner’s representative may randomly 
inspect geotextile before, during and after installation. 


9.2 Any damaged or defective geotextile (that is frayed 
coating, separated junctions, separated layers, tears, 
etc) shall be repaired/replaced in accordance with 10. 


10 DAMAGE REPAIR 


10.1 Localized distressed areas of existing AC 
pavement that are caused by base failure shall be 
repaired prior to any pavement rehabilitation. 


NOTE — Geotextiles are not capable of bridging structurally 
deficient pavements. 


10.2 Rahabilitate localized distressed areas and utility 
cuts by improving with the application of geotextiles. 


10.3 Repair isolated areas that are excessively cracked 
with geotextile prior to an AC overlay by using either 
a full-width membrane strip depending on the size of 
the distressed area. 


IS 16343 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Patt (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RitikA Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MAnisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. Kumaraswamy PILLay (Alternate) 


Dr Swapan GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Cumis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SincH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BaLucuamy (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Suri HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SauraBu Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16343 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai Dr ManisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 
Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad Suri JANAK NANAVATY 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai Suri S. P. BORKAR 
BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupra 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


(Continued from Second Cover) 


Full-width fabrics shall be limited to use on flexible pavements where there is extensive random cracking and 
waterproofing of the pavement is needed and justified. If widespread alligator cracking is due to surface aging of 
bitumen/asphalt and not structural failure, full-width fabric may be an inappropriate treatment; rejuvenation or 
surface recycling may be more appropriate. 


Fabrics have not demonstrated good success in reducing reflection of thermal (transverse) cracks in flexible 
pavements and joints in concrete pavements. Geogrids typically exhibit much higher moduli than fabrics and 
logically should take on more stress at low strain levels. Grid systems serve primarily as a reinforcing interlayer. 
Composites may offer benefits of both fabrics (stress-relieving interlayer) and grids (reinforcement). Composites 
are recommended for use on pavements where both reinforcement and waterproofing are desired. 


Heavy-duty membranes shall serve as both a waterproofing membrane and a stress-relieving interlayer. The 
mastic membrane shall provide both reduced permeability and be sufficiently soft and thick to act as a stress- 
relieving interlayer. Membranes are relatively expensive and are normally placed in strips over joints or cracks. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1073). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


