RAT Alte IS 9303 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


¿dd HR vita HSTUT oH AT 
ATTTatstent 


( TEAM FRAT ) 


Guide for Cold Storage 
of Table Grapes 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.080.10 


O BIS 2021 


anda Ar ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEERNE TH HM, ag faset — 110002 


A et MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 4 


Fruits, Vegetables and Allied Products Sectional Committee, FAD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fruits, Vegetables and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


To ensure fuller utilization of perishable foodstuffs such as fruits and vegetables, they should be preserved under 
conditions which will keep them fit for fresh consumption over a reasonable period. Storing them in refrigerated 
space (cold storage) is an important method of preservation. To provide guidelines for the cold storage industry in 
the country, a series of Indian Standard guides have been issued. These guides describe the pre-storage treatments 
and the optimum storage conditions for different fruits and vegetables to help the industry to develop on scientific 
lines and also to promote the export of fresh fruits and vegetables. 


This standard was first published in 1979, for which assistance had been drawn from the then ISO Draft International 
Standard on the subject. The first revision of this standard is being brought out to align the conditions of storage 
with those prevailing in Indian scenario. Considerable assistance has been derived from the work carried out 
at the CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore and ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural 
Research, Bengaluru. 


This Indian Standard provides guidance on storage of table grapes, however, because of the variability of the 
product according to the time and place of cultivation, local conditions may make it necessary to define other 
conditions for harvesting or other physical conditions in the store. 


The application of the guidelines contained in this Indian Standard should enable much wastage in storage to be 
avoided and thus should enable long-term storage to be achieved in most cases. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. 


IS 9303 : 2021 


Indian Standard 
GUIDE FOR COLD STORAGE OF TABLE GRAPES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This guide gives conditions for obtaining prolonged 
storage of different varieties of table grapes 
(Vitis vinifera). 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 Gray — Gray (Gy) is the unit of absorbed radiation 
dose. I Gy is equal to 1 Joule of energy/kg of material 
being irradiated. 


2.2 D min — It is the minimum absorbed dose received 
by the food samples when subjected to radiation 
treatment. 


3 CONDITIONS OF HARVESTING AND COLD 
STORAGE 


3.1 Varieties 


The commercially cultivated grape varieties in India 
include. Thompson seedless, Anab-e-shahi, Dilkush, 
Bangalore blue, Gulabi, Perlette, Flame seedless, 
Sharad seedless, Crimson seedless, Red globe, etc. 


3.2 Harvesting 
3.2.1 Maturity 


Grapes are non-climacteric fruits that do not ripe after 
harvest and are picked from the vine at the fully mature 
and ripe stage. Table grapes should be harvested at right 
maturity stage to have the optimum eating quality and 
to enable them to withstand the vagaries of handling 
and transport. The maturity can be judged based on the 
following: 


a) Appearance of characteristic colour of the cultivar 
and waxy bloom on the surface of the berries. 
On ripening, grapes which are green in colour 
at immature stage turn to amber colour (in case 
of white varieties) or attain uniform dark colour 
(in case of colour varieties characteristic to that 
variety) (Fig. 1). Further the seeds of ripe berries 
become dark brown. 


b) Easy separation of berries from the bunches. 
c) Characteristic aroma and flavour. 
d) Total soluble solids (°Brix) 


a) Anab-e-shahi and its mutant : 14-16 percent 


Dilkush 
b) Bangalore blue :16-18 percent 
c) Gulabi :18-20 percent 


d) Perlette 


e) Thompson seedless andits 
clones (Sonaka and T as - A. 
Ganesh) 


f) Flame seedless 


:16-18 percent 
: 20-22 percent 


: 18 percent 

: 20-22 percent 
: 20-22 percent 
: 18-20 percent 


g) Sharad seedless 
h) Red globe 
j) Crimson Seedless 


FIG. I APPEARANCE OF WAXY BLOOM 
ON MATURE BUNCHES 


3.2.2 Method of Harvesting and Handling 


Grape bunches should be clipped with scissors 
carefully without injuring the berries. Clip the bunch 
above the knot present on the bunch peduncle which 
helps in retention of freshness by reducing the loss of 
moisture. Harvesting should be done during the cooler 
part ofthe day loss of moisture and pedicel desiccation. 
The harvested bunches should be placed carefully 
in clean containers, preferably plastic crates, with 
proper cushioning material at the bottom and placed 
under the shade of the vine till they are transported to 
pack-house. Rough handling results in loss of natural 
bloom (thin wax coating on berry surface) making the 
berries susceptible to moisture loss. 


IS 9303 : 2021 


3.3 Pre-storage Operations of Trimming and 
Sorting 


Trimming of bunches is done with scissors to remove 
the undersized, immature, dried, split and damaged 
berries. Sort out and discard the diseased and rotten 
bunches if not removed during harvesting. Handling 
bunches carefully at all time to avoid removal of the 
waxy bloom and berry damage is highly essential. 
Rubber gloves should be worn while sorting or 
trimming operations and handling of bunches. 


Grapes should not be washed before storing as it would 
be difficult to remove the wash water completely and 
may lead to enhanced spoilage. 


3.4 Storage 


3.4.1 Ouality Characteristics for Storage 


Only sound bunches with green stalk and turgid berries 
that are free from any visible signs of spoilage should 
be kept for storage. The amount of water content is 
more in immature berries (as the sugar content is 
low) compared to fully mature berries. Berries with 
high water content are more prone to withering even 
with slight fluctuations in the storage temperature and 
humidity during storage. The water loss from immature 
fruits is also rapid and immature berries shrivel faster 
than fully mature berries. So avoid storing immature 
grape bunches. 


3.4.2 Packaging: The grape bunches should be packed 
properly before putting into storage rooms. Grapes 
meant for cold storage of export should not packed 
in traditional bamboo baskets and wooden boxes. 
Corrugated fiberboard (CFB) boxes are most suitable 
for packing of grapes. Generally 4-5 kg capacity 
ventilated CFB boxes having a maximum size of 
50 x 24 x 13 cm are used for packaging of grapes. A 
layer of bubble pad or paper shreds can be placed as 
cushioning at the bottom of the box and a polythene 
lining of 100 gauge thickness is placed over this. 
Uniform bunches of 300 to 600 g each are packed in 
perforated individual plastic pouches with the stalk 
ends up, to avoid chances of bruising of berries and 
these pouches are placed inside the polythene lining. 
The grapes are then precooled and the sulphur pads are 
placed over the grapes. The sulphur pad is separated 
from the grapes by layers of tissue paper. This is then 
covered with the polythene lining. 


Care should be taken not to erase the bloom of berries 
while weighing the bunches and use of hand gloves is 
must while handling the bunches during packaging. 
While packing, the grapes should be neither compressed 
nor loose so as to cause rubbing of berries against the 
wall of the box or against each other leading to loss of 
natural bloom. It is recommended that the bunches be 
packed in a single layer. The contents of each package 


should be uniform, in order to facilitate checking during 
storage. The bunches should not be packed together too 
tightly in the packages. 


3.4.3 Grape Guard/Sulphur Pads 


Sulphur pad commonly known as ‘grape guard’ is a 
brown sheet containing sodium metabisulphite (SMS) 
(Fig. 2). Quick release (QR) pads coated with a layer 
of SMS on one side of the brown paper could be used 
for short term storage (2-3 weeks) of grapes. The slow 
release pads (SR) with a layer of SMS coating and 
small white pouches with granules of SMS packed 
in it can be used for long term storage (10-12 weeks) 
(Fig. 3). Sulphur dioxide is released slowly in the moist 
atmosphere of the package creating SO, atmosphere 
around the bunches. This gas will retard the growth of 
moulds and also retain the green colour of the bunches 
(Fig. 4). The high humidity maintained inside the PE 
lining helps in preventing stem drying and thus berry 
shattering. For coloured grapes, quick releasing sulphur 
pads and high storage temperature should be avoided as 
high SO, released may bleach the colour of the grapes. 


FIG. 3-SLOW RELEASE GRAPE GUARD 
(FRONT AND BACK VIEWS) 


FIG. 4 CONTROL OF SPOILAGE USING GRAPE GUARD 


The CFB boxes used for packaging should have a waxed 
inner surface to minimize the absorption of moisture 
from the grapes when the grapes are packed as such 
for the local market (without using the grape-guard or 
PE lining). Further, use of bubble sheet as cushioning 
material instead of paper shreds will prevent the loss of 
moisture from berries to paper shreds, especially when 
bunches are not packed in individual polyethylene 
pouches. The usual practice of packing of bunches 
in perforated individual plastic pouches and placing 
these pouches inside the polythene lining will help in 
maintenance of humidity inside the pack and reduces 
moisture loss to a great extent. 


3.4.4 Precooling 


The postharvest management of grapes relies heavily 
on achieving the optimum temperature of storage 
as soon as possible after harvest. Pre-cooling is very 
important in grapes as the difference between field 
heat and storage temperature of 0-1 °C is very high. 
Pre- cooling is usually done by using forced air cooling 
method. For maintaining the quality of fresh grapes, the 
fruit tissue temperature should be rapidly precooled to 
1-2 °C within 6-8 h for harvest. Precooling is effective 
in minimizing moisture loss and improves the shelf life 
of grapes. Introducing Sulphur pads immediately after 


VE Å Ea 
IRN Lg Å 


hm i \ 
| ii 


— me] 


[lil Hill 
HALV HAMA 001 


"em" Il 
HALM Sida 00 
ini ==" 1] 


LTE 


In Ra) 
UT 
i" IU 
LUD 

MA phi 


Inn 


Use | 
annen 


SE i 


TT 


IS 9303 : 2021 


precooling avoids SO, injury as the rate of SO, release 
is controlled much more effectively at this temperature. 
Precooling can be carried out in mobile precoolers on 
the way to cold storage or in precooling chambers at 
pack houses (Fig. 5). 


Following should be taken care of: 
a) Pre-cooling must start as soon as possible after 
harvest; 


b) High humidity of 90 to 95 percent should be 
maintained in the forced air precoolers as low 
humid air passing over the produce at higher 
speeds would result in greater moisture loss; and 


c 


ma 


Grapes precooled by forced air cooling method 
at 0 °C with relation humidity of 90-95 percent 
would take normally 6 to 8 h to pull down the 
berry temperature from around 30 °C to I °C. 


3.4.5 Irradiation 


Gamma radiation treatment (D min 0.4 kGy) of 
grapes is recommended as a phytosanitary measure to 
overcome technical barrier to trade. The radiation dose 
used are within the window of approved dose range for 
Fresh Fruits and Vegetables (Class 2) as per the Food 
Safety and Standards Rules and Regulations. 


3.4.6 Optimum Storage Conditions 


The precooled grape boxes should be stored 
immediately at 0-1 °C. Grapes should always be 
stored at optimum relative humidity in addition to 
the optimum storage temperature especially where 
PE lining of boxes is not done. A relative humidity of 
90-95 percent is recommended for grapes. The boxes 
should be properly stacked by pelletization (Fig. 6). 
Enough air movement should be provided to remove 
respiratory heat and maintain uniform temperatures 
during cold storage. Temperature more than 0-1 *C and 
or humidity less than 90 percent leads to more moisture 
loss from berries. Care should also to be taken that the 
storage temperature should not go much below zero 
degree centigrade that may freeze the grapes and cause 
freezing injury. 


ar 


FIG. 5 FORCED ÅIR PRE-COOLING OF GRAPES 


IS 9303 : 2021 


Vg 


í 


LE Ea 


= 
= 
— 
~ 
— 
= 
— 
= 
ery: 

= 
we 


FIG. 6 PALLETIZATION OF GRAPE BOXES 


3.4.7 Temperature Management 


Maintenance of optimum temperature during different 
stages of handling grapes such as packing, precooling, 
transportation and storage helps in maintaining the 
quality of fresh grapes. Care should be taken to maintain 
the constant temperature continuously. The cool chain 
has to be maintained throughout, right from harvest till 
the produce reaches the destination. While removing 
the grapes from cool stores for marketing, the gradual 
rise of temperature from | °C to 25 °C is essential to 
prevent condensation of moisture on the berries which 
enhances rotting. 


3.4.8 Storage Life 


Grapes can be stored for less than a week at ambient 
temperature even when using grape guard. At optimum 
low temperature, grapes can be stored for about 
2 weeks without grape guard and can be stored for 
about 8-12 weeks when grape guard is used depending 
on the variety. 


3.5 Better Post Harvest Operations for Prevention 
of Desiccation 


Annex A provides guidelines on good practices 
for better post harvest operations for prevention of 
desiccation. 


IS 9303 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 3.5 ) 


GUIDELINES ON GOOD PRACTICES FOR BETTER POST HARVEST OPERATIONS FOR 
PREVENTION OF DESICCATION 


Optimum maturity — Avoid immature bunches 
Harvesting må handling — Use gloves to avoid loss of bloom 
Transport ne house — Avoid sun exposure/ use refrigerated vans 
ee — Maintain low temp. and high humidity 


hd 


Trimming, grading and weighing — Use gloves to avoid loss of bloom 


på 


Packing — Use PE lining 
Precooling — Use humidified forced air cooling 
Storage — Low temperature and high humidity (90-95 percent) 


IS 9303 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fruits, Vegetables, and Allied Products Sectional Committee, FAD 10 


Organization 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


All India Food Processors Association, New Delhi 


Association of Food Scientists and Technologists 
India, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


College of Agricultural Engineering Post-Harvest 
Technology, Gangtok 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry, 
New Delhi 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Dabur Research and Development Centre, Ghaziabad 
Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, 
Lucknow 


ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR-Central Plantation Crops Research Institute, 
Kasaragod 


ITC Limited, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology, 
Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Jain Irrigation Systems Limited, Jalgaon 


Mother Dairy Fruit and Vegetable Private Limited, 
Noida 


National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Sonipat 


Representative(s) 
Dr M. R. DINESH (Chairman) 


Dr R. K. BANSAL 
Ms MAMTA ARORA (Alternate) 


DR REVATHY BASKARAN 
DRK. V. HARISH PRASHANTH (Alternate) 


Dr P. VIJAYANAND 
Dr A. S. CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


Dr SUJATA JENA 
Dr SAID PRASHANT PANDHARINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PRIYANKA SHARMA 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH C. PANDEY 
MR SumIT NARA (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. CHOUHAN 
DR A. JAGANNATH(Alternate) 


SHRI PARMOD SIWACH 


Dr C. R. MEHTA 
DRM. K. TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


Dr R. B. TIWARI 
Dr D. V. SUDHAKAR Rao (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA GARG 


DR RAMESH KUMAR 
DR SUNIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANITHA KARUN 
Dr M. R. MANIKANTAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN B. 
SHRI PRAKASH SELVARAJ (Alternate) 


Dr V. R. SINIJA 


DR TANWEER ALAM 


SHRI SUNIL GUPTA 
SHRI VINAY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR KALPAM 
NANCY TALWAR (Alternate) 


Dr SUNIL PAREEK 


IS 9303 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link I, SHRI PITAM CHANDRA 
Greater Noida) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA ,SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI VARSHA GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (FAD), BIS 


Review of Indian Standards Related to Storage, Transport and Ripening of 
Fresh Fruits and Vegetables, FAD 10: Panel 2 


Organization Representative(s) 
ICAR-Central Potato Research Institute, Shimla Dr BRAJESH SINGH (Convenor) 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai Dr SATYENDRA GAUTAM 
ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticulture Research, Dr D. V. SUDHAKAR RAO 

Bengaluru 
ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, DR BHARATI KILLADI 
Lucknow 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority, SHRI Vinay KUMAR CHAUHAN 
New Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 10 (17052). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T, Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


