IS 14273 : 1999 vITT#Tm
-

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES - EXHAUST EMISSIONS - GASEOUS POLLUTANTS FROM VEHICLES FITTED WITH COMPRESSION IGNITION ENGINES - METHOD OF MEASUREMENT

ICS 43.060.20;

19.060

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Febniq

1999

Price Group

7

Automotive

Primemovers

Sectional

Committee,

TED 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive Primemovers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. The present day emphasis is on controlling of emissions from automobiles. This standard deals with the method of measurement of gaseous emissions from diesel engines. The method of measurement of black smoke emissions through the engine exhaust gases by means of standard smoke meter are dealt separately by IS 8 I 18: 1987 `Smoke emission levels for diesel vehicles which prescribes the determination of smoke density in terms of light absorption coefficient in Bosch and Hartridge Units. However, for the approval of diesel engines for vehicular applications, in-factory measurement of CO, HC and NOx a draft was considered necessary by the committee. This standard helps in gauging the suitability of the engine for meeting the compliance requirements specified in Government acts and rules. With the increasing emphasis on environment, the Government of India has already come out with legislation under Central Motor Vehicle Rules for the new vehicles fitted with compression ignition (diesel) engines to check and confirm that the gaseous pollutants in the exhaust of the vehicles are within the prescribed limits. While preparing the standard considerable assistance has been taken from the following: of diesel engines with regard to

ECE R-49

Uniform provisions concerning the approval the emission of gaseous pollutants.

Annexure-V of Ranganathan Committee Report

Details of standards for emission of gaseous pollutants from diesel engine vehicles and test procedures effective from 01.04.1992. (Part V of Dot No. MOSTKMVRfTAP-115-116)

IS 14273 : 1999 Indian

Standard

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES - EXHAUST EMISSIONS - GASEOUS POLLUTANTS FROM VEHICLES FITTED WITH COMPRESSION IGNITION ENGINES -METHOD OF -MEASUREMENT
1 SCOPE This standard covers the test procedures for the measurement and determination of gaseous pollutants from vehicles fitted with compression ignition (diesel) engine and also the requirements of the componeht to be used for the tests. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editiolis indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 14599:1999 Title Automotive vehicles Performance requirements of internal combustion engines - Method of test Automotive vehicles - Exhaust emissions - Gaseous pollutants from vehicles equipped with spark ignition engines Method of measurement 45 percent of maximum net power speed 1 000 rev/min, minimum or such lower speed as the manufacturer 3.4 Percent Load Means the fraction of the maximum at an engine speed. 3.5 Intermediate Speed to the maximum torque the range of 60 to 75 cases it means a speed speed. available torque may request. speed permitted by the idling control

Means the speed corresponding value if such speed is within percent of rated speed; in other equal to 60 percent of rated 3.6 Net Power

I 4600: 1999

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this definitions shall apply. 3.1 Compression Ignition standard the following

Means the power obtained on a test bench at the end of the crankshaft or its equivalent (if power measurement can be carried out only on an engine with the gear box mounted, the efficiency of the gearbox shall be taken into account) at the corresponding engine speed with the auxiliaries listed in Table 1 of IS 14599 and determined under reference atmospheric conditions specified in it. 3.7 Unladen Mass

Engine

Means an internal combustion engine which operates on compression ignition principle (Diesel Engines). 3.2 Maximum Rated Speed

Means the mass of the vehicle in running order without crew, passengers or load, but with the fuel tank 90 percent full and the usual set of tools and spare wheel on board where applicable. 3.8 Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) Means the technically permissible maximum declared by the vehicle manufacturer. 3.9 Gaseous Pollutants weight

Means the maximum speed permitted by governor at full load, unless otherwise declared by the manufacturer. 3.3 Minimum Rated Speed three engine 1

Means either the highest of the following speeds.

Means carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons (assuming a ratio of CH 1.85) and oxides of nitrogen (expressed in nitrogen dioxide NO, equivalent).

IS 14273 : 1999 3.10 Cold Start Device Means a device which enriches the air-fuel mixture of the engine temporarily and thus to assist engine start-up. 3.11 Starting Aid exhaust probe is located, and presenting an exhaust back pressure within +650 Pa of the upper limit at the maximum rated power, as established by the engine manufacturer's sale and service literature for vehicle application. 4.2.1.5 An engine air inlet system presenting an air inlet restriction within +300 Pa of the upper limit for the engine operating condition which results in maximum air flow, as established by the engine manufacturer for an air cleaner, for the engine being tested. When an engine is tested for exhaust emissions, the complete engine shall be tested with all standard accessories which might reasonably be expected to influence emissions to the atmosphere installed and functioning as listed in IS 14599. 4.2.2 Exhaust Gas Sampling System system shall be of the true mass

Means a device which assists the engine start-up without enrichment of the fuel mixture, for example, glow plug, change of injection timing, etc. 3.12 Vehicle Model Means a category of power driven vehicle which do not differ in such essential respects of the vehicle characteristics which affect the vehicular emission and as listed in Annex B of IS 14599. 4 DESCRIPTION OF THE TEST Principle

4.1 Measurement

4.2.2.1 The exhaust gas sampling designed to enable the measurement emissions of the exhaust.

The test shall be carried out with the engine mounted on a test bench and connected to a dynamometer. The gaseous emissions from the exhaust of the engine include hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen. During a prescribed sequence of warmed up engine operating conditions the amounts of the above gases in the exhaust shall be examined continuously. The prescribed sequence of operations consist of a number of speed and power modes which span the typical operating range of diesel engines. During each mode the concentration of each pollutant, exhaust flow and power output shall be determined and the measured values weighted and used to calculate the grams of each pollutant emitted per kilowatt hour, as outlined in this standard. 4.2 Test Equipment 4.2.1 Dynamometer and Engine Equipment

4.2.2.2 The probe shall extract a true sample of the exhaust gases. 4.2.2.3 The system shall be free of gas leaks. The design and materials shall be such that the system does not influence the pollutant concentration in the exhaust gas. 4.2.2.4 The various valves used to direct the exhaust gases shall be of a quick-adjustment, quick-acting type. 4.2.3 Analytical Equipment with the

4.2.3.1 Pollutant gases shall be analysed following instruments: Carbon monoxide (CO,) analysis

(CO) and carbon dioxide

The following equipment shall be used for emission tests 01 engines on engine dynamometers. 4.2.1.1 An engine dynamometer with adequate characteristics to perform the test cycle specified in 4.3.1. 4.2.1.2 The accuracy of measuring instruments for speed, torque, fuel consumption, air consumption, temperature of coolant and lubricant, exhaust gas pressure and section flow resistance, air inlet temperature, atmospheric pressure, fuel temperature and humidity shall satisfy the method of measuring the power of the internal combustion engines of road vehicles specified in IS 14599. 4.2.1.3 An engine cooling system with sufftcient capacity to maintain the engine at normal operating temperatures for the duration of the prescribed engine tests. 4.2.1.4 A non-insulated and uncooled exhaust system extending at least 0.5 m past the point where the 2

The carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide analysers shall be of the non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) absorption type.

b) Hydrocurbon

(HC) analysis

The hydrocarbon analyser shall be of the flame ionization type with the whole flame ionization detector (FID) system maintained at a temperature between 423 K and 473 K. It shall be calibrated with propane gas of equivalent to carbon atoms (C,).

cl Nitrogen oxide (NOx} analysis.
The nitrogen oxide analyser shall be of the Chemiluminescent (CLA) type with an NOxNO converter or heated Chemiluminescent (HCLA).

4 Accuracy
The analysers shall have a measuring range compatible with the accuracy required to measure the concentrations of the exhaust gas sample pollutants:

IS 14273 : 1999 Measurement errors percent disregarding calibration gases. shall not exceed +-3 the true value of the 4.3 Description of the Test

43.1 Test Cycle The following 13-mode cycle shall be followed dynamometer operation on the test engine: Mode No. Engine Speed Percent 10

For concentrations of less than 100 ppm the measurement error shall not exceed ?3 ppm. The ambient air sample shall be measured on the same analyser and range as the corresponding diluted exhaust sample. e) Annex A describes the analytical systems recommended. Other systems of analysers which have proved to give equivalent results may be used. f) Annex B outlines the method of measurement of efficiency of the NOx converter. 4.2.4 Gases

in

Load

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 a 9 10 11 12 13

Idle Intermediate do do do do Idle Rated do do do do Idle

25 50 75 100 100 75 50 25 10 -

4.2.4.1 The following pure gases shall be available when necessary, for calibration and operation: Purified nitrogen (purity I 1 ppm C, < 1 ppm CO, 5 400 ppm CO,, 5 0.5 ppm NO); air (purity I 3 ppm C, I 1 ppm CO, I 400 ppm CO,, I 0.5 ppm NO);

Purified

synthetic

Oxygen content between 18 and 21 percent volume; Purified oxygen (purity > 99.5 percent volume 02); Purified hydrogen (and mixture containing hydrogen) (purity c lppm C, < 400 ppm CO,). and span gases chemical compositions 4.3.2

Measurement

of Exhaust

Gas Flow

4.2.4.2

Calibration

For calculation of the emission it is necessary to know the exhaust flow, as given in 4.3.8 below. For determination of exhaust flow either of the following methods may be used. 4.3.2.1 Direct measurement of the exhaust flow by flow nozzle or equivalent metering system.

Gases having the following shall be available: C,H, and purified CO and purified CO, and purified

synthetic nitrogen; nitrogen.

air (see 4.2.4.1); and 4.3.2.2 Measurement of the air flow and the fuel flow by suitable metering systems and calculation of the exhaust flow by the following equations:

NO and purified nitrogen (the amount of NO, contained in this calibration gas must not exceed 5 percent of the NO content). 4.2.4.3 The true concentration of a calibration gas shall be within +2 percent of the stated figure. 4.2.4.4 The concentrations specified in 4.3.3 below may also be obtained by means of a gas divider, diluting with purified nitrogen or with purified synthetic air. The accuracy of the mixing device shall be such that the concentrations of the diluted calibration gases may be determined within +2 percent. 3 where

GEXH
or

or
"`EXH =

`A,,

+

0.77 G,,,

G EXH
YXtr

-

exhaust `gas mass flow rate on wet basis in kg/h, exhaust gas volume in m'lh, on dry basis

-

IS 14273 : 1999 V" EXH G AIR V AIR G FUEL
-

exhaust gas volume on wet basis m'/h, intake kg/h, air mass flow rate in

one month preceding the type approval emission test and once in six months for verifying conformity of production.

-

b) The verification

-

intake air volume flow rate in m'/h, and fuel mass flow rate in kg/h.

shall be carried out using standard gases. The same gas flow rates shall be used as when sampling exhaust. minimum for w~ming of two hours shall be allowed up the analysers.

' -

c>A

4.3.2.3 The accuracy of exhaust flow determination shall be +2.5 percent or better. 4.3.2.4 The concentration of carbon monoxide and nitric oxide are measured in the dry exhaust. For this reason the CO and NOx emissions shall be calculated using the dry exhaust gas volume VEXH.If the exhaust mass flow rate (G,,,) is used in the calculation the CO and NOx concentrations shall be related to the wet exhaust. Calculation of the HC emission shall include G,,, and V,,, according to the measuring method used. 4.3.3 Operuting and Calibrating Anulysers and Sumpling System Procedure for

d) The NDIR analyser

e>

shall be tuned, where appropriate, and the flame combustion of the FID analyser optimised. . Using purified dry air (or nitrogen), the CO and NOx analysers shall be set at zero; dry air shall be purified for the HC analyser. Using appropriate calibrating gases mentioned in 3.2.4 above, the analysers shall be reset.

f) The zero setting shall be rechecked and the
procedure outlined in (d) and (e) above shall be repeated, if necessary.

8) The calibration
The operating procedure for analysers shall follow the start-up and operating instructions of the instrument manufacturer. The following minimum requirements shall be included. 4.3.3.1 Estublishment of calibration curve

calibration curve shall be a> The analyser established by at least five calibration points, spaced as uniformly as possible. The nominal concentration of the calibration gas of the highest concentration shall be at least equal to 90 percent of the full scale. b) The calibration curve is calculated square method. If the degree of the resulting from the curve is greater number of calibration points shall equal to this polynomial degree by the least polynomial than 3, the be at least plus 2.

curves of the analysers shall be verified by checking at least at five calibration points, spaced as uniformly as possible. The nominal concentration of the calibration gas of the highest concentration shall be at least equal to 90 percent of the full scale. It shall meet the requirement of(c) above.

h) If it does not meet, the system shall be checked,
fault, if any, corrected and a new calibration curve shall be obtained. 4.3.3.3 Pretest checks

c) The ca!ibration curve shall not differ by more than k2 percent from the nominal value of calibration gas of each calibration point. d) The different characteristic parameters of the analyser, particularly the scale, the sensitivity, the zero point and the date of carrying out the calibration shall be indicated on the calibration curve. e> It can be shown to the satisfaction of the testing authority, that alternative technology, for example, computer, electronically controlled range switch, etc, can give equivalent accuracy, then these alternatives may be used. 4.3.3.2 Verifcution of calibmtion

a) A minimum of two hours shall be allowed for warming up the infra red NDIR analyser, but it is preferable that power be left on continuously in the analysers. The chopper motors may be turned off when not in use. b) Each normally used operating range shall be checked prior to each analysis. c? Using purified dry air ( or nitrogen ), the CO and NOx analysers shall be set at zero; dry air shall be purified for the HC analyser. of the d) Span gas having a concentration constituent that gives a 75-95 percent fullscale deflection shall be introduced and the gain set to match the calibration curve. The same flow rate shall be used for calibration, span and exhaust sampling to avoid correction for sample cell pressure. e) The nominal value of the span calibration gas used shall remain within rt2 percent of the calibration curve.
4

a) The calibration procedure shall be carried out as often as necessary and in any case within

IS 14273 : 1999 If it does not, but it remains within 25 percent of the calibration curve, the system parameters such as gain of the amplifier, turning of NDIR anaiysers, optimization of FID analysers, etc, may be adjusted to bring within *2 percent. If the system does not of (e) and (f) above, checked, fault, if any, calibration curve shall meet the requirement the system shall be corrected and a new be obtained. shall be held to within +_50 rpm and the specified torque shall be held to within 1-2 percent of the maximum torque at the test speed. The fuel temperature at the injection pump inlet shall be 311 &5 K. The governor and fuel system shall be adjusted as established by the manufacturer's sales and service literature. The following steps shall be taken for each test. 4.3.7.1 Instrumentation installed as required. 4.3.7.2 The cooling and sample probes shall be

Zero shall be checked and the procedures outlined in (c) and (d) above shall be repeated, if required. 4.3.4 System L/ok Test

system

shall be started.

4.3.7.3 The engine shall be started and warmed up until all temperatures and pressures have reached equilibrium. 4.3.7.4 The torque curve at full load shall be determined by experimentation to calculate the torque values for the specified test modes. 4.3.7.5 The emission and spanned. analysers shall be set at zero

A system leakage test shall be performed. The probe shall be disconnected from the exhaust system and the end plugged. The anaiyser pump shall be switched on. After an initial stabilization period all flow meters and pressure gauges shall read zero. If not, the sampling line(s) shall be checked and the fault corrected. 4.3.5 Fuel be the reference fuel specified in

The fuel shall IS 14599. 4.3.6

Attnosplwric

Factor

4.3.6.1 This factor is obtained by applying the formula: Naturally engines: aspirated and Mechanically supercharged 07 F = (99/PS) x (T/298)

4.3.7.6 The test sequence as given in 4.3.1 above shall be started. The engine shall be operated for six minutes in each mode, completing engine speed and load changes in the first minute. The responses of the analysers shall be recorded on a strip chart recorder for the full six minutes with exhaust gas flowing through the analysers at least during the last three minutes, the engine speed and load, intake air temperature and vacuum exhaust back pressure, fuel flow and air or exhaust flow shall be recorded during the last five minutes of each mode, with the speed and load requirements being met during the last minute of each mode. 4.3.7.7 Any additional data required shall be read and recorded. for calculation

Turbo charged engines without charge air cooling or charge cooling by air/air cooler:
11.7

F

=

(99/P,)

x

(T/298; 2 air cooling by

Turbo charged engines engine coolant:
II7 F =

with charge

4.3.7.8 The zero and span settings of the emission analysers shall be checked and reset, as required, at least at the end of the test. The test shall be considered satisfactory if the adjustment necessary after the test does not exceed the accuracy of the analysers specified in 4.2.3. 4.3.8 Chart Reachg

0.7

(99/P>)

x

(T/298)

where P5 the total dry atmospheric pressure in kPa, that is, the total barometric pressure minus water vapour pressure; and the absolute temperature (K) of the laboratory. in kelvin

During the last 60 seconds of each mode the average chart reading for HC, CO and NOx shall be determined. The concentration of HC, CO and NOx during each mode shall be determined from the average chart readings and the corresponding calibration data. However, a different type of recording can be used if it ensures an equivalent data acquisition. 4.4 Calculations

T

-

4.3.6.2 For a test to be recognized as valid, parameter F shall be between 0.98 and 1.12. 4.3.7 Test Run

the

4.4.1 The final reported test results shall be derived through the following steps. 4.4.1.1 The exhaust gas mass flow rate G,_xn or V',,, and V"rxn shall be determined as given in 4.2 above for each mode.
5

During each mode of the test cycle, the specified speed

IS 14273 : 1999 the measured carbon 4.4.1.2 When applying G YY' monoxide and nitric 0x1 e concentration shall be converted to a wet basis according to 4.5. 4.4.1.3 The NOx concentration according to 4.6. shall be corrected Mode No. 5 6 7 4.4.1.4 The pollutant mass flow for each mode shall he calculated as follows: NOx"M\ = CO,,,:nS = HC,l%., = 0.001587 0.000966 x (NOx& x (COc,,J x (G,,,) x (Gaxn) 8 9 10 11 12 13 x (V',,,) 4.5 Conversion of CO and NOx Concentration to a wet basis. The CO and NOx exhaust gas concentration as measured in this procedure are on a dry basis. To convert the measured values to the concentrations present in the exhaust (wet basis), the following relationship may be employed: ppm (wet basis) = ppm (dry basis) x [ 1 - (1.85 x G FUXL ' GAIR)I where G FUEL nel power output uncorrected, kW; G AIR
-

WF 0.08 0.25 0.2513 0.10 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.2513

O.Of)o478 x (HC,,,,,) x (G,,,) OR

NOx,II&* = CO\,Y.,S, = HCIIIP\S =

0.002 05 x (NOx_)

0.001 25 x (COC,,"nc> x (V',,,) 0.000 618 x (HC,,,,,) x (V"ax,,)

4.4.2 The emissions shall be calculated in the following way: NOx co, HC where P CO HC NOx = = =

(NOX,,,~~~ x WV / 0 x WF)

(CO,,,:,bb x WV / P x WV WC,;,,, x WV / 0' x WV

the fuel flow, kg/s; and the air flow, kg/s.

-

carbon monoxide emission, g/kWh; hydrocarbon emission, g/kWh; emission of oxides of nitrogen, g/kWh; concentration (ppm by volume), pollutant mass flow, g/h; and weighing factor. ppm:

4.6 Correction Factor for Nitric Oxide for Humidity The values of the nitric oxides shall be multiplied the following humidity correction factor: l/[l+ A x (7 m - 75) + 1.8 x B x (T-302)] - 0.003 8. GAIR) by

cone mass WF The weighing are according

factors used in the above calculation to the following table: Mode No. 1 2 3 4 WF 0.2513 0.08 0.08 0.08

A = 0.044 x (GFVEL/GA,,)

B = 0.005 3 - 0.116 x (G,,,,/ where m T G FUEL

humidity of the inlet air in grams of water per kilogram of dry air, temperature and
`GA,R

of the air in Kelvin, air ratio (dry air basis).

-fuel

6

IS 14273 : 1999

ANNEX A [&use 4.2.3.1(e)]
ANALYSIS A-l SCOPE the analysis system SYSTEM

T "1 -

Temperature readout of sample entering oven compartment.

stream

A-l.1 This Annex describes mentioned in 4.2.3.1(e).

A-l.2 Two analytical systems are specified based on the use of FID analyser for the measurement of hydrocarbons, and NDIR analyser for the measurement ofC0 and the alternative choice of CLA and equivalent analysers for the measurement of NOx. A-2 SYSTEM 1 and sampling analyser for

Suitable valving for selecting sample, span gas or air gas flow to the system. The valve shall be in the oven compartment or heated to the temperature of the sampling line. Needle valves to regulate calibration zero gas. gas and

"23 "3-

F, -

A schematic diagram of the analytical system using the chemiluminescent measuring NOx is shown in Fig. 1. SP -

Filter to remove particulates. A 70 mm diameter glass fibre type filter disc is suitable. The filter shall be readily accessible and changed daily or more frequently, as needed. Heated sample pump.

Stainless steel sample probe, to obtain samples from the exhaust system. A closed end, multihold static probe extending at least 80 percent across the exhaust pipe is .recommended. The exhaust gas temperature at the probe shall be not less than 343 K.

PI -

c, "`I FID -

Pressure gauge to measure pressure in sample line. Pressure regulator valve to control pressure in sample line and flow detector. Heated flame ionization detector for hydrocarbons. Temperature of oven shall be kept between 423 K and 473 K. Flow flow. meter to measure sample by-pass

HSL - - Heated sampling line, temperature shall be kept between 423 K and 473 K, the line shall be made in stainless steel or PTFE. F, - - Heated pre-filter, if used; temperature be the same as HSL. shall

FL, -

A'RG:ERo
I

AIR FUEL

GI

FIG. 1 FLQW DIAGRAMOF EXHAUSTGAS ANALYSISSYSTEMFOR CO, NOx, HC (NOx ANALYSISBY CLA)
7

IS 14273 : 1999 R,, Rz SL Pressure regulators for air and fuel. made in stainless steel or PTFE.

Sample line. The line shall be made in PTFE or in stainless steel. It .may be heated or unheated. Bath to cool and condense water from The bath shall be exhaust sample. maintained at a temperature of 273 to 277 K by ice or refrigeration. Cooling coil and trap to condense and collect water vapour. A coiled 2.5 to 3 mm stainless steel line attached to 25 mm diameter, 150 mm length trap would be typical. Temperature readout of bath temperature. traps

F, T, "1

-

Heated pre-filter, if used; temperature shall be the same as the HSL. Temperature readout of sample entering oven compartment. stream

R

-

c

-

Suitable valving for selecting sample, span gas or air zero gas flow to the system. The valve shall be in the oven compartment or heated to the temperature of the sampling line. Needle valves to regulate calibration and zero gas. gas

"1, "7 F

-

r,

-

"s "6 "7 F, -

Toggle valves to drain condensate and bath. Three -way valve.

Filter to remove particulates. A 70 mm diameter glass fibre type filter disc is suitable. The filter shall be readily accessible and changed daily or more frequently, as needed. Heated sample pump. Pressure gauge to measure sample line. Pressure pressure detector. regulator in sample pressure in

Filter for removing particular contaminants from sample prior to analysis. A glass fibre type of at least 70 mm diameter is suitable. Sample pump.

PI G, "4

-

p, "8

,--

Pressure regulator to control sample flow. Three-way to ball valve or solenoid valves FID -

valve to control line and flow to

",,> ",,I, "I,, ",I 1' 13'"I, co NOx FL,, FL,, FL, A-3 SYSTEM -

direct sample, zero gas or calibrating streams to the analysers. Needle valves to regulate analysers. NDIR analyser CLA analyser By-pass for carbon

gas FL, R,, R, -

Heated flame ionization detector for hydrocarbons. Temperature of oven shall be kept between 423 K and 473 K. Flowmeter flow. Pressure to measure regulators sample by-pass

flows to the monoxide. SL B

for air and fuel.

for nitric oxides.

Sample line. The line shall bc made in PTFE or in stainless steel. Bath to cool and condense water from exhaust sample. The bath shall be maintained at a temperature of 273 to 277 K by ice or refrigeration. Cooling coil and trap to condense and collect water vapour. A coiled 2.5 - 3 mm stainless steel line attached to 25 mm diameter, 150 mm length trap would he typical. Temperature readout of bath temperature. Toggle valves to drain condensation and bath. Three-way valve. trap

flowmeters.

2

c

-

A schematic diagram of the analytical and sampling system using the NDIR analyser for measuring NO is shown in Fig. 2. where SP Stainless steel sample probe, to obtain samples from the exhaust system. A closed end, multihole static probe extending at least 80 percent across the exhaust pipe is recommended; the temperature at the probe shall be at least 373 K. The probe shall be located in the exhaust line at a distance of 1 - 5 m from the exhaust manifold outlets flange or the outlet of the turbocharger. T "9 "6 "7 F3 -

Filter for removing particulate contaminates from sample prior to analysis. A glass fibre type of at least 70 mm diameter is suitable. Sample pump.

P2 HZ-Heated sampling line, temperature shall be kept between 423 K and 473 K, the line shall be 8 "8

-

Pressure regulator to control sample flow.

IS 14273 : 1999

AIR FUEL OVEN

EXHAUST

ttt i

SL

f &
v12 v5 v6

l-l-w

co

_1NOXt

4
FL3
to the

BACK-FL

CALl6RATlON AND SPAN GAS

FE. 2 Flow DIAGRAM OF EXHAUST GAS ANALYSIS SYSTEM FORCO, NOx, HC (NOx ANALYSISBY NDIR)

v,

L -

Ball or solenoid valve to direct sample, zero gas or calibrating gas streams to the analysers. Three-way valve to by-pass drier.

"12 G2
co
NOx

-

Needle valve analysers.

to regulate

flow to the

v,o, Y
D

Gauge to indicate analysers. NDIR analyser NDIR analyser By-pass

inlet pressure

-

Drier to remove moisture in the sample stream. If a drier is used before NOx analyser it shall have minimum effect on NOx concentration.

for carbon

monoxide.

for nitric oxides.

4, J%-

flowmeter.

9

IS 14273 : 1999

ANNEX B [Clause 4.2.3.1(f)]
MEASUREMENT B-l SCOPE OF EFFICIENCY mode which means that the gas mixture (consisting of NO, 0, and NJ now passes through the converter. Record the indicated concentration (a). B-l.6 The ozonator is now deactivated. The mixture of gases described in B-l.3 passes through the converter into the detector. Record the indicated concentration (b). B-l.7 With the ozonator deactivated, the flow of oxygen or synthetic air is also shut off. The NO, reading of the analyser shall then be no more than 5 percent above the value given in B-1.2. B-2 CALCULATION B-2.1 Calculation converter: of the efficiency of the NOx

B-l.1 This Annex describes the efficiency test of the NOx converter mentioned in 4.2.3.1(f). Using the test set up as shown at the end of this Annex and the procedure below, the efficiency of converters can be tested by means of an ozonator. B-l.2 Calibrate the CL.A in the most common operating range complying with the manufacturer's recommendations using zero and span gas (the NO content of which shall amount to about 80 percent of the operating range and the NO, concentration of the gas mixture to less than 5 percent of the NO concentration). The NOx analyser shall be in the NO mode so that the span gas does not pass through the converter. Record the indicated concentration. B-l.3 Via a T fitting, oxygen shall be added continuously to the gas flow until the concentration indicated is about 10 percent less than the indicated calibration concentration given in B-1.2. Record the indicated concentration (c). The ozonator is kept deactivated throughout the process. B-l.4 The ozonator is now activated to generate enough ozone to bring the NO concentration down to 20 percent (minimum 10 percent) of the calibration concentration given'in B-1.2. Record the indicated concentration (d). B-l.5 The NO analyser is then switched to the NOx

Efficiency

(percent)

=

I +(. "I-k' ,I _ ri x1()() 1 ,

B-2.2 The efficiency of the converter shall be tested prior to each calibration of the NOx analyser. The efficiency of the converter shall not be less than 95 percent.
NOTE If the analyser

operating range is above the highest

range that the NOx generator can operate to give a reduction from 80 to 20 percent, then the highest range the NOx generator operates on shall be used.

10

IS 14273 : 1999

ANNEX
COMMITTEE Automotive Primemovers

C
Committee, TED 2

COMPOSITION Sectional

DR M. L. MAUIUK Alok Villa, 17, Sector `A', Shastri Nagar, Jodhpur - 342003

Members
SHIU M. NIKMAL KUMAK SHRI S. K. RAIU (Alfernute) SHIU HIKA Lhl. SHI<IM. K. CHA1II)HhKI SHKI S. BHA~ACHAKYA (Al&m&e) SHRI S. H. RAO StIRI T. M. BAUKAMAN (Alternuie) SHKI V. M. MUNI)AI)A SHRI M. NAC~ASUNDARAM (Alternute)

Represen fing Ashok
Leyland

Ltd. Chennai

Association Automotive

of State Road Transport Research Association

Undertakings,

New Delhi

of India, Pune

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune

Bajaj Tempo

Ltd. Pune

Sm

B. K. DATTATIII: SHIU R. KKISHNAMUKTHY (Altermite)

Bharat

Earth Movers

Ltd,

Bangalore

SHKI S. R. TAIWI:

Central

lnstitute

of Road Tmnsport,

Pune

SHKI S. KUMAK (Alterntrte)
SHlll Ante/w GLWTA

Daewoo

Motors

Ltd, New Delhi of Quality Assurance (Vehicles), Ahmednagar

SHHI V L. N. RAO SHIU M. M. KANILYSWRMY (Alternclfe)
SIIKI SUSHII. KLJMAR S~IKIS. K. BHAIII.I (A/fcrntrte) SHKI V. K. SKIUHAK SHKI I. C. KHANNA (Alternute) SHKI V. MATHUR SHIU N. RAN(;ANATHAN(Alrernufe)

Directorate

General

Department

of Industrial

Policy

and Promotion,

New Delhi

Directorate

General

of Supplies

and Disposals,

New Delhi

Royal

Enfield

Motors

Ltd, Chennai

Stw

K. C. JAIN SHKI RAIIJ AWKWAI. (Alternute)

Escorts

Ltd, Faridabad

DR S. SATYA M~KTY
SHHI S. K. SEAM (Alremure) SHIU RAW AI)II~

Either

Goodearth

Ltd. Ballabhgarh

Hindustan HMT

Motors

Ltd, Dist. Hooghly

(W.B.)

SHKI OM PKAKASH SHIU A. P. BHA~TATHAKIIZ(Alternate)
SHKI J. SHAKMA SHlcI A. N. GANLA SHHI G. B. MUNAKAMIE SHIU S. P. SUI~HEIIAK (Alter-m&)

Ltd, Pinjore

Indian

Institute

of Petroleum, Ltd, Pune

Debra Dun

Kirloskar Mahindra

Cummins

& Mahindra

Ltd. Nasik

(Continued

on puge

12)

11

Members SHKI T. SAHAN(;AKAIAN SIWI SHIVA KUMAK(Alternute) SIIIU N. R

Representing

Maruti

Udyog

Ltd. Gurgaon

GUI~THA S~II<IK. L. S. SI:TTY (Altemate)

Motor Industries Co Ltd. Bangalore

SIII<IV. K. JAIN SHRI V. C. VI:RMA (Altrrnute) D~IWTOI~ (EN<iINI. DI:WI.WMCNT) JT Dllcl.(`ToK(Altetnute) SHKIW. N. KHATAVKAK SHI<fA. S. PATII. (Alternute) SHrcr S. M~II~AI.II)HAKAN SHWIS. JANAKI)HANAN (Alternute SHRI R. N. AGARWAI.(Akrnute SHRI V. LAKSHMINAKAYANAN SIII<IS. K. BASU (Alferwte) SIII~IP. N.' BLIKGUI. SHRI A. B. PHAI~NIS (Alternute) SHRI M. N. MWWKKISHNA Dl< C. L. DHAMElANI SHI:I K. S. JAIN (Alternute) SW A. R. GUI.ATI, I) II)

Ordnance

Factory

Board,

Calcutta

RDSO, Lucknow

&eaves

(I) Ltd. Pune

Simpson

& Co Ltd, Chennai

Tata

Engineering

and Locomotive

Co Ltd, Pune

The Premier

Automobiles

Ltd, Mumbai

TVS Suzuki Vehicle

Ltd, Hosur and Development Establishment, Ahmednagar

Research

Director Engg)

General,

BIS (Ex-c$fTcio Member)

Dil-ector (Transport

Member - Secretury SHRI A. K. NAGPAL

Additional

Director

(Transport

Engg),

BIS

Method

of Test and Pollution

Evaluation

Subcommittee,

TED 2 : 2

SHI<IS. RAW
Members SHI~IR. P. SHAI~MA SHKI S. K. RA.IU(Alternute) SHKIS. B. RAO

Automotive

Research

Association

of India, Pune

Ashok

Leyland

Ltd, Chennai

Bajaj Auto Limited,

Pune

SI~KI T. M. BAI.ARAMAN(Alternute)
SHKI V. M. MUNIW.I)A

Bajaj Tempo

Ltd. Pune

%!<I N. NA(~ASIJNI)AKAM (Alfernute)
SHKIS. R. TAI'AIX: SIIRI P. C. BAKIATIA(Alternate) SW

GIRT, Pune

A. K. KHANNA
SIIKI S. S. UI'ASANI(Alternufe)

Controllerate

of Quality

Assurance

(Vehicles),

Pune

SHlcIN. MOHAN

Daewoo

Motors

Ltd. New Delhi (Cr~ntinued on puge
13)

12

IS 14273 : 1999

Representing
SHKI

V. K. SIUIIHAR SHIU P. MAI)HAVAN(Alternate)

Directorate

General

of Supplies and Disposals,

New Delhi

SHKI,K. C. JAIN SHIU W. N. KHATAVKAR SHKI T. P. MANI(Altemute) SHKI R. P. AIXI~ SHKI J. S. MI~HTA(Alternute) SHKI K. K. GAN~IHI SHKI MUKESH SAXENA (Alternnte) SHKI R. K. MAI.HOTKA SHKI G. K. ACHAKYA (Alternute) SHRI R. VENKATESHGOVIND SHRI B. K. BARE (Altemute) SHI<IS. G. SAI<I)1SAI DK P. A. L. NAKAYANAN(Alternate) SHIU S. K. MUKHEREE SHKI G. B. MUNAKAMI(Alternote) SHIU T. SAKANUKAJAN SHKI SHIVA KUMAK (Alternate)

Escorts Ltd. Faridabad Greaves (I) Ltd. Pune

Hindustan Motors Ltd. Dist. Hooghly (W.B.)

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Debra Dun

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. R&D Centre, Faridabad

Kinetic Engg Ltd. Pune

Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd. Pune

Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. Nasik

Maruti Udyog Limited, Gurgaon

13

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. TED 2 (5063).

Amendments

Issued

Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters

: Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone Shah Zafar Marg 323 7617 323 3841 337 8499 337 8561 337 8626, 3319120 60 3843 60 2025 235 0216, 235 0442 235 1519, 235 2315 832 9295, 832 7858 832 7891, 832 7892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 3315, 323 9402 Regional Central Offices : :

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

Eastern

:

l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700054 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Northern

: SC0

Southern

: C.1.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road,

CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Mankala)la, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri MUMBAI 400093

(East) {

Branches

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printogaph, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847

