NAT HA IS 15495 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


REIS fore HEUT caret — 
ta dear 


( TET JTÜ ) 


Printing Ink for Food Packaging — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 55.040; 67.230; 87.080 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 4 


Inks, Stationery and Allied Products Sectional Committee, CHD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Inks, Stationery and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 2004. This standard was formulated with a view to assist the 
manufacturers of printing inks to produce inks, which are intended for use on food packages and which do 
not contain any hazardous chemicals that may get transferred to the food packed, and help food packers and 
manufacturers of packages in selecting proper quality printing ink. General guidelines for exclusion of certain 
substances from printing ink formulations intended for use on food packages have also been prescribed in this 
standard. 


The committee responsible for development of this standard has reviewed the standard in view of overall impact 
of constituent chemicals of the ink formulation considering their reported toxicological profile, hazardous to 
environment and health of human being and possible contamination of food product while food products are 
being packed in the printing packages. The committee, therefore, decided to revise this standard by incorporating 
prohibition of toluene under ‘solvents’ category, phthalates (di-n-butylphthalate, di-isononyl phthalate) under 
‘plasticizers’ category and titanium acetylacetonate under ‘various compounds’ category in Annex-A of exclusion 
list on the basis of their hazards to health and environment. Provision also incorporated in the revised version to 
restrict limit of the sum of concentration levels of lead, cadmium, mercury and chromium (VI) to 100 ppm for 
printing inks. Also, technical advancements that have taken place since the publication of this standard have been 
considered in this revision. 


There is no ISO standard on the subject. 


The composition of the committee member significantly contributed for formulation of the standard is given 
in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15495 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


PRINTING INK FOR FOOD PACKAGING — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes guidelines for printing inks for 
use on food packages. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following Indian standard contains provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of the 
standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
4395 : 1987 Glossary of terms relating 
to inks and allied industries 
(first revision) 
6931 : 1972 Methods of test for printing 
inks 
9873 (Part3):2017/ Safety of toys: Part 3 
ISO 8124-3: 2010 Migration of certain 


elements (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 4395 shall apply. 


4 PRINTING INKS 
PACKAGES 


FOR USE ON FOOD 


4.1 The packaging of food, as far as printing ink is 
concerned, can be divided into the following four 
categories. 


4.1.1 External Packaging 


Any packing additional to an immediate food wrapping. 
This relates to inks for printing external food wrappings, 
where there is a barrier in the form of another wrapper 
between the printed surface and the food. 


4.1.2 Immediate Food Wrappings 


Wrapping material in direct contact with food. 


4.1.3 Print in Direct Food Contact 


Printed wrapper or insert, where the printed side is in 
direct contact with food. 


4.1.4 Disposables 


This covers paper plates, drinking straws, table napkins 
and other disposables, which might be used to wrap or 
hold food. 


4.2 Printing Inks for External Packing 


In external packing, the printed matter has a barrier in 
the form of another additional wrapper layer between it 
and the food. The very low mass of the ink is generally 
used to print on such packing and the remoteness of 
ink itself from the food make any additional safeguards 
unnecessary. The components in printing ink need to 
comply with exclusion list given in Annex A. 


4.3 Printing Inks for Immediate Food Wrappings 


4.3.1 In case the printing ink film is deliberately applied 
to the surface intended to be in contact with food, there 
is likely possible of migration of some ink ingredients 
into the food and therefore, the printing ink for such 
a purpose shall have to be formulated with materials 
which are permissible as food additives and comply 
with the appropriate regulations of the Government of 
India. 


4.3.2 The over coating of printed matter with food 
grade varnish/coating to provide a functional barrier 
between the printed side and the food may not, under all 
conditions, prevent migration of some ink ingredients 
from printed surface into the food and therefore, may 
not prevent contamination. It is, therefore, necessary 
that inks for immediate food wrappings must be applied 
to the outside of the wrapper. The wrapper itself shall 
form a functional barrier between the printed surface 
and the food. 


4.3.3 The ink film applied on the wrapper is generally 
extremely thin and consequently, the total quantity of 
ink involved is very small. However, in order to impose 
the safeguard, inks for immediate food wrappings shall 
be formulated with materials, which are proven non- 
toxic nor hazardous to health and shall also not contain 
material listed in Annex A. 


IS 15495 : 2020 


4.3.4 The immediate food wrappers shall be printed 
in such a manner that set-off in the printing process is 
avoided. This is necessary to ensure that the surface of 
the wrapper in contact with food is free from printing 
ink. 


4.3.5 The materials and articles in contact with food, that 
is, food packages or wrappers shall be so manufactured 
that under normal or foreseeable condition of use, 
they shall not transfer their constituents to the food in 
quantities which may endanger human health, cause 
a deterioration in the organoleptic characteristics or 
unacceptable change in the nature, substance and/or 
quality of food. 


4.4 Printing Inks for Prints in Direct Food Contact 


As prescribed in 4.3.1 to 4.3.4 and as far as possible, 
the printed surface should not be in immediate contact 
with food. However, if it is necessary for the printed 
surface to be in direct contact with food, the guidelines 
prescribed in 4.3.5 shall apply and the printing inks 
shall have to be formulated with materials, which are 
acceptable as food additives under the appropriate 
regulations ofthe Government of India. 


4.4.1 In case of printed films or coupon inserts for 
dry granular foods, printed inks shall be formulated 
in such a way that there is no risk of migration of 
substances from printing inks onto the food. In general, 
requirements of 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 apply there. 


4.5 Printing Inks for Disposables 


Printing inks for disposables shall be formulated with 
ingredients necessarily excluding the substances listed 
in Annex A or those, which are otherwise known to 
be toxic and hazardous to health. As far as possible 
and practicable, the printing ink manufacturers shall 
ensure that inks are formulated in such a way as to 
avoid migration of dyes or other colouring agents, 
liable to bleed under the expected conditions of use, 
onto the food. Whenever there are issues related to 
biodegradability of the packaging material, printing ink 
manufacturers need to consider biodegradability of ink 
raw materials. 


5 GENERAL CODE OF PRACTICES 


5.1 Inks for printing external food wrappers, where 
there is a functional barrier in the form of another 
wrapper between the printed wrapper and the food, 
may be formulated without restriction, provided the 
ingredients are considered to be non-toxic and non- 
injurious to health, as referred in the general exclusion 
list is given in Annex A, which are not present in the 
printing ink composition. 


5.2 As far as possible and practicable, the printed 
surface should not come in contact with food and 


printing inks for immediate food wrappers shall be 
applied on outside of the wrapper, which, by itself, 
shall form a barrier between the ink and the food. 


5.3 Immediate food wrappers shall be of sufficiently 
low permeability to prevent migration and shall be 
printed in such a manner that set-off in the printing 
process is avoided. 


5.4 Where the nature of the food packaging is such 
that migration or bleeding form dyes or other soluble 
colouring agents is likely to occur, printing inks shall 
not be formulated with such colouring agents. 


5.5 If, for some specific requirements, it is necessary 
for the printed surface to be in contact with food, 
the printing inks shall be formulated with materials 
acceptable as food additives under the appropriate 
regulations of the Government of India, be 
manufactured in an appropriate manner to prevent 
contamination and, where printed, produce a non- 
toxic printed surface that complies with appropriate 
Regulations of the Government of India. 


5.6 The printing ink manufacturers are expected to take 
all necessary precautions to meet the guidelines of this 
standard. However, as they have no overall control over 
the printing process or the actual wrapping/packing, 
the final responsibility for ensuring that there is no 
deterioration in the organoleptic characteristics of the 
food rests with the food packager. 


5.7 The printing ink manufacturers shall inform the 
converters and point buyers on suitability of ink type 
towards packages of food and the norms followed in 
formulation whenever there is such need. 


5.8 The general exclusion list may be reviewed and 
amended in the light of new data on safety, health, 
environment and relevant regulation. 


5.9 The sum of concentration levels of lead, cadmium, 
mercury and chromium (VI) shall not exceed 100 ppm 
for printing inks. 


6 RESPONSIBILITY 


6.1 Responsibility of Print Buyer/Printer — 
Packaging Design, Selection etc. 


Packaging should be designed with the restrictions 
of printing in mind. For example, printing should not 
occur in areas, which, by folding, come into contact 
with food. It is important that the substrate itself should 
not cause taint and odour ofthe packaged product. Taint 
and odour tests should be conducted to ensure that a 
particular substrate is suitable for use. The relationship 
between press speed and curing/drying power needs to 
be fully understood to ensure adequate curing/drying 
takes place. 


6.2 Responsibility of Ink Manufacturers 


Only raw materials other that those known to be toxic, 
carcinogenic, sensitizing or mutagenic are used in the 
formulation of its inks and coatings, to be governed 
by exclusion list given in Annex A. Inks companies 
should conduct regular testing on ink components, 
retained solvents from flexo/gravure packages, and 
distillates from conventional offset products, which 
have the possibility to migrate from the packaging into 
food. This capability brings control on risk assessments 
and ensures that printed packages are suitable for 
food packaging. Traces of impurities (including 
listed in Annex A) coming from the raw materials in 
printing inks are unavoidable as these raw materials 
are produced under commercial industrial conditions. 
The ink manufacturer should make every effort with 
the supply chain to ensure that impurities are kept at 


IS 15495 : 2020 


minimum level. MSDS should also be declared by the 
Ink Manufacturers. 


6.3 Responsibility of the Printer 


The responsibility of the printer and converter is to 
ensure that food packages are manufactured and stored 
in such a manner by which all preventable transfer of 
material from the ink or coating to the food contents 
is avoided, even if such transfer is unobjectionable 
on the grounds of health, odour and flavour. Printed 
matter, following approval by appropriate quality 
control tests, should be stored appropriately so that 
no deterioration in its performance against these tests 
occurs. The storage environment should be free from 
potential volatile contaminants, which could have 
adversely affect the organoleptic characteristics of the 
food. 


IS 15495 : 2020 


ANNEXA 
( Clauses 4.2, 4.3.3, 4.5, 5.1 and 6.2 ) 


GUIDE TO MATERIAL AND SUBSTANCES FOR EXCLUSION 
FROM PRINTING INK FORMULATIONS 


A-1 Pigments and compounds based on antimony (see A-3.7 Monochlorobenzene 
Note 1), arsenic, cadmium, chromium (VI), lead (see 


Note 2), mercury and selenium. A-3.8 2-nitropropane 


NOTES: A-3.9 Toluene 
1 With the exception of non-biodegradable antimony titanate 
present in titanium dioxide pigments. A-3.10 Volatile Chlorinated Hydrocarbons (see Note 


2 Except where necessary in certain screen inks to meet below) 
specified resistance requirements. 


A-3.11 Volatile Fluorochlorinated Hydrocarbons 
A-2 DYE COLOURANTS NOTE — With the exception of their use as denaturants for 


ethanol to meet legal requirements. 


A-2.1 Auramine (Basic Yellow 2 — CI 41000) 


A-4 PLATICIZERS 
A-2.2 Chrysoidine (Basic Orange 2 — CI 11270) 


A-2.3 Cresylene Brown (Basic Brown 4— 121010) +1 Chlorinated Naphthalenes 


A-2.4 Fuchsine (Basic Violet 14 — CI 42510) da Chlorinated Paraftins 


NOTE — formerly listed as ‘magenta’. A-4.3 Di-n-butylphthalate (DBP) 
A-2.5 Induline (Solvent Blue 7 — CI 50400) A-4.4 Di-isononyl Phthalate (DINP) 


Azo dyes which can decompose in the body to 
bioavailable aromatic amines that are classified as 
category 1A or 1B carcinogens. A-4.6 Monocresyl Phosphate 


A-4.5 Monocresyl Diphenyl Phosphate 


NOTE — In case of pigment and dye based on heavy metal, 
the permissible limit for heavy metal shall be as follows: 


A-4.7 Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
A-4.8 Polychlorinated Terphenyls 


Metal Requirement (ppm) 
As 25, Max A-4.9 Tricresyl Phosphate 
Ba 1000, Max A-5 VARIOUS COMPOUNDS 
Cd 75, Max 
Cr (VD 60, Max A-5.1 Asbestos 
Hg 60, Max A-5.2 Brominated Flame Retardants 
Mi 
Ph Me A-5.3 Diaminostibene and Derivatives 
Sb 60, Max 


For testing above heavy metals in printed substrate,  A-5-4 2,4 Dimethyl 6 tertiary Butyl Phenol 
IS 9873 (Part 3) may be referred for migration in A-5.5 Dioxins 
dilute HCl and water followed by analysis through 
ICP-OES. A-5.6 Hexachlorocyclohexane 


A-3 SOLVENTS A-5.7 Nitrosamines 


ABA Benzene A-5.8 Pentachlorophenol and its Salts 


A-3.2 Dichlorobenzene A-5.9 Polychlorinated Dibenzofuranes 


A-5.10 4,4 Tetramethyldiamino Benzophenone 


A-3.3 2-ethoxy Ethanol (Michlers Ketone) 


A-3.4 2-ethoxy Ethyl Acetate Methanol (see Note 
below) 


A-3.5 2-methoxy Ethanol 


A-5.11 Toluene Di-isocyanate 
A-5.12 Titanium Acetylacetonate 


A-3.6 2-methoxy Ethyl Acetate A-5.13 Vinyl Chloride Monomer 


IS 15495 : 2020 


ANNEXB 
( Foreword ) 


EXPERTS WHO MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF THIS STANDARD 


Organization 


Govt Printing, Govt of West Bengal 
Government of Indian Stationery Office, Kolkata 


All India Federation of Master Printers, New Delhi 


All India Plastic Manufacturer Association, Mumbai 
Asian Ink Company, New Delhi 


Bank Note Press, Dewas 
Consumer’s Forum 


Currency Note Press, Nasik 

DIC India Limited, Kolkata 
Directorate of Printing, New Delhi 
Kores India Limited, Mumbai 


Kriskem Industries, Ghaziabad 
Dept. of Post, Ministry of Communication, New Delhi 


National Institute of Science Communication and 
Information research, New Delhi 


National Archives of India, New Delhi 
National Test House 


Office ofthe Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Western Printing Group, Survey of India, Delhi 
All India Printing Ink Mfgrs Association Ltd, Mumbai 


Sakata Inx (India) Ltd, New Delhi 
Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
SICPA India Ltd, New Delhi 


In personal capacity 


Kokuyo Camlin Limited , Mumbai 


Toyo Ink India Pvt. Ltd, Uttar Pradesh 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SUBIR KUMAR MANDAL, (Chairman) CHD 14 


SHRI BISWANATH HALDER 
SHRI BISHAMBER Duar (Alternate) 


MR HARJINDER SINGH 


Dr AsuTosH K. Gor 
SHRIR. K. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI Y M CHANDHOK/ 
SHRI M CHANDHOK (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MAHAPATRA 
SHRI JAGDISH KAUSHIK 


SHRI GANGA PRAKASH 
SHRI SUMIT SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI U. CHOWDHURI 
SHRI SAROJ PANDA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. JAIN 
Suri K. K Puri (Alternate) 


SHRI S. M. KHANNA 
Suri K. K. MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 


SMT RUPALI BANERJEE SINGH 
Director (Estates & MM) 


SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA/ 
Suri K. B. NAGPAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAM SWAROOP 
Dr SUTAPA CHAKRAVARTY (Alternate) 


SHRI BUDDH PRAKASH 


Dr JUGALKISHOR 
Ms Sunita Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI EQUERAR AHMAD 


SHRI RAVINDRA GANDHI 

Suri B. S. Kamranı (Alternate) 
SHRI REYNOLD D’SouzaA 

SHRI SUNIL K. CHHABRA (Alternate) 
Dr A.K. TYAGI 

Dr Vinay Traci (Alternate) 
SHRI ARUN VIG 

Suri A. B. SACHAN (Alternate) 
Dr R. N. GHosH 
SHRI MANIK J. SALUNKHE 

MRs SAYALI SARFARE (Alternate) 


MR K.S. MURTHY 


IS 15495 : 2020 


Organization 


The Hindu 
Huber group India Pvt Ltd 


Security Printing & Minting Corpn India Ltd, Delhi 
(SPMCIL) 


In personal capacity 


In personal capacity 


Whale Stationery Products Ltd, Delhi 
All India Print-Tech Professionals Forum, Kolkata 
Siegwerk Inks, Bhiwadi 


Indian Institute of Packaging 


Kumarappa Handmade Paper 


Flint Group 
Yansefu Inks & Coating Pvt Ltd 


Directorate General, BIS 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SRI BALA 


SHRI SUDHIR PANDE 
SHRI RAJEEV RANJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MAHAPATRA 
Dr D. K. Ratu (Alternate) 


SHRI PUNANDU SEN 


SHRI A. K. SINHA, EX-DIRECTOR (PRINTING), 
DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING 


SHRI MUKESH GUPTA 
SHRI PARTHA PRATIM SANYAL 


SHRI JATIN TAKKAR 
DR JOERG PETER LANGHAMMER (Alternate) 


Dr TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI SUBODH KAMALAKAR JUIKAR (Alternate) 


Dr SAAKSHY AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV BANSAL 
SHRI DINESH AHUJA (Alternate) 
SHRI JITENDRA SHARMA 
SHRI NEELAKAMAL MOHAPATRA (Alternate) 


Suri U. K. Das, Scientist ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SAGAR SINGH 
Scientist ‘C’ (CHD), BIS 


IS 15495 : 2020 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


. EPA Toxicological review on Toluene (CAS No. 108-88-3): EPA/635/R-05/004 


https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-03/documents/toluene_toxicology_review_0118tr_3v. 
pdf 


. Migration of toluene through different plastic laminated films into food simulants- 


Nan Chang, Chun-hong Zhang, Feng-e Zheng, Ya-lu Huang, Jin-yan Zhu, Qian Zhou, Xin Zhou, Shu- 
juan Ji 


. Toluene - toxicity, side effects, diseases and environmental impacts 


https://www.chemicals.news/2017-11-07-toluene-toxicity-side-effects-diseases-and-environmental- 
impacts.html 


. Toluene — WHO/ Europe — World Health Organization 

http://www.euro.who.int/ data/assets/pdf file/0020/123068/AQG2ndEd_ 5 14Toluene.PDF 
. Ototoxicity of Toluene in Rats 

MICHAEL J. SULLIVAN, KYLE E. RAREY AND RORY B. CONOLLY 
https://email.gov.in/service/home/~/?auth=co&loc=en&id=10979&part=2 

. Occupational Toluene Exposure and Auditory Function: Results from a Follow-up Study 


MICHAEL SCHAPER, PETER DEMES, MICHAELA ZUPANIC, MEINOLF BLASZKEWICZ and 
ANDREAS SEEBER 


https://email.gov.in/service/home/~/?auth=co&loc=en&id=10979&part=3 
. Toluene General information 
https://email.gov.in/service/home/~/?auth=co&loc=en&id=10864&part=4 
. Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet — Toluene 
https://email.gov.in/service/home/~/?auth=co&loc=en&id=10864&part=3 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 14 (14457). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


