IS 15363 (Part 2) :2003 W?dk7 Wi'@

W&k-iildi d?*

w4i@iq7[

Indian Standard

GUIDE TO TEROTECHNOLOGY
PART 2 INTRODUCTION TO TECHNIQUES AND APPLICATIONS

ICS 03.100.01

0 BIS 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group

7

Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Management and Productivity Sect ional Comm ittee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. In any organization, it is necessary to identify and then choose between the investment options open to it and to make decisions on how best to invest the capital available. Once a decision has been made to make an investment in some form of physical asset or project, then the application of terotechnology should assist in the object of getting the best value for money from that investment and thus justify it. Terotechnology is a combination of management, financial, engineering, building and other practices applied to physical assets in pursuit of economic life cycle costs. It is concerned with the specification and design for reliability and maintainability of physical assets, such as, plant, machinery, equipment, buildings and structures. The application of terotechnology also takes into account the processes of installation, commissioning, operation, maintenance, modification and replacement. Decisions are influenced by feedback of information on design, performance and costs, throughout the life cycle of a project. It applies equally to both assets and products because the product of one organization often becomes the asset of another. Even if the product is a simple consumer item its design and customer appeal will benefit from terotechnology and this will reflect in improved Imarketsecurity for the producer. Terotechnology was developed in the context of larger organizations, with the objective of making them more efficient and competitive. Throughout this standard the applicability to a larger organization is used as a basis as (his wit I represent the more complex situations. However the objective of maximizing value for money spent and the principles involved in achieving this, are equally applicable to small organizations. Small organizations face problems as much as those faced by the larger; more complex organizations. Their problems maybe simpler but the principles of problem solving remain tbe same. The small organization can, therefore, benefit from this guidance by selecting those parts of the decision-making process that can help them. Tbe key ingredients of success in the application of terotechnology are enthusiasm and cooperation throughout a well structured organization with impetus maintained by enthusiastic senior managers. Discipline too, is important to efficient application and managers need to specify the degree of analysis which backs different levels of decision. It is essential that data are adequate to support the required confidence limits but care needs to be taken to avoid wasteful over-analysis. Regardless of the success (or failure) achieved in the management of an asset, the experience can provide valuable feedback which is fundamental requirement of terotechnology. This feedback is gathered by monitoring decisions, actions, consequences and tbe lifetime performance of the asset and can be used to improve confidence in new decisions. The cyclic nature of terotechnology demands that decisions about asset management are reviewed in the light of increasing experience and knowledge. Throughout an asset's life, relevant data need to be collected and analyzed to :U ide current management decisions and the consequences of resulting actions recorded, providing feedback to guide new decisions. This structured, analytical approach results in better decision-making throughout the organization, thereby providing opportunities to improve profitability and/or efficiency. This standard sets out in detail all the activities that should be carried out to ensure that the organization, which uses terotechnology, could compete successfully and at the same time, achieve consumer satisfaction. This standard is largely based on BS 3843 (Part 2) : 1992, `Guide to terotechnology : Part 2 Introduction to the techniques and applications'.

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003

Indian Standard

GUIDE TO TEROTECHNOLOGY
PART 2 INTRODUCTION TO TECHNIQUES AND APPLICATIONS
1 SCOPE

4 PRINCIPLES

OF TEROTECHNOLOGY

This standard (Part 2) provides introductory guidance to managers on the techniques used in applying terotechnology (The techniques themselves are described in Part 3 of this standard). It outlines the techniques and describes how, generally, they are incorporated into decision-making processes. It also illustrates how individual and departmental interests and considerations interact with others and emphasizes the importance of communication throughout the enterprise. 2 RE-FERENCES The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 1S No. 9990: ]998 15362 (Part 1): 2003 (Part 3) 3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS 9990 shall apply, together with the following: 3.1 Board --Superior management level of the organization, ultimately responsible for deciding upon and authorizing any new project, specifying the objectives and policies to be followed in assessing options. 3.2 Organization -- In the context ofterotechnology, this means the totality of the enterprise which is to undertake a proposed new or additional project.
NOTE -- This may be a large industrial company, a public service or in the extreme an individual,

4.1 Investment in capital plant, buildings and equipment

is fraught with uncertainties and risks which make the assessment of lifetime economics difficult. Terotechnology provides techniques within a structured approach which help an organization both to evaluate an investment and having invested, to protect and service it economically throughout its working life, Terotechnology's first and paramount prerequisite is communication. Because.its techniques are interactive it is vital that departmental interests do not become isolated. Instead, there needs to be continuing dialogue between all the functional departments in the organization and line managers need to understand the weight of every argument, for.it is their responsibility to decide on the level of risk that is acceptable to the organization. 4.2 Clearly the most financially desirable venture is worthless if based on unachievable technology and equally the cleverest invention is useless, if it is beyond the financial reach of the market. As a genera} rule, however, ventures are rarely as clear cut and careful, comprehensive analysis are required in evaluating all the factors that contribute to decisions. When investing in a domestic appliance, for example, a wise buyer seeks the best buy to meet his or her particular needs. In reaching a decision, such factors as cost, capacity, appearance, potential time saving running and servicing costs, maintenance and insurance are examined. Decisions are often conditioned by advice from other users of similar products. Performance reviews throughout (and particularly at the end of) the appliance's life reveal whether the forecasts made at the time of purchase have been realized. This review provides valuable input to new decisions, firstly on whether or not to replace the appliance and secondly, on the selection of a replacement. 4.3 This selection process marks the beginning of a new life cycle. 4.4 These thought processes represent the application of terotechnology in the simplest, and probably most effective form. The principal activities are best summarized as follows: a) Initial investment appraisal using the `best data currently available; and b) Investment in the acquisition of the asset. Then, when the asset has been acquired and its usefhl life progresses, the user develops: a) Operational experience; and 1

Title

Glossary of terms in terotechnology
(fht revision)

Guide to terotechnology: Introduction to terotechnology Guide to available techniques (under
preparation)

3,3 Spare --A replica or equipment component purchased to replace the original component supplied a part of the asset.
NOTE-� Replacement is normally expected to be required due to failure. in its widest sense.

1S 15363 (Part 2):2003

b) A maintenance history. Finally, experience during these four activities is used in: a) Feedback of information into considerations of improvements to the asset or in its use; and b) Disposal and replacement decisions. 4.5 Mass production cannot meet the individual's specific needs. Instead, a wise manufacturer will include market research as a key element in applying terotechnology in respect of his products; on the results of such exercizes he will ensure that desirable features are developed and undesirable ones dropped or designed out. Dissatisfied customers are more likely to air their views and prompt, positive reaction by designers to the most common complaints should render the product more competitive and marketable. Negative attitudes to customer input, have the opposite effect and many suppliers adopting a take it or leave it sales policy have found that customers have taken the latter choice. Often such suppliers have failed to survive. 4.6 An organization contemplating a multi-million rupee capital project, perhaps to build a factory to produce domestic appliances, applies identical principles in its decision-making. However, because the financial risks are very much greater, a structured, formal approach to lifetime costs and decision-making is required. Unfortunately, far too frequently, economic appraisals and cost-benefit analysis are carried out merely to support an acquisition decision already made. Thereafter the asset is often managed by instinct and in ignorance of the industrial efficiency and product structured, scientific approach which this standard advocates. Terotechnology offers such a structured app(oach and this standard introduces the primary techniques available. 4.7 rar, 1 of this standard describes the consequential benefits and costs of introducing terotechnology. Benefits to be gained by an organization through introducing terotechnology are listed in 5 of IS 15363 (Part 1). This standard describes how those benefits can be achieved and -emphasizes the need for regular, structured communication between different specialism. Tables used to illustrate this structure and to list the thought processes and techniques that support decision-making. All of the tables in this Part have a similar layout and they summarize those matters, which can influence the major decision phases of the asset life cycle. These phases are concept and investment decision, acquisition, useful life (comprising operation and maintenance as the principal activities) and disposal. The four columns of the Tables list the following: a) Primary analysis, listing the particular factors that need to be analyzed as contributions to each major decision; 2

b) Consideration, providing an aide rnernoireof the matters that typically impinge on the factors of the primary analysis; c) Techniques and procedures, outlining the methods by which the considerations can be measured objectively (and where necessary uptimized) in reaching judgments on the primary analyses factors; and d) Interacting interests, indicating those departments or activities within the organization which might input information to, or gain benefit from, the aspects of terotechnology listed in (a), (b) and (C). 5 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
5.1 Organizational Strategies

5.1.1 An organization may wish to -embark on a new

project for a number of reasons. These include the following: a) Expand the organization's share of a market for a given product; b) Fill a gap-perceived in the market, that is a new or updated produc~ c) Meet customers' requests; d) Conform to a statutory requirement; e) Support other activities being undertaken by the organization; and f) Replace another project coming to an end. 5.1.2 In cases 5,1.1 (a) to 5.1.1 (e) the circumstances will directly determine the product and in most cases, the output as well. Options will exist with respect to the assets with which to carry out the specified objectives. There will also be an interaction between the detailed design of the product and the assets needed to execute this design. This increases the number of potential options that will have to be considered. 5..1.3 In the last case 5.1.1 (~, the board may direct an objective that may not be specitlc in terms of the product but may be simply in terms of turnover or profit. This will increase the number of options open to the manager of the new project. 5.1.4 In all cases the organization is likely to be faced with a number of options, one of which might be not to proceed with a new project at all. By employing terotechnology techniques a best choice of option can be selected and decisions in respect of the assets made throughout the life cycle in the interest of achieving the most economic life cycle costs.
5,1.5 It is clear that, in pursuit of the terotechnology objective, the cost and benefit implications of all aspects of the asset's life need to be considered. Where costs and benefits are distributed in time throughout the life cycle, analytical techniques such as discounted cash

1S 15363 (Part 2): 2003

flow are used to sensibly compare incomes and/or notional expenditures at different dates. However, in addition other aspects which may not have a notional cost and/or benefit implication need to be taken into account; in some of these a notional cost implication might be appropriately used. in other cases alternative approaches may have to be taken. The principal areas to be considered are outlined in 5.2 to 5.7. 5.1.6 Techniques based upon the principles of discounted cash flow are also used in comparing the costs and benefits arising from different forecast scenarios which identify the factors that maximize the benefits to the enterprise. O.f equal importance are factors which could negate these benefits and these key areas of risk need to be identified and the risk minimized wherever possible. In essence, an attempt should be made to identify those uncertainty factors -which have the greatest influence on the likely return (sensitivity analysis) and, if necessary, to concentrate resources on investigating those factors in more detail. This is particularly relevant to the most common source of risk which arises from uncertainty in the data used in the economic assessments. 5.1.7 There should be a corporate input to decisions to invest in capital projects so that the impact of existing policies on forecast scenarios (and possibly the converse) can be properly examined. The organization needs to ensure that the investment does not affect the nature and objectives of the business in an uncontrolled way because this could result in uncontrolled risk. 5.1.8 Inevitably any new project will result in change which can affect both the organization and those outside it, Such change may involve factors which are subject to external constraints and these have to be considered and their influence included in the investment appraisal. 5.2 Community
5.2.1 The social and environmental acceptability of changes are increasingly prominent considerations for organizations contbsmplating new investment or developing existing facilities. These aspects can impact with equal severity whether the proposal is to extend a dwelling house or to build a major production facility. People awareness of such developments quite properly increases with improved living standards and wider educational aspirations. As knowledge grows, so increasingly more stringent international, national and local controls are applied to protect the environment. In addition to these legal constraints, developers also need to consider individual local acceptability as well as the specialist views of pressure groups. What may be regarded as a prosperity-generating asset by one section of the community can equally be considered a dangerous, toxic monstrosity by another.

might limit the operation of the asset. For example, increased legislative requirements in regard to, say,' effluents, noise rmd even demolition and disposal processes could significantly affect lifetime cost equations. 5.2.3 In planning changes the owner and/or user needs to assess the risk to the investment or the organization's overall image and the associated effect on profitability. 5.3 Nature of the Business
5.3.1 Developers should also consider the risk that

investment proposals pose for the organization's existing business. Here, concern centres on whether or not the proposed investment is concomitant with, or fundamentally different from, the organization's traditional business. For example, a proposed new project may produce goods or services repugnant to existing customers on political or ethical grounds or which may be seen to compete with products of customers who purchase the traditional products or services of the organization. This could be reflected in market resistance to the existing products and the consequent reduction in profitability having to be made good by income from the ne-w investment. The corporate study might conclude that this effect would be so severe that the proposed investment would adversely affect the organization and thereby select other suitable altemat ive(s). 5.4 Commitments/Involvement The third area of risk is that of corporate confidence in the ability to maintain the quality of existing and new products with increased diversity and that commitment to and involvement of customers old and new will be unaffected. Further, the commitmentlinvolvement of employees has to be considered because they, too, will have opinions about environmental and ethical aspects which may so affect their reactions to internal changes that low morale would reflect in poor quality. Proper consultation with employees at every stage is desirable if their support for change is to be forthcoming. 5.5 Markets On the more tangible aspects of the business, the investment appraisal needs to examine the market for the asset's products. There has to be high confidence that a significant and continuing market exists and that foreseeable output booms and slumps can be accommodated without undue risks to production costs, delivery schedules, stockholding costs, product quality or asset viability. It is also important to recognize that products themselves, particularly in the high technology field, can rapidly become outdated. This imposes the need to examine the adaptability of production facilities, the market life of products and the impact on the asset of the introduction of new products, -possibly by competitions. Future opportunities should be critically assured for product innovation, design development, 3

5.2.2 Because of these differences of view, there is a risk of future growing public unacceptability which

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003
rationalization, reductions. improved quality and unit cost and price

5.6 Production
Input by production specialists to the corporate (particularly analysis

where asset refurbishment is concerned) on unit costs that will be achieved as the result of increased output from more efficient equipment, providing there is a market. `lhough this cheaper product allows the marketing section increased input to terotechnology by way of wider analysis in opportunities, it presents alternatives and new risks and therefore calls for an increased order to maximize profit (or minimize loss) whether through changed volume of sales or altered selling prices, or reduced production, selling or administrative costs. The longer the term of the investment, the greater will be the uncertainty and risk attaching to these key data elements. The greater the perceived risk, the greater the depth of investigation that should be undertaken. The need to examine various combinations of `what if?' questions gives rise to the need for sensitivity analysis to guide decisions adequately. Production specialists would also assess, for example, the efficiency with which the operation of the asset could be managed, seeking to minimize money tied up in queuing and work in progress and the ways in which new processes will be integrated into established areas. These aspects also influence the cost equations.
includes the effect of the investment

opportunities for alternative ways forward will arise almost constantly and management will be faced with decisions between such alternatives. Unless there is an overriding consideration, such as, a statutory constraint, the decisions made should always be, such as, to achieve the best economic solution. An econom[c solution needs to be viewed in terms of the full residual life of the project and, where relevant, the objectives set for it. These may, of course, differ from those originally set when the project was initiated due to developments in the organization. Thus, each time a decision has to be made, a new appraisal should be carried out into the differences expected throughout the residual life of the project, in terms of costs and benefits. In the earliest phases of the project, these appraisals may have to be made in absolute terms as well as in terms of differences between alternative options to ensure that the project remains viable in terms of the set objectives. Similarly at later stages, during the useful life of the asset, an appraisal in absolute terms maybe appropriate to ensure that continuation of the project remains viable.
6.1.2 In the case of both comparative appraisals and absolute appraisals, where the comparison is against financial objectives laid down for the project, similar techniques are employed. 6.1.3 The fundamentally important aspect of any project whose life extends at.all over a period of time is the need to compare on some valid basis the cash flows which arise at different points in time. A sum of money, A, spent today has a different value from a similar sum to be spent in x year's time. This arises because a sum smaller than A can be invested today such that, with interest, it could produce a sum A in x year's time to meet the required expenditure. The actual sum to be invested today to achieve A in x years is termed the `Present Worth' of A in x years and will depend upon both x and the expected rate of interest. Thus the value of A invested in x year's time can be considered as having been discounted to a smaller (present) value. The general term for this principle of evaluation is Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) and is common to the techniques recommended for use in economic appraisals. 6.1.4

5.7 Resources 5.7.1 The organization needs to examine financial and human resources. In material terms it has to be able to tinance the investment and decide on sources of capital. Where external finance is sought, lenders or shareholders will wish to understand the risk they are accepting and all the foregoing corporate considerations should be included in the formal investment proposal. With increases in technology, skilled human resources become significant organizational assets. Due consideration should, therefore be given to the value and availability of skills of the personnel employed in the organization. 5.7.2 Decisions on how acquisition, installation, operation and maintenance of the asset are to be managed are generally a matter of the organization's policy and related to its size and experience in that activity rather than directly to terotechnology considerations. Operation has traditionally been resourced in-house, but maintenance and other aspects can often be managed more economically by specialist consultants and other professionals. 6 MANAGEMENT~ND
THROUGH TECHNIQUES THE PROJECT LIFE CYCLE

Other traditional methods of evaluation are the following: a) Rate of return; and b) Payback. Since these do not adequately take into account all the factors relevant to an evaluation, they are not dealt with in this standard.
6.1.5 Another source of difficulty in comparing cash flows at different future points in time arises from changing price levels, both general and specific. However, in many cases relative values, when viewed over the lifetime of a project, may be assumed to be

6. I General, Economic Appraisals 6.1.1

Throughout

the life cycle of a project, 4

IS 15363 (Part 2) :2003
reasonably of products same ratio changing constant. In practical terms the selling prices to relmain in roughly and materials, the all of labour

can be expected to the prices

future cash flows should not necessarily be taken as the current rate of interest which contains an element to compensate for the current inflation rate. 6.1.7 The above considerations are common to all economic appraisals and assessments. In consideration of the total costs and benefits of a project over its life, especially those arising before commitment to the project is made, several approaches may be used in presenting, in a summarized form, the overall results of the appraisal. 6.1.8 While the underlying principle of discounting is the same, sometimes the circumstances of a project make one of its variants preferable to another. 6.1.9 Table 1 lists the various methods of making economic appraisals, which may be required in any phase of the life cycle, and shows the variants of the discounted cash flow approach. 6.2 Concept/Investment
Decision Phase

in value of the currency. Owing to the impossibility of predicting future inflation, it is normal to assume a constancy of value in economic assessments, that is to assume no inflation at all will take place and the relative cash values of materials and services as well as selling cycle of the project. Assessments ]made on this basis are normally termed as being on a constant price basis, for example, All values in terms of January 20XX prices.
proportionately -to the changes

6.1,6 Where, however, a particular service, Iabour need or material is expected to change in price in real terms, that is its price is expected to rise faster or slower than the general price level, this should be taken into account. [n such circumstances, when using constant prices, one should nevertheless calculate the variations in terms of the expected rates of relative change in real value and not in terms of price. A similar consideration may have to be made regarding the rate of interest to be used in discounting future cash flows. if comparative assessments are carried out in constant price terms the rate of interest to be used in discounting future cash flows should also reflect changes in value rather than prices. When comparative assessments are carried out in constant price terms the rate to be used in discounting

6.2.1 As discussed in 5,1, an organization's incentive

to initiate a new project may arise from any one of a number of reasons. According to the circumstances the product of the project may or may not be known from the start. If the product is not so specified, a number of possible product options maybe offered for

Table 1 General Economic Appraisals (Cfause 6. 1.9)
S1No. (1) i) ii) Primary Analysis (2) Forecasts of capital expenditure Economic appraisals Considerations (3) Need to identify transactions in terms of time and value Comparison of optional courses of action or judgement of viability against objectives Techniques (4) As given in Tables 2 to 6 1) Discounted cash flow a) Net present value b) Internal rate of return c) Annuity 2) Rate of return 3) Payback 4) Cost-benefit analysis NOTES [ AlI forms of DCF take into account the time value of money, but different forms are more appropriate for particular situations. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Notes (5)

2 This, the commonest form of DCF, is suitable where constant rates of interest apply throughout the life of the project. 3 This variant of DCF takes accoont of varying rates of interest applicable throughout the life of the project. 4 This variant is only relevant when there is need to finance a project on an even basis throughout its life and is normally only appropriate to government (especially local government) projects. Strictly it is based on-calculations of net present value or internal rate of return (see Notes 2 and 3). S This takes no accoont of the time value of money, nor of the interest benefit of depreciation. 6 While this approach recognizes the time valoe of money, it fails to recognize adequately the situation in the more distant future. 7 This is used in cases where the costs or benefits cannot easily be quantified in monetary terms.

5

1S 15363 (Part 2):2003

consideration and, inmost cases, there will be further options on product output. 6.2.2 Alternative production methods and the assets needed for these widen the choice still further. Before the possible production methods and the assets to achieve these can be considered the product design SI1OU Id be developed to an advanced stage. This should be carried out with the terotechnological needs of the customer in mind. 6.2.3 The establishment of these choices into a series of proposed projects, each with a given output of product, produced by a given method from a defined asset, in the first step in the conceptual process. In all circumstances the number of such options will have to be reduced to manageable proportions. Some may be eliminated because of serious deficiencies in terms of the factors discussed in 5. Thereafter, the number should be reduced to those offering the best economic prospects by conducting and repeating investment appraisals on each remaining option, using progressively refined inputs and eliminating those which fail to meet the organization's specified objectives or are less attractive from a life cycle costbenefit point of view. On the final short-list of options an investment appraisal should be carried out in as much detail as possible and using the best input data available. The exercises should also identify areas of risk and the implications that these may have on the costs and benefits of the proposed projects. These studies-should be pursued until an optimum choice is clearly established and the probable full consequences for the organization can be appreciated. At this point the final decisions can be made on the option to be chosen and whether to proceed; this is the final investment decision. 6.2.4 The items to be considered in the investment appraisal and the techniques that might be employed are given in Table 2. 6.2,5 The benefits of capital projects, in certain cases, are not measurable in terms of cash or profit. This does not mean that terotechnology is inappropriate to such projects. On the contrary, its application is simply a matter of defining the benefit in different terms. Rates of treating patients, processing documents or passing examinations for example may be perfectly valid parameters on which decisions can be founded. 6.3 Acquisition
Phase

than buying but the elements of risk accruing to the hirer may be very considerably reduced in comparison with buying. Leasing may also reduce the peak financial borrowing required for the project and this may be of significant value to the organization. 6.3.2 At the acquisition stage, the organization seeks to turn investment plans and decisions into reality in the form of buildings and plant, completed to time and cost schedules, ready to begin productive operation. 6.3.3 Table 3 lists relevant considerations, shows the appropriate techniques and lists the various functional specialities which interact at each stage of analysis. It shows how the management of the acquisition process involves the overall planning, control and coordination of a project aimed at achieving the concept objective by completion on time, within the defined cost parameters of the investment appraisal/decision and to defined quality standards. Success depends on the ability to: a) Plan and programme all the resources and activities required to complete the project; b) Commit everyone involved to the project's objectives particularly those relating to programme and cost; c) Design the plant, structure, comprising the asset; or buildings

d) Make appropriate arrangements for the supply, delivery and setting to work of the asset; e) Construct and/or install the asset; f) Commission and run-in the asset; g) Monitor and control progress and take remedial action w"here appropriate to achieve the programme; and h) Finance the project and ensure that costs are contained within the planned budget. 6.3.4 Whether these functions are performed directly by the buyer or consultants on his behalf, the considerations, techniques and interactions listed in Table 3 are equally applicable. The scale of the project and its attendant risks naturally given the depth of analysis of each aspect, but even quite modest projects benefit from the disciplined approach outlined in Table 3. 6.3.5 Though acquisition decisions may be delegated throughout the management organization, they cannot be made until the corporate decisions to invest has been reached and promulgated, providing clear financial objectives together with the ethical, social and environmental parameters which have to be accommodated. 6.3.6 These decisions are influenced by the analyses and considerations listed in Table 3. The degree to which they are applied requires discretion and depends 6

6.3.1 In the acquisition phase of a capital asset, many

contractual routes are open to the user organization, particularly where mechanical plant is concerned. For example, an organization may wish to consider hiring or leasing rather than buying. Terotethnology can be applied to this decision as to all others in order to determine, say, the net effective cost of hiring compared with buying the asset or some of its components. It often transpires that hiring or leasing is more costly

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003 Table 2 The Concept/Investment (Clause 6.2.4)
S1No. (1)
i)

Decision Phase

Primary Analysis
(2)

Consideration
(3)

Techniques
(4)

Interacting Interests~
(5)

Objectives set by board

Product .Output and/or turnover or profit Project life Organizations purpose and policy Resources available Products and output Product designs and production methods Outline of assets required Basic scenario assumptions Scenario variations and ranges Price level changes Interest and discount rates Taxation/grants Accounting methods Items not measurable in cash terms Method of presentation of selection/recommendation Roughly estimate life cycle costs and returns of options in (ii) Select short-list of best projects for further study Refine product designs Life of project Time to come on stream Probable capital cost Cost of finance Project design appraisal Product proceeds Cash flow expectations Forecasts of outputs from Tables 3 to 6 Implications for other activities of the organization Report on each option

Organization's business plan

ii)

Identification of options

Marketing

iii)

Identification of common bases ofjudgement

Planning Finance See Table 1

Legal and/or statutory obligations

iv)

Select shortlist of viable options

See Tables 3 to 6

v)

Detailed study and evaluation of short-listed options

Product design audit

See Table 3 Project design appraisal

Design Sales programme Contracts Finance Operations, Maintenance Marketing Procurement Cost engineering

vi)

Factors to be included: 1) Risk and uncertainty

Effects of scenario variations within ranges identified in (iii) Uncertainties in data Range and distribution of uncertainties Annual expenditures Annual revenues Effects on other activities Contingent costs for uncertainties Interest during construction Use of facilities Comparison with objectives Cash flow predictions Report of appraisals and recommendations Approval to proceed

Probability analysis Risk analysis

Cost engineering

2) Effects on budgets

Contracts, Finance

Quality surveyor Project staff, maintenance

vii)

Selection of best option

Board

7

IS 15363 (Part

2.):2003 Table 3 The Acquisition Phase

(Clauses 6.3.3,6.3.4
S1No. (1)
O

and6.3.6)
Techniques (4) Interacting Interests (5) Finance

Primary Analysis (2)

Considerations (3) Cash availability Uncertainty and risk Obsolescence of components Reliability of sources Suitability of available components Strategic spares availability and requirements Effect on taxation/grants, etc Responsibility for maintenance costs Compare costs of alternatives Complete product design "Consideralternative asset/component types to achieve product design objectives Establish any policy needs of the organization affecting design Output capacity required Highlight safety Identify special requirements regarding: Compatibility with other assets Replication aspects Number and size of production streams Economic configurations Optimization of alternatives and orientations Statutory requirements

Choice of hire, lease or use of existing internal sources

Design, Operations Maintenance, reliability Finance Contracts See Table 1 Product design audit Design, sales, quality assurance

ii)

Prepare specification of asset requirements: 1) Technical requirements

Marketing Safety, operations

Drawings Queueing theory Value analysis Allowance for statutory inspections Controlof waste

Operations Maintenance Operations Work study Inspectorates hrspectorates

Standards (Company and national) Spares provisions Time to come on stream Reliability or maintainability demonstrations Asset life Special materials to be used or prohibited Supply sources Efficiency aspects Suitability for special grades of operations/maintenance personnel Environmental requirements to be met Communications 2) Contractual requirements Form of contract for asset Penalties for non-fulfilment of contract condhions and programme Guarantees Payment schedule and cost variations

Reliability/ maintainaLrility Operations, maintenance analysis Plant history files Design Vendor assessments Performance analysis Ergonomics Contracts, legal Design, Operations Maintenance, Personnel, Operations National and/ or local government

Environmental planning Flow charts

Contracts Project staff

iii)

Assess tenders or offers to supply asset: 1) Technical/contract Review against factors identified in (ii) See (ii) Design appraisal See (ii)

8

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003 Table 3 -- (Concluded
S1No. (1) Primary Analysis (2) 2) Additional factors Considerations (3) Estimate likely capacity decline with time Review constructability Review supply programme Determine optimum spares holdings needed Likely asset availability Life expectancy of various likely operating regimes Effects on public accountability and relationships Areas of uncertainty Status of proposed designs Review assessment under (iii) Review expected life cycle costs and incomes against those authorized at end of investment decision phase Identify best offer and report If needed, seek approval of selection Place order or contract Design submission procedure Design freeze Design and development programme Consultation and communication Prograrnme Quality Assurance Work tests Progress and stage payments vi) Erectibuild and install Procurement/construction programme Techniques (4) Interacting Interests (5)

Construction analysis Modelling

Project staff Operations, Maintenance,Stores

iv)

Select supplier

All departments

Project management Contracts, Purchasing Design Drawings Quality programme Quality Assurance methods Test procedures Budgets Network analysis Bar charts Progress assessment Project management Programming Quality assurance Project management Finance Programming, Project management

v)

Design and manufacture asset

Interface management and access Terminal points Effects on existing operations Quality assurance and stage inspections Surveillance Safety of people and plant

Quality programme Safety consultation Structural safety limits Allowance for statutory inspections Technical manuals Expected cost to completion Network analysis Qualityprogramme Drawings, technical manuals, commissioning procedures Training schedule

Quality Assurance Safety Inspectorates Stores Supplier Supplier Supplier Quality assurance Project management, Operations Personnel

Handling and storage Time and cost Security vii) Commissioning .Commissioning programme Design limits, tits, tolerances Documentation

Train operations and maintenance staff Precommissioning checks during installation Test and run up plant, etc Load/output tests to ensure contractual conditions met Extended production run Time to come on stream Re-test economic equations before setting initial sales price of product

Supplier, Operations Operations Design, Contracts Finance, sales, cost engineering

Performance guarantees See Tables 1 and 2

9

1S 15363 (Part 2):2003
upon the gravity of the decision. For example, the purchase of an additional typewriter would require only minimal analysis whereas a new factory project would attract the most rigorous exam ination at the highest level. Table 3 shows that an early decision is required on whether the asset is to be hired or bought and,.despite the objective view provided by a cost-benefit analysis, other considerations might be more powerful. For example, cash availability could be the prime determinant, in which case hiring might be the only course open to the enterprise. Here, the input by the finance department is a key element and prompt communication of its advice reduces abortive effort elsewhere in the organization.

aspects often demand outside liaison with Governmental and other public bodies, and consequently systems need to be established to seek the necessary consents and to make financial and design provisions to meet all legal requirements relating to both the local community and to national statutes. This could include the need to cover against product liability claims. 6.3.12 Aspects of acquisition have two main facets, procurement and financial control. Procurement strategy is concerned with the selection of the tenderers, the conditions of contract and purchase, the price required by the tenderersand the eventual selection of a supplier. Guidance on technical matters front designers and on financial aspects from the finance department are required in order to contract for exact needs. Financial control involves the development of cash flow programmed to align with the procurement processes of manufacture, construction, installation and commissioning and will need to consider the consequential interest on money tied up in these processes during procurement. Again for consistency, the discounted cash flow technique is used and escalation and inflation are-handled as separate elements in the budget for the acquisition phase of the project. 6.3.13 At the hardware stage of the acquisition, beginning with manufacture, the major elements of capital expenditure begin. The project management is generally pre-occupied with two main factors: time and cost. 6.3.14 Timely completion of the acquisition is vital for two reasons. a) No income can be generated by the asset until it is installed and commissioned. b) Many elements of capital cost can be timedependent and therefore delayed acquisition means increased capital cost as well as delayed income generation. 6.3.15 Consequently great care is necessary on the part of the organization, agents, suppliers and installers to ensure that realistic, optimized programmed are prepared, agreed and followed. The techniques most commonly used for all but the simplest programming are network analyses, of which critical path analysis and programme evaluation review technique are perhaps the most widely used. However, the choice of techniques depends on the particular application, organizational preferences, whether analysis is manual or computerized and the capacity of particular computer software packages amongst many other considerations. Simple programmed which contain no significant interdependencies and have few parallel activities can be directly drawn in bar chart form. As shown in Table 3, network analysis can be used to programme all aspects of the acquisition and provide overall and departmental objectives. Used in connection with

6.3.7 Analysis of lifetime benefits and costs calls for methods that reduce the variable money values occurring throughout an asset's life to a common monetary level in order to facilitate proper comparisons. This is achieved by the methods described in 6.1. Because many of the inputs are themselves estimates, they have to be tested using statistical techniques and by comparison with past recorded experience of similar assets. Techniques like regression analysis together with sensitivity and probability tests are necessary to establish levels of confidence conducive to sound management decision making and the reduction of risk in the acquisition to acceptable levels. 6.3.8 These analysis of costs and benefits continue into the early stages of specification and design of the purchased asset because they aid the selection of alternative designs and layouts that can equally well achieve the technical objectives. Before considering the detailed requirements for the asset, the design of the product needs to be developed in sufficient depth so that the total requirements for the asset in terms of output, quality and possible production methods can be identified. 6.3.9 In the asset design stage, the value engineering technique can be applied to problems ranging in magnitude from plant layout to rationalization of the simallest components, whilst a scale model of the asset (where appropriate) aids the design's development. In addition network analysis, of manufacturing, delivery and construction programmed may be necessary. 6.3.10 The second major input to design and specification of the asset is the feedback of data relating to actual performance of similar assets, coupled with lifetime estimated data used in the earlier cost and benefit statements. Mathematical modelling can be used to optimize different aspects of operational life, such as, reliability, availability and maintainability. Differing possible operating regimes can also be tested using these models. Again, operational research techniques, such as regression analysis and probability analysis provide the means of comparing alternative courses of action.
6.3.11 The acquisition's

social and environmental

10

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003

computing systems, the techniques can be applied hierarchically to provide a computer aided management system for each level in the organization acquiring the asset. Such systems analyze the networks to produce working documents, such as, bar charts, resource requirements and schedules which all assist in both target setting and the control of acquisition time. 6.3.16 The need for cost control is self-evident; if it is not enforced the very basis of the asset's lifetime cost effectiveness can be put at risk. Cost control, like time control, required a programme of cash flows which derives primarily from, but might also influence the logic of, the time control programme itself. Normally the cumulative expenditure programme (or budget) for a capital acquisition is presented inthe form of a money versus time curve (known as an `S' curve). Regular comparisons of actual cumulative expenditure (manually or through a computer aided management system) with this budget curve, read in conjunction with similar time control comparisons, serve as management gui-desto the acquisition project's status. 6.4 Useful Life Phase, Operational
Aspects

terotechnology are best served by feeding back such -applications and the data need to be judged against possible costs in terms of reduced competitiveness. 6.4.3 The production of goods and services, through the operation of the asset, is the organization's prime objective. Consequently, those responsible for its operation interact with all other parts of the management organization and all should seek to service the operation of the asset. In order to ensure that the asset is well served, the operating department should carefully monitor operation and ensure that appropriate data are collected and disseminated throughout the management organization. Information needs vary and effective feedback can only be achieved if it matches the needs of individual user departments. .For example, operational data appropriate to the `marketing department may be valueless to the maintenance department and vice versa. However, for effective terotechnological performance the needs of both have to be met. 6.4,4 The department responsible for the operation of the asset is involved in decision making throughout the asset's lifetime. The management services techniques, including operational research, work study, programming, planning, scheduling and cost accounting and control, all have a role to play in guiding these decisions and in providing input and feedback to other departments. 6.4.5 Whilst output achievements are precise in nature, forecasts are less definitive. `When the forecast is made before the asset is acquired, it can contain very significant uncertainties and similar problems beset forecasts projecting the distant periods of an asset's life. The more uncertain the input data, the more predictive the forecast and the more predictive the forecast the greater the risk to the enterprise. Consequently medium and long-term forecasting requires the application of mathematical modelling techniques to assess not only quantitative matters like output and market size but also the related, more intangible, qualitative aspects of probability and sensitivity which really indicate the degree of risk in acting on the forecast. Similarly, the mathematical approach to stock" control through optimizing buffer storage and lead time, prompt reordering, improved transportation and distribution by means of linear programming and better service by means of the use of queuing can have significant effect on the amount of capital tied up in stock. 6.4.6 The work study techniques of work measurement and method study are used to optimize the employment of Iabour and the utilization of the asset and their results are also invaluable in production planning and control. 6.4.7 Qua[ity assurance procedures for the asset's products can reflect on the asset itself. "Forexample, increasing reject rates might indicate a declining quality
.11

6.4.1 Table 4 lists various processes that underlie the monitoring and control of the operational life of an asset. Here, effort is concentrated on the optimization of the asset's performance in order that the enterprise can fully exploit the planned return on its investment. Table 4 shows, for example, that production plans depend on the forward survey of demand by marketing specialists and that this forecast distils into, and its accuracy is checked by, the plant loading schedule required to meet current firm orders for the product, The production plans are conditioned by inputs from special ists including operational research, work study and cost control in deriving the most economic plant loadings consistent with the optimum deployment of labour, materials and other key resources including energy. 6.4.2 Well designed systems for the collection of operational performance data are imperative both for the short-term appraisal of plant health and for longer term use in the organization's global application of terotechnology. The former provides vital inputs to maintenance decisions, whilst the latter may be a key element in future investment or replacement decisions, Systems can vary between simple daily log sheets that might be compiled by an operator to record output and the sophisticated computer controlled continuous data logging and plant surveillance schemes now typical in modern process plant designs. Condition monitoring techniques, wherever required, and applications have developed so rapidly that they can be utilized during an asset's life. Similarly owners might change maintenance techniques in the light of experience to optimize costs, performance, reliability and other considerations. The long-term interests of

IS 15363( Part2 ):2003

the need for intensified of the asset showing maintenance or earlier replacement. Alternatively, for example, there may be operator failures which would signal to the personnel function a possible need for retraining. TerotechnoIogy covers these aspects in order to bring significant benefits to the organization. 6.5 Useful Life Phase, Maintenance
6.5.1 Aspects

to keep the asset in good, safe, efficient condition by maintaining it at the correct frequencies in the appropriate order and within budgetary provisions consistent with the financial objectives of the organization. This would lead to feedback information ensuring the application of terotechnology throughout the organization. 6.5.6 Table 5 emphasizes the close relationship between operational and maintenance aspects of asset management. It appears self-evident that an asset which is heavily worked will require more intensive maintenance care than its lightly loaded counterpart but this is not always the case. Often the decline in condition of an asset relates to `exposure to weather or other particular environmental factors. Also, in the case of mechanical plant, for example, heavy continuous load can be less deleterious than intermittent light load. Again, therefore, terotechnology demands a disciplined approach to maintenance decision-making. 6.5.7 Operational research techniques (see 6.4.1) are used to examine the maintenance needs of different operating aspects and to forecast replacement dates for major parts of the asset, thus providing a basis for likely lifetime maintenance costs which can be used for budgetary control. Similar techniques can be applied to examine reliability and availability, optimize maintenance frequency and guide decisions on the maintenance strategy most appropriate to the particular conditions. 6.5.8 The resources needed to execute the maintenance strategy also have to be programmed and scheduled. Network analysis techniques, with computer processing, provide the means for doing this work, whilst quantitative inputs derived from the application of work study techniques allow the programme to be modified according to manpower availability. Similarly, stock control, cost control, tribology and other technical aspects can be built in to the maintenance management model and supplementary computer programmed used to produce the necessary maintenance documents. Typically, bar chart programmy, labour resource charts, cash flow programmed, parts and materials orders and schedules, and detailed work instructions are produced. 6,6 Disposal Phase 6.6.1 Disposal is invariably a consequence of outdated technology and demands new investment appraisal and decisions. 6.6.2 Disposal is invariably a consequc,~ceof outdated technology and demands new investment appraisal and decisions. 6.6.3 Disposal is often a maintenance decision based upon the unacceptable maintenance cost of an item/ asset which is life-ex.pired. In such cases, the 12

The maintenance of assets has significant cost implications which are inseparable from the operation of the asset. Even if the asset is temporarily out of use, time, weather and general environment together cause continuing deterioration and consequently maintenance costs continue until a disposal decision is reached. Traditionally, maintenance managers have based their strategy on what is known as the bathtub curve effect. This hypothesis suggests that maintenance costs per plant item are high during its early life due to runningin problems, they reduce significantly in midlife but rapidly increase as the item's life expires. Terotechnology offers the opportunity to reduce the cost impact of the curve through the following: a) Improved design resulting from operational and maintenance feedback; b) Design input from reliability analysis; c) Quality assurance programmed; d) Value engineering; and e) Improved functional specifications. 6.5.2 Most of these have traditionally been regarded as unrelated to the maintenance department. The primary benefits of the application of terotechnology have been higher reliability, resulting in reduced maintenance costs and better designs optimizing early costs as a proportion of the lifetime maintenance cost. Optimizing the disposal or replacement dates of components or the entire asset can also reduce the lifeend cost peak. 6.5.3 The application of terotechnology to the maintenance function itself provides valuable guidance on strategy decisions where, for example, the selection of the maintenance aspects can be made in an objective (rather than intuitive) way, Here, due consideration can be given to the impact of various aspects on the following: a) Labour resource requirements; b) Spares inventory costs; c) Breakdown probability and risk; and d) Availability for production. The maintenance accordingly. aspects can then be updated

6.5.4 The considerations particularly applicable to the maintenance function are given in Table 5. 6.5.5 The maintenance function's prime objective is

IS 15363 (Part 2) :2003

replacement cost may be offset to a degree by its scrap value. 6.6.4 Disposal decisions are guided largely by the outcome of the reliability and availability analysis which condition the operational and maintenance aspects of asset management. In addition, continuing cost effective utilization, product demand and profitability have to be considered because the decision

may go beyorrd more disposals to complete or part replacement. 6.6.5 In the case of replacement of all or a significant part of the asset, the terotechnology cycle should begin again with a fresh investment appraisal. The considerations which apply in the disposal phase are given in Table 6.

`Table 4 Useful Life Phase, Operational (Clause 6.4.1)
S1No. (1) i) Primary Analysis (2) Production management Considerations (3) Profitability in context of original project appraisal Future demand of product Output forecasts and achievements Documentation

Aspects

Techniques (4)

Interacting Interests (5) Finance Sales, Marketing operations

Order processing Technical manuals, including: Operating instructions System drawings F]OW charts Control limits Loadings

Availability Reliability Down-time costs Maintenance frequency, etc Maintainability Statutory inspections Obsolescence Disposal and replacement of components Safety ii) Output performance Production capability Operating regime Plant loading Plant performance Production efficiency Output quality "Rejectrate Waste Statutory restraints Environmental factors

Cost accountants Maintenance Plant history tiles Operator maintenance Life assessment Operator instructions Material needs Work Study Stock control Control limits Data logging Purchasing Maintenance

Design

Statutory bodies

iii)

Resource optimization

Manpower

Operational research Production planning Recruitment and employee training Energy management Quality assurance methods, Marketing programme

Energy Materials

Cash
iv)

Personnel, trade unions, 1abour relations Engineering Purchasing, quality Assurance, Marketing Finance Design Operations

Feedback to new projec~

Data logging Reports Plant history files

13

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003 Table 5 Useful Life Phase, Maintenance (Clause 6.5.4)
S1No. (1) i) Primary Analysis (2) Maintenance Considerations (3) Documentation Techniques (4) Quality records Plant inventory Technical manuals/ drawings giving: spares Iists maintenance instructions structural safety Iimits workshop overhaul instructions work instructions Reports of work done Statutory inspection Maintenance scheduling Resourw allocation Interacting Interests (5) Quality Assurance Supplier Project Management

Aspects

Maintenance requirements

Maintenance-strategy: Preventive condition monitoring corrective breakdown contracts expertize available from suppliers/consultants Strategy reviews Maintenance/Repair guarantees

Spares turnover and stock-holding Working methods Resource acquisitions: Workshops and tools Manpower

Probability analysis Reliability analysis Design appraisal Technical diagnosis and analysis Failure investigations Fault analysis (FTA and FMECA)') Tribology Stock control Work study

Stores, Purchasing Specialists

Recruitment Training schedule

Maintenance costs Down-time costs Labour productivity ii) L]fe cycle of asset Operational feedback on: availability process efficiency product quality Asset history Plant modifications Design aspects Unit replacements Major reliability and maintenance capital/revenue schemes Life extension/reduction Obsolescence/Disposal Maintenance programme (1 Fault tree analysis and fault modes and etfects and criticality analysis

Maintenance, Suppliers Finance Finance Operations Operations

Maintenance history Design, Supplier Design Planning Planning, Operations, Finance Operations, Finance Operations, Finance

Repair/replacement optimization

IS 15363 (Part 2):2003 Table 6 Disposal'Phase

(Clause 6.6.5)
S1 No. (1) O

Primary Analysis (2) Economics of disposal

Considerations (3) Consideration of project Continuation of demand for product Obsolescence of product of asset

Techniques (4) See Table 2 See Table 2 See Table 3 See Table5

Interacting Interests (5) Marketing Operations Sales, Operations

Operations, Maintenance

Repair replacement optimization Netcostofdisposal
ii) Suitability for further use Maintenance policy Survey of condition Change of use Residual value Resale value Scrap value Special hazards: structural chemical and dangerous materials buried wastes electrical Documentation See Table 5 Maintenance Operations Contracts

See Table 3

Safety Statutory controls Inspectorates Local government

See Tables 3 and 4

15

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

B iS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of lndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from
Amendments
DOC: No.

N4SD4 (224)

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern
Southern

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022
:

C.1.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Western

:

Branches

:

AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

