**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9853 (1981): Milk Collection Trays [FAD 19: Dairy 
Products and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS ; 0S53 - 1981 

( Reaffirmed 1999) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
MILK COLLECTION TRAYS 



UDC 637 J n : 621 641 




© Copyright \n\ 

INDIAN STANDARDS KNSTITUTION 

MANAK B HA VAN. 9 BAHADUR. SHAH ZAKAR M ARQ 
NEW DELHI IUXXJ2 



Price /■■■-- »» jaA fit- Auuwkr 1981 




IS : 9853 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
MILK COLLECTION TRAYS 

Dairy Equipment Sectional Committee, AFDC 35 

Chairman Representing 

Shri V. H. Shah Kaira District Cooperative Milk Producers' Union 

Ltd, Anand 

Members 

Shri R. N< Shah ( Alternate to 
Shri V. H. Shah ) 
Shri H. K. Agrawal Glaxo Laboratories ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Puri ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. s Banerjee Department of Agriculture & Animal Husbandry > 

Government of Bihar, Patna 
Shri R. P. Banerjee Chemical Vessels Fabricators ( P ) Ltd, Faridabad 

Shri D. P. Chowdhury ( Alternate ) 
Shri Asoke Basak Dairy Development Commissioner, Maharashtra State.. 

Bombay 
Dr A. P. Deshmukh ( Alternate ) 
Shri Rajinder Batra The A. P. V. Engineering Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri B, A. Khurody ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. P. Bhasin The Haryana Dairy Development Cooperative Federa- 

tion Ltd, Chandigarh 
Shri T. S. Chandraekaran Milk Commissioner, Government of Tamil Nadu, 

Madras 
Brig B. S. Dahiya Directorate of Military Farms ( Ministry of Defence ), 

New Delhi 
Shri Shahid Ali ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Dagupta Stainco Enterprises Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri S. Dagupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. B. Deshmukh Vulcan-Laval Limited, Bombay 

Shri N. J. Keshavdas ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ganesh National Committee on Science & Technology, New 

Delhi 
Shri A. S. Garg National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

Shri I. D. Moudgiix ( Alternate ) 

( Continued On page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act i XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9853 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1) 

Members Representing 

Joint Commissioner ( Dairy Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation, New Delhi 
Development ) 

Shri S. L. Tuli ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. N. Khan Delhi Milk Scheme, New Delhi 

Shri G. S. Mann ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. R. A. Krishnan Directorate General of Inspection ( DGI ) ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Kanpur 
Shri B. K. Ghosh {Alternate ) 
Shri J. P. Pal Milk Commissioner, Government of West Bengal, 

Calcutta 
Shri B. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Pandit Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shri P. S. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Pandya Venus Trading Company, Anand 

Shri M. S. Pandya ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. M. Patel Mehsana District Cooperative Milk Producers Union 

Ltd, Mehsana 
Shri M. V. Chaudhari ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Ramakrishna Rao The Andhra Pradesh Dairy Development Corporation 

Ltd, Hyderabad 
Shri M. A. Narasimhalu ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Ramasubramanian Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 
Shri K. L. Nangia ( Alternate ) 
Shri Bhanu C. Sanghani Unicorn Industries, Secunderabad 

Shri T. R. Janardhan ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. C. Sarma National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal 

Shri V. P. Aneja ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. K. Somany Hindustan National Glass & Industries Limited, 

Calcutta 
Shri D. D. Kothari ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Purnanandam, Director General, ISI, ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Agri & Food ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. P. Maitra 

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI 



IS : 9853 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
MILK COLLECTION TRAYS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 15 July 1981, after the draft finalized by the Dairy Equipment Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products 
Division Council. 

0.2 Milk collection trays are being increasingly used at the collection centres 
for facilitating collection and pouring of milk, through strainers, directly 
into the cans and for quick measurement of milk. 

0.3 This standard has been prepared on a request from the National Dairy 
Development Board, Anand. As these trays are being used in considerable 
quantities, a need was felt to formulate this specification to ensure hygienic 
handling of milk. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the 
same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements for milk collection trays. 

2. MATERIAL 

2.1 The trays shall be manufactured from stainless steel or tinned mild steel 
or aluminium alloy as specified in Table 1. All parts of the trays shall be 
of the same material. 

3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

3.1 The milk collection trays shall be manufactured in accordance with the 
shape and dimensions as shown in Fig. 1. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 9853 - 1981 



TABLE 1 MATERIAL FOR MILK COLLECTION TRAYS 

( Clause 2.1 ) 



Sl 

No. 


Material 


Conforming to 


Grade 


Thickness 
mm 


(1) 
i) 
ii) 


(2) 
Stainless steel 
Mild steel sheets 


(3) 
IS: 6911-1972* 
IS : 513-1973f 


(4) 
7 Cr 18 Ni 9 


(5) 
1'2 
2-00 


iii) 


Aluminium alloy 


IS : 737-1974* 


64430 


1-6 



♦Specification for stainless steel plate sheet and strip. 
fSpecification for cold rolled carbon steel sheets ( second revision ). 
{Specification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloys, sheet and strip ( for 
general engineering purposes ) ( second revision ). 



\ I 



d 

A 



85 



460 



A v -' 



L 



■0 40 



-0 3 MS WIRE 



-3 R 



SECTION AA 




610- 



^ — *;iipp 



-♦—150- 
40 



!-£ 



t^ 



SUPPORTS 



All dimensions in millimetres 

Fig. 1 Milk Collection Tray 



IS : 9853 - 1981 

4. MANUFACTURE 

4.1 The trays made of aluminium alloy shall be manufactured by pressing 
or spinning; the trays made from stainless steel and, mild steel sheet shall 
be manufactured by pressing from one piece or building up with longitudinal 
butt-welded joint from one piece. 

4.2 Corner — The corners of the milk collection trays shall be properly 
bent and soundly butt-soldered/brazed/welded depending on the material 
used. 

4.3 Spout — The shape and size of the bore in the direction of flow shall be 
so formed as to provide no lodgement for solid matter and shall be properly 
bent and soundly welded/brazed. 

4.4 Handle and Supports — Handle and minimum two supports shall be 
securely soldered/brazed/welded to the tray and finished smooth. 

4.4.1 The supports may be provided at the bottom of the tray to make it 
self-draining when placed at a level platform. 

4.5 Edge — The edge of the milk collection tray shall be fully beaded using 
mild steel wire of 3 mm diameter. 

4.6 All components of mild steel trays after fabrication shall be cleaned free 
from all traces of rust and then tinned all over by hot-dip process to a 
minimum coating of 20 mg/cm 2 counting both sides as determined by the 
method described in IS : 1327-1977". The tin used for tinning shall conform 
to grade Sn 99.75 of IS : 26-1966f. 

5. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

5.1 The general workmanship and finish shall be of sanitary standard. 

5.2 The welding of the trays shall be satisfactory in all respects. The weld 
shall not be porous or brittle. All welded joints shall be well dressed and 
smoothly finished. The soldering shall be neat and clean. The trays shall 
be finished smooth all over, and all sharp corners and burrs be removed. 
The trays shall be free from cracks, seams, dents and such other defects. In 
case of tinned mild steel trays, the tin deposit shall be even, well spread, 
smooth, bright and free from streaks, pinholes, de-wetted patches, visible 
untinned spots, flux inclusions and objectionable flow marks. 



*Method for determination of mass of tin coating on tinplate ( second revision ). 
tSpecification for tin ingot ( second revision ). 



IS : 9853 - 1981 
6. MARKING 

6.1 The outer side of the milk collection tray shall be marked legibly and 
indelibly with the following particulars: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Year of manufacture, and 

c) Batch or code number. 

6.1.1 Each milk collection tray may also be marked with the ISI Certifica- 
tion mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification marks ) Act and the Rules and Regula- 
tions made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 

6.2 In case of tinned mild steel trays, care shall be taken that the tin coating 
is not destroyed during marking. 



