HAFAI Wah IS 16677 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


Tura Weert — saat 
Wqfe — IAA fraa 
KAA ch few Maana 


Quality Management — Customer 
Satisfaction — Requirements for 
Complaint Handling in 
Organization 


ICS 03.120.10 


© BIS 2017 


ada res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e "rH WH, 9 au BAHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
aii MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 2 


Ouality Management Sectional Committee, MSD 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Ouality 
Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. 


A complaint is an expression of dissatisfaction. Complaints handling system is developed to manage the complaints 
which are associated with quality of product/service. Complaints handling mechanism helps an organization to 
build process(es) which enable it to consistently resolve/ dispose the complaints. 


This standard addresses the following aspects of complaints handling: 


a) 


b) 


g) 


enhancing customer satisfaction by creating a customer-focused environment that is open to feedback 
(including complaints), resolving any complaints received, and enhancing the organization’s ability to 
improve its product and customer service; 


top management involvement and commitment through adequate acquisition and deployment of resources, 
including personnel training; 


recognizing and addressing the needs and expectations of complainants; 

providing complainants with an open, effective and easy-to-use complaints process; 

analyzing and evaluating complaints in order to improve the product and customer service quality; 
auditing of the complaints-handling process; 

reviewing the effectiveness and efficiency of the complaints-handling process. 


In this standard wherever the term ‘product’ is used, it can also mean ‘service’. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from IS/ISO 9000 series of standards, 
IS/ISO 10002 ‘Quality management — Customer satisfaction — Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations’ 
and IS 15700 : 2005 ‘Quality management systems — Requirements for service quality by service organizations’. 


IS 16677 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


QUALITY MANAGEMENT — CUSTOMER 
SATISFACTION — REQUIREMENTS FOR 
COMPLAINT HANDLING IN ORGANIZATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements for the 
process of complaints-handling related to products and 
services provided by the organization. This standard is 
applicable for use by all organizations, regardless of 
size, type, products and services provided. 


1.2 The requirements for complaints-handling process 
covered in this standard do not apply to 


a) employment related complaints and disputes, 
and 

b) disputes referred for resolution outside an 
organization. 


NOTE — This standard may also be applied to internal 
customers’ complaints 


1.3 This standard is not intended to change any rights 
or obligations provided by applicable statutory and 
regulatory requirements. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below. 


IS No. 
IS/ISO 9000 : 
2015 


Title 
Quality management systems — 
Fundamentals and vocabulary 
(fourth revision) 
Quality management — Customer 
satisfaction — Guidelines for 
complaints handling in 
organizations (under print) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


IS/ISO 10002 : 
2014 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions, in addition to that given in IS/ISO 9000 
shall apply. 


3.1 Appeal — Request by the Complainant to the 
organization for reconsideration of a decision it has 
made relating to the complaint. 


3.2 Complaint — Expression of dissatisfaction made to 
an organization related to its products and services where 
aresponse or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected. 


3.3 Complainant — Person, organization, or its 
representative, making a complaint. 


3.4 Complaints-Handling Objective — Something 
sought, or aimed for, related to complaints handling. 


3.5 Customer — Organization or person that receives 
a product and/or service. 


3.6 Customer Satisfaction — Customer's perception 
ofthe degree to which the customer's requirements have 
been fulfilled. 


3.7 Feedback — Opinions, comments, suggestions and 
expressions of satisfaction/dissatisfaction. 


3.8 Non-conformity — Non fulfillment of a require- 
ment. 


3.9 Quality — Degree to which a set of inherent 
characteristics fulfils requirements. 

NOTES 

1 The ‘requirements’ include product and/or service requirements. 


2 "[nherent", as opposed to "assigned", means existing in 
something, especially as a permanent characteristic. 


3.10 Top Management — Person or group of people, 
who directs and controls an organization at the highest 
level. 


4 DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Complaints-Handling System 


The organization shall define and document its 
complaints-handling system including 

a) Scopeofcomplaint handling system in terms 
of its products and services; 

b) Complaints-handling policy; 

c) Objectives for improving the effectiveness of 
complaints-handling system; 

d) Responsibilities and authorities for handling 
of complaints; 

e) Description of complaints-handling 
process(es), including norms and those needed 
to directly support them; and 

f) Documented procedures required by this 
standard. 


IS 16677 : 2017 


4.2 Control of Documents 
4.2.1 All the documents required by this standard shall be 


a) approved for adequacy prior to issue; 

b) reviewed periodically, updated as necessary 
and re-approved. The changes made shall be 
identified; and 

c) legible and identifiable indicating their current 
revision status. 


4.2.2 The organization shall 


a) maintain a master list of all documents as 
required by this standard, which also identifies 
their current revision status; 

b) maintain distribution list of all such documents; 
c) ensure that the current versions of applicable 
documents are available at point of use; 

d) ensure that obsolete documents, if retained for 
any purpose, are suitably identified to prevent 
their unintended use; and 

e) ensure that the documents of external origin 
are identified and their distribution controlled. 


4.2.3 A documented procedure shall be established to 
define the controls needed for the above. 


NOTE — Documentation can be in any form or media including 
electronic copies. 


4.3 Control of Records 


Records (including files) shall be maintained to provide 
evidence of conformity to requirements and for the 
effective operation of the complaints-handling management 
system. The records shall remain legible, readily identifiable 
and easily retrievable. The method of identification, 
storage, protection, disposal of each record, their retention 
time and responsibility for each of these activities shall be 
established in a documented procedure. 


5 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY 


5.1 Management Commitment 
Top management shall 
a) establish the complaints-handling policy 
(see 5.2.1); 


b) ensure that objectives for improving the 
effectiveness of Complaints-handling system 
are established (see 5.3.1); 


c) conduct management reviews; 
d) ensure the availability of resources; and 
e) ensure the promotion of awareness of the 
complaint-handling process(es). 
5.2 Complaints-Handling Policy 


5.2.1 Top management shall ensure that complaints- 
handling policy 


a) is documented; 

b) isappropriate to the nature and type of product 
and services being offered by the organization; 

c) is made available to all personnel including 
customers and other stakeholders; 

d) is communicated and understood within the 
organization; 

e) includes a commitment to comply with 
requirements and continually improve the 
effectiveness of the complaints-handling 
management system; and 

f) isreviewed for continuing suitability. 


5.2.2 The complaints-handling policy shall provide a 
framework for establishing and reviewing objectives for 
improving the effectiveness of complaints-handling 
system. 


5.3 Objectives for Improving the Effectiveness of 
Complaints-Handling System 


5.3.1 Objectives for improving the effectiveness of 
Complaints-handling system shall be consistent with the 
complaints handling policy and shall be established for 
relevant functions and levels within the organization. 
All the objectives shall be measurable and documented. 


5.4 When establishing the above policy and objectives, 
the following factors shall be taken into account: 


a) organizational quality policy (if any); 

b) any relevant statutory and regulatory 
requirements; 

c) the input of customers and other interested 
parties; and 

d) past trends related to complaints. 


NOTE — Inputs may include the formal reports of customer 
satisfaction. 


5.5 Responsibility, Authority and Communication 


5.5.1 Top management shall designate nodal officer for 
co-ordination of complaint handling activities which 
include 


a) ensuring that process(es) needed for the 
complaints handling and obtaining feedback 
are established, implemented and maintained; 

b) reporting to top management of any 
complaints which have a significant impact on 
the organization; 

c) reporting to the top management on the 
performance of the complaints handling 
management system periodically; 

d) promoting awareness of complaints-handling 
process(es) internally and externally; and 

e) planning and organizing internal audit 
(see 8.2). 


5.5.2 Top management shall ensure that the 
responsibilities and authorities for complaint handling 
are established, communicated and understood at 
relevant functions and levels within the organization. 


5.5.3 Internal Communication 


Top management shall ensure that appropriate 
communication processes are established within the 
organization so that effective communication takes 
place for the various process(es) related to complaints- 
handling. 


5.6 Management Review 


5.6.1 Top management shall review the organization's 
complaints handling management system at planned 
intervals to ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy, 
efficiency and effectiveness. This review shall include 
assessing opportunities for improvement and the need 
for changes, including the complaints handling policy 
and objectives. Records of management reviews shall 
be maintained (see 4.3). 


5.6.2 The input to management review shall include 
information on 


a) follow-up actions from previous management 
reviews; 


b) results of audit; 

c) changes in customer perception; 

d) change in statutory/regulatory requirements 
affecting complaint-handling process(es); 

e) feedback from customer and complainants; 

f) the overall performance of the complaints- 
handling process(es) which will also include 
nature and type of complaints, recurring 
complaints and turn around time; 

g) status of remedial, preventive and corrective 
actions; and 

h) recommendations for improvement. 


5.6.3 Review output shall include any decisions and 
actions related to 


a) improvement in complaints-handling 
process(es); 

b) proposals on product, process and service 
improvement, as relevant; and 

c) resource needs. 


6 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 


6.1 The organization shall determine and provide 
resources for effective and efficient implementation of 
management systems for complaints-handling. The 
resources shall include human resources, infrastructure 
and work environment. 


6.2 The organization shall ensure that the personnel are 


IS 16677 : 2017 


a) selected on the basis of capability to satisfy 
defined job responsibility, 


b) trained to ensure that they understand the tasks 
to be performed and the objectives to be 
achieved including how they contribute to the 
achievement of objectives, 

c) aware of their responsibilities including 
promptly reporting on complaints which have 
a significant impact on the organization, 

d) aware of procedures to be followed and 
information to be given to the customers, and 


e) empowered to take relevant decisions in an 
efficient manner. 


6.2.1 The training records shall be maintained (see 4.3). 


6.3 The organization shall ensure that the personnel, 
who are in direct contact with the complainants 


a) areavailable and accessible, as specified; 

b) are sensitized to treat complainants in a 
courteous manner; 

c) respond promptly to complainant’s enquiry/ 
complaint; 

d) provide accurate, updated and complete 
information; and 

e) possess good interpersonal and good 
communication skills. 


6.4 Infrastructure and Work Environment 


The organization shall determine, provide and maintain 
the infrastructure and work environment necessary for 
effective complaints handling. 


NOTE — Infrastructure includes Information Management 
System. 


7 COMPLAINTS HANDLING PROCESS 


7.1 The organization shall establish a documented 
procedure for complaint handling process. The process 
shall include procedure for recording complaints and 
responses. Various steps in the complaints handling 
process shall include the following: 


a) Identification of complaint prone areas in a 
systematic manner and determine the time 
norms for their redress; 

b) Providing information concerning lodging of 
complaints in clear language and formats 
accessible to all. Such information shall 
include: 

1) where and how the complaints can be 
made, 

2) minimum information to be provided by 
complainant, and 

3) estimated time limits within which the 
resolution will be offered taking into 
account the nature of the complaint 


IS 16677 : 2017 


c) Widely publicizing, through web and other 
media the name, address, telephone number 
and other contact details of the nodal officer 
and local officer (if any) of the organization. 
This shall also be displayed prominently at the 
reception and other convenient places in the 
organization; 

d) Unique identification of the complaint and 
recording necessary information including 
relevant details of complainant, remedy 
requested, due date of redress, relevant data 
related to the complaint and immediate action 
to be taken (if any); 

e) Acknowledgement of each complaint promptly 
giving the complaint number along with an 
indication of the estimated redress time and 
the contact details of the employee to be 
contacted for all future correspondence; 

f) Scrutiny of the type and nature of complaint 
and its prioritization depending upon its 
seriousness and gravity; 

g) Investigation of relevant circumstances and 
information relating to the complaint. The level 
of investigation shall be commensurate with 
the seriousness and severity of the complaint. 
If the complaint cannot be immediately 
resolved, it shall be dealt in a manner which 
would lead to its effective redress as soon as 
possible and the complainant be intimated; 

h) Communication of the decision to the 
complainant regarding his complaint 
immediately after the decision is taken and 
getting his feedback. In case the decision is 
not in line with the remedy requested by the 
complainant, the justification for the decision 
taken along with alternative internal and 
external recourse available for appeal shall also 
be intimated and the complaint shall then be 
closed; and 

j) The organization shall establish an appeals 
mechanism in case the complainant is not 
satisfied with the remedy offered. The appeal 
mechanism shall ensure independence to ensure 
complete objectivity in handling the appeal. 

7.2 Records of complaint handling including recording 
complaints, responses and appeals, where applicable 
shall be maintained (see 4.3). 


8 MONITORING, MEASUREMENT AND 


IMPROVEMENT 


8.1 Monitoring and Measurement 


8.1.1 The organization shall monitor and measure the 


working of the complaints-handling process(es) against 
norms including time norms as applicable for each stage 
of the process(es). 


8.1.2 Complainant Satisfaction 


The organization shall establish and implement a system 
for measuring complainant satisfaction through suitably 
designed methodology. This information shall be used 
for establishing the objectives and for continual 
improvement. 


8.2 Internal Audit 


The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned 
intervals to determine whether the complaints-handling 
management system conforms to the requirements of 
this standard and to the documents established by the 
organization. An audit plan shall be documented 
indicating the scope, frequency of audit, auditor(s), 
auditee and audit date(s)/time. Selection of auditors and 
conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and 
impartiality ofthe audit process. Auditors shall not audit 
their own work. The auditee shall ensure that actions 
are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected 
non-conformities and their causes. Follow-up activities 
shall include the verification of the actions taken and 
reporting of verification results. Records of the audits 
shall be maintained (see 4.3). 


NOTE — See IS/ ISO 19011 : 2011 “Guidelines for auditing 
management systems' for guidance. 


8.3 Analysis of Data 


8.3.1 Theorganization shall analyze the complaints to 
identify systematic and recurring problems and trends 
to help improve the effectiveness and efficiency of 
complaints-handling process as well as to eliminate the 
underlying causes of complaints. 


8.3.2 The organization shall analyze the data collected 
during monitoring and measurement (see 8.1.1) 
including complaints received and customer satisfaction 
(see 8.1.2) to determine current level of performance 
and opportunities for continual improvement, 
particularly where nonconformities are recurring. 


8.4 Improvement 
8.4.1 Corrective and Preventive Actions 


The organization shall take action to eliminate the 
cause(s) of non-conformities and potential cause(s) in 
order to prevent recurrence and occurrence respectively. 
These shall be appropriate to the effects of the 
nonconformities encountered and potential problems. 
Records ofaction taken and improvements effected shall 
be maintained (see 4.3). 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 02 (0466). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


