NAT Alan IS 17242 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Trt deal & uiten ta 
ama aard! Hat Terre sore! 


Man Riding Chair Lift System for 
Transportation of Persons in Mines 


ICS 73.100.40 


@ BIS 2019 


anda AM sad 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEGE TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2019 Price Group 5 


Mining Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Mining 
Techniques and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


Man riding chair lift systems are being widely used for transportation of persons in mines. As a number of safety 
issues are involved and systems are to operate in hazardous conditions therefore the committee has decided to 
formulate a standard for use of stake holders. 


Use of man riding chair lift system for transportation of persons in underground mines shall comply with specific 
provisions of Mines Act, 1952 and Rules and Regulations made there under and Central Electricity Authority 
Regulations, 2010. No man riding shall be used unless it is of a type approved by the Chief Inspector of Mines and 
is maintained in its designed conditions. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17242 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


MAN RIDING CHAIR LIFT SYSTEM FOR 
TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONS IN MINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the design, construction, 
installation, operation, maintenance and testing of the 
chair lift system for the transportation of persons in 
mines. 


1.1 Design, Construction and Safety Provisions of 
the Man Riding Chair Lift System 


Every part of the system shall be of good construction, 
suitable material, of adequate strength and free from 
visible defect and shall be properly maintained. Every 
man riding chairlift system and each of the accessories 
thereof shall so far as is practicable be constructed 
of non-inflammable material and any inflammable 
material, if used, shall be shrouded with a suitable non- 
inflammable covering. 


No part of the equipment/ machine (for example, fan 
hubs, fan blades) shall be made of light metals or its 
alloys which causes incendive sparking due to impact 
or friction. 


1.2 Drive Station 


1.2.1 The drive station shall be firmly connected 
to a rigid foundation and so designed, constructed 
and maintained that with the power provided. The 
transportation of persons can be carried out with ease, 
regularity and safety. 


1.2.2 The drive station consisting of a drive unit, 
electrical systems, power pack and wire rope etc. shall 
not be a source of danger to the passengers and chair 
lift operator. The passenger entrance shall not cross 
the path of the travel without ensuring proper safety, to 
avoid any possible accident to the passengers. 


1.2.3 A suitable provision shall be made at prime mover 
or its controls to prevent reverse motion of prime mover. 


1.2.4 Drive station shall be fitted with speed indicator 
at a suitable location for easy monitoring by operator. 


1.2.5 Drive station shall be provided with a suitable 
over speed tripping device. 


1.2.6 The chair lift operator shall be located such that 
he will have clear view of the driving machinery and 
instrumentation. The controls and communicating 
devices will be within his reach. 


1.2.7 Adequate and suitable type fire extinguishers 
shall be kept available at the drive station. 


1.2.8 A suitable fencing and gate with interlock to stop 
the system shall be provided at drive station to avoid 
entry of unauthorized persons. 


1.3 Power Pack 


1.3.1 The Hydraulic power pack shall be consisting of 
suitable variable displacement hydraulic pump with 
seals compatible with the fire resistant hydraulic fluid 
and directly driven by adequately rated electric motor 
with cooling system. 


The following safety features shall be provided in the 
hydraulic power pack: 


a) Pressure relief valves, to relieve pressure beyond 
rated working pressure; 

b) Tripping at low oil level; 

c) Tripping on low oil pressure; 

d) Tripping if working oil temperature rises beyond 
85°C; 

e) Tripping if oil filter is choked; and 

f) Tripping on low booster pressure. 


1.3.2 The design of power pack shall be such that the 
speed of the rope can be adjustable from “zero to 3.0 
(three) meter/second maximum”. 


1.3.3 A suitable hydraulic device with locking 
arrangement shall be provided to regulate the speed 
of the rope and shall be capable of maintaining the 
constant speed of the system. 


1.3.4 A suitable hydraulic device shall be provided, 
such that the variation of the speed of rope during 
acceleration or deceleration (start/stop) shall not give 
any sign of discomfort to the passengers. 


1.3.5 An efficient cooling system shall be provided to 
maintain the hydraulic oil temperature within limits. 


1.4 Drive Unit and Sheave 


1.4.1 The drive unit shall be made of steel of adequate 
strength, consisting of drive sheave driven by high 
torque hydraulic motor and provided with spring 
applied hydraulically released (SAHR) brake for 


IS 17242 : 2019 


smooth, efficient and safe operation of the system. The 
drive unit shall be mounted on robust and rigid base 
frame made of steel section of adequate strength and 
suitably fenced. 


1.4.2 The diameter of driving sheave shall be not less 
than 80 times the diameter of wire rope. Drive sheave 
shall be provided with liner made of bronze and rubber/ 
polyurethane material, having adequate coefficient 
of friction. The diameter of return sheave shall not 
be less than the distance between two ropes. Return 
sheave shall be provided with liner made of rubber/ 
polyurethane material. 


1.4.3 The sheave, on which carrying rope is supported, 
shall be made of carbon steel casting and conforming 
to IS 1030 or its revised version. They shall be mounted 
on suitable bearings with proper locking. 


1.4.4 The speed of rope shall be maintained constant 
irrespective of any load conditions. The variation of 
speed in the most unfavourable conditions shall not 
exceed +5 percent. 


1.4.5 Power to drive sheave shall be stopped 
automatically when any brake is applied or any tripping 
device is activated. 


1.4.6 The contact angle of the rope on the drive sheave 
shall be designed such that even in most unfavourable 
combination of circumstances the required power is 
transmitted to the rope. 


1.4.7 The material specification of sheave are given at 
Annex A. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards at Annex A contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All the standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


3 BRAKES 


3.1 The system shall be provided with service brake 
and an emergency brake. Each of these brakes shall be 
able to ensure the safe stopping of the system under 
most unfavourable conditions of loading. 


3.2 The service brake shall be inbuilt in the closed 
loop hydraulic system consisting of the high torque 
hydraulic motor and the swash plate type pump. The 
service brake shall be capable of resisting the outside 
forces actuated by the loaded chair lift system on the 
drive sheave. 


3.3 The emergency brake shall be a spring applied 
hydraulically released (fail safe type). In case of any 


failure in the system, springs shall actuate the brake and 
stop the drive sheave. 


The factor of safety of all vital components forming the 
brakes shall not be less than 3.0 (three). 


4 EMBARKING AND  DISEMBARKING 
STATIONS 


4.1 Embarking and disembarking stations shall be 
provided at drive station, intermediate station and 
return stations. 


4.2 Both embarking and disembarking stations shall 
have horizontal gradient and adequate length. It shall 
be suitable to easily engage and disengage chairs with 
persons from the rope. 


4.3 Over travel limit switches shall be provided on 
either end of run so as to stop the system, if any chair 
reaches such limits. 


4.4 Adequate number of stretchers shall be kept 
available at return/intermediate stations to carry the 
injured persons comfortably by the chairlift system. 


4.5 Push button switch with locking arrangement shall 
be installed at drive station, return station, intermediate 
stations and at other suitable locations to stop the 
system completely in case of emergency as well as to 
facilitate maintenance of the system. 


5 CHAIRS 


5.1 The chair shall be ergonomically designed and 
provided with a cushioning seat (probably with back 
rest) to give comfort to the passenger(s) throughout the 
travel period. 


5.2 A suitable device to prevent backward movement of 
the chair shall be provided, wherever required. 


5.3 A secondary gripping provision in the four-roller 
assembly or any other suitable arrangement shall be 
provided to avoid uncontrolled movement of chair due 
to failure of rubber chuck in the four-roller assembly. 


5.4 Number(s) shall be legibly marked on the chairs 
and suitably arranged at every station for easy access 
to the passenger(s). 


6 ROUTE AND PROFILE OF THE ROADWAY 


6.1 The centre line of the roadway should be straight as 
far as possible. However, horizontal deflection/ vertical 
deflection of the travel may be permitted with curve 
station/deflection pulleys respectively provided that the 
load on the pulley satisfies the requirements. 


6.2 The route shall facilitate and allow persons to get 
down easily from chairs in case of power failure or due 
to any other reason. 


6.3 The total load on the rope shall be uniformly 
distributed all along the rope. 


6.4 In order to ensure free movement of passengers, the 
following clearances shall be provided: 


a) From side : 0.8m (min) 
b) From top of the chair seat to floor : 1.0 m (Max.) 
c) Centre to centre of rope : 1.2 m (Min.) 


6.5 Along the line, the distance between the two paths of 
travel of rope shall be, such as to avoid contact between 
persons swung by 12 degree towards one another. 


6.6 The minimum distance between two persons 
traveling along the line of path shall not be less than 
the maximum distance between two consecutive pulley 
stations. The same shall be ensured by any suitable 
device or mechanism. 


6.7 Roof bolt system, wherever adopted, shall withstand 
a minimum of 7 Tonnes anchorage test. 


6.8 Gradient of the road way shall be smooth as far as 
possible and shall not be more than 1 in 4. 


7 PULLEY STATIONS 


7.1 The pulley station/suspension tubes shall be fixed 
in the roof with suitable roof bolts or to the goal posts 
with suitable fasteners. 


7.2 All the pulleys and its liners shall be designed such 
that chair can pass over the pulleys smoothly without 
any jerk to passenger(s). 


7.3 The diameter of the deflection sheaves, used for 
diverting the rope horizontally for more than 5°, shall 
not be less than 50 times the diameter of wire rope to 
minimize the flexure loads on the rope. 


7.4 All pulleys shall be mounted on suitable sealed 
bearings. 


8 ROPE GUIDING 


8.1 The load on rope shall be equally distributed on 
carrying pulleys by maintaining gradual change in 
deflection of rope and by maintaining only one person 
between two pulley stations. 


8.2 The rope shall be aligned using pressing pulleys 
such that it shall be in the centre of each carrying pulley. 


8.3 The depression pulleys shall be provided to align 
the rope in such a way that the rope shall not leave the 
line of path. 


9 CROSSING 


The chair lift system shall not foul or interfere with any 
other transport system, such as conveyors, haulages, 
etc, as far as possible. In case of any unavoidability 


IS 17242 : 2019 


of interference, adequate precautions shall be taken 
to avoid any fouling of one system with the other. A 
suitable fool-proof system shall be provided at such 
junctions. 


10 CURVE STATION 


10.1 Curve station shall be designed as per the given 
angle with suitable deflection pulleys and railing 
arrangement so that the chair with passenger(s) shall 
move freely without getting down from the chair in 
both the travelling directions. 


10.2 Pulleys are to be provided such that load will 
be distributed equally. Number of pulleys shall be 
provided depending upon the angle of the curvature to 
minimize the flexure loads on the rope and wear and 
tear of pulleys. 


10.3 Curve station shall be designed considering 
passenger(s) safety and convenience. It shall be suitable 
to easily engage and disengage chairs with passenger(s) 
from the rope and glide smoothly over the curved rail 
with rated speed without any jerky moments. 


11 ROPE TENSIONING AND ANCHORING 
DEVICE 


11.1 The carrying rope shall be kept under tension at 
one end by counter weight type or any suitable type of 
tensioning arrangement. 


11.2 The tensioning tower in which the counter weights 
travel (in pit or construction above the ground) shall 
be protected from water and properly fenced. The free 
movement of the counter weight shall be ensured at all 
times. 


11.3 The travel of the counter weight shall be determined 
taking in to account the maximum variation due to the 
sag of rope. 


11.4 All the foundations of tensioning device, anchorage 
clamps, etc., be of adequate strength. 


11.5 Over stretch device (limit switches) shall be 
incorporated in the tensioning tower to stop the system 
in the event of rope stretches beyond the present limit 
or snapping of the rope. 


11.6 Scaling arrangement shall be provided on the 
tensioning tower to indicate/measure the moment of 
counter weight due to sag of rope. 


11.7 Limit switch on return pulley shall be provided to 
trip the system in the event of slackness of the bearing 
of the pulley. 


12 WIRE ROPE 


12.1 The wire rope shall be of approved by Chief 
Inspector of Mines and shall conform to IS 1855 or its 


IS 17242 : 2019 


revised version with minimum size of 16 mm diameter, 
construction of stranded 6 x 7, galvanized, non- 
lubricated and fiber core. The fiber core shall conform 
to IS 1804 or its revised version. 


12.2 The minimum breaking load of wire rope shall not 
be less than ten times the maximum pulling load by 
the system. The same rope shall be used for tensioning 
arrangement also by haulage. 


12.3 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or 
kinking of the rope while un-reeling of rope during 
installation. 


12.4 In-situ non-destructive test of all vital components 
of haulage engine and man raiding cars along with 
wire rope shall be tested once in every six months, 
conforming to at any Government approved laboratory 
or a test house accredited by National Accreditation 
Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 
subject to confirmation of its ability to conduct such 
tests, along with NABL accredited certificate for the 
purpose and testing personnel having valid competency 
level-II certificates for NDT issued from Indian Society 
for Non-Destructive Testing (ISNT)/American Society 
for Non-Destructive Testing (ASNT) and test reports 
certified by Competency level-III person issued 
from ISNT/ASNT, which may be accepted by Chief 
Inspector on the basis of the authenticity/legitimacy of 
the test house. 


13 SPLICES 


13.1 All splices shall be made by authorized personnel. 
The splicing length shall be conformed to IS 5245 
(Part 1) or its revised version (the length to be taken for 
splicing shall be not less than 960 times the diameter 
of the rope). 


13.2 Only one spliced joint along closed loop framed 
by the carrying rope is desirable. However, if the length 
of the rope way exceed 1.0 (one) kilo-meter, two splice 
joints may be permitted. 


14 ROPE LIFE AND DISCARDING FACTORS 


The life of rope shall be fixed by manager in 
consultation with engineer and in any case it shall not 
be more than 2 years and the norms of discarding of 
the rope shall conform to DGMS Tech. Cir. 77/1963 
or its revised version along with following additional 
conditions: 


a) Reduction in diameter of the rope is 10 percent of 
the original diameter when new, anywhere along 
the length of the rope. 

b) Broken wires with in any one strand exceed 
15 percent of the total no. of wires in that 
strand. 


15 COMMUNICATION AND SIGNALING 


15.1 Care shall be taken to ensure that the 
communication and signaling cables do not come into 
contact either with personnel riding on chair, rope, or 
into contact with other cables and apparatus even under 
adverse conditions. These cables shall be connected in 
such a manner to avoid interference with the ropes to 
ensure the safety and smooth operation. 


15.2 Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent 
the communication and signal cables do not come 
into contact with other cables and electrical apparatus. 
Precaution shall be taken to prevent against danger 
from lower voltage cables to charge with higher voltage 
cables, by leakage or contact. 


15.3 Pull cord switches shall be provided with 
indication lamp installed all along the chair lift system 
at an interval of 45 m, so that the system can be stopped 
from any point. 


15.4 In order to have better communication, loud 
hailing communication system (page phones) shall be 
provided for every 200 m. 


15.5 Pre-start warning alarm shall be of audio-visual 
type and provided all along the roadway, to warn 
the persons. The pre start alarm shall give warning 
signal for at least 10 s before every start of the rope 
movement. 


15.6 Signaling arrangement shall be such that signals 
can be passed from any point along the road way. 


16 ELECTRICAL 


16.1 The electrical equipment for chair lift system 
shall be selected in accordance with IS 9559or its 
revised version. For use in below ground coal mines, 
all electrical equipments associated with the man- 
riding car system, shall be of flame proof construction 
and intrinsically safe as per requirement, and such 
equipment/apparatus shall comply to relevant 
applicable standards and duly approved by Chief 
Inspector of Mines. 


16.2 All electric lighting fixtures shall be of flame proof 
construction. Provided that, the lighting fixtures may 
be of increased safety enclosure type ‘e’ in first degree 
gassy mines at locations other than return airways and 
in-bye of the last ventilation. 


16.3 No part of the structure or frame of the metallic 
body shall form a part of the electrical circuit or be 
connected to the electrical circuit. 


16.4 All parts of the electrical equipment shall be 
robust, totally enclosed, and have mechanical strength 
to withstand rough usage. 


16.5 All conductors shall be adequately insulated, 
protected and maintained in such a manner as to prevent 
leakage or sparking. 


16.6 All live parts shall be properly enclosed to prevent 
sparks, short-circuits, etc, when persons coming into 
contact accidentally with them, and shall be maintained 
in such a manner that there remains no possibility of 
inadvertently coming in contact with metallic structures 
or frames of the system. 


16.7 The relevant provisions of the Central Electricity 
Authority (Measures relating to Safety and Electric 
Supply) Regulations, 2010 as amended from time 
to time shall be complied in all matters relating to 
the installation, operation and maintenance of the 
equipment. 


16.8 The cables shall comply to the provisions of the 
DGMS Tech. Circular (Electrical) Approval No. 12 
dated 25.05.2015 and corrigendum vide DGMS Tech. 
Circular (Electrical) Approval No. 01 dated 19.02.2016 
or its revised version in addition to the special 
requirements, if any, specifically for safe operation of 
the equipment. 


16.9 All electrical equipment associated with the 
chairlift system shall be checked by electrical supervisor 
of the mine and the observations shall be recorded daily 
in a bound register kept for the purpose or in electronic 
form with due authentication. 


17 GENERAL CONDITIONS 


17.1 Adequate lighting arrangement shall be provided 
all along the road way. 


17.1.1 The speed of rope shall be fixed by Manager 
in consultation with engineer and original equipment 
manufacturer. 


17.1.2 Adequate number of competent persons 
including fitter, electrician, operator, rope splicer, and 
supervisors (Electrical, Mechanical and Mining) etc. 
shall be appointed. 


IS 17242 : 2019 


17.1.3 An engineer shall be authorized to hold charge 
of man riding chairlift system, and to be responsible for 
its installation, maintenance and safe working. 


17.1.4 Regular inspections of the system that is, shift 
wise, daily, weekly, monthly, half yearly etc., as per 
reguired original eguipment manufacturer manual, 
shall have to be carried out by a competent person 
appointed by the manager of the mine and results are to 
be recorded in a soft copy/bound paged book. 


17.1.5 The performance report of the man riding 
chairlift system shall be recorded as per Annex B and 
the same shall be kept available at mine office along 
with test certificates of rope and vital components. 


17.1.6 All fire resistant high pressure hydraulic hoses 
shall comply to the general order No. DGMS/Mech/ 
Technical Cir(Approval)/04 dated 13.02.2015 or 
its revised version and fire resistant hydraulic fluids 
shall comply to the general order No. DGMS/Mech/ 
Technical Cir(Approval)/02 dated 13.02.2015 or its 
revised version issued by this Directorate. 


17.1.7 All technical circulars/guidelines issued from 
this Directorate from time to time in the interest of 
safety shall be complied. 


17.1.8 The Chief Inspector of mines may by an order 
in writing and subject to such condition as may be 
specified therein require any modifications or additional 
requirements to be included in this standard on merit of 
the case. 


18 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the standard mark. 


IS 17242 : 2019 


IS No 


210 : 2009 
1030 : 1998 


1570 (Part 1) 
: 1978 


1804 : 2004 


1855 : 2003 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Grey iron castings (fifth revision) 
Carbon steel casting for General 
Engineering purpose (fifth revision) 


Schedule for wrought steels: Part 
1 Steels specified by tensile and/or 
yield properties (first revision) 
Steel wire ropes — Fiber main 
cores (fourth revision) 


Standard steel wire ropes for 
winding and man riding haulages in 
mines (second revision) 


IS No 
1904 : 1986 


2062 : 2011 


3973 : 1984 


Title 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations in 
soils General requirements (third 
revision) 

Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel (seventh revision) 


Code of practice for the selection 
installation and maintenance of 
wire ropes (first revision) 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 17.1.5 ) 


PERFORMANCE REPORT OF MAN RIDING CHAIR LIFT SYSTEM 


Date of Inspection: 


Mine: 


Area: 


IS 17242 : 2019 


SI No. 


Description 


Status 


1 


Name of the manufacturer 


Location (From - To) 


Date of commissioning 


Dgms approval no. 


Permission no. 


Valid up to: 


Length of travel (m) and Max. gradient 


INIIAI] AJN 


PUMP STATION 


Hour meter reading 


Ref. no. of electric motor 


Coupling 


Fastening/mounting of motor 


Oil leakage 


Boost pressure (MPa) 


Working pressure (MPa) 


Oil cooler 


Oil condition/working temperature 


Oil level/previous oil change HMR 


Oil filter condition 


Vibration if any 


DRIVE UNIT 


Drive unit motor seepage (Ipm) 


Outer leakage of oil 


Speed indicator 


Brake piston dimension: 
When released (in mm) 


When applied (in mm) 


Foundation of frame and fastenings of drive unit 


Brake test result (braking distance) 


Condition of drive sheave lining 


IS 17242 : 2019 


h) | Clearance between drive sheave and drive frame 


j) | Condition of brake pads 


k) | Clearance between brake pads and drive sheave face 


m) | Condition of bearing 


10 EMBARKING AND DIS-EMBARKING STATION AT DRIVE UNIT 


a) | Condition of lining of pulleys 


b) | Bearings of pulleys 


c) | Embarking rail with starting device 


d) | Disembarking rail with back run stop device 


e) | Fastening of complete construction 


f) | Stability/vibration of the structure 


11 GATE WAY AREA 


a) | Number of curve stations 


b) | Number of intermediate stations 


c) | Safety provisions at intermediate stations 


d) | Fastening/stability of all stations 


e) | Safety distance in all respects 


f) | Lining of pulleys 


g) | Roll bearing of pulleys 


h) | Stability/vibration of the curve station 


12 EMBARKING AND DIS-EMBARKING STATION AT RETURN UNIT 


a) | Condition of lining of pulleys 
b) | Bearings of pulleys 


c) | Embarking rail with starting device 


d) | Disembarking rail with back run stop device 


e) | Fastening of complete construction 


f) | Stability/ vibration of the structure 


13 RETURN STATION AND TENSIONING TOWER 


a) | Condition of lining of return pulley 


b) | Bearing of return pulley 


c) | Rope, return pulley and tensioning rope directions (in 
the same plane or not) 


d) | Suspension at trolley 


e) | Rollers of trolley 


f) | Condition of rails and suspensions 


g) | Alignment of counter weight 


IS 17242 : 2019 


h) | Condition of tensioning rope and rope clamps 


j) | Stability of tensioning tower 


k) | Max. travel of counter weights 


14 CHAIRS 


a) | Total no. of chairs in operation 


b) | Numbering of all chairs and history book 


c) | Rollers of suspension assembly 


d) | Bush bearing and shaft of suspension assembly 


e) | Average life of rope chuck 


f) | Chair suspension and seats 


g) | Max. clearance between chair and floor 


15 Rope 


a) | Original rope size 


b) | Name of rope manufacturer 


c) | Rope changed on date (life obtained) 


d) | Actual rope size and percent reduction 


e) | Condition of rope 


f) | No. of joints 


g) | Spinning of rope 


h) | NDT of rope 


16 ELECTRICAL CONTROL DEVICES 


a) | Proper function of start and stop device 


b) | No. of pull cord switches 


c) | Over speed tripping device (location of input) 


d) | Right position and function of counter weight limit 
switches 


e) | Proper function of audio visual alarm 


f) | Lighting arrangements at Pump station and other stations 


g) | Accessibility of controls to operator 


h) | Proper function of page phones 


j) | Provision of pull cord switches along the total length of 
travel 


GENERAL CONDITIONS 


Condition of floor along the travel 


Condition of roof and sides along the travel 


Separate SOPs circulated 


IS 17242 : 2019 


NDT (test report no. and date) 
attach the copy of test report 


No. of authorized fitters 


Name of the authorized engineer 


History of accidents, if any 


Overall performance 


Any other information: 


Name and Signature Name and Signature 
of Service Engineer of Survey Officer 


Name and Signature 
of Mine Manager 


10 


Name and Signature of 
Mine Engineer 


Name and Signature 
of Agent 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 08 (12391). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 CIT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern :C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


