(Reaffirmed 2002)

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO CORROSION OF METALS ( Second Revision )

ICS 01.040.77; 77.060

(8 BIS 1997

BUREAU OF ltdAl'lAK BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
110002

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI

Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee, MTD 24

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council This standard was first published in 1966 and subsequently revised in 1983. The standard is expected to remove any ambiguity and confusion that might arise from individual interpretation of different terms. In the present revision, number of additional definitions have been included and some of the definitions have also been aligned with IS0 8044 : 1989 `Corrosion of metals and alloys - Terms and definitions'. Assistance has also been derived from SHREIR ( L L ), ED Corrosion Vo12, 1977, Newness Butterworths, London.

IS 3531 : 1997

Indian Standard GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO CORROSION OF METALS ( Second Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard covers the terminology used in the field of corrosion of metals and alloys, including prevention technology. 2 DEFINITIONS 2.1 Accelerated Corrosion Test Corrosion test, carried out under more severe conditions that will yield results in a shorter time than in service. 2.2 Activation Overpotential That part of an over-potential ( polarization ) that exists across the electrical double layer at an electorde/ solution interface and thus directly influences the rate of the electrode process by altering its activation energy. 2.3 Active Freely corroding. 2.4 Active-Passive Cell Corrosion cell, with anode and cathode formed by active and passive surface areas of the same metal. 2.5 Addition Agent A substance, added to an electroplating solution to produce a desired change in the physical properties of the electrodeposit. 2.6 Adhesion The attractive force that exists electrodeposit and the substrate. 2.7 Alclad A composite, in which a thin layer of aluminium, or an aluminium alloy of good corrosion resistance, is bonded metallurgically to a high-strength aluminium alloy ( of lower corrosion resistance ) to provide a combination of these two properties. 2.8 Anaerobic Air or uncombined oxygen being absent. 1 between an 2.9 Anaerobic Bacteria ( Anaerobes ) Group of bacteria that are unable to multiply in any but a minute trace of oxygen. 2.10 Anarabolic Oxidation An oxidation reaction that conforms kinetically to a parabolic law so that the rate of oxidation decreases with thickness of the oxide. 2.11 Anion A negatively charged ion; it migrates to the anode of a galvanic or voltaic cell. 2.12 Anode Electrode at which anodic reaction predominates. 2.13 Anode Corrosion Efficiency The ratio of the actual corrosion rate of the anode to the theoretical rate according to Faraday's law expressed as a percentage. 2.14 Anode Polarization Difference between the potential of an anode passing current and the equilibrium ( or steady-state ) potential of the electrode having the same electrode reaction. 2.15 Anode Shield Protective covering of insulating material, placed on a painted structure in the immediate vicinity of the anode to reduce the cathodic current density in that area, thus preventing the development of excessive alkalinity and stripping of the paint (see Saponification, 2.241). 2.16 Anodic Protection Electrochemical protection by increasing the corrosion potential to a value corresponding to the passive state. 2.17 Anodic Reaction Electrode reaction equivalent to a transfer of positive charge from the electronic to the ionic conductor.
NOTE An anodic reaction is an oxidation process. An

IS 3531 : 1997
exampie common Me + in corrosion Me* + neis:

types : a) Drainage Bond - A bond used to effect dramage; and b) Resistance Bond - A bond, either incorporating resistors or adequate resistance in itself, used for the purpose of limiting current flow. 2.28 Breakway Corrosion A sudden increase in corrosion rate, especially in conditions like high-temperature dry oxidation, etc. 2.29 Breakdown Potential See Critical Pitting Potential (2.79). 2.30 Bright Plating Electroplating, electrodeposit reflectivity. under conditions whereby the has a high degree of specular

2.18 Anodizing The formation of oxide films on metals by anodic oxidation of the metal in an electrolyte solution. The term can be used for thin dielectric films but is more particularly applied to thick porous films on aluminium. 2.19 Anolyte The electrolyte solution adjacent to the anode. 2.20 Anti-Pitting Agent An addition agent, which is used to prevent the formation of pits or large pores in an electrodeposit. 2.21 Atmospheric Corrosion Corrosion with the earth's atmosphere at ambient temperature as the corrosive environment. 2.22 Attenuation The decrease in potential and current density along a long buried or immersed structure from the drainage point. 2.23 Attenuation Curve A graph of interfacial electrical potentials between the pipes and surrounding soil in cathodic protection schemes versus the length of the pipe. 2.24 Backfill The material which fills up the space between a buried anode and the surrounding soil. It should have low resistivity, moisture retaining capacity and be capable of increasing the effective area of contact between the anode and the environment. 2.25 Base Potential See Potential (2.214) 2.26 Bimetallic (Deprecated ) Corrosion; Contact Corrosion

2.31 Brightener An addition agent, used specifically to produce an electrodeposit of high specular reflectivity. 2.32 Brush Plating A method of electrodeposition in which the plating solution is applied to the article to be plated by means of an absorbent pad or brush which contains the anode. 2.33 Buffer A substance, or mixture of substances, which when present in an electrolyte solution tends to diminish fluctuations inpH. 2.34 Burnt Deposit A rough, poorly coherent, electrodeposit that results from the application of an excessively high current density. 2.35 Calcareous Scale A scale consisting largely of calcium carbonate and magnesium hydroxide which maybe precipitated from hard water. 2.36 Cathode Electrode at which cathodic reaction predominates. 2.37 Cathodic Area Area on which the cathodic ( Protection ) current is picked up from an electrolyte. 2.38 Cathodic Protection Electrochemical protection by decreasing the corrosion potential. 2

Galvanic corrosion, where the electrodes are formed by dissimilar metals or other electronic conductors. 2.27 Bond A metal piece, having very little electrical resistance, used for connecting two points on the same or different structures. Bond can be of following two

IS 3531 : 1997 2.39 Cathodic Reactant Species, which is reduced at a cathode. 2.40 Cathodic Reaction Electrode reaction equivalent to a transfer of negative charge from the electronic to the ionic conductor.
NOTE -- A cathodic reaction is a reduction process:

from a difference in concentration agent(s) near its electrodes. 2.52 Concentration Overpotential

of the corrosive )

( Diffusion or Transport

Change of potential of an electrode, caused by concentration changes near the electrode/solution interface, produced by an electrode reaction. 2.53 Corrosion Physicochemical interaction between a metal and its environment which results in changes in the properties of the metal and which may often lead to impairment of the function of the metal, the environment or the technical system, of which these form a part.
NOTE nature. This interaction is usually of an electrochemical

Ox+ne-+Red

2.41 Catholyte The electrolyte solution adjacent to the cathode. 2.42 Cation A positively charged ion; it migrates to the cathode in a galvanic or voltaic cell. 2.43 Caustic Embrittlement Stress-corrosion cracking of carbon steels caused by the presence of caustic alkali. 2.44 Cavitation Corrosion A process involving conjoint corrosion and cavitation 2.45 Cavitation Damage Erosion of a solid surface caused by the collapse of vacuum bubbles formed in a fluid. 2.46 Cell An electrolytic system, consisting of anode;cathode and an electrolyte. 2.47 Chemical Conversion Coating A protective or decorative coating which is produced deliberately on a metal surface by a chemical environment. 2.48 Chemical Polishing Improvement in the brightness and levelness of a surface finish of a metal by a chemical dissolution reaction. 2.49 Composite Plate An electrodeposit consisting of two or more layers of metals deposited separately. 2.50 Concentration Cell A galvanic cell, in which the emfis due to differences in the concentration of one or more electrochemically reactive constituents of the electrolyte solution. 2.51 Concentration Corrosion Cell Corrosion cell in which the potential difference arises 3
NOTE - The corrosion current density the rate of electrochemical corrosion. is equwalent to

2.54 Corrosion Cell Short-circuited galvanic cell in a corrosion system, the corroding metal forming one of its electrodes ( see also Galvanic Cell, 2.137 ). 2.55 Corrosion Control Control of the corrosion rate and form of attack of a metal of a given metal/environment system at an acceptable lever and at an economic cost. 2.56 Corrosion Current Current due to an electrode reaction, directly causing corrsion.

2.57 Corrosion Damage Corrosion effect which is considered detrimental to the function of the metal, the environment or the technical system, of which these form a part. 2.58 Corrosion Depth Perpendicular distance between a point on the surface of a metal affected by corrosion and the original surface of the metal. 2.59 Corrosion Effect Change in any part of the corrosion system caused by corrosion. 2.60 Corrosion-Erosion ( Erosion-Corrosion )

Conjoint action of corrosion and erosion resulting from the abrasive action of a fluid ( solution or gas >,

IS 3531 : 1997 moving at a high velocity, resulting in continuous removal of the protective film from the metal surface. 2.61 Corrosion Fatigue A process involving conjoint corrosion and alternating straining of the metal.
NOTE - Corrosion fatigue may occur when a metal is subjected to cyclic straining in a corrosive environment. Corrosion fatigue may lead to cracking.

corrosion system 2.69 Corrosion System System consisting of one or more metals and all parts of the environment which influences corrosion.
NOTE - Part of the environment may be coatlng, surface layer, additional electrode, etc.

2.70 Corrosion Test Test carried out to assess the corrosion behaviour of a metal, the environmental contamination by corrosion products, the effectiveness of corrosion protection or the corrosivity of an environment. 2.71 Corrosive Agent Substance which when in contact with a given metal will react with it. 2.72 Corrosive Environment Environment that contains one or more corrosive agents. 2.73 Corrosivity Ability of an environment to cause corrosion in a given corrosion system. 2.74 Couple (Bimetallic, Galvanic ) Two dissimilar metals in electrical contact. 2.75 Covering Power The ability of a plating solution to produce an electrodeposit, irrespective of thickness, at low current densities on all significant areas. 2.76 Crevice Corrosion Corrosion associated with, and taking place in, or immediately around, a narrow aperture or clearance. 2.77 Critical Anode Current Density Anodic current density that must be exceeded in order to produce an active to passive transition; for a given metal it varies with the nature of the solution, temperature, velocity, etc. 2.78 Critical Humidity The value of relative humidity of an atmosphere above which there is a sharp increase in the corrosion rate of a given metal. 2.79 Critical Pitting Potential The most negative potential required to initiate pits on the surface of a metal held within the passive region 4

2.62 Corrosion Inhibitor Chemical substance which decreases the corrosion rate when present in the corrosion system at a suitable concentration, without significantly changing the concentration of any other corrosive agent.
NOTE - A corrosion inhibitor is generally effective in a small concentration. In commercial applications additives are sometimes named as inhibitors.

2.63 Corrosion Interaction ( Interaction ) Increase or decrease in the rate of corrosion of a buried or immersed structure, caused by interception of part of the cathodic protection current applied to another buried or immersed structure. 2.64 Corrosion Potential Electrode potential of a metal in a given corrosion system.
NOTE - The term is used whether or not there is a net electrical current flowing to or from the metal surface under consideration.

2.65 Corrosion Product Substance formed as a result of corrosion. 2.66 Corrosion Protection Modification of a corrosion system so that corrosion damage is mitigated. 2.67 Corrosion Rate Corrosion effect on a metal per unit of time.
NOTE - The type of corrosion rate be used will depend on the technical system and on the type of corrosion effect. Thus corrosion rate may be expressed as an increase in corrosion depth per unit of time, or the mass of metal turned into corrosion products per unit area of surface per `unit of time, etc. The corrosion effect may vary with time and may not be the same at all points of the corroding surface. Therefore, reports of corrosion rates should be accompanied by information on the type, time dependency and location of the corrosion effect.

2.68 Corrosion Resistance Ability of a metal to withstand corrosion at a given

IS 3531 : 1997 of potentials, it varies with the nature of solution, temperature, time, etc. 2.80 Crossing Point A point where two or more buried or immersed structures cross in a plan. 2.81 Current Density Current intensity per unit area of the electrode. 2.82 Current Drainage Survey A survey to determine current requirements for cathodic-protection schemes. A temporary ground bed is installed at a suitable location and an impressed current is applied between it and the pipe or any other structure. A survey of potentials along the structure produces attenuation curves, and permits fairly accurate estimation of initial current requirements. 2.83 Current Efficiency The ratio of the rate ofthe actual electrochemical change at the electrode ( anode or cathode) to the theoretical rate according to Faraday's law, expressed as percentage. 2.84 Deactivation Prior removal of the constituent ( of a liquid ), that is, active in causing corrosion. The term is usually applied to the removal of oxygen by physical and/or chemical methods. 2.85 Dealloying Selective removal by corrosion of a constituent of an alloy. 2.86 Delayed Failure See Sustained Load Failure ( 2.270 ). 2.87 Depolarization Reduction or elimination (by physical or chemical methods) of the electrode polarization, needed to produce a specified current. 2.88 Deposit Attack Localized corrosion ( a form of crevice corrosion ) under a metal surface and resulting from a deposit on it. 2.89 Deposit Corrosion Corrosion associated with, and taking place under, or immediately around, a deposit of corrosion products or other substance. Driving emf is the open circuit potential difference between a structure to be protected ( a cathode ) and the system of anodes which protect this. The emf does not include the voltage drop in the soil or in the connecting load and is the total voltage available for establishing a protective circuit. The driving emf in galvanic cells are fixed while those in an impressed current system are variable. 2.97 Earth It can be defined as following: 2.90 Dezincification of Brass Selective corrosion of brass resulting in preferential removal of zinc. 2.91 Differential Aeration The stimulation of corrosion at a localized area due to the difference in oxygen concentration in the electrolyte solution in contact with the metal surface; the area in contact with the solution of lower oxygen concentration is the anode. 2.92 Differential Aeration Cell Corrosion cell, in which the potential difference arises from a difference in the concentration of oxygen near its electrodes.
NOTE - In some cases the differential may result in an active-passive cell. aeration cell

2.93 Diffusion Coating A coating produced temperatures. 2.94 Diffusion Layer The thin layer of solution adjacent to an electrode through which transport of species to or from the electrode surface occurs by diffusion rather than by convection. 2.95 Drainage Process of ( electric drainage ) draining away or drawing away electric current from a cathodically protected structure back to the source of current through an external conductor. 2.96 Driving emf by diffusion at elevated

a) The conducting mass of earth or of any
conductor therewith; in direct electrical connection

b) A connection, whether intentional or unintentional, between a conductor and the earth; and

IS 3531 : 1997 c) To connect any conductor with the general mass of earth.
NOTE - Ground is sometimes used in place of earth; both terms include expense of natural water.

2.105 Electrode Potential Voltage measured in the external circuit between an electrode and a reference electrode in contact with the same ionic conductor.
NOTE -- Ohmic potential drop is subtracted if more than one ionic conductor is included then the measured value may be only approximate.

2.98 Electrical Drainage Protection Electrochemical protection against stray-current corrosion by drainage of stray-current from the metallic object.
NOTE - The drainage can be obtained, for example, by connecting the metal to be protected to the negative part of the stray-current source, or by connecting to an auxiliary electrode.

2.106 Electrochemical

Protection

Corrosion protection achieved by electrical control of corrosion potential. 2.107 Electrode Reaction Interfacial reaction equivalent to a transfer of charge between electronic and ionic conductors. 2.108 Electrode Reaction Current Current resulting from the anodic and cathodic partial current of the electrode reaction.
NOTE - In the steady state the sum of the electrode reaction currents is equal to the net electrical current.

2.99 Electrochemical

Cell

A cell in which chemical energy is transferred into electrical energy. 2.100 Electrolytic Cell A cell in which electrical energy is used to bring about electrode reactions and is thus converted into chemical energy.
NOTE - The term `Electrochemical used to describe both types of cells. Cell' is frequently

2.109 Electrogalvanizing Galvanizing by electroplating. 2.110 Electroless Plating Formation of a metallic coating by chemical reduction, catalyzed by the metal deposited. 2.111 Electrolysis Decomposition by the passage of electric current. 2.112 Electrolyte A substance which in solution gives rise to ions; the term is also used for a solution of an electrolyte or for a molten ionic salt. 2.113 Electrolyte Solution

2.101 Electrochemical Corrosion Corrosion involving at least one electrode reaction. 2.102 Electrochemical Equivalent The theoretical number of moles of electrochemical change resulting from the passage of 1 Faraday of electrical change; if M is the molar mass ( kg ) and z the number of electrons required for- one act of the reaction then the electrochemical equivalent isM/z kg. 2.103 Electrode Electronic conductor. conductor in contact with an ionic

A solution in which the co bduction of electric current occurs by the passage of dissolved ions. 2.114 Electrolytic Cleaning Cleaning obtained at cathode or anode of a cell containing a suitable solution. 2.115 Electrode Acceptor

NOTE - In the electrochemical sense the electrode is in fact restricted to a narrow region on both sides of the interface of this system. The electrode is often named after the electrode reaction taking place, for example, oxygen electrode.

2.104 Electrode Polarization Change of electrode potential with respect to a reference value.
NOTE - Often the corrosion potential is used as the reference value. The change may be caused, for example, by the application of an external electrical current or by the addition of an oxidant or reductant.

A species in solution, that accepts one or more electrons from a cathode for each act of the cathodic reaction and is thus reduced to a lower valence state. 2.116 Electra-osmosis Passage of a liquid through a porous medium ( such as soil ) under the influence of a potential difference. 6

IS 3531 : 1997 2.117 ElectrophoreticPlating Production of a layer or deposit by discharge of colloidal particles in a solution on an electrode. 2.118 Electropolishing Surface finishing of a metal by making it the anode in an appropriate solution, whereby a bright and level surface showing specular reflectivity is obtained. 2.119 EMF Series A table of the standard equilibrium electrode potentials of systems of the type Mz+ ( aq ) + ze = M, relative to the standard hydrogen electrode, and arranged in order of sign and magnitude. 2.120 Epitaxy The phenomenon whereby a deposit or coating takes up the lattice habit and orientation of the substrate. 2.121 Equilibrium Potential The electrode potential of an unpolarized reversible electrode. 2.122 Erosion-Corrosion A process involving conjoint corrosion and erosion.
NOTE Erosion-corrosion may occur in, for example,

2.127 Fatigue Failure of metal under alternating stress. 2.128 Filiform Corrosion Corrosion in the form of hair or filaments progressing across a metal surface. 2.129 Film A thin coating of material, not necessarily thick enough to be visible. 2.130 Flade Potential The potential at which a metal which is passive becomes active ( see Passivation Potential, 2.197 ). 2.131 Flood Coat Application of coal-tar or bituminous coatings to pipelines by flooding the heated coating materials over the pipe surface; wrappings and slings are used to pull the coat underneath the pipe. 2.132 Fogging Reduction of the lustre of a metal by a film or particulate layer of corrosion product, for example, the dulling of bright nickel surfaces. 2.133 Fouling Deposition of flora and fauna on metals exposed tp natural waters, like sea water. 2.134 Free Corrosion Potential Corrosion potential in the absence of net electrical current flowing to or from the metal surface. 2.135 Fretting Corrosion A process involving conjoint corrosion and oscillatory slip between two surfaces in contact.
NOTE -- Fretting corrosion may occur, mechanical joints in vibrating structures. for example. at

conditions

of repeated

Pipes with high fluid flow velocity, and pipelines Pumps containing abrasive particles carrying fluid in suspension.

2.123 Evans - Diagram Diagram in which the potential versus current relationships for the cathodic and anodic reactions of a corrosion reaction aredrawn as straight lines intersecting at the corrosion potential, thus indicating the corrosion current associated with the reaction. 2.124 Exchange Current Density ( i,) The rate of exchange of electrons, expressed as an electric current per unit area, between the two species concerned in a reversible electrode process at the equilibrium potential. 2.125 Exfoliation Loss of material in the form of layers or leaves from a solid metal or alloy. 2.126 Faraday Quantity of electric charge required to bring about a change of one electrochemical equivalent ( 1F = 965OOC).
7

2.136 Galvanic Anode The electrode in a galvanic couple formed by two dissimilar metals, as applied to cathodic protection in which the galvanic current is flowing from this electrode into the electrolyte. The galvanic anodes corrode and are designated as sacrificial anodes. 2.137 Galvanic Cell Combination of different electrodes connected in series with an ionic conductor.

IS 3531 : 1997
NOTE - The galvanic cell is an electrochemical source of electrical current and will produce current when the electrodes are connected by an external conductor.

2.138 Galvanic Corrosion Corrosion due to the action of a corrosion cell.
NOTE - The term has often been restricted to the action of bimetallic corrosion cells, that is, bimetallic corrosion.

to the positive terminal of an independent source of direct current, in order to lead to earth the current used for the cathodic protection of a buried or immersed metallic structure. 2.148 Half-Cell One of the electrodes, and its immediate environment, in an electrochemical or electrolytic cell; particularly, an electrode and environment arranged for the passage of current to another electrode or especially for the measurement of its electrode potential. 2.149 Holiday A break or pinhole in an otherwise uniform protective coating. 2.150 Holiday Detector A high-voltage low-current output generator with a built-in spark gap used for detecting pinholes ( holidays ) in pipeline coatings. 2.151 Hydrogen Electrode An electrode at which the equilibrium H' ( aq ) +e = % H, is established. By definition, at unit activity of hydrogen ions and unit fugacity of hydrogen gas the potential of the standard hydrogen electrode E'H+/ % H,=O.OOV. 2.152 Hydrogen Embrittlement A process resulting in a decrease of the toughness or ductility of a metal due to absorption of hydrogen.
NOTE --- Hydrogen embrittlement often accompanies hydrogen formation, for example, by corrosion or electrolysis, and may lead to cracking.

2.139 Galvanic Current A dc current passing into or out of a structure due to a galvanic couple being established, in which the structure forms one of the electrodes. By using less noble metals artificial galvanic couples are formed in such a way, that the galvanic current protects a desired structure. 2.140 Galvanostatic Polarization (Intentiostatic) Polarization of an electrode during which the current density is main& :,l at a predetermined constant value. 2.141 Galvanic Protection Electrochemical protection in which the protecting current is obtained form a corrosion cell formed by connecting an auxiliary electrode to the metal to be protected. 2.142 Galvanic Series A list of metals and alloys based on their relative potentials in a given specified environment, usually sea water.
2.143

Galvanizing Hot-Dip

Coating of iron and steel with zinc using a bath of molten zinc. 2.144 Gaseous Corrosion Corrosion with gas as the only corrosive agent and without any aqueous phase on the surface of the metal. 2.145 Graphitic Corrosion Selective corrosion of grey cast iron, resulting in preferential removal of metallic constituents, leaving graphite. 2.146 Green Rot Carburization and oxidation of certain nickel alloys at around 1 OOO'C, resulting in a green corrosion product. 2.147 Ground Bed A system of buried or submerged electrodes connected 8

2.153 Hydrogen Overpotential (Overvoltage) The displacement of the equilibrium or steady-state electrode potential of a cathode required for the discharge of hydrogen ions at a given rate per unit area of electrode. 2.154 Immunity ( Thermodynamic ) A condition whereby the equilibrium activity of metal ions ( simple or complexed ) in solution is prevented from exceeding some arbitrary value by making the potential of the metal sufficiently negative to that of the solution. Pourbaix has defined this arbitrary activity at 10e6 ion/ 1. 2.155 Impingement Attack Localized corrosion resulting from the action of corrosion and/or erosion ( separately or conjoint ) when liquids impinge on a surface.

IS 3531 : 1997 2.156 Impressed Current Cathodic current supplied by a dc source to a structure in order to lower the potential to the protective potential for cathodic protection. 2.157 Impressed Current Protection Electrochemical protection in which the protecting current is supplied by an external source of electric energy. 2.158 Inhibitor A substance added to an environment in small concentrations to reduce the corrosion rate. 2.159 Inseparable Anodes and Cathodes Anodes and cathodes which cannot be distinguished experimentally although their existence is postulated by theory. 2.160 Insulating Flanges Flanges which permit mechanical continuity but break the electrical continuity on a pipe. The flange faces have insulating gaskets in between and the nuts and bolts are again insulated from the substantial flanged faces. 2.161 Interaction See Corrosion Interaction ( 2.63 ). 2.162 Interaction Testing Routine investigation carried out when installing cathodic protection schemes on pipelines.
NOTE - The accepted criterion in the United Kingdom is that when the secondary structure potential has been moved more than 0.02 V in a positive direction, step must be taken to eliminate the interaction. 2.163

corrodent as co-ordinates and curves ( IS0 corrosion curves ) of various specified constant corrosion rates of the metal. 2.167 Knife-Line Attack Severe highly localized attack ( resembling a sharp cut into the metal ) extending only a few grains away from the fusion line of a weld in a stabilized austenitic stainless steel, which occurs when the metal comes into contact with hot nitric acid and is due to the precipitation of chromium carbides. 2.168 Knife-Line Corrosion Corrosion resulting in a narrow slit in or adjacent to the filler/parent boundary of a welded or brazed joint. 2.169 Layer Corrosion Corrosion of internal layers of wrought metal, occasionally resulting in exfoliation, that is, detachment of unattached layers.
NOTE - Exfoliation is generally oriented in the direction of rolling, extrusion or principal deformation.

2.170 Leveller A substance which is added to a plating bath to produce a levelling or smoothing action. 2.171 Levelling Action The ability of a plating bath to produce a surface which is smoother than that of the substrate. 2.172 Limiting Current Density The current density at which change of polarization produces little or no change of current density. 2.173 Line Wrapping The technique of wrapping a pipeline over the pipeline trench; applied only to welded steel pipelines. It is carried out by a line-wrapping machine which travels along the pipe, cleaning and priming it, pulling in the reinforcement, and if necessary, applying the outer wrap. 2.174 Linear Polarization The linear relationship between overpotential and current density, that is. considered to prevail at potentials very close to the corrosion potential. 2.175 Local Anodes and Cathodes See Inseparable Anodes and Cathodes ( 2.159 )
9

Intergranular Corrosion

Corrosion in or adjacent to the grain boundaries of a metal. 2.164 Internal Oxidation ( Subsurface Corrosion, Subscaie Formation ) Formation of isolated particles of corrosion product ( or products ) beneath the metal surface, which may be coated with a uniform film of corrosion product. 2.165 Ion An electrically charged atom or complex or atoms. 2.166 IS0 Corrosion Chart A chart having temperature and concentration of the

IS 3531 : 1997 2.176 Localized Corrosion Corrosion at discrete sites of the metal surface exposed to the corrosive environment. 2.177 Locating and Bonding When cathodic protection is applied to an existing jointed pipeline, all joints must be located without digging up the pipe. On location, each joint is exposed and an electrically conducting bond, usually galvanized steel strip or copper cable, is welded into position. 2.178 Matt Surface A surface of low specular reflectivity. 2.179 Metal Distribution Ratio The ratio of the thicknesses of metal produced during electroplating on two specified parts of the cathode. 2.180 Metal Spraying Application of a metal coating to a surface ( metallic or non-metallic ) by means of a spray of metal particles. The metal particles may be produced by `Atomizing' a metal wire in a flame-gun or by introducing metal power into a similar gun. 2.181 Microbial Corrosion Corrosion associated with the action of microorganisms present in the corrosion system. 2.182 Migration of Ions Movement of ions towards the anode and cathode under the influence of an electrical potential gradients. 2.183 Millscale Thick oxide layer on metals produced during fabrication by hot rolling; most of the oxidation occurs as the metal passes from one rolling mill to the next. 2.184 Negative Potential See Potential ( 2.214 ). 2.185 Nearest Equation The thermodynamic relationship between the reversible potential of the reaction ( or half-reaction ) and the activities of the species involved in the reaction. 2.186 Noble Potential See Potential ( 2.214 ). 2.187 Non-electrochemical Corrosion (Deprecated) Corrosion, Chemical A corrosion cell of a geometry that prevents intermingling of the anodic reaction products ( anolyte ) with the bulk solution, resulting in a decrease in pH of the anolyte; shielded areas, pits, crevices and cracks in the surface of the metal are the examples of an occluded cell. 2.190 Open Circuit Potential The potential of an electrode from which no significant current is flowing. 2.191 Overpotential (Overvoltage, Polarization) The displacement of the equilibrium (or steady-state) electrode potential, required to cause a reaction to proceed at a given rate. 2.192 Oxidation Loss of electrons by a species during chemical or electrochemical reaction; addition of oxygen or removal of hydrogen from a substance. 2.193 Oxidizing Agent A substance that causes oxidation of another species. 2.194 Partial Reactions Anodic reaction ( reactions) and cathodic reaction ( reactions ) constituting a single exchange process or a corrosion reaction 2.195 Partial Current ( Current Densities ) The currents ( current densities ) corresponding with each of the partial reactions. 2.196 Parting Selective dissolution of one metal, usually the most electro-reactive, from an alloy, leaving a residue of the less reactive constituent. 2.197 Passivation Potential A corrosion potential, at which the corrosron current has a peak value, and above which there is a range of potential, where the metal is rn a passive state. 2.198 Passivation Decrease of corrosion rate by the formation of a corrosion product on the metal surface. 10 2.188 Normal Electrode Potential See Electrode Potential ( 2.105 ). 2.189 Occluded Cell

Corrosion not involving electrode reaction.

IS 3531 : 1997 2.199 Passivator A substance which in solution causes passivity. 2 200 Passive State, Passivity State of a corrosion system resulting from passivation.
NOTE The passive state usually refers to the metal.

into oxide during a high temperature reaction. 2.206 Pits (In Electroplating)

oxidation

Macroscopic channels in an electrodeposit which may or may not extend to the substrate. 2.207 Pitting Corrosion

2.201 Passivity A metal or alloy which is thermodynamically unstable in a given electrolyte solution is said to be passive when it remains visibly unchanged for a prolonged period. The following should be noted: a) During passivation the appearance may change if the passivating film is sufficiently thick, for example, interference films on titanium; Corrosion resulting in pits, that is, cavities ektending from the surface into the metal. 2.208 Pitting Initiation Potential Lowest value of the electrode potential at which pit initiation is possible on a passive surface.
NOTE - In some countries the pitting initiation potential has beencalled `Pitting potential', whereas in other countries the latter term refers to the potential achieved after pitting has become established.

b) The electrode potential of a passive metal is
always appreciably more noble than potential in the active state; and its

2.209 Pitting Potential Potential at which a metal pit ( see also Critical Pitting Potential, 2.79 ). 2.210 Polarization (Overpotential, Overvoltage) Difference of the potential of an electrode from its equilibrium or steady-state potential. 2.211 Potential@ Equilibrium Diagram ( Pourbaix Diagram ) Diagram with equilibrium potential and pH as co-ordinates, that show the phases that are at equilibrium when a metal reacts with water or an aqueous solution of a specified electrolyte. 2.212 Pores, Porosity ( In Coating) Microscopic channels in coatings ( metallic or nonmetallic ) which extend to the substrate. 2.213 Positive Potential See Potential ( 2.214 ). 2.214 Potential Potential difference at an electrode defined with reference to another `specified electrode. a)
Base Potential - A potential towards the negative end of a scale of electrode potentials. The potential of an electrode which is made cathodic is said to become `more base'; or `more negative' (preferred term). Negative Potential -

cl Passivity is an anodic phenomenon,

and control of corrosion by decreasing cathodic reactivity, for example, amalgamated zinc in sulphuric acid or by cathodic protection is not passivity.

An alternative definition of passivity is that a metal in a given solution is said to become passive when there is a significant decrease in the corrosion rate on raising the potential of the metal above a certain critical value by an external emf or by adding an oxidant to the solution. 2.202 Patina A green coating of corrosion products of copper ( basic sulphate, carbonate and chloride ) which forms on copper or copper alloys after prolonged atmospheric exposure. 2.203 pH A measure of the hydrogen ion activity defined by pH = - log a"+, where aH is the activity of the hydrogen ion. 2.204 Pickel ( Pickling ) A solution ( usually acidic ) used to remove or loosen corrosion products from the surface of a metal. Anodic and cathodic pickling are forms of electrolytic pickling in which the metal is anodically or cathodically polarized in the pickel. 2.205 Pitting-Bedworth Ratio Ratio of volume of oxide to volume of metal converted 11

b)

A potential

more

IS 3531 : 1997 negative than the potential of the standard hydrogen electrode. c) A potential towards the positive end of the scale of electrode potentials. The potential of an electrode which is made anodic is said to become more noble or more positive ( Preferred term ).
Noble Potential Potential - A potential more positive than the potential of the standard hydrogen electrode. Positive

2.223 Protective Current It is the total current to be picked up on the structure so that it reaches protective potential. 2.224 Protective Current Densrty Density of the current, to or from the surface. that is, required to maintain a potential in a protective potential range. 2.225 Protective Potential The potential of a structure with reference to a specified standard reference half cell at and below which the structure stops corroding due to any electrolytic action. 2.226 Rack A frame for suspending and carrying current to article during plating and related operations, 2.227 Rate-Determining Step ( rds )

d)

2.215 Potential/Current Density Curve; Polarization ( Curve Deprecated ) Diagram density. relating electrode potential to current

NOTE - The dependent variable can be either the electrode potential or the current density.

2.216 Polarization Resistance The quotient of electrode potential increment and current increment.
NOTE - Usually the polarization resistance is measured in the vicinity of the free corrosion potential.

The step in the sequence of steps of a reaction that has the highest activation energy and is thus rate controlling. 2.228 Reactive (Active Sacrificial ) Anode A mass of metal ( Mg, Zn and Al ) which buried or immersed and connected to a metallic structure which is to be protected, forms a cell with that structure and has the effect of making it more negative with respect to the surrounding environment. 2.229 Redox Potential The electrode potential of a reversible oxidation-reduction system like Cuz+/ Cu, Fe3+/Fe2, MnOJ Mn?, Cl&l -. 2.230 Redox System A reverisble oxidation-reduction 2.231 Reducing Agent A substance that causes reduction of another species. 2.232 Reduction system.

2.217 Potentiostatic Polarization Polarization of an electrode during which the potential is maintained at a predetermined constant value by means of a potentiostat. 2.218 Primary Structure The basic structure to which cathodic protection is to be applied, as distinct from a secondary structure, on which interference takes place. 2.219 Protective Coating Layer(s)of materialappliedto a metal surfaceto provide corrosion protection, 2.220 Protective Potential The threshold value of the corrosion potential which has to be reached to enter a protective potential range. 2.221 Protection Potential for Pitting Potential below which neither new pits can be initiated nor preexisting pits continue to propagate. 2.222 Protective Potential Range A range of corrosion potential values in which an acceptable corrosion resistance is achieved for a particular purpose. 12

A chemical or electrochemical reaction in which a species gains electrons; the removal of oxygen or the addition of hydrogen. 2.233 Reference Electrode Electrode, having a stable and reproducible potential, which may be used in the measurement of other electrode potentials.

IS 3531 : 1997 2.234 Relative Humidity The ratio of the amount of water vapour present in the atmosphere at a given temperature to the amount required for saturation at the same temperature, expressed as a percentage. 2.235 Remedial Bond A bond established between a primary and secondary structure in order to eliminate or reduce corrosion interaction. 2.236 Reversible Electrode An electrode in which a small increase or decrease in potential can reverse the direction of the electrode reaction. 2.237 Reversible Potential See EquilibriumPotential 2.238 Rust Visible corrosion products hydrated iron oxides. 2.239 Rusting ( Rust ) Corrosion of iron or ferrous alloys resulting in a corrosion product which consists largely of hydrous ferric oxide. 2.240 Sacrificial Anode See Reactive Anode ( 2.228 ). 2.241 Saponification Deterioration by softening of paint film caused by action of aqueous alkali, resulting from cathodic protection at excessively high current densities, on the fatty-acid constituents of the film. 2.242 Saturation Index An index which shows if a water of given composition andpH is at equilibrium, supemammted orunsaturated with respect to calcium carbonate or magnesium hydroxide. 2.243 Scale Solid layer of corrosion products formed on a metal at high temperature.
NOTE - The term `Scale' is also used in some countries for deposits of hardness salt from water.

corrosion and stress, which is usually confined to the stress-corrosion cracking of brass in ammoniacal environments. 2.245 Secondary Structure A structure not in view when anodic protection is originally planned, but enters the picture as a result of interference. 2.246 Selective Corrosion Corrosion of an alloy whereby the components react in proportions which differ from their proportions in the alloy. 2.247 Selective Leaching See Parting ( 2.196 ). 2.248 Sensitization Suseptibility of intergranular attack in a corrosive environment resulting from heating a stainless steel at a temperature and time that results in precipitation of chromium carbides at grain boundaries. 2.249 Service Corrosion Test Corrosion test conducted in service. 2.250 Sherardizing The coating of iron and steel with zinc by heating in contact with zinc powder at a temperature below the melting point of zinc. 2.251 Shield A non-conducting medium which is used for altering the current distribution on a cathode or an anode. 2.252 Simulated Corrosion Test Corrosion test conducted under simulated service conditions. 2.253 Spalling The break-up of a surface through the operation of internal stresses, often caused by differential heating or cooling. 2.254 Standard Electrode Potential See Electrode Potential ( 2.105 ). 2.255 Steady-State Potential The potential ( not varying with time ) of an electrode, that is, operating under steady-state conditions of zero or constant current density. 13

( 2.121).

consisting

mainly of

2.244 Season Cracking Cracking resulting from the combined effect of

IS 3531 : 1997 2.256 Stoichiometric Number Number of times the rate-determining occur for one act of the overall reaction. 2.257 Stray-Current Current flowing through paths other than the intended circuits. 2.258 Stray-Current Corrosion Corrosion due to stray-current. 2.259 Stress Intensity Factor ( Kisco ) A fracture toughness parameter used for evaluating susceptibility to stress-corrosion cracking. 2.260 Stress Corrosion A process involving conjoint corrosion and straining of the metal due to residual or applied stresses. 2.261 Stress Corrosion Cracking Cracking due to stress corrosion. 2.262 Strike (n ) An electrolyte solution used to deposit a thin film of metal at and initial current density lower than what is normally used. 2.263 Strike ( vb ) To electroplate for a short time at a higher initial current density than is normally used. 2.264 Stripping Removal of a metal coating by means of an electrolyte solution or an electrolyte solution and external emf. 2.265 Structure to Electrolyte Potential Potential of a structure with reference to a standard reference electrode located as close to the structure as is practically permissible in the electrolyte or soil. 2.266 Subscaie Formation See Internal Oxidation ( 2.164 ). 2.267 Substrate The basis metal on which a coating is present. 2.268 Subsurface Corrosion See Internal Oxidation ( 2.164 ). step must 2.269 Sulphate-Reducing Bacteria ( SRB ) Species of anaerobic bacteria Desulphovibno, that is, capable of causing rapid corrosion of iron and steel in near-neutral solutions in the absence of dissolved oxygen. 2.270 Sustained Load Failure Delayed failure due to the presence of hydrogen In stressed high tensile steels. 2.271 Symmetry Factor Ratio of distance across the double layer to summit of energy barrier/distance across the whole double layer. 2.272 Tafel Equation The linear relationship between the overpotential and the logarithm of the current density for an electrode reaction in which charge transfer is rate determining. 2.273 Tarnish Dulling, straining or discoloration of metals due to the formation of thin films of corrosion products. The term can also be applied to thin transparent film which may give rise to interference colours. 2.274 Temporary Protection Corrosion protection intended to last only for a limited time. 2.275 Thief An auxiliary cathode which is placed in a position relative to the article to be electroplated so that the current density on certain areas is reduced. 2.276 Throwing Power A measure of the ability of an ele&plating solution to give a uniform plate on a irregularly shaped cathode. 2.277 Transfer Coefficient (cc) The transfer coefficient of a cathodic process is the fraction of the electrical energy difference that assists the transfer of an ion through the double layer towards the electrode and inhibits its transfer in the reverse direction; frequently experimental values of cl: are approximately0.5. 2.278 Transpassivity Active behaviour of a metal at potentials more positive than those leading to passivity. 2.279 Transpassive State State of anodically passivated metal characterized b!

14

IS 3531 : 1997 a considerable increase of the corrosion current, in the absence of pitting, when the potential is increased. 2.280 Transport 2.283 Uniform Corrosion Corrosion proceeding at almost the same rate over the whole surface of the metal exposed to the corrosive environment. 2.284 Voltaic Cell A term sometimes used for an electrochemical cell, it is sometimes used to refer a cell in which chemical changes are caused by the application of an external en-if 2.285 Water-Link Corrosion Corrosion along, and as a consequence ence of, a gas/liquid boundary. 2.286 Weld Corrosion Localized attack in which the corrosion products form warlike mounds over the corroded areas. Corrosion associated with the presence of a welded joint and taking place in the weld or its vicinity. of the pres-

(Transference)

The term `transport' is frequently used to include diffusion as well as migration of an ion to an electrode, ( see Migration of Ions, 2.182 ).

2.281 Transport Number
The proportion of the current carried by a particular ion, it is also known as transfer number. 2.282 Tubereulation

15

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau oflndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards'are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard hasbeen developed from Dot : No. MTD 24 ( 3558 )

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

I

337 86 84 26, 99, 337 86 85 62 61

I 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 23502 16,2350442 235 15 19,235 23.15 8329295,8327858 I 8327891,8327892

BHUBANESHWAR. RHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADAEMD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
hinted at New India F&&g hcss, Khuja, India

