Ward Wah IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


wala 


UAT 1 Aare staat sit TT 


(Weer GRIT ) 


Luminaires 
Part 1 General Requirements and Tests 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 29.140.40 


© BIS 2014 


ada AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 FEMS BH AM, as feeeit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2014 Price Group 18 


Illumination Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee, ET 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Illumination Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This Standard (Part 1) was first published in 1982. Part 1 was one of the series of Indian Standards for luminaires. 
The series comprised of the following parts: 


Part 2 Constructional requirements, 
Part3 Screw and screwless terminals, 
Part4 Method of tests and 


Part5 Particular requirements. 


In this standard all the requirements which were earlier covered under Part | to Part 4 have been covered in this 
Part 1. 


It is also intended to revise all the series of standards under IS 10322 (Part 5) to cover general and safety 
requirements for particular types of luminaries. The presentation of photometry data for luminaires shall also be 
covered in Part 5 dealing with various types of luminaires in line with publications issued by the International 
Commission on Illumination (CIE) and is not, therefore, included in Part 1. 


In general this standard (Part 1) covers safety requirements for luminaires. The object of this standard is to 
provide a set of requirements and tests which are considered to be generally applicable to most types of luminaires 
and which can be called up as required by the detail specifications of IS 10322 ( Part 5) and their sections. This 
standard | is thus not to be regarded as a specification in itself for any type of luminaires, and its provision apply 
only to particular types of luminaires to the extent determined by the appropriate section of Part 5. 


Each section of Part 5 details requirements for a particular type of luminaires or a group of luminaires on supply 
voltages not exceeding 1 100 V shall be covered. These sections are published separately for ease of revision and 
additional sections will be added as and when a need for them is recognized. 


The sections of Part 5, in making reference to any of the sections of Part 1, specify the extent to which that 
section is applicable and the order in which the tests are to be performed; they also include additional requirements 
as necessary. 


The order in which various clauses of Part 1 are numbered has no particular significance as the order in which 
their provisions apply is determined for each type of luminaires or group of luminaire by the appropriate section 
of Part 5. All sections of Part 5 are self-contained and therefore do not contain references to other sections of 
Part 5. 


Where the requirements of any of the sections of Part 1 are referred to in the sections of Part 5 by the phrase ‘The 
requirements of section ... of IS 10322 shall apply’, this phrase is to be interpreted as meaning that all the 
requirements of that clause of Part 1 apply except those which are clearly inapplicable to the particular type of 
luminaire covered by that section of Part 5. 


In accordance with the present practice, Indian Standards are divided into those covering either safety or 
performance. In the lamp safety standards, ‘Information for luminaire design’ is given for the safe operation of 
lamps; this should be regarded as normative when testing luminaires to this standard. 


Attention is drawn to lamp performance standards which contain ‘information for luminaire design’; this should 
be followed for proper lamp operation; however, this standard does not require the testing of lamps performance 
as part of the type test approval for luminaries. 


(Continued on third cover) 


Indian Standard 


LUMINAIRES 


PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS 


( First Revision ) 


SECTION 0 GENERAL INTRODUCTION 


0.1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) specifies general requirements 
for luminaires, incorporating electric light source for 
operation from supply voltages up to 1 100 V. The 
requirements and related tests of this standard covers: 


a) Classification; 

b) Marking; 

c) Mechanical construction; and 
d) Electrical construction. 


Each section of this standard 1 shall be read in 
conjunction with this Section 0 and with other relevant 
sections to which reference is made. 


Attention is drawn to the fact that this standard 1 covers 
all aspects of safety (electrical, thermal and mechanical). 


The presentation of photometry data for luminaires is 
not included in this standard 1. 


Requirements are included in this standard 1 for 
luminaires incorporating ignitors with nominal peak 
values of the rated voltage pulse voltage not exceeding 
those of Table 11.2. The requirements apply to 
luminaires with ignitors built into ballast’s and to 
luminaires with ignitors separate from ballasts. For 
luminaires with ignitors built into lamps, the 
requirements are under consideration. 


Requirements for semi-luminaires are included in this 
standard 1. 


0.2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjunct to this 
standard: 


IS No. Title 


616: 1986 Safety requirements for mains 
operated electronic and related 
apparatus for household and similar 
general use (second revision) 

PVC insulated cables for working 
voltages up to and including 1 100 V 


(first revision) 


694 : 1990 


IS No. 
1271 : 1985 


1258 : 2005 


1293 : 2005 


1401 : 2008/ 
TEC 61031 : 
1997 

1416: 1972 

2215 : 1983 


2824 : 1975 


3010 (Part 1) : 


1965 


3010 (Part 2) : 


1965 


3323 : 1980 


5921 (Part 1): 


1993 


6616 : 1982 


7809 (All parts) 


8913 : 1978 


9000 (Part 7/ 
Sec 1 to 5): 
1979 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Title 


Thermal evaluation and classifica- 
tion of electrical insulation (first 
revision) 

Bayonet lampholders (second 
revision) 

Plugs and socket-outlets of rated 
voltages up to and including 250 
volts and rated current up to and 16 
amperes (third revision) 

Protection of persons and equipment 
by enclosures — Probes for 
verification (second revision) 
Safety transformers (first revision) 
Starters for fluorescent lamps (third 
revision) 

Method for determining the 
comparative tracking index of solid 
insulating materials under moist 
conditions (first revision) 
Appliance-connectors and appliance- 
inlets (non reversible three pin type): 
Part 1 Appliance connectors 
Appliance-connectors and appliance- 
inlets (non reversible three pin type): 
Part 2 Appliance inlets 

Bi-pin lamp holders for tubular 
fluorescent (first revision) 

Metal clad base material for printed 
circuit for use in electronic and 
telecommunication equipment: 
Part 1 General requirements and test 
(second revision) 

Ballasts for high pressure mercury 
vapour lamps (first revision) 

Guide for the determination of 
thermal endurance properties of 
electrical insulating materials 
Method of measurement of lamp cap 
temperature rise 

Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and 
electrical items: Part 7 Impact test 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


IS No. 


9968 (Part 1): 
1988 


9974 (Part 1): 
1981 

9974 (Part 2) : 
1981 


10276 (Part 2) : 


1982 
10322 (Part 5) 


10322 (Part 5/ 
Sec 4) : 1987 


11000 (Part 2/ 
Sec 2) : 1984 
11000 (Part 2/ 
Secl ) : 1984 


Title 


Elastomer insulated cables : Part 1 
For working voltages up to and 
including 1 100 V (first revision) 

High pressure sodium vapour lamps: 
Part 1 General requirements and tests 
High pressure sodium vapour lamps: 
Part 2 Standard lamp data sheets 

Edison screw lamp holders: Part 2 
Standard data sheets for lamp holders 


and gauges 
Luminaries: Part 5 Particular 
requirements 
Luminaries: Part 5 Particular 


requirements, Section 4 Portable 
general purpose luminaries 

Fire hazard testing: Part 2 Test 
method, Section 2 Needle-flame test 
Fire hazard testing: Part 2 Test 
method, Sec 1 Glow wire test 


11654 (All parts) Flexible insulating sleeving 


12063 : 1987 


15382 (Part 1): 


2003 


15382 (Part 3) : 


2006 


12948 : 1990 


15518 (Part 1): 


2004 


15687 (Part 1): 


2006 
SP 30: 1985 


IS QC 302400 : 


1994 


ISO 75 (1987) 


Classification of degrees of 
protection provided by enclosures of 
electrical equipment 

Insulation coordination for 
equipment within low voltage 
system: Part 1 Principle requirements 
and test 

Insulation coordination for 
equipment within low voltage 
system: Part 3 Use of coatings, 
potting or moulding for protection 
against pollution 

Tungsten halogen lamps (non- 
vehicle) 

Safety requirements for incandescent 
lamps: Part 1 Tungsten filament 
lamps for domestic and similar 
general lighting purposes 
Single-capped fluorescent lamps: 
Part 1 Safety requirements 

National Electrical Code 

Fixed capacitors for use in electronic 
equipment — Sectional specification 
for fixed capacitors for electro- 
magnetic interference suppression 
and connection to the supply mains 
Plastic and ebonite — Determination 
of temperature of deflection under 
load 


0.3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


Luminaires shall be so designed and constructed that 
in normal use they function safely and cause no danger 


to persons or surroundings. In general, compliance is 
checked by carrying out all the tests specified. 


0.3.1 A luminaire shall comply with relevant section 
of Part 2. If, however, an appropriate section of Part 2 
does not exist for a particular luminaires or group of 
luminaries, the nearest applicable section of Part 2 may 
used as a guide to the requirements and tests. 


Where the design of a luminaire is such that two or more 
sections of Part 2 are applicable, the luminaire shall 
comply with both or all of the appropriate sections. 


0.3.2 Semi-luminaires should be regarded as 
luminaires for test purposes. 


0.4 GENERAL TEST REQUIREMENTS AND 
VERIFICATION 


0.4.1 Tests according to this standard are type tests. 
For the definition of a “Type test’, see section 1. 


NOTE — The requirements and tolerances permitted by this 
standard are related to testing of a type test sample submitted 
for that purpose. Compliance of the types test sample does not 
ensure compliance of the whole production of a manufacturer. 
Compliance for production is the responsibility of the 
manufacturer and may include routine tests and quality 
assurance in addition to type testing. 


0.4.2 Except where otherwise specified in Part 1 or 
Part 2, luminaires shall be tested in an ambient 
temperature of between 15°C and 35°C. Luminaires 
shall be tested as delivered, and installed as in normal 
use, having regard to the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions. The lamp (or lamps) is (are) not included 
except where essential for the test. 


Luminaires cannot be regarded as meeting the 
requirements of this standard 1 unless all internal 
wiring is complete. 


In general, the tests are made on a single sample 
luminaire or, where a range of similar luminaires are 
involved, on a single luminaire of each rated wattage 
in the range or on a representative selection from the 
range as agreed with the manufacturer (see Annex S). 
This selection shall include the luminaire, together with 
any attachments, which represents the most 
unfavourable combination from a testing point of view. 


Each sample luminaire shall comply with all the 
relevant tests. In order to reduce the time of testing 
and to allow for any tests which may be destructive, 
the manufacturer may submit additional luminaires or 
parts of luminaires provided that these are of the same 
materials and design as the original luminaire and that 
the results of the test are the same as if carried out on 
an identical luminaire. Where the test for compliance 
is shown as being by inspection this shall include any 
necessary handling. 


For track-mounted luminaires the manufacturer shall 


provide, together with the luminaire, a sample of the 
appropriate track, connector and adaptors for the 
luminaires to be connected. 


Combination luminaires are tested for safety 
requirements with that assemblage of parts which gives 
the most unfavourable result. 


Certain parts of luminaries, such as joints, raising and 
lowering devices, may be tested separately provided 
that the design of these parts is such that their 
performance is not dependent upon the other parts of 
the luminaries. 


Luminaires intended to be used with non-detachable 
flexible cables or cords are tested with the flexible cable 
or cord connected to the luminaire. 


For luminaires intended to be used with but not 
normally supplied with a shade, the luminaire 
manufacturer shall provide a shade, typical of the type 
that might be used with the luminaire. 


0.4.3 Luminaires for testing to the requirements of this 
standard may have earlier test reports updated in 
accordance with this edition by submitting a new 
sample for test together with the previous test reports. 


Full type testing need not generally be necessary and 
the product and the previous test results shall be 
reviewed only against any amended clauses marked 
‘R’ and scheduled in Annex S. 


NOTE — Clauses marked ‘R’ and scheduled in Annex R shall 
be included in future amendments/revisions (editions). 


0.5 COMPONENTS OF LUMINARIES 


0.5.1 Components, other than integral components, 
shall comply with the requirements of the relevant 
Indian Standards, if any. 


Components which comply with the requirements of 
the relevant Indian Standards and are marked with 
individual ratings are checked to establish that they 
suit the conditions which may occur in use. Aspects of 
use not covered by the respective standard shall require 
them to satisfy the additional relevant requirements of 
this standard. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the relevant 
tests. 


Integral components shall comply as far as is 
reasonable with the relevant Indian Standards on 
components if any, as part of the luminaire. 


Internal wiring of a luminaire shall comply with the 
requirements in 5.3. 


NOTES 


1 This does not imply that components need to be separately 
tested before approval of the luminaire. 


2 This does not exclude the use of standardized cables. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


0.5.2 Components complying with the requirements 
of their own standard and used in accordance with their 
intended use, shall only be tested to the requirements 
of this standard where there are no requirements in the 
component standard (covering the requirements 
heading of this standard). 


Lampholders and starter holders shall additionally 
comply with the gauging and interchangeability 
requirements of the appropriate standard where 
applicable after building into the luminaire. 


NOTE — A valid test report should be considered adequate to 
show compliance. 


0.5.3 Components for which no appropriate Indian 
Standard exists shall satisfy the relevant requirements 
of this luminaire standard as part of the luminaire. 
Lampholders and starterholders shall additionally 
comply with the gauging and interchangeability 
requirements of the appropriate component standard 
where applicable. 


NOTE — Examples of components are lampholders, switches, 
transformers, ballasts, flexible cables and cords and plugs. 


0.5.4 Compliance with this standard can only be 
assured if protective shields of identical specification 
are used. 


SECTION 1 TERMINOLOGY 


1.1 General 


This section gives general definitions applicable to 
luminaires. 


1.2 Terminology 


For the purpose of all sections of this Part 1, the 
following definitions shall apply; other definitions 
related to lamps are to be found in the relevant lamp 
standards. 


Where the terms ‘voltage’ and ‘current’ are used, they 
imply the r.m.s. values unless otherwise stated. 


1.2.1 Luminaire — An apparatus which distributes, 
filters or transforms the light transmitted from one or 
more lamps and which includes all the parts necessary 
for supporting, fixing and protecting the lamps, but 
not the lamps themselves, and where necessary circuit 
auxiliaries together with the means for connecting them 
to the supply. 


NOTE — A luminaire with integral non-replaceable lamps is 
regarded as a luminaire except that the tests are not applied to 
the integral lamps or integral self blasted lamp. 


1.2.2 Main Part (of Luminaire) — It is that which is 
fixed to the mounting surface or is directly suspended 


from it or standing on it (it may or may not carry the 
lamps, lampholders and auxiliary gear). 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


NOTE — In luminaires for tungsten filament lamps, the part 
carrying the lampholders is normally the main part. 


1.2.3 Ordinary Luminaire — A luminaire providing 
protection against accidental contact with live parts but 
without any other special protection against dust, solid 
objects or moisture. 


1.2.4 General Purpose Luminaire — A luminaire which 
is not designed for a special purpose. 


NOTE — Examples of general purpose luminaires include 
pendants, some spotlights and certain fixed luminaires for 
surface or recessed mounting. Examples of special purpose 
luminaires are those for rough usage, photo and film 
applications and swimming-pools. 


1.2.5 Adjusted Luminaries — A luminaire, the main 
part of which can be turned or moved by means of 
joints, raising and lowering devices, telescopic tubes 
or similar devices. 


NOTE — An adjusted luminaire may be fixed or portable. 


1.2.6 Basic Luminaire — The smallest number of 
assembled parts that can satisfy the requirements of 
any of the sections of Part 5 of IS 10322. 


1.2.7 Combination Luminaire — A luminaire 
consisting of a basic luminaire in combination with 
one or more parts which may be replaced by other parts, 
or used in a different combination with other parts and 
changed either by hand or with the use of tools. 


1.2.8 Fixed Luminaire — A luminaire which cannot 
easily be moved from one place to another, either 
because the fixing is such that the luminaire can only 
be removed with the aid of a tool, or because it is 
intended for use out of easy reach. 


NOTE — In general, fixed luminaires are designed for 
permanent connection to the supply, but connection may also 
be made by means of a plug or similar device. 


Examples of luminaires intended for use out of easy 
reach are pendants and luminaires designed for fixing 
to a ceiling. 


1.2.9 Portable Luminaire — A luminaire which, in 
normal use, can be moved from one place to another 
while connected to the supply. 


NOTE — Luminaires for wall mounting provided with a non- 
detachable flexible cable or cord for connection to a plug and 
luminaires which may be fixed to their support by means of a 
wing screw, a clip or a hook so that they can easily be removed 
from their support by hand, are considered to be portable 
luminaries. 


1.2.10 Recessed Luminaire — A luminaire intended 
by the manufacturer to be fully or partly recessed into 
a mounting surface. 

NOTE — The term applies both to luminaires for operation in 


enclosed cavities and to luminaires for mounting through a 
surface such as a suspended ceiling. 


1.2.11 Rated Voltage — The supply voltage or voltages 
assigned to the luminaire by the manufacturer. 


1.2.12 Supply Current — The current at the supply 
terminals when the luminaire has stabilized in normal 
use at the rated voltage and frequency. 


1.2.13 Rated Wattage — The number and rated wattage 
of the lamps for which the luminaire is designed. 


1.2.14 Non-Detachable Flexible Cable or Cord — A 
flexible cable or cord which can only be removed from 
the luminaire with the aid of a tool. 


NOTE — Luminaires may be provided with non-detachable 
flexible cables and cords or designed for use with non- 
detachable flexible cables or cords for example types X, Y or Z 
attachments. 


1.2.15 Live Part — A conductive part which may cause 
an electric shock in normal use. The neutral conductor 
shall, however, be regarded as a live part. 


NOTE — The rest to determine whether or not a conductive 
part is a live part which may cause an electric shock is given in 
Annex A. 


1.2.16 Basic Insulation — Insulation applied to live 
parts to provide basic protection against electric shock. 


NOTE — Basic insulation does not necessarily include 
insulation used exclusively for functional purposes. 


1.2.17 Supplementary Insulation — Independent 
insulation applied in addition to basic insulation in 
order to provide protection against electric shock in 
the event of a failure of basic insulation. 


1.2.18 Double Insulation — Insulation comprising both 
basic insulation and supplementary insulation. 


1.2.19 Reinforced Insulation — A single insulation 
system applied to live parts, which provides a degree 
of protection against electric shock equivalent to 
double insulation. 


NOTE — The term ‘insulation system’ does not imply that the 
insulation must be one homogeneous piece. It may comprise 
several layers which cannot be tested singly as supplementary 
or basic insulation. 


1.2.20 (Not Used at Present) 


1.2.21 Class 0 Luminaire (Application to Ordinary 
Luminaires Only) — A luminaire in which protection 
against electric shock relies upon basic insulation. This 
implies that there are no means for the connection of 
accessible conductive parts, if any, to the protective 
conductor in the fixed wiring of the installation, 
reliance in the event of a failure of the basic insulation 
being placed on the environment. 


NOTES 


1 Class 0 luminaires may have either an enclosure of insulating 
material which forms a part of the whole of the basic insulation 
or a metal enclosure which is separated from live parts by at 
least basic insulation. 


2 If a luminaire with an enclosure of insulating material has 
provision for earthing internal parts, it is Class I. 


3 Class 0 luminaires may have parts with double insulation or 
reinforced insulation. 


4 Class 0 luminaires are not allowed in India. 


1.2.22 Class I Luminaire — A luminaire in which 
protection against electric shock does not rely on basic 
insulation only, but which includes an additional safety 
precaution in such a way that means are provided for 
the connection of accessible conductive parts to the 
protective (earthing) conductor in the fixed wiring of 
the installation in such a way that accessible conductive 
parts cannot become live in the event of a failure of 
the basic insulation. 


NOTES 


1 For a luminaire intended for use with a flexible cord or cable, 
this provision includes a protective conductor as part of the 
flexible cord or cable. 


2 Where a luminaire designed as Class I is fitted with a two- 
core flexible cord or cables with a plug which cannot be 
introduced into a socket-outlet with earthing contact (formerly 
Class OI), the protection is then equivalent to that of class 0, 
but the earthing provisions of the luminaire in all other respects 
should fully comply with the requirements of class I. 


3 Class I luminaires may have parts with double insulation or 
reinforced insulation. 


1.2.23 Class II Luminaire — A luminaire in which 
protection against electric shock does not rely on basic 
insulation only, but in which additional safety 
precautions such as double insulation or reinforced 
insulation are provided, there being no provision for 
protective earthing or reliance upon installation 
conditions. 


NOTES 
1 Such a luminaire may be of one of the following types: 


a) A luminaire having a durable and substantially 
continuous enclosure of insulating material which 
envelopes all metal parts with the exception of small 
parts such as nameplates, screws and rivets which are 
isolated from live parts by insulation at least equivalent 
to reinforced insulation. Such a luminaire is called an 
insulation encased Class II luminaire. 


b) A luminaire having a substantially continuous enclosure 
of metal, in which double insulation is used throughout, 
except for those parts were reinforced insulation is used 
because the application of double insulation is 
manifestly impracticable. Such a luminaire is called a 
metal-encased Class II luminaire. 


c) A luminaire having which is a combination of types (a) 
and (b). 
2 The enclosure of an insulation-encased Class II luminaire 
may form a part or the whole of the supplementary insulation 
or the reinforced insulation. 


3 If earthing is provided to assist starting, but is not connected 
to an accessible metal part, the luminaire may still be deemed 
to be of Class II. Lamps caps, shells and starting stripes on 
lamps are not regarded as accessible metal parts unless the 
tests of annex A show them to be live parts. 

4 If a luminaire with double insulation and/or reinforced 
insulation throughout has an earthing terminal or an earthing 
contact, it is Class I construction. However, a fixed Class II 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


luminaire intended for looping-in may have an internal terminal 
for maintaining the electrical continuity of an earthing 
conducting not terminating in the luminaire, provided that the 
terminal is insulated from accessible metal parts by Class II 
insulation. 


5 Class II luminaires may have parts in which protection against 
electric shock relies on operation at safety extra-low voltage 
(SELV). 


1.2.24 Class III Luminaire — A luminaire in which 
protection against electric shock relies on supply at 
safety extra-low voltage (SELV) and in which voltages 
higher than those of SELV are not generated. 


NOTE — A Class III luminaire should not be provided with 


means for protective earthing. 


1.2.25 Rated Maximum Ambient Temperature (t,) — 
The temperature assigned to a luminaire by the 
manufacturer to indicate the highest sustained 
temperature in which the luminaire may be operated 
under normal conditions. 


NOTE — This does not preclude temporary operation at a 


temperature not exceeding 1,+10 °C. 


1.2.26 Rated Maximum Operating Temperature of the 
Case of Ballast, Capacitor or Starting Device (t,) — 
The highest permissible temperature which may occur 
on the outer surface (at the indicated place, if marked) 
of the component under normal operating conditions 
at the rated voltage or maximum of the rated voltage 
range. 


1.2.27 Rated Maximum Operating Temperature of a 
Winding (t,,) — The operating temperature of a ballast 
winding which gives an expectancy of ‘10 years’ 
continuous service (at that temperature). 


1.2.28 Ballast — A unit inserted between the supply 
and one or more discharge lamps which by means of 
inductance, capacitance or resistance, single or in 
combination, serves mainly to limit the current of the 
lamp(s) to the required value. 


It may also include means for transforming from the 
supply voltage and arrangements which help to provide 
starting voltage and pre-heating current, prevent cold 
starting, reduce stroboscopic effect, correct the power 
factor and suppress radio interference. 


1.2.29 Independent Lamp Control Gear — A lamp 
control gear consisting of one or more separate 
elements so designed that it, or they, can be mounted 
separately outside a luminaire with protection 
according to the marking on the lamp control gear and 
without any additional enclosure. 


1.2.30 Built-in Lamp Control Gear — A lamp control 
gear designed to be built into a luminaire and not 
intended to be mounted outside a luminaire without 
special precautions. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


1.2.31 Integral Lampholder — A part of a luminaire 
which supports the lamp and provides electrical contact 
with it and which is designed as part of the luminaire. 


1.2.32 Ballast Compartment — That part of the 
luminaire in which the ballast is intended to be 
mounted. 


1.2.33 Translucent Cover — The light-transmitting 
parts of the luminaire which may also protect the lamps 
and other component parts. This term includes 
diffusers, lens panels and similar light-control 
elements. 


1.2.34 Fixed Wiring — A cable which is part of the 
fixed installation to which the luminaire is connected. 


NOTE — Fixed wiring may be brought into the luminaire and 
connected to terminals, including terminals of lampholders, 
switches and the like. 


1.2.35 Appliance Coupler — It means enabling a 
flexible cable to be connected at will to the luminaire. 
It consists of two parts: a connector provided with 
contact tubes which is the part integral with or designed 
to be attached to the flexible cable connected to the 
supply; an appliance inlet, provided with contact pins, 
which is the part incorporated in or fixed to the 
luminaire. 


1.2.36 External Wiring — Wiring generally outside 
the luminaire but delivered with it. 


NOTES 


1 External wiring may be used for connecting the luminaire to 
the supply, to other luminaires, or to any external ballast. 


2 External wiring is not necessarily outside the luminaire for 
its full length. 


1.2.37 Internal Wiring — Wiring generally inside the 
luminaire and delivered with it, which forms the 
connection between terminals for external wiring or 
supply cables and terminals of lampholders, switches 
and similar components. 


NOTE — Internal wiring is not necessarily inside the luminaire 
for its full length. 


1.2.38 Normally Flammable Material — Material 
having an ignition temperature of at least 200°C and 
which will not deform or weaken at this temperature. 


Examples: Wood and materials based on wood of more 
than 2 mm thickness. 


NOTE — The ignition temperature and the resistance of 
normally flammable materials to deformation or weakening are 
based on widely accepted values determined during a test period 
of 15 min. 


1.2.39 Readily Flammable Material — Material which 
cannot be classified as either normally flammable or 
non-combustible. 


Examples: Wood fibre and materials based on wood 
of up to 2 mm thickness. 


1.2.40 Non-Combustible Material — Material 
incapable of supporting combustion. 


NOTE — For the purpose of this standard, materials such as 
metal, plaster and concrete are regarded as non-combustible 
materials. 


1.2.41 Flammable Material — Material which does 
not comply with the glow-wire test requirements of 
13.3.2. 


1.2.42 Safety Extra-Low Voltage (SELV) — A voltage 
which does not exceed 50 V a.c. rms (see Note 1) 
between conductors, or between any conductor and 
earth, in a circuit which is isolated from the supply 
mains by means such as a safety isolating transformer 
or converter with separate windings. 


NOTES 
1 The d.c. value is under consideration. 


2 The voltage limit should not be exceeded either at full or no- 
load, but it is assumed, for the purpose of this definition, that 
any transformer or converter is operated at its rated supply 
voltage. 


1.2.43 Working Voltage — The highest r.m.s. voltage 
which may occur across any insulation at rated supply 
volts, transients being neglected, in open-circuit 
conditions or during normal operation. 


1.2.44 Type Test — A test or series of tests made on a 
type test sample, for the purpose of checking 
compliance of the design of a given product with the 
requirements of the relevant standard. 


1.2.45 Type Test Sample — A sample consisting of one 
or more similar units submitted by the manufacturer or 
the responsible vendor for the purpose of a type test. 


1.2.46 By Hand — Not requiring the use of a tool, a 
coin or other object. 


1.2.47 Terminal — That part of a luminaire or 
component which is necessary to make electrical 
connection to a conductor. See Sections 14 and 15. 


1.2.48 Looping-In (Feed Through) — A system of 
mains supply connection to two or more luminaires 
where each supply conductor is taken into and out of 
the same terminal. 


NOTE — A supply conductor may be cut to facilitate 
connections to a terminal (see Fig. 20). 


1.2.49 Through Wiring — Wiring which passes through 
the luminaires intended for interconnection of a row 
of luminaires. 


NOTE — The luminaire may or may not be electrically 
connected to the through wiring (see Fig. 20). 


1.2.50 Starting Device — An apparatus that, by itself 
or in combination with other components in the circuit, 
provides the appropriate electrical conditions to start 
a discharge type of lamp. 


1.2.51 Starter — A starting device, usually for 
fluorescent lamps, that provides for the necessary 
preheating of the electrodes and in combination with 
the series impedance of the ballast, causes a surge in 
the voltage applied to the lamp. 


1.2.52 Ignitor — A starting device that generates 
voltage pulses to start a discharge lamp and that does 
not provide for preheating of electrodes. 


1.2.53 Terminal Block — An assembly of one or more 
terminals in or on a housing or body of insulating 
material to facilitate interconnection between 
conductors. 


1.2.54 Rough Service Luminaire — A luminaire 
designed to withstand severe mechanical handling. 


NOTES 

1 The luminaire may, 
a) be permanently fixed, or 
b) be temporarily fixed on a construction or stand, or 
c) incorporate an integral stand or handle. 


2 Such luminaires are for use where normally rough 
circumstances occur, or where temporary lighting is required, 
for example, on building sites, engineering workshops and 
similar applications. 


1.2.55 Electro-Mechanical Contact System — A 
connection system within a luminaire by which the 
main part carrying the lamp holder is electrically and 
mechanically connected to the base plate or suspension 
device. It may or may not incorporate an adjusting 
device. 


The system may be dedicated to a specific luminaire 
design or may provide for connection of a variety of 
luminaire types. 


Figure 29 describes an electro-mechanical contact 
systems as defined in 1.2.55. As such the requirements 
of 4.11.6 and 7.2.1 shall apply. 


Because, in the situation described, the base and gear 
tray are unique and non-interchangeable, the base plate 
does not require marking with the rated current of the 
electrical connection, as specified in 3.2. 


1.2.56 Extra-Low Voltage d.c. Supplied Fluorescent 
Luminaire — A luminaire for operation from a battery 
voltage not exceeding 48 V d.c. nominal and 
incorporating a d.c./a.c. inverter using transistors for 
supplying power to one or more fluorescent lamps. 


NOTES 


1 Extra-low voltage d.c. supplied fluorescent luminaires may 
generate internal voltages higher than the supply power, and 
thus not belong to Class III. A risk of electric shock should be 
taken into account and guarded against with such luminaires. 


2 The value of 48 V is under consideration. 


1.2.57 Mounting Surface — The part of any building, 
furniture or other structure which a luminaire may in 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


any way be attached to, suspended from, stood on or 
placed upon in normal use and which will or is intended 
to support the luminaire. 


1.2.58 Integral Component — A component which 
forms a non-replaceable part of a luminaire and which 
cannot be tested separately from the luminaire. 


1.2.59 Self-Ballasted Lamps — A unit which cannot 
be dismantled without being permanently damaged, 
provided with a lamp cap and incorporating a light 
source and any additional elements necessary for 
starting and stable operation of the light source. 


NOTES 


1 The light source component of a self-ballasted lamp is not 
replaceable. 


2 The ballast component is part of the self-ballasted lamp; it is 
not a part of the luminaire. It is discarded at the end of the life 
and of the unit. 


3 For test purposes, self-ballasted lamp units should be regarded 
as conventional lamps. 


1.2.60 Semi-Luminaire — A unit similar to a self- 
ballasted lamp but designed to utilize a replaceable 
light source and/or starting device. 


NOTES 
1 The light source component and/or starting device of a semi- 
luminaire is readily replaceable. 


2 The ballast component is not replaceable and is not disposed 
off each time a light source is replaced. 


3 A lamp holder is required for a supply connection. 


1.2.61 Plug-Ballast/Transformer — A ballast or 
transformer incorporated in an enclosure provided with 
an integral plug as the means of connection to the 
electrical supply. 


1.2.62 Mains Socket-Outlet-Mounted Luminaire — A 
luminaire provided with an integral plug as the means 
of both mounting and connection to the electrical 


supply. 


1.2.63 Clip-Mounted Luminaire — An integral 
assembly of a luminaire and resilient spring clip, 
securing the luminaire in position on its mounting 
surface by a single hand action. 


1.2.64 Lamp Connectors — A set of contacts specially 
designed to provide a means of electrical contact but 
not to support the lamp. 


1.2.65 Mains Socket-Outlet — An accessory having 
socket-contacts designed to engage with the pins or 
blades of a mains plug and having terminals for the 
connection of cables or cords. 


1.2.66 Rewireable Luminaire — A luminaire so 
constructed that the flexible cable or cord can be 
replaced using general purpose tools. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


1.2.67 Non-Rewireable Luminaire — A luminaire so 
constructed that the flexible cable or cord cannot be 
separated from the luminaire using general purpose 
tools without making the luminaire permanently 
unusable. 


NOTE — Examples of general purpose tools are screwdrivers, 
spanners, etc. 


1.2.68 Lamp Control Gear — Devices employed for 
the control of lamps, for example ballasts, transformers 
and step-down convertors. 

NOTE — The definition does not include devices for the 


switching of lamps or the control of brightness such as dimmers 
and daylight sensors. 


1.2.69 Safety Extra-Low Voltage (SELV) Part — A 
current-carrying part supplied from within a luminaire 
of extra-low voltage [not exceeding 50 V a.c.(rms)] 
with respect to any other parts or earth. 


1.2.70 Dummy Lamp — A device incorporating a cap 
which is in compliance with the requirements of 
relevant Indian Standards. 


1.2.71 Self-Shielded Tungsten Halogen Lamp 
(Abbreviated: Self-Shielded Lamp) — Tungsten 
halogen lamp for which a protective shield on the 
luminaire is not needed. The packaging of these lamps 
is marked with the relevant symbol of Fig. 1. 


1.2.72 External Flexible Cable or Cord — A flexible 
cable or cord for external connection to the input or 
output circuit, fixed to or assembled with, the luminaire 
according to one of the following methods of 
attachment: 


a) Type X attachment — Method of attachment 
of the cable or cord such that it can be easily 
replaced. 


NOTES 


1 The flexible cable or cord may be specially prepared 
and only available from the manufacturer or his service 
agent. 


2 A specially prepared cable or cord may also include a 
part of the luminaire. 


b) Type Y attachment — Method of attachment 
of the cable or cord such that any replacement 
can only be made by the manufacturer, his 
service agent or similar qualified person. 


NOTE — Type Y attachment may be used either with 
an ordinary or a special flexible cable or cord. 


c) Type Z attachment — Method of attachment 
of the cable or cord such that it cannot be 
replaced without breaking or destroying the 
luminaire. 


SECTION 2 CLASSIFICATION OF 
LUMINAIRES 


2.1 General 
This section describes the classification of luminaires. 


Luminaires are classified according to the type of 
protection against electric shock, the degree of 
protection against ingress of dust, solid objects and 
moisture, and the material of the supporting surface. 


2.2 Classification According to the Type of 
Protection Against Electric Shock 


Luminaires shall be classified according to the type of 
protection against electric shock provided, as Class I, 
Class II and Class III (see definitions in Section 1). 


Luminaires shall have only a single classification. For 
example, for a luminaire with a built-in extra-low 
voltage transformer with provision for earthing, the 
luminaire shall be classified as Class I and part of the 
luminaire shall not be classified as Class III even 
though the lamp compartment is separated by a barrier 
from the transformer compartment. 


Semi-luminaires shall comply with all relevant 
requirements for Class II luminaires without being 
provided with the Class II symbol. 

NOTE — The Class II symbol is omitted in order to avoid the 


symbol being applied to the complete luminaire in which the 
semi-luminaire is used. 


2.3 Classification According to Degree of Protection 
Against Ingress of Dust, Solid Objects and Moisture 


Luminaires shall be classified in accordance with the 
‘IP number’ system of classification described in 
IS 12063. 


Symbols for the degrees of protection are given in 
Section 3. 


Tests for the degrees of protection are given in 
Section 9. 


NOTES 


1 Luminaires classified as water-tight are not necessarily 
suitable for operation under water; pressure watertight 
luminaires should be used for such applications. 


2 The IP numbers are the principal marking on luminaires but 
symbols may be used in addition to IP numbers if desired. 


2.4 Classification According to Material of 
Supporting Surface for which the Luminaire is 
Designed 


Luminaires shall be classified according to whether 
they are suitable for direct mounting on normally 
flammable surfaces in all cases, or are primarily 
intended for that application or are only suitable for 
mounting on non-combustible surfaces as follows: 


Classification Symbols 
Portable and handheld Symbol not 
luminaires required. 

Other fixed luminaires | Symbol required 
suitable for mounting on | (see Fig. 1). 
normally flammable surfaces. 

Other fixed luminaires | No symbol, but 


suitable for mounting on 
non-combustible 
only. 


warning notice may 
materials |be required (see 
Section 3). 


NOTE — Readily flammable surfaces are not suitable for the 
direct mounting of luminaires. Requirements for luminaires 
classified as primarily intended for direct mounting on normally 
flammable surfaces are given in Section 4 and related tests in 
Section 12. 


2.5 Classification According to the Circumstances 
of Use 


Luminaires shall be classified according to whether 
they are intended for normal use or for rough service. 


Classification Symbol 


Luminaires for normal use. | No symbol 
Luminaires for rough Symbol (see Fig 1, 
service. in 15.9.2.5). 


SECTION 3 MARKING 


3.1 General 


This section specifies the information to be marked on 
luminaires. 


3.2 Marking on Luminaires 


The following information shall be distinctly and 
durably marked on the luminaire (see Table 3.1). 


a) Marking to be observed when replacing lamps 
shall be visible on the outside of the luminaire 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


(except the mounting side) or behind a cover 
which is removed during lamp replacement 
and with the lamp removed. 


b) Marking to be observed during installation, 
shall be visible during installation on the 
outside of the luminaire or behind a cover or 
part which is removed during installation. 


c) Marking to be observed after installation shall 
be visible with the luminaire assembled and 
installed as for normal use and with the lamp 
is place. 


Marking may be on ballasts provided the conditions 
under 3.2 (a) or 3.2 (b), as appropriate, are fulfilled. 


The earthing symbol referred to in 3.2.12 may be 
marked on the ballast, instead of the luminaire, if the 
ballast is a non-replaceable type. The height of 
graphical symbols shall not be less than 5 mm except 
that the symbols for Class II and Class III luminaires 
and for the ‘F’ mark may be reduced to a minimum of 
3mm where the space available for marking is 
restricted. The height of letters and numerals either 
shown separately or with or as part of symbols shall 
not be less than 2 mm. 


For combination luminaires where the type references 
or the rated inputs are different for different 
combinations, the main part and the alternative parts 
may be marked with a type reference or a rated input, 
as appropriate, provided that the type can be identified 
and the rated input of the complete unit may be 
established from a catalogue or a similar document. 


For luminaires with electro-mechanical contact systems 
the base plate shall be marked with the rated current 
of the electrical connection, if the system can be used 
with a variety of different luminaire types. 


3.2.1 Mark of origin (this may take the form of a trade- 
mark, the manufacturer’s identification mark or the 


Table 3.1 Marking on Luminaires 
(Clause 3.2) 


Markings Belonging to a) Markings Belongings to b) Markings Belongings to c) 
3.2.8* Rated wattage 3.2.1— 3.2.2** Ambient temperature (see 3.2.3) 
3.2.10 Special lamps 3.2.4 — 3.2.5 IP number 
3.2.11 Cool beam 3.2.7 Type reference Lighted objects 


3.2.15 Bowl mirror 


3.2.16 Protective shield 
3.2.18 Ignition warning 
3.2.19 Self-shielded lamp 


3.2.12 Termination 


PA V X 


Rough service 


3.2.17*** Interconnected luminaires 


= 3.2.8 Rated wattage. For luminaires for discharge lamps with remote control gear, the marking may be replaced by the instruction: 


“For lamp designation, see control gear”. 


** 3.2.2 Rated voltage. For luminaires for discharge lamps. If the ballast is not built into the luminaire, the luminaire shall be marked 
with the working voltage instead of the mains voltage. For luminaires with built-in transformers for filament lamps, see IS 10322-2 6. 


*** 3.2.17 Interconnected luminaires. For fixed luminaires this information may alternatively be provided within the installation instructions. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


name of the responsible vendor) and country of 
manufacture. 


3.2.2 Rated voltage(s), in volts. Luminaires for tungsten 
filament lamps shall be marked only, if the rated 
voltage is different from 250 V. 


Portable Class HI luminaires shall be marked with the 
rated voltage on the outside of the luminaire. 


3.2.3 The rated maximum ambient temperature t, if 
other than 25°C (see Fig. 1). 


NOTE — Exceptions to this general requirement may be 
specified in particular sections of Part 5 of IS 10322. 


3.2.4 Symbols for Class II luminaires where applicable 
(see Fig. 1). 


For portable luminaires provided with a non-detachable 
flexible cable or cord, the symbol for Class II 
construction, if applicable, shall be on the outside of 
the luminaire. 


The class II symbols shall not be applied to semi- 
luminaires. 


3.2.5 Symbols for class II luminaire where applicable 
(see Fig. 1). 


3.2.6 Marking (if applicable) with IP numbers for 
degree of protection against ingress of dust, solid 
objects and moisture and, if desired, additional symbols 
(see Fig. 1 and Annex J). Where X is used in an IP 
number in Fig. 1, it indicates a missing numeral in the 
example, but both of the appropriate numerals shall 
be marked on the luminaire. 


In cases where different IP numbers apply to distinct 
parts of the luminaire, the lower number shall be 
marked on the type label on the luminaire whereas the 
higher number shall be marked separately on the part 
concerned. The instruction sheet supplied with the 
luminaire shall include details of the IP numbers 
applying to the various parts of the luminaire. The use 
of different IP numbers on different parts of a luminaire 
is only applicable to fixed luminaires. 


Marking of IP20 on ordinary luminaires is not required. 
3.2.7 Marker’s model number or type reference. 


3.2.8 Rated wattage or the designation as indicated on 
the lamp data sheet of the type or types of lamp for 
which the luminaire is designed. Where the lamp 
wattage alone is insufficient, the number of lamps and 
the type shall also be given. 


Luminaires for tungsten filament lamps shall be 
marked with the maximum rated wattage and number 
of lamps. 


Marking of maximum rated wattage for luminaires for 
tungsten filament lamps with more than one 


10 


lampholder may be in the form: 
“n x MAX...W”, n being the number of lampholders. 


3.2.9 Where applicable, the relevant symbol (see Fig. 1) 
for suitability or non-suitability for direct mounting or 
normally flammable surfaces or suitability for 
mounting in/on normally flammable surfaces when 
thermally insulating material may cover the luminaire. 
NOTE — A warning notice is not required when it is obvious 
that either a luminaire shall never be mounted on normally 
flammable surfaces, for example portable luminaires for garden 
use or a luminaire will always be mounted on normally 
flammable surfaces, for example, portable general purpose 


luminaires, portable child-appealing luminaires and luminaires 
for emergency lighting. 


3.2.10 Information Concerning Special Lamps, if 
Applicable 


In particular this applies to the symbols (see Fig. 1) 
for luminaire for use with high-pressure sodium lamps 
having either an internal starting device or requiring 
an external ignitor where the lamp is required to be 
marked with the same symbol according to 
IS 9974 (Part 1). 


3.2.11 Symbol (see Fig. 1), if applicable, for luminaires 
for lamps of similar shape to ‘cool beam’ lamps but 
where the use of a dichroic reflectorized ‘cool beam’ 
lamp might impair safety. 


3.2.12 Except for Type Z attachments, terminations 
shall be clearly marked or otherwise identified to give 
a clear indication as to which termination should be 
connected to the live side of the supply, where 
necessary for safety, or to ensure satisfactory operation. 
Earthing terminations shall be clearly indicated by the 
appropriate symbol. 


Luminaires with non-detachable flexible cables or 
cords which are not fitted with a plug shall include 
with the manufacturer’s instructions any information 
necessary to ensure safe connection, for example, 
deviations from the national standardized color coding 
of the cores. 


Extra-low voltage d.c. supplied fluorescent luminaires 
shall have positive supply terminations marked ‘+’ or 
coloured red and negative supply terminations ‘—’ or 
coloured black. 


3.2.13 Symbol (see Fig. 1) for minimum distance from 
lighted objects, if applicable, for luminaires which 
might otherwise overheat the lighted objects due to 
various reasons (for example the applied lamp type, 
the shape of the reflector, the adjustability of the 
mounting means or the location of mounting as 
indicated in the installation instructions). 


The minimum distance marked shall be determined by 
the temperature test described in 12.4.1 (J). 


The distance is measured on the optical axis of the 
luminaire from that part of the luminaire or lamp which 
is nearest to the lighted object. 


The symbol for minimum distance and explanation of 
its meaning shall also be given either on the luminaire 
or in the instructions with the luminaire. 


3.2.14 Symbol (see Fig. 1), if applicable, for rough 
service luminaires. 


3.2.15 Symbol (see Fig. 1), if applicable, for luminaires 
which are designed for use with bowl mirror lamps. 
NOTE — Separate bowls for attachment to GLS lamps without 


reference to luminaires testing are not within the scope of this 
standard. 


3.2.16 Luminaires incorporating a glass protective 
shield shall be marked as follows: 


‘Replace any cracked protective shield’ 
or 
With the symbol (see Fig. 1). 


3.2.17 The maximum number of luminaires that may 
be interconnected or the maximum total current that 
may be drawn by means of couplers provided for 
looping-in connection to the mains supply. For fixed 
luminaires this information may alternatively be 
provided within the installation instructions. 


3.2.18 A warning symbol or notice for luminaires with 
ignitors for use with double ended high pressure 
discharge lamps if the voltage measured according to 
Fig. 26 exceeds 34 V peak. 


a) Warning symbol visible during replacement 
of the lamp. The symbol shall be explained 
on the luminaires or in the manufacturer’s 
instructions provided with the luminaires, or 

b) A warning notice near the to the holder of a 


replaceable ignitor or replaceables witching 
element, if any: ‘Attention, remove 
replaceable device before replacement of 
lamp. After lamp-replacement reinsert 
replaceable device’. 


3.2.19 Symbol (see Fig. 1) for luminaires which are 
designed for use with self-shielded tungsten halogen 
lamps only. 


3.3 Additional Information 


In addition to the above making, all details which are 
necessary to ensure proper installation, use and 
maintenance shall be given either on the luminaires or 
on built-in ballasts or in the manufacturer’ s instructions 
provided with the luminaires, for instance: 


Written instructions related to safety shall be in a 
language which is acceptable in the country in which 


11 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


the equipment is to be installed. 


3.3.1 For combination luminaires, the permissible 
ambient temperature, the class of protection or the 
protection against ingress of dust, solid objects and 
moisture of an alternative part if not at least equal to 
that of the basic luminaires. 


3.3.2 Nominal Frequency in Hertz (Hz) 
3.3.3 Operating Temperatures 
a) 


The rated maximum operating temperature (of 
a winding) f,,, in degree Celsius; 

b) The rated maximum operating temperature (of 
a capacitor) f,, in degree Celsius; 

c) The maximum temperature to which the 
insulation of supply cables and 
interconnecting cables will be subjected 
within the luminaire under the most 
unfavourable conditions of normal operation, 
if in excess of 90°C (see remarks under sl 
no. (X) of to Table 12.2 relating to unsleeved 
fixed wiring). The symbol to indicate this 
requirement is given in Fig. 1. 

d) Spacing requirements to be observed during 
installation. 


3.3.4 A symbol or a warning notice that the luminaire 
is not suitable for mounting on a normally flammable 
surface (see Fig. 1). 


3.3.5 A wiring diagram, except where the luminaire is 
suitable for direct connection to the mains supply. 


3.3.6 Special conditions for which the luminaire, 
including the ballast, is suitable; for instance, whether 
or not the luminaire is intended for looping-in. 


3.3.7 Luminaires provided with metal halide lamps 
shall, if applicable, be provided with the following 
warning notice: 


‘The luminaire shall only be used complete with its 
protective shield’. 


3.3.8 The limitations of use or application for semi- 
luminaires. 


3.3.9 In addition, the manufacturer shall be prepared 
to supply information on the power factor and the 
supply current. 


For connections suitable for both resistive and 
inductive loads, the rated current for the inductive load 
shall be indicated between brackets and shall 
immediately follow the rated current for the resistive 
load. The marking may accordingly be as follows: 


3(1 
3(1) A 250 V or 3(1)/250 or 3 a 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


NOTE — The rated current values do not apply to circuits in 
general but only to the rating of the luminaire as a whole. 


3.3.10 Suitability for use ‘indoors’ including the related 
ambient temperature. 


3.3.11 For luminaires using remote control gear, the 
range of lamps for which the luminaire is designed. 


3.2.12 For clip-mounted luminaires a warning when 
the luminaire is not suitable for mounting on tubular 
material. 


3.3.13 The manufacturer shall provide the 
specifications of all protective shields. 


3.3.14 Where necessary for correct operation, the 
luminaire shall be marked with the symbol for nature 
of supply (see Fig. 1). 


3.3.15 The rated current at rated voltage shall be 
declared by the manufacturer for any socket outlet 
incorporated in the luminaire, if less than the rated 
value. 


3.3.16 The information about rough service luminaires 
concerning: 


a) The connection to IPX4 rated socket outlets; 


b) The correct mounting taking into account the 
temporary installation; 

c) The correct fixing to a stand, and also where 

the stand is not supplied with the luminaire, 

the maximum height of a possible stand, and 

its required stability by the indication of the 


number and minimum length of the legs. 


3.3.17 For luminaires with X, Y or Z attachments, the 
mounting instructions shall contain the substance of 
the following information: 


a) For Type X attachments having a specially 
prepared cord — If the external flexible 
cable or cord of this luminaire is damaged, it 
shall be replaced by a special cord or cord 
exclusively available from the manufacturer 
or his service agent. 

b) For Type Y attachments — If the external 

flexible cable or cord of this luminaire is 

damaged, it shall be exclusively replaced by 

the manufacturer or his service agent or a 

similar qualified person in order to avoid a 

hazard. 

For Type Z attachments — The external 

flexible cable or cord with of this luminaire 

which cannot be replaced; if the cord is 
damaged, the luminaire shall be destroyed. 

3.3.18 Luminaires which are other than ordinary, 

provided with a PVC non-detachable cable or cord, 

shall be provided with information about the intended 
use, that is, “For indoor use only’. 


12 


3.4 Test of Marking 


Compliance with the requirements of 3.2 and 3.3 is 
checked by inspection and by the following test: 


The durability of the making is checked by trying to 
remove it by rubbing lightly for 15 with a piece of 
cloth soaked with water and, after drying, for a further 
15 s with a piece of cloth soaked with petroleum spirit 
and by inspection after the tests detailed in Section 12 
have been completed. 


After the test, the marking shall be legible, marking 
labels shall not be easily removable and they shall show 
no curling. 


NOTE — The petroleum spirit used should consist of a solvent 

hexane with a content of aromatics of maximum 0.1 percent by 

volume, a value of 29 percent for kauri-butanol, an initial 

boiling-point of approximately 65°C, a dry-point of 

approximately 69°C and a density of approximately 0.68 g/cm’. 
The luminaire may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


3.5.1 The use of Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


SECTION 4 CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 General 


This section specifies general constructional 
requirements for luminaires. See also Annex L. 


4.2 Replaceable Components 


Luminaires incorporating components or parts 
intended to be replaceable shall be so designed that 
there is sufficient space to permit replacement of such 
components or parts without difficulty and without 
impairing safety. 
NOTE — Sealed-in components and riveted parts are not 
replaceable components. 


4.3 Wireways 


Wireways shall be smooth and free from sharp edges, 
burrs, flashes and the like, which might cause abrasion 
of the insulation of the wiring. Parts such as metal set 
screws shall not protrude into wireways. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if necessary, 
by dismantling and reassembling the luminaire. 


4.4 Lampholders 


4.4.1 The requirements for electrical safety of integral 
lampholders shall be those applicable to the luminaire 


as a whole with the lampholder and lamp is fully 
assembled position, as for normal use. 


In addition, integral lampholders shall, when mounted 
in the luminaire, comply with the requirements 
concerning safety during insertion of the lamp as 
specified in the appropriate lampholders standard. 


4.4.2 Connection of wiring to integral lampholder 
contacts may be made by any method giving reliable 
electrical contact over the service life of the 
lampholder. 


4.4.3 Luminaire for tubular fluorescent lamps designed 
for end-to-end mounting shall be so designed that the 
lamp may be changed in the middle luminaire of a row 
without adjusting any other luminaire. In multi-lamp 
luminaires for tubular fluorescent lamps, the changing 
of any one lamp shall not impair the security of the 
other lamps. 


Compliance with the requirements of 4.4.1 to 4.4.3 is 
checked by inspection. 


4.4.4 Lampholders which are put into position by the 
user shall be capable of easy and correct positioning. 


The distance between the pair of fixed lampholders 
for a fluorescent lamp intended to be set in a fixed 
position shall comply with the lampholder 
manufacturer’s mounting instructions. The fixing 
device of lampholders shall have adequate mechanical 
strength so as to withstand such rough handling as may 
be expected in normal use. These requirements apply 
both to lampholders put in position by the user and to 
lampholders put in position by the luminaire 
manufacturer. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, measuring and, 
if applicable, by the following mechanical tests: 


a) Lampholders for a fluorescent lamp, with a 
test-cap in position, are subjected, for 1 min, 
to a pressure applied to the centre of the cap 
in the direction of its axis of, 

1) 15 N of G5 lampholders; 
2) 30N for G13 lampholders; and 


3) 30 N for lampholders for single-capped 
fluorescent lamps (G23, G10q, GR8, etc). 


After the test, the distance between the holders shall 
comply with the relevant Standard Sheet of IS 3323 
and the lampholder shall show no damage. The test- 
cap for his test shall comply with the IS 3323 for G 5 
and G 13 lampholders. 


Test-caps for other lampholders are under 
consideration. 


After the test on lampholders for single-capped 
fluorescent lamps the lampholders shall not have 


13 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


moved from its position and the fixing device shall 
show no permanent deformation, so that the lamp, 
when reinserted, will come in its intended position. 


b) Mounting brackets for Edison screw or 
bayonet-capped lampholders are subjected to 
testing for 1 min, to the following bending 
moments: 


1) For E14 and B15 lampholders: 1.0 Nm; 

2) For E27 and B22 lampholders: 2.0 Nm; 
and 

3) For E40 lampholders:Value under 
consideration. 


4.4.5 For luminaires with ignitors, the peak pulse 
voltage occurring across contacts in lampholders which 
are part of the pulse voltage circuit shall not be greater 
than the pulse voltage marked on the lampholder or, 
in the absence of such marking shall not be greater 
than, 


a) For 250 V rated lampholders :2.5kV 
b) For 500 V rated ES lampholders : 4k V 
c) For 750 V rated ES lampholders : 5k V 


Compliance is checked by measurement of the voltage 
occurring across the lampholder contacts during the 
pulse test of 10.2.2. for luminaires with ignitors. 


4.4.6 For luminaires with ignitors incorporating Edison 
screw lampholders, the centre contact of the 
lampholder shall be connected to the lead which 
supplies the pulse voltage. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.4.7 The insulating parts of lampholders and plugs 
incorporated in rough service luminaires shall be of a 
material resistant to tracking. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 13.4. 


4.4.8 Lamp connectors shall comply with all the 
requirements for lampholders other than those rated 
to retaining the lamp in position. Means for retaining 
the lamp have to be provided by other parts of the 
luminaire. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and test as 
required by 4.4.1. to 4.4.7. 


4.5 Starter Holders 


Starter holders the luminaires other than Class II shall 
accept starters which comply with IS 2215. 


Class II luminaires may require starters of Class II 
construction. 


For Class II luminaires where the starter can be touched 
with the standard test finger when the luminaire is fully 
assembled for use or open for the replacement of lamps 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


or starters, the starter holder shall be one accepting 
only starters complying with the requirements for 
starters for Class II luminaires given in IS 2215. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.6 Terminal Blocks 


If luminaires are provided with connecting leads (tails) 
requiring a separate terminal block for the connection 
to the fixed wiring, adequate space for this terminal 
block shall be provided within the luminaire, or within 
a box delivered with the luminaire, or specified by the 
manufacturer. 


This requirement applies to terminal blocks for 
connecting leads (tails) with conductor nominal cross- 
sectional areas not exceeding 2.5 mm”. 


Compliance is checked by measurement and by an 
installation test, using one terminal block for each two 
conductors to be connected together, as shown in 
Fig. 2, and fixed wiring having a length of 
approximately 80 mm. The dimensions of the terminal 
blocks are those specified by the manufacturer or, 
inthe absence of such a specification, 10 
mm x 20 mm x 25 mm. 


NOTE — Unsecured terminal blocks are permitted when they 
are so designed and insulated that creepage distances and 
clearances in accordance with Section 11 are always maintained 
for any position of the terminal block, and that damage to 
internal wiring is prevented. 


4.7 Terminals and Supply Connections 


4.7.1 In portable luminaires of Class I and Class II in 
fixed luminaires of Class I and Class II that are 
frequently adjusted, adequate precautions shall be 
taken to prevent metal parts from becoming live due 
to a detached wire or screw. This requirement applies 
to all terminals (including supply terminals). 


NOTE — The requirements may be met by securing the wires 
adjacent to their entry to the terminals, by suitable dimensioning 
of the enclosure for the terminals, by the use of an enclosure of 
insulating material or by the provision of an insulating lining 
in the enclosure. 


Examples of methods deemed efficient to prevent a 
wire from becoming detached are: 


a) 


Wires are retained by a cord anchorage 
adjacent to the terminals; 

b) Conductor is clamped by a spring type 
screwless terminal; 

c) Wire conductor is anchored to the tag before 
soldering, unless breakage close to the 
soldering place is likely to occur as a result 
of vibration; 

d) Wires are twisted together in a reliable 
manner; 


14 


e) 


Wires are fastened together by insulation tape, 
sleeves, or the like; 

Wire conductor is inserted into a hole in a 
printed board, bent and soldered, the hole 
having a diameter slightly greater than the 
conductor; 

Wire conductor is securely wrapped around 
the terminal by means of a special tool (see 
Fig 19); and 

Wire conductor is crimped to the terminal by 
means of a special tool (see Fig. 19). 


g) 


h) 


The methods [see 4.7.1(a) to (h)] apply to internal and 
the methods under [see 4.7.1(a) and (b)] shall apply to 
rewireable external flexible cords. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and based upon 
the assumption that only one conductor can become 
detached at the same time. 


4.7.2 Supply terminals shall be located or shielded in 
such a way that, if a wire of a stranded conductor 
escapes from a terminal when the conductors are fitted, 
there is no risk of contact between live parts and metal 
parts which can be touched with the standard test finger 
when the luminaire is fully assembled for use or open 
for the replacement of lamps or starters. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
following test: 


An 8 mm length of insulation is removed from the end 
of a flexible conductor having the largest cross- 
sectional area specified in Section 5. One wire of the 
stranded conductor is left free and the remainder are 
fully inserted and clamped in the terminal. The free 
wire is bent, without tearing the insulation back, in 
every possible direction, but without making sharp 
bends around barriers. 


The free wire of a conductor connected to a live 
terminal shall not touch any metal part which is 
accessible or connected to an accessible metal part, 
and the free wire of a conductor connected to an 
earthing terminal shall not touch any live part. 


This test does not apply to lampholders which have 
been separately approved to an appropriate Indian 
Standards and to terminals of components where the 
construction method justifies a shorter length of free 
wire. 


4.7.3 Terminals for supply conductors, including those 
for non-detachable flexible cables and cords, shall be 
suitable for connection to be made by means of screws, 
nuts or equally effective devices. 


Connecting leads (tails) shall comply with the 
requirements of Section 5. 


NOTES 


1 For luminaires designed to be connected by means of rigid 
(solid or stranded) conductors, screwless terminals of the spring 
type are effective devices, including the earth connection. No 
requirements are specified at present for using such terminals 
for the connection of non-detachable flexible cables and cords. 


2 For luminaires designed to be connected by means of a non- 
detachable flexible cable or cord and having a rated current 
not exceeding 3 A, soldered, welded, crimped and similar 
connections, including snap-on connectors, are effective 
devices, including an earth connection. 


3 For luminaires having a rated current exceeding 3 A, snap- 
on connectors are suitable, if the connection can also be made 
without making use of the receptacle, for example, by means 
of a screwed connection for which a threaded hole is provided 
in the tab. 


4.7.4 Terminals, other than those for supply connection, 
which are not covered by separate standards for 
components, shall comply with the requirements of 
Section 14 or Section 15. 


Terminals of lampholders, switches and similar parts 
used for multiple connection of internal wiring shall 
have dimensions adequate for the purpose and shall 
not be used for the connection of external wiring. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of Sections 14 and Section 15. 


4.7.5 If the external wiring or supply cable is unsuitable 
for the temperatures reached inside the luminaires, 
either a connection shall be provided at the point of 
entry of the external wiring into the luminaire for the 
use of heat-resistant wiring after this point, or heat- 
resisting parts shall be supplied with the luminaire to 
cover the part of the wiring placed inside it, which 
exceeds the wiring temperature limit. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.7.6 If during the installation or maintenance of a 
luminaire electrical connections are made by a multi- 
pole plug and socket, unsafe connections shall be 
prevented. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by trying to 
make unsafe connections for exmple by shifting the 
plug positions and the like. 


4.8 Switches 


Switches shall be adequately rated and so fixed that 
they are secured against rotation and cannot be 
removed by hand. 


Switches in flexible cables or cords and switched 
lampholders shall not be used in luminaires other than 
ordinary, unless the degree of protection against dust, 
solid objects or moisture of the switch is in accordance 
with the classification of the luminaire. 


For luminaires intended for use on a polarized supply 
and where the luminaire has a single-pole on/off switch, 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


the switch shall be wired into the live side of the supply 
or the side other than that identified as the neutral side. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.9 Insulating Linings and Sleeves 


4.9.1 Insulating linings and sleeves shall be so designed 
that they are reliably retained in position when 
switches, lampholders, terminals, wires or similar parts 
have been mounted. 


NOTE — Self-hardening resins, such as epoxy resins, may be 
used to fix linings. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


4.9.2 Insulated linings, sleeves and similar parts shall 
have adequate mechanical, electrical and thermal 
strength. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by manual test 
and by the electric strength test in accordance with 
Section 10. The thermal properties of wire and sleeve 
are checked in accordance with Section 12. Heat 
resistant sleeves used as covering for wires attaining a 
temperature exceeding the values given in Table 12.2 
of Section 12 shall comply with the requirements of 
IS 11654, taking into account the temperature 
measured on the wire in question. The sleeve shall be 
resistant to a temperature exceeding the temperature 
measured on the wire by 20°C or withstand the 
following test: 


a) Three test specimens of the sleeve, about 
15 cm in length, are subjected to the humidity 
test (see 9.3) and subsequently to the 
insulation resistance and electric strength tests 
according to Section 10. A suitable 
uninsulated copper conductor or metal rod is 
passed through the specimens, and the outside 
is covered by a metal foil in such a way that 
no flashover at the ends of the samples can 
occur. The measurement of the insulation 
resistance and the electric strength test is then 
made between the copper conductor/metal rod 
and the metal foil. 


b) After the copper conductor/metal rods and 
metal foils have been removed, the specimens 
are placed in a heating cabinet for 240 h at a 
temperature of T + 20°C, T being the 
measured temperature of the wire. 


c) The specimens are allowed to cool to room 
temperature and are then prepared as indicated 
under 4.9.2 (a). 


Measurement of the insulation resistance and electric 
strength is then made between the copper conductor/ 
metal rod and the metal foil. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Compliance is checked by the insulation resistance 
values and test voltages specified in Table 10.1 and 
10.2 in Section 10. 


4.10 Double and Reinforced Insulation 


4.10.1 For metal encased Class II luminaires, contact 
between, 


a) mounting surfaces and parts with basic 
insulation only; and 
b) accessible metal parts and basic insulation, 


shall be effectively prevented. 


NOTE — This requirement does not exclude the use of 
bare conductors, if adequate protection is provided. 


This wiring includes internal and external wiring of 
the luminaire, and fixed wiring of the installation. 


Class II fixed luminaires shall be so designed that the 
required degree of protection against electric shock is 
not impaired as a result of the installation of the 
luminaire, for example by contact with conduits or 
metal sheaths of cables. 


Capacitors shall not be connected between live parts 
and the body of metal encased Class II luminaires, 
with the exception of interference suppression 
capacitors. 


The interference suppressions capacitors shall comply 
with the requirements of ISQC 302400 and the method 
of their connection shall be in accordance with 9.3.4 
of IS 616. 


NOTE — Contact between accessible metal parts and the basic 
insulation of internal wiring may be prevented by sleeves or 
similar parts which comply with the requirements for 
supplementary insulation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.10.2 Any assembly gap with a width greater than 
0.3 mm in supplementary insulation shall not be 
coincidental with any such gap in basic insulation, nor 
shall any such gap in reinforced insulation give straight 
access to live parts. 


Openings in double or in reinforced insulation shall 
not give straight access to live parts, so that the live 
parts can be touched with the conical pin of test probe 
as given in IS 1401. 


In addition, compliance shall be ensured with the 
required degree of protection against electric shock in 
accordance with the IP classification of the luminaires. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement 
using the relevant probe(s) in accordance with the 
required degree of protection against electric shock. 


4.10.3 For parts of Class II luminaires which serve as 
supplementary insulation or reinforced insulation, 


16 


a) either they shall be fixed so that they cannot 
be removed without being seriously damaged; 
or 

b) they shall be unable to be replaced in an 


incorrect position. 


Where sleeving is used as supplementary insulation 
on internal wiring, and where insulated linings are used 
in lampholders as supplementary insulation on external 
of internal wiring, the sleeving and lining shall be 
retained in positions by positive means. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual 
test. 


NOTE — Lining metal enclosures with a coating of lacquer or 
with any other material in the form of a coating which can be 
easily removed by scraping is not considered to meet this 
requirement. A sleeve is considered to be fixed by positive 
means, if it can only be removed by breaking or cutting or if it 
is a clamped at both ends or its movements on internal wiring 
is restricted by neighbouring components. A lining is considered 
to be fixed by positive means, if it can only be removed by 
breaking or cutting or by dismantling the lampholder. 


Parts, such as a tube of insulating material provided 
with a shoulder and used as a liner inside the nipple of 
a lampholder, are considered to provide supplementary 
insulation on external or internal wiring if they can be 
removed only by dismantling the lampholder. 


4.11 Electrical Connections and Current-Carrying 
Parts 


4.11.1 Electrical connections shall be so designed that 
contact pressure is not transmitted through insulating 
material other than ceramic, pure mica or other material 
with characteristics at least equivalent, unless there is 
sufficient resilience in the metallic parts to compensate 
for any possible shrinkage of the insulating material. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.11.2 Self-tapping screws shall not be used for the 
connection of current-carrying parts, unless they clamp 
these parts directly in contact with each other, and are 
provided with a suitable means of locking. 


Thread-cutting screws shall not be used for the 
interconnection of current-carrying parts of metal 
which is soft or liable to creep, such as zinc or 
aluminium. 


Self-tapping screws may be used to provide earth 
continuity, if it is not necessary to disturb the 
connection in normal use, and at least two screws are 
used for each connection. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 
NOTE — See Fig. 22 for some examples of screws. 


4.11.3 Screws and rivets which serve as electrical as 
well as mechanical connections shall be locked against 


loosening. Spring washers may provide satisfactory 
locking. For rivets, a non-circular shank or an 
appropriate notch may be sufficient. 


Sealing compound which softens on heating provides 
satisfactory locking only for screw connections not 
subject to torsion in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and manual test. 


4.11.4 Current-carrying parts shall be of copper, an 
alloy containing at least 50 percent copper, or a material 
having at least equivalent characteristics. 


NOTE — Aluminium conductors can be accepted as having at 
least equivalent characteristics subject to an assessment of 
suitability being made in each individual case. 


This requirement does not apply to screws which do 
not essentially carry current, such as terminal screws. 


Current-carrying parts shall be resistant to, or 
adequately protected against, corrosion. 


NOTE — Copper and copper alloys containing at least 50 
percent copper are considered to meet this requirement. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if necessary, 
by chemical analysis. 


4.11.5 Current-carrying parts shall not be in direct 
contact with wood. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.11.6 Electro-mechanical contact systems shall 
withstand the electrical stresses occurring in normal 
use. 


Compliance is checked by subjecting the electro- 
mechanical systems to 100 operations at a speed which 
corresponds to practical usage (an operation is either 
making or breaking the contact). The test is made with 
a.c. at rated voltage, and the test current shall be 
1.25 times the rated current of the electrical contact 
system. The power factor of the load shall be 
approximately 0.6, unless a different rated current is 
marked for resistive loads, in which case the load power 
factor shall be unity. 


Where a luminaire is marked for both resistive and 
inductive loads, it shall be subjected to tests at power 
factors of both unity and 0.6. 


Before and after the tests, the electro-mechanical 
contact systems shall be loaded with 1.5 times rated 
current, and the voltage drop across each contact shall 
not exceed 50 mV. 


Following completion of these tests the electro- 
mechanical contact systems shall withstand an electric 
strength test made in accordance with 10.2. 


After the test the samples shall show, 


17 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


a) no wear impairing their further use; 
b) no deterioration of enclosures or barriers; and 
c) no loosening of electrical or mechanical 


connections. 


For electro-mechanical contact systems the mechanical 
test of 4.14.3 is made simultaneously with this electrical 
test. 


4.12 Screws and Connections (Mechanical) and 
Glands 


4.12.1 Screws and mechanical connections, the failure 
of which might cause the luminaire to become unsafe, 
shall withstand the mechanical stresses occurring in 
normal use. 


Screws shall not be made of a material which is soft or 
liable to creep. 


NOTE — Examples are zinc, some grades of aluminium and 
several thermoplastics. 


Screws which are operated for maintenance purposes 
shall not be of insulating material, if their replacement 
by a metal screw could impair supplementary or 
reinforced insulation. 


Screws used to provide earthing continuity, for 
example fixing screws for ballast’s and other 
components, shall comply with the requirement in the 
first paragraph of this sub-clause as far as the ballast is 
concerned as at least one screw retaining the ballast 
will have a mechanical and electrical function. 
Changing the screw retaining the ballast is not 
considered to be maintenance. 


Screws of insulating material used in cord anchorages 
can be accepted bearing directly on the cable or cord 
as replacement of such screws is not regarded as 
maintenance. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and screws and 
nuts transmitting contact pressure or which are likely 
to be tightened by the user, shall be tightened and 
loosened five times. Screws and nuts of insulating 
material shall be removed completely during each 
operation of loosening of the screws. During the test, 
no damage impairing the further use of the fixing or 
screwed connection shall occur. After the test it shall 
still be possible to introduce the screw or nut made of 
insulation material in the intended manner. 


The test is made by means of a suitable test screwdriver 
or spanner, applying a torque as shown in Table 4.1 
except that for screw of insulating material used in cord 
anchorage and bearing directly on the cable or cord 
the torque is 0.5 Nm. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Table 4.1 Torque Tests on Screws 
(Clause 4.12.1) 


SI Nominal Outer Thread Torque 

No. Diameter of Screw occ! 
mm 1Nm 2Nm 3Nm 

a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Up to and including 2.8 0.20 040 0.40 
ii) Over 2.8 up to and including 3.0 0.25 0.50 0.50 
iii) Over 3.0 up to and including 3.2 0.30 0.60 0.50 
iv) Over 3.2 up to and including 3.6 0.40 0.80 0.60 
v) Over 3.6 up to and including 4.1 0.70 0.80 0.60 
vi) Over 4.1 up to and including 4.7 0.80 1.80 0.90 
vii) Over 4.7 up to and including 5.3 0.80 2.00 1.00 
viii) Over 5.3 up to and including 6.0 — 2.50 1.25 
ix) Over 6.0 up to and including 8.0 — 8.00 4.00 
x) Over 8.0 up to and including 10.0 — 17.00 8.50 
xi) Over 10.0 up to and including 12.0 — 29.00 14.50 
xii) Over 12.0 up to and including 14.0 — 48.00 24.00 
xiii) Over 14.0 up to and including 16.0 — 114.00 57.00 


The shape of the blade of the screwdriver shall suit the 
head of the screw to be tested. The screws shall not be 
tightened in jerks. Damage to covers is neglected. 


Column 1 of Table 4.1 applies to metal screws without 
heads, if the tightened screw does not protrude from 
the hole; 


Column 2 applies to, 


a) other metal screws and to nuts; 

b) screws of insulating material; 

c) having ahexagonal head with the dimensions 
across flats exceeding the overall thread 
diameter; 

d) having a cylindrical head and a key socket 
with a cross-corner dimension exceeding the 
overall thread diameter; and 

e) having a head with a slot or cross slots, the 


length of which exceeds 1.5 times the overall 
thread diameter. 


Column 3 applies to other screws of insulating material. 


The values given in Table 4.1 for screws over 6.0 mm 
diameter apply to steel screws and the like, which are 
used mainly in the mounting of the luminaire. 


The values given in Table 4.1 for screws over 6.0 mm 
diameter do not apply to nipple threads of lampholders, 
the requirements for which are specified in 15 of 
IS 10276 (Part 2). 


The requirements of this sub-clause do not apply to 
metal nuts used as means of fixing for push-button 
switches. 


4.12.2 Screws transmitting contact pressure, screws 
which are operated when mounting or connecting the 
luminaires and having nominal diameter less than 
3 mm, shall screw into metal. 


18 


Screws or nuts which are operated when mounting the 
luminaire or replacing lamps include screws or nuts 
for fixing covers, lids, etc. Connections for screwed 
conduits, screws for mounting the luminaire to its 
mounting surface, hand-operated fixing screws or nuts 
of glass covers and screwed lids are excluded. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and for screws 
which are operated when mounting the luminaire or 
when replacing the lamps, by the test described 
in 4.12.1. 


4.12.3 Not used. 


4.12.4 Screwed and other fixed connections between 
different parts of luminaires shall be made in such a 
way that they do not work loose through such torsion, 
bending stresses, vibration, etc, as may occur in normal 
use. Fixed arms and suspension tubes shall be securely 
attached. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by attempting 
to loosen locked connections with a torque not 
exceeding, 


a) 2.5 Nm for thread size up to and including M 
10 or corresponding diameters; and 


b) 5.0 Nm for thread sizes above M 10 or 
corresponding diameters. 


For lampholders which are exposed to a rotary action 
during lamp replacement, compliance shall be checked 
by inspection and by attempting to loosen locked 
screwed mechanical connections for 1 min with a 
torque not exceeding, 


1) 4.0 Nm for E40 lampholders; 

2) 2.0 Nm for E27 and B22 lampholders; 

3) 1.2 Nm for E14 and B15 lampholders (except 
candle type); 

4) 0.5 Nm for E14 and B15 candle lampholders; 
and 

5) 0.5 Nm for E10 lampholders. 


For push-button switches, the means of fixing are 
subjected to a torque not exceeding 0.8 Nm. 


During the test, such screwed connections shall not 
loosen. 


NOTE — Examples of means of preventing the loosening of 
connections are soldering, welding, lock nuts and set screws. 


4.12.5 Screwed glands shall comply with the following 
test: 


Screwed glands shall be fitted with a cylindrical metal 
rod having a diameter equal to the nearest whole 
number of millimetres below the internal diameter of 
the packing. The glands shall then be tightened by 


Table 4.2 Torque Tests on Glands 
(Clause 4.12.5) 


SI Diameter of Force 
No. Test Rod oo @m@\M———T—-.. 
mm Metal Glands Glands of Moulded 
N Material 

N 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Up to and including 14 25 15 

ii) Over 14 up to and 30 20 

including 20 
iii) Over 20 40 30 


means of a suitable spanner, the force shown in 
Table 4.2 being applied to the spanner for 1 min at a 
point 250 mm from the axis of the gland. 


After the test, the luminaire and the glands shall show 
no damage. 


4.13 Mechanical Strength 


4.13.1 Luminaires shall have adequate mechanical 
strength and be so constructed as to be safe after such 
rough handling as may be expected in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by applying blows to the 
sample by means of the spring-operated impact test 
apparatus specified in IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 1 to 5) or by 
other suitable means giving equivalent results. 


NOTE — Equivalent impact energies obtained by different 
methods do not necessarily give the same test result. 


The hammer spring shall be such that the product of 
the compression, in millimetres, and the force exerted, 
in Newton’s, equals 1 000, the compression being 
approximately 20 mm. The spring shall be adjustable 
so as to cause the hammer to strike with an impact 
energy and spring compression as shown in Table 4.3. 


Fragile Parts are parts such as glass and translucent 
covers providing only protection against dust, solid 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


objects and moisture, and ceramic and small parts 
protruding from the enclosure by less than 26 mm, or 
if their surface area does not exceed 4 cm’. 


Protective shields required according to 4.24 are 
regarded as fragile parts. 


The sample is mounted or supported as in normal use 
on a rigid wooden board, cable entries being left open, 
knock outs opened, and cover-fixing and similar screws 
tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds of that 
specified in Table 4.1. 


Three blows shall be applied to the point which is likely 
to be the weakest, paying special attention to insulating 
material enclosing live parts and to bushings of 
insulating material, if any. Additional samples may be 
necessary to find the weakest point; in case of doubt, 
the test shall be repeated on a fresh sample to which 
three blows only are applied. 


After the test, the sample shall show no damage, in 
particular, 


1) live parts shall not have become accessible; 


2) the effectiveness of insulating linings and 
barriers shall not have been impaired; 


3) the sample shall continue to afford the degree 
of protection against ingress of dust, solid 
objects and moisture, in accordance with its 
classification; and 


4) it shall be possible to remove and to replace 
external covers without these covers or their 
insulating linings breaking. 

Breakage of an enclosure is, however, allowed if its 


removal does not impair safety. 


In case of doubt, supplementary insulation or 
reinforced insulation is subjected to an electric strength 
test as specified in Section 10. 


Table 4.3 Impact Energy and Spring Compression 
(Clause 4.13.1) 


SI. Type of Luminaire Impact Energy Compression 
No. Nm mm 
Se eS SS 

Fragile Other Fragile Other 

Parts Parts Parts Parts 

a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Recessed luminaires, fixed general purpose luminaires and portable luminaires for wall 0.2 0.35 13 17 

mounting 

ii) Portable floor and table luminaires, photo and film luminaires 0.35 0.50 17 20 
iii) Floodlights, road and street lighting luminaires, swimming-pool luminaires, portable 0.5 0.70 20 24 


garden luminaires and child-appealing luminaries 
iv) Rough service luminaires, handlamps and lighting chains 


Other testing methods 


NOTE — Lampholders and other components are rested only in so far they protrude beyond the projection of the outline of the luminaire. 
The front of the lampholders is never retested since in normal operation this part is covered by the lamp. 


19 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Damage to the finish, small dents which do not reduce 
creepage distances or clearances below the value 
specified in Section 11, and small chips which do not 
adversely affect the protection against electric shock, 
dust or moisture, are neglected. 


4.13.2 Metal parts enclosing live parts shall have 
adequate mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate tests of 
4.13.3 to 4.13.5. 


4.13.3 A straight unjointed test finger is used, with the 
same dimensions as the standard test finger specified 
in IS 12063. The finger is pressed against the surface 
with a force of 30 N. 


During the test, metal parts shall not touch live parts. 


After the test, covers shall not be excessively deformed 
and the luminaire shall continue to meet the 
requirements of Section 11. 


4.13.4 Rough Service Luminaires 


Rough service luminaires shall have protection against 
ingress of solid objects and moisture of at least IP 54. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the 
appropriate test of 9.2.0. 


Rough service luminaires shall have adequate 
mechanical strength and shall not overturn under 
circumstances that may be expected during normal use. 
In addition the fixation means of the stand to which 
the luminaires is connected shall have adequate 
mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by the test of (a) to (d): 


a) Fixed rough service luminaires and portable 
rough service luminaires (not hand-held) — 
Each of three samples of the luminaires shall 
be subjected to three single impacts, at points 
likely to be the weakest, on any surface 
normally exposed. The sample without lamp 
(or lamps) is mounted as in normal use on a 
rigid supporting surface. 

The impacts are produced by dropping a steel 
sphere 50 mm diameter weighing 0.51 kg 
from a height H (1.3 m) as shown in Fig. 21, 
to produce an impact energy of 6.5 Nm. 
Each of the three samples of a luminaire 
intended for outdoor use shall additionally be 
cooled to a temperature of -5 + 2°C and 
maintained at that temperature for 3 h. 


Whilst the samples are at this temperature they 
shall be subjected to the impact test specified 
above. 
b) Hand-held luminaires — The luminaire is 
caused to fall four times from a height of 1 m 


20 


on to aconcrete floor. The falls are made from 
four different horizontal starting positions, the 
luminaire being turned through 90° around 
its axis between each fall. Lamps are removed 
but protective glasses, if any, are not removed 
for this test. 

After the test of 4.13.4 (a) or 4.13.4 (b) the 
luminaires shall show no damage impairing 
safety and its further use. The parts protecting 
the lamp against damage shall not have 
loosened. 


NOTE — These parts may have become deformed. 
Breakage of a protective glass or translucent cover is 
ignored if the sole means of protecting the lamp against 
damage. 


c) Luminaires delivered with a stand — Any 
lamp(s) are removed before the tests. The 
luminaire and stand shall not overturn at an 
angle of 6° from the vertical. The luminaire 
shall withstand the impacts resulting from 
overturning four times from an angle up to 
15° from the vertical. 

The fixation means of the stand shall 
withstand a force of four times the weight of 
the luminaire in the most onerous direction. 


If the luminaire overturns during the test on 
the plane inclined at an angle of 15° from the 
vertical, the test of 12.5.1 is made with the 
luminaire on a horizontal surface, in the most 
unfavourable of the overturned positions that 
may reasonably be expected in practice. 
d) Luminaires for temporary installations and 
suitable for mounting on stand — The 
luminaire shall withstand four impacts 
resulting from the following test. 
Any lamp(s) are removed before the test. The 
luminaire is suspected by an aluminium rod 
along a concrete or brick wall. The length of 
the rod is that of the stand as indicated for a 
possible stand in the mounting instruction. 


The luminaire is lifted until the rod is in the 
horizontal plane and then allowed to fall freely 
against the wall. 

After the test there shall be no impairing of 
the safety. 


4.13.5 Not used. 


4.13.6 Plug-ballast/transformers and mains socket- 
outlet-mounted luminaires shall have adequate 
mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by the following test, which is 
made in a tumbling barrel as shown in Fig. 25. 


The barrel is turned at a rate of five rev/min, 10 falls/ 
min thus taking place. 


The sample falls from a height of 50 cm on to a steel 
plate 3 mm thick, the number of falls being, 


a) 50, if the mass of the sample does not exceed 
250 g; and 
b) 25, if the mass of the sample exceeds 250 g. 


After the test, the sample shall show no damage within 
the meaning of this standard, but it need not be 
operative and any damage to the glass bulb shall be 
ignored. Provided that the protection against electric 
shock is not affected, small pieces which may have 
broken off the sample are ignored. 


Distortion of pins and damage to the finish and small 
dents which do not reduce the creepage distances or 
clearances below the values specified in Section 11 are 
ignored. 


4.14 Suspensions and Adjusting Devices 


4.14.1 Mechanical suspensions shall have adequate 
factors of safety. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate following 
tests. 


a) Test A, for all suspended luminaires — A 
constant evenly distributed load equal to four 
times the weight of the luminaire shall be 
added to the luminaire in the normal direction 
of the load for a period of 1 h. There shall be 
no appreciable deformation of the 
components of the suspension system at the 
end of this period. Where alternative means 
of fixing or suspension are provided, each 
shall be tested separately. 


For adjustable suspension, the load shall be 
applied with the supporting cable fully 
extended. 

b) Test B, for rigid suspensions luminaires — A 
torque of 2.5 Nm is applied to the luminaires 
for a period of 1 min, first in a clockwise and 
then in an anti-clockwise direction. For this 
test, it shall not be possible to rotate the 
luminaire relative to the fixed part by more 
than one revolution in either direction. 

c) Test C, for rigid suspension brackets — 

Details of the test for rigid suspension brackets 

are as follows: 

1) For heavy-duty brackets (for example, 
workshop brackets), a force of 40 N shall 
be applied for 1 min, in various directions 
at the free end, with the bracket arm fixed 
as in normal use. The bending moment 
resulting from this shall be not less than 
2.5 Nm. When the test force has been 
removed, the bracket arm shall not be 


21 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


permanently displaced or deformed so as 

to endanger safety. 
2) For light-duty brackets (for example 
domestic brackets), a similar test as per 
4.14.1(a) shall be applied for 1 min, but 
with a force of 10 N, and the bending 
moment resulting from this best shall be 
not less than 1.0 Nm. 
Test D, for track-mounted luminaires — The 
mass of the luminaire shall not exceed the 
value, recommended by the track 
manufacturer, of the maximum loading for 
which the luminaire suspension devices are 
suitable. 


(d) 


(e) Test E, for clip-mounted luminaires — A pull 
is applied on the cable without jerk for 1 min 
in the most unfavourable direction in normal 
use. During the test the clip is mounted on 
standard test ‘shelves’ made of ordinary 
window glass, one with a nominal thickness 
of 10 mm and one with the maximum thickness 
onto which the clip can be mounted. For this 
test the thickness of the test shelf is increased 
by multiples of 10 mm. The clip shall not start 
moving on the glass at a pull of 20 N. 
Clip-mounted luminaires shall, in addition, be tested 
on the metal rod having a polished chromium plated 
finish and a nominal diameter of 20 mm. The 
luminaires shall not rotate under its own weight and 
shall not fall off the rod when a pull of 20 N is applied 
on the cable. The test on a polished metal rod is not 
applied to luminaires marked ‘not suitable for 
mounting on tubular material’. 


NOTES 


1 The increase in the thickness of the test sheet by 10 mm steps 
for the maximum thickness, limits the possibility of forcing 
the clip onto the test shelf. 


2 The test shelf for a maximum thickness test may comprise 
layers of glass and wood, provided that the surfaces that are 
gripped by the clip of the luminaires are of glass. 


4.14.2 The mass of the luminaires suspended by 
flexible cables or cords shall not exceed 5 kg. The total 
nominal cross-sectional area of the conductors of 
flexible cables or cord suspending pendants shall be 
such that the stress in the conductors does not exceed 
15 N/mm’. 


For the calculation of the stress, only the conductors 
are considered. 


Where a luminaire of mass greater than 5 kg is intended 
to be suspended, the design of the luminaire or of the 
flexible cable or cord shall be such as to prevent any 
tension being applied to the conductors. 


NOTE — This requirement can be met by using a cable which 
incorporates suitable load-carrying cores. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


For the semi-luminaires intended for connection to 
Edison screw or bayonet lampholders the mass and 
effective bending moment shall not exceed the 
maximum value given in Table 4.4. The bending 
moment is relative to the point of contact, in the fully 
inserted position, of the semi-luminaire contact(s) with 
the centre contact of an Edison screw lamp holder or 
the plungers of a bayonet lamp holder. 


Table 4.4 Test on Semi-Luminaires 
(Clause 4.12.2) 


S1 Lampholders Luminaires 
No. cies 
Maximum Mass Maximum Bending 
Moment 
kg Nm 
a) 2) (3) (4) 
i) El4 and B15 1.8 0.9 
ii) E27 and B22 2.0 1.8 


NOTE — These values are lower than those to which a 
lampholder would normally be tested to provide a safety 
margin. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurements 
and by calculation. 


4.14.3 Adjusting devices, for example joints, hoisting 
devices, adjusting brackets or telescopic tubes, shall 
be so constructed that cords or cables are not pressed, 
clamped, damaged or twisted along the longitudinal 
axis by more than 360° during operation. 


Compliance is checked by the following test: 


The adjusting device, equipped with the appropriate 
cable or cord shall be operated in accordance with 
Table 4.5. A cycle of operation is a movement from 
one extreme of the range to the other and back to the 
starting position. The rate of movement shall not cause 
the device to heat appreciably and shall not exceed 
600 cycles/h. 


For electro-mechanical contact systems this test is 
conducted simultaneously with the electrical 
connection test of 4.11.6. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


After the test, not more than 50 percent of the strands 
in a conductor shall be broken nor shall there be any 
serious damage to the insulation, if any, of the flexible 
cord. The cord or cable shall be subjected to, and shall 
satisfy, the insulation resistance and high-voltage tests 
specified in Section 10. 


Ball-joints and the like, where the clamping means can 
be adjusted, are tested with the joints only lightly 
clamped to avoid excessive friction. If necessary, the 
clamping areas are readjusted during the test. 


22 


For adjusting devices that consist of a flexible tube the 
range of adjustment for this test is normally 135° in 
both directions from the vertical. However where this 
adjustment cannot be achieved without using 
unreasonable force the flexible tube is bent only to the 
positions where it will remain by itself. 


NOTE — If a luminaire has more than one joint the 360° limit 
applies to each joint if they are not too close together. Each 
case needs to be judged on its own merits. 


Table 4.5 Test on Adjusting Devices 
(Clause 4.14.3) 


SI Type of Luminaire Number of Cycles 
No. of Operation 
a) (2) (3) 

i) Luminaires intended to be frequently 1 500 
adjusted, for example drawing board 
luminaires 

ii) Luminaires intended to be occasionally 150 

adjusted, for example shop-window 
spotlights 
iii) Luminaires intended to be adjusted 45 


during installation only, for example 
flood lighting luminaires 


4.14.4 Cords or cables passing through telescopic tubes 
shall not be fixed to the outer tube. Means shall be 
provided for avoiding strain on the conductors at the 
terminals. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.14.5 Guide pulleys for flexible cords shall be 
dimensioned to prevent damage to the cord by 
excessive bending. Grooves in the pulleys shall be well 
rounded, the diameter of the pulley at the bottom of 
the groove being at least three times the diameter of 
the cord. Accessible metal pulleys shall be earthed. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.14.6 Plug-ballast/transformers and mains socket- 
outlet-mounted luminaires shall not impose undue 
strain on socket-outlets. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. The plug- 
ballast/transformer or mains socket-outlet-mounted 
luminaires is inserted, as in normal use, into a fixed 
socket-outlet pivoted about a horizontal axis through 
the centre lines of the contact tubes at a distance of 8 
mm behind the engagement face of the socket-outlet. 


The additional torque which has to be applied to the 
socket-outlet to maintain the engagement face in the 
vertical plane shall not exceed 0.25 Nm. 


For adjustable mains socket-outlet-mounted luminaires 
the total torque transmitted to the socket-outlet during 
adjustment shall not exceed 0.5 Nm. 


The socket-outlet used for the test shall have the earth 


contact (if any) removed unless the socket has shuttered 
pin receptacles that are uncovered by the action of 
inserting the earth pin. 


4.15 Flammable Materials 


Covers, shades and similar parts not having an 
insulation function, and which do not withstand the 
650°C glow-wire test of 13.3.2, shall be adequately 
spaced from any heated part of the luminaire which 
could raise the material to its ignition temperature. 
These parts made of flammable material shall have 
suitable fastenings or supporting devices to maintain 
this spacing. 


The spacing from heated parts mentioned above shall 
be at least 30 mm, unless the material is protected by a 
screen spaced at least 3 mm from the heated parts. This 
screen shall comply with the needle-flame test 
of 13.3.1, shall have no holes, and shall have a height 
and a length at least equal to the corresponding 
dimensions of the heated parts. A screen is not required 
in cases where the luminaire provides an effective 
barrier to burning drops. 


NOTE — The requirements of this clause are illustrated in 
Fig. 4. 


Materials which burn fiercely, such as celluloid, shall 
not be used. 


The requirement of this clause do not apply to small 
parts such as wiring clips and resin-bonded paper parts 
used inside the luminaire. 


Spacing is not required from electronic circuits, if under 
abnormal conditions the operating current tubes not 
exceed normal conditions current by more than 10 
percent. 


Spacing is not required from parts of luminaires 
incorporating a temperature sensing control which 
provides protection against overheating of the covers, 
shades or similar parts. 


The requirements, of this clause do not apply to a 
transformer supplied within an enclosure of its own, 
that is IP20 or higher, complying with IS 1416. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by operating the luminaires in the abnormal 
condition with a slowly and steadily increasing current 
through the windings of the ballast or transformer, until 
the temperature sensing control operates. During and 
after this test, covers, shades and similar parts shall not 
catch fire and accessible parts shall not become live. 


To check whether accessible parts have become live a 
test in accordance with Annex A is made. 


Luminaires made of thermoplastic materials shall 
withstand temperature rises due to fault conditions in 


23 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 
ballasts/transformers and electronic devices, so that no 
danger occurs when mounted as in normal use. 


This requirement shall be met by one of the following 
measures: 


a) Constructive measures ensuring that, 


1) during failure conditions, the 
components are kept in place, for 
example by temperature-independent 
supports. 

2) luminaire parts cannot be overheated in 


such a way that live parts can become 
accessible. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and/or 
the test of 12.7.1. 


b) The use of a temperature sensing control to 
limit the temperature of the ballast/ 
transformer and electronic device fixation 
points and exposed parts of the luminaire to a 
safe value. The temperature sensing control 
may be either an auto-reset cut-out, a manual- 


reset thermal cut-out, or a thermal link. 
Compliance is checked by the test of 12.7.2. 


c) The thermoplastic materials used for the 
luminaires shall be suitable for the maximum 
surface temperature permitted by the use of 
thermally protected ballasts complying with 


the relevant auxiliary standard. 


Compliance shall be checked by the test of 
12.7.2. 


4.16 Luminaires Marked with \/ Symbol 


For luminaires with an W, symbol, the excessive 
temperatures which may arise due to the failure of a 
component shall not overheat the mounting surface. 


The requirements of the 4.16 are not applicable to a 
transformer supplied within an enclosure of its own, 
that is, IP20 or higher complying with IS 1416. For 
shaver transformers or shaver apply units incorporated 
in a luminaire and complying with IS 1416, the 
requirements of 4.16.1 apply. Electronic lamp control 
gear and small wound devices that may be incorporated 
into these components are exempt from the 
requirements of this clause. 


For luminaires incorporating lamp control gear, 
compliance with this requirement shall be met by 
spacing the lamp control gear from the mounting 
surface in accordance with 4.16.1, or by the use of 
thermal protection in accordance with 4.16.2, or by 
compliance with 4.16.3. 


For luminaires that do not contain lamp control gear, 
the requirements are met by compliance with section 12. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


NOTE — Examples of small wounded devices are windings 
having ferrite or non-laminated cores, these being normally 
mounted on a printed circuit board. 


4.16.1 The lamp control gear shall be spaced from the 
mounted surface by a minimum distance of either, 


a) 10 mm, including the thickness of the 
luminaire case material when the spacing 
includes a minimum of 3 mm air space 
between the outer surface of the luminaire 
case and the mounting surface of the 
luminaire in the region of the lamp control 
gear, and a minimum of 3 mm air space 
between the lamp control gear case and the 
inner surface of the luminaire case. If there is 
no control gear case, the distance of 10 mm 
shall apply from the active part, for example 
windings of the lamp control gear. 


NOTE — The luminaire case should be substantially 
continuous in the projected area of the lamp control gear 
so that a direct path of at least 35 mm is provided 
between the active part of the lamp control gear and the 
mounting surface; otherwise, the requirement of item 
b) applies, or 


b) 35 mm. 


NOTE — The spacing of 35 mm is primarily to take 
account of stirrup-mounted luminaires where the lamp 
controlgear to mounting surface distance is often much 
greater than 10 mm. 


In both instances the luminaire shall be so designed 
that any necessary air space is automatically obtained 
when it is mounted as in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
measurements. 


4.16.2 The luminaire shall incorporate a temperature 
sensing control to limit the temperature of the 
mounting surface of the luminaire to a safe value. This 
temperature sensing control may be either external to 
the lamp controlgear or be part of a thermally protected 
lamp control gear in accordance with the relevant 
auxiliary standard. 


The temperature sensing control may be either a self- 
resetting thermal cut-out, a manual reset thermal cut- 
out or a thermal link (a thermal cut-out which operates 
only once and then requires replacement). 


A temperature sensing control external to the lamp 
controlgear shall not be of the plug-in type or an other 
wise easily replaceable type. It shall be kept in a fixed 
position with regard to the ballast/transformer. 


NOTE — Cementing or the like to the ballast/transformer is 
not permitted. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the test 
of 12.6.2. 


24 


The requirements of this sub-clause are deemed to be 
complied with for luminaires incorporating “class P” 
thermally protected ballast/transformer(s), marked with 
the symbol W, and temperature declared thermally 
protected ballast/transformer(s), symbol \)/ with a 
marked value equal to or below 130°C, in accordance 
with the relevant auxiliary standard, without any further 
tests. 


Luminaires incorporating ballast/transformer(s) 
without the symbol for thermally protected ballasts or 
with a marked value above 130°C shall comply with 
the requirements of 4.16.1 or 4.16.3. 


4.16.3 If the luminaire does not comply with the 
spacing requirements of 4.16.1, and does not 
incorporate thermal cut-outs in accordance with 4.16.2, 
it shall be so designed that it satisfies the test of 12.6. 


NOTE — This requirement and its test are based on the 
assumption that, during failure of the ballast/transformer, for 
instance owing to short-circuited windings or a short-circuit 
to the case, the ballast/transformer windings will not exceed 
350°C for a duration of more than 15 min and therefore that 
the temperature of the mounting surface will not exceed 180°C 
for a duration of more than 15 min. 


— For an explanation of \/ marking of 
luminaires, see Annex N. 


4.17 Drain Holes 


Drip-proof, rain-proof, splash-proof and jet-proof 
luminaires shall be so designed that if water 
accumulates in the luminaire it can drain out 
effectively, for example by opening one or more drain 
holes. Water tight luminaires shall have no provision 
for draining. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
given in Section 9. 


NOTE — A drain hole in the back of luminaire for surface 
mounting is effective only, if the design ensures a clearance of 
at least 5 mm from the mounting surface, for example, by means 
of projections from the back. 


4.18 Resistance to Corrosion 


NOTE — Since the tests as per 4.18 and Annex F may be 
destructive, they may be carried out on separate samples in 
accordance with 0.4.2. 


4.18.1 Ferrous parts of drip-proof, rain-proof, splash- 
proof, jet-proof, watertight and pressure watertight 
luminaires, the rusting of which might cause the 
luminaire to become unsafe, shall be adequately 
protected against rusting. 


Compliance is to be checked by the following test: 


All grease is removed from the parts to be tested. The 
parts are then immersed for 10 min in a 10 percent 
solution of ammonium chloride in water at a 


temperature of 27 + 5°C. Without drying, but after 
shaking off any drops, the parts are placed for 10 min 
in a box containing air saturated with moisture at a 
temperature of 27 + 5°C. 


After the parts have been dried for 10 min in a heating 
cabinet at a temperature of 100 + 5°C, their surfaces 
shall show no signs of rust. 


For small helical springs and the like, and for 
inaccessible parts exposed to abrasion, a layer of grease 
may provide sufficient protection against rusting. Such 
parts are subjected to the test only if their is doubt about 
the effectiveness of the grease film, and the test is then 
made without previous removal of the grease. 


NOTE — Traces of rust on sharp edges and any yellowish film 
removable by rubbing are ignored. 


4.18.2 Contacts and other parts made of rolled copper 
or copper alloy sheet, the failure of which might cause 
the luminaire to become unsafe, shall be free from 
stress corrosion. 


Compliance is checked by the test as given in Annex F 
which shall be made on samples not subjected to any 
other test. 


4.18.3 Parts of aluminium or aluminium alloy in drip- 
proof, rain-proof, splash-proof, jet-proof, watertight 
and pressure-watertight luminaires, shall be resistant 
to corrosion, if otherwise the luminaire might become 
unsafe. 


NOTE — Guidance on resistance to corrosion is given the 
Annex L. 


4.19 Ignitors 


Ignitors used in luminaires shall be electrically 
compatible with the associated ballast in the luminaire. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 
4.20 Rough Service Luminaires — Vibrant 
Requirements 


Rough service luminaires shall have adequate 
resistance to vibrations. 


Compliance is checked by the following vibration test. 


The luminaire is fastened in its most onerous but normal 
position of installation to a vibration generator. 


The direction of vibration is in the most onerous 
direction and the severity is: 


: 30 min 
: 0.35 mm 
10 Hz, 55 Hz, 10 Hz 


: approximately one octave per 
minute. 


Duration 

Amplitude 
Frequency range : 
Sweep rate 


25 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


After the test the luminaire shall have no loosened parts 
which could impair the safety. 


4.21 Protective Shield (Tungsten Halogen Lamps) 


4.21.1 Luminaires incorporating tungsten halogen 
lamps, without an integral outer envelope, shall be fitted 
with a protective shield except when the lamp is, 


a) 


a mains voltage (general lighting source) 
replacement lamp, or 


b) a low pressure tungsten halogen lamp as 
specified in IS 12948. 


4.21.2 Parts of the lamp compartment shall so be 
designed that particles from a shattering lamp cannot 
impair safety. 


4.21.3 All openings in the luminaire shall be that no 
parts of a shattered lamp can leave the luminaire by a 
direct path, including the rear of recessed luminaires. 


4.21.4 Compliance with 4.21.1 to 4.21.3 is checked 
by inspection and by the following tests: 


a) The protective shields shall comply with the 
impact test of 4.13.1 with the impact energy 
of Table 4.3 for fragile parts; 

b) Parts of the lamp compartment, if of insulating 


material, shall comply with the resistance to 
flame and ignition test of 13.3.2. 


NOTE — This requirement is intended to improve safety 
by eliminating the hazards due to chance failure of a 
lamp or incorrect application. Existing open luminaires 
not fitted with a protective shield do not necessarily 
present a hazard. 


4.22 Attachments to Lamps 


Luminaires shall not incorporate attachments to lamps 
which might cause overheating or damage to the lamps, 
lamps caps or holders, luminaires or attachments. 


Attachments to fluorescent lamps are only allowed, if 
supplied or approved by the luminaire manufacturer. 
The total weight of the lamp plus attachment shall not 
exceed, 


a) 100 g for lamps with cap G5; and 
b) 500 g for lamps with cap G13. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by weighing and 
by thermal measurements if appropriate. 


NOTE — Examples of attachments to incandescent lamps which 
might not comply with these requirements are bowl mirror 
reflectors, reflectors around lamps, etc. Example which might 
be permitted are springs for attachments of light weight shades 
to lamps and similar devices. 


4.23 Semi-Luminaires 


Semi-luminaires shall comply with all relevant 
requirements for Class II luminaires. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


NOTE — The Class II symbol is omitted to avoid it being 
considered as applying to the complete luminaires in which the 
semi-luminaire is used. 


4.24 UV Radiation 
Luminaires shall not emit excessive radiation. 


NOTE — See Annex P, procedure A or B for method of 
calculation to provide effective radiation shielding. 


4.25 Mechanical Hazard 


Luminaires shall have no sharp points or edges that 
could, during installation, normal use, or maintenance, 
create a hazard for the user. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


4.26 Short-Circuit Protection 


4.26.1 Adequate means shall be provided to prevent 
the impairing of safety due to unintended short- 
circuiting of uninsulated accessible SELV parts of 
opposite polarity. 
NOTE — Class III luminaires supplied from a separate 
unspecified SELV supply should have one conductor insulated. 
Where insulation is not provided, the luminaire manufacturer 
should declare the maximum VA output and type reference of 


the SELV source, and the test in 4.26.2 should be conducted 
with this transformer/converter. 


4.26.2 A type test sample is operated at 0.9 to 1.1 times 
is rated voltage with its nominal load. A test chain as 
specified in 4.26.3 is hung over accessible uninsulated 
SELV parts. The test chain shall form the shortest 
possible path by being loaded at each end, subject to a 
maximum of 250 g with a weight equal to: 


=15X g 
where ‘X’ is the distance between conductors in the 
unloaded state, in centimetre. 


The test chain shall not melt through, nor shall any 
part of the type test sample reach a temperature 
exceeding the values given in Tables 12.1 and 12.2. 


4.26.3 Test Chain 


A chain of sufficient length of an unquoted metal, 
having links in accordance with Fig. 29 and made of 
63 percent Cu/37 percent Zn. The chain shall have a 
resistance value of 0.05 Q/m + 10 percent when 
stretched with a load of 200 g/m. 


NOTE — The resistance value of the test chain should be 
checked before each measurement. 


SECTION 5 EXTERNAL AND 
INTERNAL WIRING 


5.1 General 


This section specifies general requirements for the 
electrical connections to a supply and for the internal 
wiring of luminaires. 


26 


5.2 Supply Connection and other External Wiring 


5.2.1 Luminaires shall be provided with one of the 
following means of connection to the supply: 


Fixed luminaires : Terminals; plugs for engagement 
with socket-outlets; connecting 
leads (tails); 

Non-detachable flexible cables or 


cords; 
Adapters for engagement with 
supply tracks; appliance inlets 


Ordinary portable : Non-detachable flexible cables or 


luminaires cords; 
Appliance inlets 
Other portable : Non-detachable flexible cables or 
luminaires cords 


Track-mounted 
luminaires 


: Adapters or connectors 


Semi-luminaires : Edison screw or bayonet cap 


Portable luminaires intended for wall mounting and 
incorporating a junction box and cord anchorage may 
be delivered without a non-detachable flexible cable 
or cord, if instructions for mounting are enclosed with 
the luminaire. 


Luminaires declared by the manufacturer to be suitable 
for use outdoors shall not have PVC insulation external 
wiring. 


5.2.2 Flexible cables or cord used as a means of 
connection to the supply, when supplied by the 
luminaires manufacturer, shall be at least equal in their 
mechanical and electrical properties to those specified 
in IS 694 and IS 9968 (Part 1), as indicated in Table 5.1, 
and shall be capable of withstanding, without 
deterioration, the highest temperature to which they 
may be exposed under normal conditions of use. 


Materials other than polyvinyl chloride and rubber are 
suitable, if the above requirements are met, but in such 
cases IS 10322 (Part 5) shall not apply. 


To provide adequate mechanical strength, the nominal 
cross-sectional area of the conductors shall be not less 
than, 


a) 0.75 mm’, for ordinary luminaries; and 


b) 1.0 mm’, for other luminaries. 


If the luminaire is provided with a 10/16 A socket- 
outlet, the flexible conductor nominal cross-section 
area shall be at least 1.5 mm”. 


5.2.3 Where the non-detachable flexible cable or cord, 
is provided with the luminaire, it shall be connected to 
the luminaire by one of the following methods: 


a) Type X attachment; 


b) Type Y attachment; and 


Type Z attachment. 


Table 5.1 Non-Detachable Flexible 
Cables or Cords 
(Clause 5.2.2) 


SI. Class of Luminaires Material of 
No. Insulation/Sheath 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Ordinary class I luminaires Rubber/PVC 

ii) Ordinary class II Rubber/PVC 
iii) Luminaires other than ordinary Rubber 
iv) Portable rough service luminaires Rubber 


NOTE — For supply voltages greater than 250 V, higher voltage 
grade cables and cords than those given in the above table may be 
necessary. 


5.2.4 Compliance with the requirements of 5.2.1 
to 5.2.3 is checked by inspection and, if necessary, by 
fitting the appropriate flexible cable or cord. 


5.2.5 Terminations within luminaires utilizing Type Z 
attachment shall not be made by means of screwed 
connections. 


5.2.6 Cable entries shall be suitable for the introduction 
of the conduit or the protective covering of the cable 
or flexible cord so that the cores are completely 
protected, and they shall provide the degree of 
protection against dust or moisture in accordance with 
the classification of the luminaires, when the conduit, 
cable or flexible cord is fitted. 


5.2.7 Cable entries through rigid materials for external 
flexible cables and cords shall have smoothly rounded 
edges of minimum radius 0.5 mm. 


Compliance with the requirements of 5.2.5 to 5.2.7 is 
checked by inspection and by manual tests. 


5.2.8 If, in Class II luminaires, in adjustable luminaires 
or in portable luminaires other than those for wall 
mounting, a flexible cable or cord where entering or 
leaving the luminaires passes through accessible metal 
parts or through metal parts in contact with accessible 
metal parts, the opening shall be provided with a tough 
bushing of insulating material having smoothly 
rounded edges, so fixed that it cannot easily be 
removed. Bushings of material likely to deteriorate 
with age (for example, rubber) shall not be used in 
openings with sharp edges. 

NOTE — The term ‘easily removable bushings’ is used to 

describe a bushing which can be pulled out of its mounting by 

hand or a bushing screwed into a luminaire but not secured 


with a lock nut or appropriate adhesive such as a self-hardening 
resin. 


If tubes or other guards are provided for the protection 
of flexible cables or cords at the entry to the luminaire 
they shall be of insulating material. 


27 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Helical metal springs and similar components, even 
when covered with insulated material, are not guards. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


5.2.9 Bushings which screw into the luminaire shall 
be locked in position. If bushings are fixed with an 
adhesive, it shall be of the self-hardening resin type. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


5.2.10 Luminaires provided with or designed for use 
with non-detachable flexible cables or cords shall have 
a cord anchorage such that the conductors are relieved 
from strain, including twisting, where they are 
connected to the terminals, and such that their covering 
is protected from abrasion. It shall be clear how the 
relief from strain and the prevention of twisting is 
intended to be affected. For luminaires supplied without 
acable or cord, suitable test cable or cords of the largest 
and smallest sizes recommended by the luminaires 
manufacturer shall be used for the tests. 


It shall not be possible to push the flexible cable or 
cord into the luminaire to such an extent that the cable 
or cord is subjected to undue mechanical or thermal 
stress. Material such as tying the cable or cord into a 
knot or tying the ends with string shall not be used. 


Cord anchorage shall be of insulating material or be 
provided with a fixed insulating lining if an insulation 
fault on the cable or cord could make accessible metal 
parts live. 


5.2.10.1 For Type X attachment cord and luminaires 
designed for use with non-detachable cables and cords, 
cord anchorage’s shall be such that: 


a) 


At least one part is fixed to, or is integral with, 
the luminaire; 


NOTE — A cord anchorage is described as fixed to or 
held by the luminaire if this is actually the case when 
the wiring is inserted and the luminaire is completely 
assembled. 


b) They are suitable for the different types of 
flexible cable or cord that are appropriate for 
connecting to the luminaire, except where the 
luminaire allows only one type of cable or 


cord to be fitted; 

They do not damage the cable or cord and 
they are unlikely to be damaged when they 
are tightened or loosened in normal use; 


c) 


The whole flexible cable or cord with its 
covering, if any, is capable of being mounted 
into the cord anchorage; 


d) 


e) The cable or cord does not touch clamping 
screws of the cord anchorage, if these screws 
are of metal and are accessible or electrically 


connected to accessible metal parts; 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


f) The cable or cord is not clamped by a metal 
screw which bears directly on the cable or 
cord; and 

g) Replacement of the flexible cable or cord does 


not require the use of a tool specially designed 
for the purpose. 


Glands shall not be used as cord anchorages in portable 
or adjustable luminaires, unless they have provision 
for clamping all types and sizes of cables and cords 
which might be used for the supply connection. 
Anchorage of labyrinth type may be used, if it is evident 
from the design or by means of suitable marking how 
the flexible cable or cord is to be mounted. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 5.2.10.3. 


5.2.10.2 For Type Y and Type Z attachments, cord 
anchorages shall be adequate. 


Compliance is checked by the test of 5.2.10.3. 


NOTE — The test is carried out on the cable or cord supplied 
with the luminaire. 


5.2.10.3 Compliance is checked by inspection and by 
the following tests which are made with the cable or 
cord which is fitted to the luminaire as delivered. 


The conductors are introduced into the terminals and 
the terminal screws, if any, are tightened just 
sufficiently to prevent the conductors from easily 
changing their position. 


The cord anchorage is used in the normal manner, 
clamping screws, if any, being tightened with a torque 
two-thirds of that specified in Table 4.1. 


After this preparation, it shall not be possible to push 
the cable or cord into the luminaire in such a way as to 
cause movement of the cable or cord at the terminals, 
or to cause the cable or cord to come into contact with 
moving parts or parts which operate at a temperature 
higher than that permissible for the insulation of the 
conductors. 


The cable or cord is then subjected 25 times to a pull 
of the value shown in Table 5.2. 


The pulls are applied without jerks, each time for 1 s. 
The measurement of the longitudinal displacement of 
the cable or cord is made during this test. A mark is 
made on the cable or cord at a distance of approximately 
20 mm from the cord anchorage while it is subjected to 
the first pull and during the 25th pull the mark shall 
not have been displaced by more than 2 mm. 


The cable or cord shall then be subjected to a torque 
of the value shown in Table 5.2. 


During and after the above tests, the conductors shall 
not have moved noticeably in the terminals and the 
cable or cord shall not be damaged. 


28 


Table 5.2 Tests for Cord Anchorage 
(Clause 5.2.10.3) 


S1 Total Nominal Cross-Sectional Area of Pull Torque 
No. all Conductors Together N Nm 
mm? 

a) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Upto and including 1.5 60 0.15 
ii) Over 1.5 up to and including 3 60 0.25 
iii) Over 3 up to and including 5 80 0.35 
iv) Over 5 up to and including 8 120 0.35 


5.2.11 If external wiring passes into the luminaire, it 
shall comply with the appropriate requirements for 
internal wiring. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 5.3. 


5.2.12 Fixed luminaires for looping-in shall be 
provided with terminals intended for maintaining the 
electrical continuity of supply cables feeding the 
luminaire, but not terminating in it. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


5.2.13 The ends of flexible stranded conductors may 
be tinned but shall not have additional solder applied, 
unless a means is provided of ensuring that clamped 
connections cannot work loose owing to cold flow of 
the solder (see Fig. 28). 


NOTE — This requirement is met when spring terminals are 
used. Securing the clamping screws is not an adequate means 
of preventing the connection of soldered strands from working 
loose owing to cold flow of the solder. 


5.2.14 If a plug is supplied with the luminaire by the 
manufacturer, the plug shall have the same degree of 
protection against electric shock and degree of 
protection against ingress of dust, solid objects and 
moisture as the luminaire. 


A Class III luminaire shall not be provided with a plug 
which permits connection with a socket-outlet 
according to IS 1293. 


5.2.15 Non-detachable flexible cables and cords and 
connecting leads (tails) of extra-low voltage d.c. 
supplied fluorescent luminaires where supplied as the 
means of connection of the luminaire to the supply 
shall be colour coded red to indicate positive and black 
to indicate negative. 


5.2.16 Appliance inlets incorporated into luminaires 
as the means of connection to the supply shall comply 
with the requirements of IS 3010 (Part 2). Looping-in 
of luminaires shall be achieved by appliance couplers, 
which, if of the Class II type, shall not accept Class I 
type plugs, or shall be achieved using screw or 
screwless terminals. 


Compliance with the requirements of 5.2.13 to 5.2.16 
is checked by inspection. 


5.3 Internal Wiring 


5.3.1 Internal wiring shall be made with conductors of 
a suitable size and type to handle the power occurring 
during normal use. The insulation of the wiring shall 
be made of a material capable of withstanding the 
voltage and the maximum temperature to which it is 
subjected, without affecting the safety when properly 
installed and connected to the mains. 


If cables with common type of insulation (PVC or 
rubber) are used as through wiring, they do not need 
to be delivered with the luminaire, if the way of 
mounting is clear from the manufacturer’ s instructions. 
However, if special cables or sleeves, for example, due 
to high temperatures, are necessary, the through wiring 
shall always be factory assembled. The requirements 
of 3.3.3 c) shall be taken into account in the latter case. 


Wires coloured green and yellow shall be used for 
making earth connections only. 


NOTES 


1 The temperature limits for the insulation are given in the tables 
of section 12. 


2 Sleeves in compliance with 4.9.2 are suitable to protect hot 
spots. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and the following 
test, after the temperature and heating tests of 
Section 12. 


The socket-outlet, if any, is loaded with the declared 
value specified by the manufacturer and, if not 
declared, with its rated current at rated voltage. 


When stable conditions are reached, the voltage is 
increased until an over-wattage of 5 percent, or an over- 
voltage of 6 percent (depending on the type of lamp), 
is present. 


When the new stable conditions are reached, all 
temperatures on components, cables, etc, which can 
be influenced by the self-heating of the conductor shall 
be checked in accordance with the requirements 
of 12.4. 


5.3.1.1 For wiring which is directly connected to the 
fixed wiring, for example, via a terminal block, and 
the disconnection from the mains is relied upon by the 
external protection device(s), the following is 
applicable. 


a) For normal operating currents higher than 


2A 

1) Nominal cross-sectional area: minimum 
0.5 mm’, 

2) For through-wiring of fixed luminaries: 
minimum 1.5 mm/?, and 

3) Nominal insulation thickness: minimum 


0.6 mm (PVC or rubber). 


29 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


b) For mechanical protected wiring carrying 
normal operating currents lower than 2 A: 


1) nominal cross-sectional area: minimum 
0.4 mm”, and 
2) Nominal insulation thickness: minimum 


0.5 mm (PVC or rubber). 


The required mechanical protection is regarded to be 
adequate when extra insulation is added at the 
following places where the wire insulation may be 
damaged: 

i) In small openings of pipes when, during 
production, the wires are slid through, 


ii) When bending wires closely around metal not 
specially treated to produce smooth edges. 


5.3.1.2 For wiring which is connected to the fixed via 
an internal current-limiting device and limiting the 
current to 2 A maximum, for example, lamp current 
control device, circuit cut-outs, fuses, protective 
impedance or isolating transformers, the following is 
applicable: 


a) The minimum cross-sectional area which may 
be less than 0.4 mm” shall be selected in 
relation to the maximum current during 
normal operating conditions and the time and 
level of the current flowing during failure 
conditions, owing to the fact that over heating 
of the wire insulation shall be prevented under 
any condition; 

b) The minimum insulation thickness which may 
be less than 0.5 mm (PVC or rubber) shall be 
selected in relation to the voltage stress 


occurring. 


5.3.1.3 In Class II luminaires where the internal wiring 
has a live conductor and touches accessible metal parts 
under normal operating conditions, the insulation, at 
least at the places of contact, shall comply with the 
requirements for double or reinforced insulation 
relevant to the voltage stress, for example, by applying 
sheathed cables or sleeves. 


5.3.1.4 Conductors without insulation may be used 
provided that adequate precautions have been taken to 
ensure adherence to the creepage distances and 
clearance requirements of Section 11 and also with 
regard to the class of protection of Section 2. 


5.3.1.5 The SELV current-carrying parts do not have 
to be insulated. However, if insulation is applied, they 
shall be tested as mentioned in Section 10. 


5.3.1.6 When insulation materials are used which have 
insulating or mechanical properties higher than PVC 
or rubber, an insulation thickness shall be selected 
which gives the same degree of protection. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


5.3.2 Internal wiring shall be so situated or protected 
that it cannot be damaged by sharp edges, rivets, screws 
and similar components, or by moving parts of 
switches, joints, raising and lowering devices, 
telescopic tubes and similar parts. Wiring shall not be 
twisted along the longitudinal axis of the cable through 
an angle exceeding 360°. 


Compliance is checked by inspection (see also 4.14.4 
and 4.14.5) and in accordance with the test of 4.14.3. 


5.3.3 If in Class II luminaires, in adjustable luminaires, 
or in portable luminaires other than those for wall 
mounting, internal wiring passes through accessible 
metal parts or through metal parts in contact with 
accessible metal parts, the opening shall be provided 
with a tough bushing of insulating material, having 
smoothly rounded edges, so fixed that it cannot easily 
be removed. Bushings of material likely to deteriorate 
with age (for example rubber) shall not be used in 
openings with sharp edges. 

NOTE — The term ‘easily removable bushings’ is used to 

describe which can be pulled out of its mounting by hand or a 


bushing screwed into a luminaire but not secured with a lock 
nut or appropriate adhesive such as a self-hardening resin. 


If the cable entry openings have smoothly rounded 
edges and the internal wiring is not required to be 
moved in service, this requirement is met by the use of 
a separate protective sheath over a cable that has no 
special protective sheath, or by using a cable which 
incorporates a protective sheath. 


5.3.4 Joints and junctions in internal wiring, excluding 
terminations on components, shall be provided with 
an insulating covering no less effective than the 
insulation of the wiring. 


Compliance with the requirements of 5.3.3 and 5.3.4 
is checked by inspection. 


5.3.5 Where internal wiring passes out of the luminaire 
and the design is such that the wiring may be subject to 
strain, the requirements for external wiring apply. The 
requirements for external wiring do not apply to internal 
wiring of ordinary luminaires which has a length of less 
than 80 mm outside the luminaire. For luminaires other 
than ordinary, all wiring external to the enclosure shall 
comply with the external wiring requirements. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, measurements 
and, if appropriate, in accordance with the tests 
of 5.2.10.1. 


5.3.6 Wiring of adjustable luminaires shall be fixed 
by means of wire carriers, clips or similar parts of the 
insulating material at all places where it might 
otherwise rub against metal parts in the normal 
movement of the luminaire in such a way that the 
insulation may be damaged. 


30 


5.3.7 The ends of flexible stranded conductors may be 
tinned but shall not have additional solder applied 
unless a means is provided of ensuring that clamped 
connections cannot work loose owing to cold flow of 
the solder (see Fig. 28). 


NOTE — This requirement is met when spring terminals are 
used. Securing the clamping screws is not an adequate means 
of preventing the connecting of soldered strands from working 
loose owing to cold flow of the solder. 


Compliance with the requirements of 5.3.6 and 5.3.7 
is checked by inspection. 


SECTION 6 — Not used 


SECTION 7 PROVISION FOR EARTHING 


7.1 General 


This section specifies requirements, where applicable, 
for the earthing of luminaires. 


7.2 Provision for Earthing 


7.2.1 Metal parts of Class I luminaires which are 
accessible when the luminaire has been mounted, or is 
opened for replacement of a lamp or replaceable starter 
or for cleaning purposes, and which may become live 
in the event of an insulation fault, shall be permanently 
and reliably connected to an earthing terminal or 
earthing contact. 


NOTE — Metal parts screened from live parts by metal parts 
which are connected to the earthing terminal or earthing 
contact, and metal parts separated from live parts by double 
insulation or by reinforced insulation, are not, for the purpose 
of this requirement, regarded as likely to become live in the 
event of an insulation fault. 


Metal parts of luminaires which may become live in 
the event of an insulation fault and which are not 
accessible when the luminaire has been mounted, but 
are liable to come into contact with the supporting 
surface, shall be permanently and reliably connected 
to an earthing terminal. 


NOTE — The earthing of starters and lamp caps is not a 
requirement but earthing of lamp caps may be necessary as a 
starting aid. 


The earthing connections shall be of low resistance. 


Self-tapping screws may be used to provide earthing 
continuity, provided that it is not necessary to disturb 
the connection in normal use and that at least two 
screws are used for each connection. 


Thread-forming screws may be used to provide 
earthing continuity, if they comply with the 
requirements for screw terminals (see Section 14.) 


For Class I luminaires with detachable parts provided 
with connectors or similar connection devices, the earth 


connection shall be made before the current-carrying 
contacts are made and the current-carrying contacts 
shall separate before the earth connection is broken. 


7.2.2 Surfaces in adjustable joints, telescopic tubes, 
etc, providing earthing continuity, shall be such that a 
good electrical contact is ensured. 


7.2.3 Compliance with the requirements of 7.2.1 
and 7.2.2 is checked by inspection and by the following 
test: 


A current of at least 10 A, derived form a source with 
a no-load voltage not exceeding 12 V, shall be passed 
between the earthing terminal or earthing contact and 
each of the accessible metal parts in turn. 


The voltage drop between the earthing terminal or 
earthing contact and the accessible metal part shall be 
measured and the resistance calculated from the current 
and the voltage drop. In no case shall the resistance 
exceed 0.5 Q. When type testing, the current shall be 
applied for a period of at least 1 min. 


NOTE — In the case of a luminaire with a non-detachable 
flexible cable for the supply connection, the earthing contact is 
at the plug or supply end of the flexible cable or cord. 


7.2.4 Earthing terminals shall comply with the 
requirements of 4.7.3. The connection shall be 
adequately locked against accidental loosening. 


For screw terminals, it shall not be possible to loosen 
the clamping means by hand. 


For screw less terminals, it shall not be possible to 
loosen the clamping means unintentionally. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by manual test 
and by the tests specified in 4.7.3. 


NOTE — In general, the designs commonly sued for current- 
carrying terminals provide sufficient re-silience to comply with 
this requirement; for other designs, special provisions, such as 
the use of an adequately resilient part which is not likely to be 
removed inadvertently, may be necessary. 


7.2.5 For luminaires provided with a connector socket 
for a mains supply, the earth contact shall be an integral 
part of the socket. 


7.2.6 For luminaires to be connected to supply cables 
or to anon-detachable flexible cable or cord, the earth 
terminal shall be adjacent to the mains terminal. 


NOTE — Luminaires may be provided with Type X or Y 
attachments. 


7.2.7 For luminaires other than ordinary luminaires, 
all parts of an earth terminal shall be such as to 
minimize the danger of electrolytic corrosion resulting 
from contact with the earth conductor or any other 
metal in contact with them. 


7.2.8 Either the screw or the other part of the earth 
terminal shall be made of brass or other non-rusting 


31 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


metal or a material with a non-rusting surface and the 
contact surfaces shall be bare metal. 


7.2.9 Compliance with the requirements of 7.2.5 
to 7.2.8 is checked by inspection and by manual test. 


7.2.10 If a fixed Class II luminaire designed for 
looping-in is provided with internal terminal(s) for 
maintaining the electrical continuity of an earthing 
conductor not terminating in the luminaire, this (these) 
terminal(s) shall be insulated from accessible metal 
parts by double insulation or reinforced insulation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


7.2.11 When a Class I luminaire is supplied with an 
attached flexible cord, this cord shall have an earthing 
core coloured green-yellow. 


The green-yellow core of a flexible cable or cord shall 
be connected to the earthing terminal of the luminaire 
and to the earthing contact of the plug, if one is 
attached. 


All conductors, whether internal or external, which are 
identified by the green and yellow colour combination 
shall only be connected to an earthing terminal. 


For luminaires with non-detachable flexible cables or 
cords, the arrangements of the terminals, or the length 
of the conductors between the cord anchorage and the 
terminals, shall be such that, should the cable or cord 
move out of the cord anchorage, the current-carrying 
conductor becomes taut before the earthing conductor. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


SECTION 8 PROTECTION AGAINST 
ELECTRIC SHOCK 


8.1 General 


This section specifies requirements for protection 
against electric shock from luminaires. A test to 
determine whether a conductive part is a live part which 
may cause an electric shock is described in Annex A. 


8.2 Protection Against Electric Shock 


8.2.1 Luminaires shall be so constructed that their live 
parts are not accessible when the luminaire has been 
installed and wired as in normal use, and when it is 
opened as necessary for replacing lamps or 
(replaceable) starters, even if the operation cannot be 
achieved by hand. 


Protection against electric shock shall be maintained 
for all methods and positions of installation in normal 
use having regard to the limitations indicated in the 
manufacturer’s installation instructions, and for all 
adjustments of adjustable luminaires. Protection shall 
be maintained after removal of all parts which can be 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


removed by hand, except lamps and the following parts 
of the lampholders: 


a) For bayonet lampholders: 
1) Domes (terminal covers); and 
2) Skirts. 

b) For Edison screw lampholders: 


1) Domes (terminal covers) for cord grip 
types on; and 


2) Outer shells. 


Covers in fixed luminaires that cannot be removed by 
a single action with one hand are not removed. 
However, covers which have to be removed for 
changing lamps or starters are removed for this test. 
NOTE — A single action with one hand is normally taken to 


include removal of items such as a knurled headed screw or a 
shade retaining ring. 


Supply conductors held by screw less terminals with 
push-button releasing devices shall not be removed for 
this test. 


The use of push-button type terminal blocks without 
the use of a cover is not precluded by this requirement. 
This is possible as some specific actions are required 
in order to release wiring from these blocks. 


Class I and Class II luminaires intended for tubular 
filament lamps having a cap/base at each end shall 
incorporate a means of automatic double-pole 
disconnection operative when the lamp is being 
changed. This requirement does not apply, if the 
relevant cap and holder combination(s) is (are) covered 
by standards which incorporate special requirements 
with regard to accessibility of live parts which may 
cause an electric shock. 


The insulating properties of lacquer, enamel, paper and 
similar materials shall not be relied upon to give the 
required protection against electric shock and 
protection against short-circuit. 


Luminaires with ignitors intended for use with double 
ended high pressure discharge lamps shall be tested 
according to Fig. 26. 


If the voltage measured according to Fig. 26 exceeds 
34 V (peak), the ignitor shall only be active if the lamp 
is fully inserted, or a warning according to 3.2.18 (a) 
or (b) respectively shall be fitted to the luminaire. 


8.2.2 For portable luminaire, protection against electric 
shock shall also be maintained after movable parts of 
the luminaires have been placed in the most 
unfavourable position, which can be effected by hand. 


8.2.3 Metal parts of Class II luminaires which are 
insulated from live parts by basic insulation only are 
live parts for the purpose of this section. 


32 


This applies also to starters and non-current-carrying 
parts of lamp caps, if they are accessible other than 
when the luminaire is open for lamp or starter changing. 


This does not apply to the caps of single-ended compact 
fluorescent lamps which comply with (Under 
preparation). 


For Class II luminaire, glass lamp bulbs are not required 
to have further protection against electric shock. If glass 
bowls and other protective glasses have to be removed 
when the lamp is replaced or if they do not withstand 
the test of 4.13, they shall not be used as supplementary 
insulation. 


NOTE — The combination of requirements in 8.2.1 and 8.2.3 
means that in Class II luminaire, basic insulated metal parts 
other than those of starters and non-current-carrying parts of 
lamp caps are not allowed to be accessible when the luminaire 
is opened for lamp or starter replacement, but basic insulation 
may be accessible. 


Class I luminaires incorporating lampholders for 
bayonet cap lamps shall either, 


a) be so designed that the lamp cap is not 
accessible to the standard test finger when the 
luminaire is assembled as in normal use, or 

b) be provided with a metal lampholder which 

is earthed. 


There is no evidence that during normal use double- 
ended halogen lamps will fail in a manner that would 
expose the filament, and in a Class II luminaire they 
do not require an insulating barrier between the lamp 
and a metal reflector. 


8.2.4 Portable luminaires for connection to the supply 
by means of a non-detachable flexible cord and plug 
shall have protection against electric shock which is 
independent of the supporting surface. 


For portable luminaires, terminal blocks shall be 
completely covered. 


8.2.5 Compliance with the requirements of 8.2.1 
to 8.2.4 is checked by inspection and if necessary by a 
test with the standard test finger specified in IS 12063. 


This finger shall be applied to every possible position, 
if necessary with a force of 10 N, an electrical indicator 
being used to show contact with live parts. Movable 
parts, including shades, shall be placed in the most 
unfavourable position by hand; if of metal they shall 
not touch live parts of the luminaire or of the lamps. 


NOTE — It is recommended that a lamp be used for the 
indication of contact and that the voltage should be not less 
than 40 V. 


8.2.6 Covers and other parts providing protection 
against electric shock shall have adequate mechanical 
strength and shall be reliably secured so that they shall 
not work loose with normal handling. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by manual test 
and by the tests as given in Section 4. 


8.2.7 Luminaires (other than those mentioned below) 
incorporating a capacitor of capacitance exceeding 
0.5 uF shall be provided with a discharge device so 
that the voltage across the capacitor 1 min after 
disconnection of the luminaire from the source of 
supply at rated voltage does not exceed 50 V. 


Portable luminaires designed to be connected to the 
supply by means of a plug, track adaptor connected 
luminaires, or luminaires with supply connector with 
contacts accessible with the standard test finger and 
incorporating a capacitor of capacitance exceeding 
0.1 uF (or 0.25 uF for luminaires with a rated voltage 
less than 150 V) shall be provided with a discharge 
device so that 1 s after disconnection the voltage 
between the pins of the plug or adaptor/connector 
contacts does not exceed 34 V. 


Other luminaires connected to the supply by means of 
a plug and incorporating a capacitor exceeding 0.1 UF 
(or 0.25 uF for luminaires of rated voltage less 
than 150 V) and track adaptors mounted in luminaires 
shall discharge so that after 5 s the voltage between 
the pins of the plug does not exceed 60 Vms 


Sub-clause 0.4.2 requires that, unless otherwise 
specified, the tests of this part of the standard shall be 
conducted with the lamp in circuit. In the case of this 
sub-clause the lamp shall be in circuit when 
measurement is made of the voltage from the 
compensation capacitor, if it leads to a more onerous 
result. 


Compliance is checked by measurement. 


NOTE — The discharge device (for all types of luminaire) may 
be incorporated on or within the capacitor or mounted separately 
within the luminaire. 


SECTION 9 RESISTANCE TO DUST, SOLID 
OBJECTS AND MOISTURE 


9.1 General 


This section specifies the requirements and tests for 
luminaires classified as resistant to dust, solid objects 
and moisture in accordance with Section 2, including 
ordinary luminaire. 


9.2 Tests for Ingress of Dust, Solid Objects and 
Moisture 


The enclosure of a luminaire shall provide the degree 
of protection against ingress of dust, solid objects and 
moisture in accordance with the classification of the 
luminaire and the IP number marked on the luminaire. 


NOTE — The tests for the ingress of dust, solid objects and 
moisture specified in this standard are not all identical to the 


33 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


tests in IS 12063 because of the technical characteristics of 
luminaires. An explanation of the IP numbering system is given 
in Annex J. 


Compliance is checked by the appropriate tests 
specified in 9.2.0 to 9.2.9, and for other IP ratings by 
the appropriate tests specified in IS 12063. 


Before the tests for second characteristic numeral, with 
the exception of IPX8, the luminaire complete with 
lamp(s) shall be switched on and brought to a stable 
operating temperature at rated voltage. 


The water for the tests shall be at a temperature of 
15 + 10°C. 


Luminaires shall be mounted and wired as in normal 
use and placed in the most unfavourable position, 
complete with their protective translucent covers, if 
any, for the tests of 9.2.0 to 9.2.9. 


Where connection is made by a plug or a similar device 
then this shall be regarded as part of the complete 
luminaire and shall be included in the tests and 
similarly for any separate control gear. 


For tests of 9.2.3 to 9.2.9, a fixed luminaires intended 
for mounting with its body in contact with a surface 
shall be tested with an expanded metal spacer 
interposed between the luminaire and the mounting 
surface. The spacer shall be at least equal in overall 
size to the projection of the luminaire, and have 
dimensions as follows: 


Longway of mesh: 10mm to 20mm 


Shortway of mesh: 4mm to7 mm 
Strand width: 
Strand thickness: 


Overall thickness: 


1.5 mm to 2 mm 
0.3 mm to 0.5 mm 
1.8 mm to 3 mm 


Luminaires having provision for draining water by 
means of drain holes shall be mounted with the lowest 
drain hole open unless otherwise specified in the 
manufacturer’s installation instructions. 


If the installation instructions indicate that a drip-proof 
luminaire is for ceiling or under-canopy mounting, the 
luminaires shall be attached to the underside of a flat 
board or plate which extends 10 mm beyond that part 
of the luminaire perimeter in contact with the mounting 
surface. 


For recessed luminaires, the parts in the recess and the 
parts protruding from the recess shall each be tested 
according to their IP classification as indicated in the 
manufacturer’s mounting instructions. 


NOTE — A box encapsulating the part in the recess may be 
necessary for the test of 9.2.4 to 9.2.9. 


For IP2X luminaires, the enclosure denotes that part 
of the luminaire containing the main part other than 
the lamp and optical controls. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


NOTE — Since luminaires have no hazardous moving parts, 
the level of safety as specified in IS 12063 is achieved. 


Portable luminaires, wired as in normal use, shall 
placed in the most unfavourable position of normal 
use. 


Glands, if any, shall be tightened with a torque equal 
to two-thirds of that applied to glands in the test 
of 4.12.5. 


Fixing screws of covers, other than hand-operated 
fixing screws of glass covers, shall be tightened with a 
torque equal to two-thirds of that specified in Table 4.1. 


Screwed lids shall be tightened with a torque having a 
value in Newton metres numerically equal to one-tenth 
of the nominal diameter of the screw thread in 
millimetres. Screws fixing other caps shall be tightened 
with a torque equal to two-thirds of that specified in 
Table 4.1. 


After completion of the tests, the luminaires shall 
withstand the electric strength test specified in 
Section 10, and inspection shall show, 


a) no deposit of talcum powder in dust-proof 
luminaires, such that, if the powder were 
conductive, the insulation would fail to meet 
the requirements of this standard; 
b) no deposit of talcum powder inside enclosures 
for dust-tight luminaires; 
c) notrace of water on current-carrying parts or 
SELV parts or on insulation where it could 
become a hazard for the user or surroundings, 
for example where it could reduce the 
creepage distances below the values specified 
in Section 11; 
d) 1) for luminaires without drain holes, there 
shall be no water entry. 


NOTE — Care should be taken not to mistake 
condensation for water entry. 


2) for luminaires with drain holes, water 
entry including condensation is allowed 
during the tests, if it can drain out 
effectively and provided it does not 
reduce the creepage and clearance 
distances below the minimum levels 
specified in the standard. 

e) no trace of water entered in any part of a 
watertight or pressure watertight luminaire; 


no contact permitted with live parts by the 
relevant test probe for first characteristic IP 
numeral 2; 


no entry into the luminaires enclosure by the 
relevant test probe for first characteristic IP 
numerals 3 and 4. 


g) 


34 


h) for luminaires with drain holes in an 
accordance with 4.17, no contact permitted 
through the drain holes with live parts with 
the relevant test probe for the first 
characteristic IP numerals 3 and 4. 


9.2.0 Tests 


Solid-object-proof luminaires (first characteristic IP 
numeral 2) shall be tested with the standard test finger 
specified in IS 12063 according to the requirements as 
given in Table 9.1. 


NOTE — Luminaires with first characteristic IP numeral 2 are 
not required to be tested with the sphere specified in IS 12063. 


Solid-object-proof luminaires (first characteristic IP 
numerals 3 and 4) shall be tested at every possible point 
(excluding gaskets) with a probe in accordance with 
test probe C or D of IS 12063, applied with a force as 
follows: 


9.2.0 The end of the probe wire shall be cut at right 


angles to its length and be free from burrs. 


Table 9.1 Solid-Object-Proof Luminaire Test 
(Clause 9.2.0) 


SI. Test Probe Probe Wire Application 
No. According Diameter Force 
IS 1401 mm (percent) 
d) 2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) First IP numeral 3 C 25 ne 3N+10 
ii) First IP numeral 4 D pee IN+10 


—0.00 


9.2.1 Dust-proof luminaires (first characteristic IP 
numeral 5) shall be tested in a dust chamber similar to 
that shown in Fig. 6, in which talcum powder is 
maintained in suspension by an air current. The 
chamber shall contain 2 kg of powder for every cubic 
meter of its volume. The talcum powder used shall be 
able to pass through a square-meshed sieve whose 
nominal wire diameter is 50 mm °? and whose nominal 
free distance between wires is 75 mm. It shall not have 
been used for more than 20 tests. 


The test shall proceed as follows: 


a) The luminaire is suspended outside the dust 
chamber and operated at rated supply voltage 
until operating temperature is achieved. 

b) The luminaire whilst still operating is placed 
with the minimum disturbance in the dust 
chamber. 

c) The door of the dust chamber is closed. 

d) The fan/blower causing the talcum powder to 
be in suspension is switched on. 

e) After 1 min the luminaire is switched off and 


allowed to cool for 3 h whilst the talcum 
powder remains in suspension. 

NOTE — The 1 min interval between switching on the 
fan/blower and switching off the luminaire is to ensure 
that the talcum powder is properly in suspension around 
the luminaire during initial cooling, which is most 
important with smaller luminaires. The luminaire is 
operated initially as in 9.2.1 (a) to ensure the test 
chamber is not over heated. 


9.2.2 Dust-tight luminaires (first characteristic IP 
numeral 6) are tested in accordance with 9.2.1. 


9.2.3 Drip-proof luminaires (second characteristic IP 
numeral 1) are subjected for 10 min to an artificial 
rainfall of 3 mm/min, falling vertically from a height 
of 200 mm above the top of the luminaires. 


9.2.4 Rain-proof luminaires (second characteristic IP 
numeral 3) are sprayed with water for 10 min by means 
of a spray apparatus as shown in Fig. 7. The radius of 
the semicircular tube shall be as small as possible and 
compatible with the size and position of the luminaire. 


The tube shall be perforated so that jets of water are 
directed towards the centre of the circle and the water 
pressure at the inlet of the apparatus shall be 
approximately 80 kN/m’. 


The tube shall be caused to oscillate through an angle 
of 120°, 60° on either side of the vertical, the time for 
one complete oscillation (2 x 120°) being about 4s. 


The luminaire shall be mounted above the pivot line 
of the tube so that the ends of the luminaire receive 
adequate coverage from the jets. The luminaires shall 
be turned about its vertical axis during the test at a rate 
of 1 rev/min. 


After this 10 min period, the luminaire shall be 
switched off and allowed to cool naturally whilst the 
water spray is continued for a further 10 min. 


9.2.5 Splash-proof luminaire (second characteristic IP 
numeral 4) are sprayed from every direction with water 
for 10 min by means of the spray apparatus shown in 
Fig. 7 and described in 9.2.4. The luminaire shall be 
mounted under the pivot line of the tube so that the 
ends of the luminaires receive adequate coverage from 
the jets. 


The tube shall be caused to oscillate through an angle 
of almost 360°, 180° on either side of the vertical, the 
time for one complete oscillation (2 x 360°) being 
about 12 s. The luminaire shall be turned about its 
vertical axis during the test at a rate of 1 rev/min. 


The support for the equipment under test shall be of 
grid shaped in order to avoid acting as a baffle. After 
this 10 min period, the luminaire shall be switched off 
and allowed to cool naturally whilst the water spray is 
continued for a further 10 min. 


35 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


9.2.6 Jet-proof luminaires (second characteristic IP 
numeral 5) are switched off and immediately subjected 
to a water jet for 15 min from all directions by means 
of a hose having a nozzle with the shape and 
dimensions shown in Fig. 8. The nozzle shall be held 
3 m away the sample. 


The water pressure at the nozzle shall be adjusted to 
achieve a water delivery rate of 12.5 l/min + 5 percent 
(approximately 30 kN/m’). 


9.2.7 Powerful water jet-proof luminaires (second 
characteristic IP numeral 6) are switched off and 
immediately subjected to a water jet for 3 min from all 
direction by means of a hose having a nozzle with the 
shape and dimensions shown in Fig. 8. The nozzle shall 
be held in 3 m away from the sample. 


The water pressure at the nozzle shall be adjusted to 
achieve a water delivery rate of 100 l/min + 5 percent 
(approximately 100 kN/m’). 


9.2.8 Water-tight luminaires (second characteristic IP 
numeral 7) are switched off and immediately immersed 
for 30 min in water, so that there is at least 150 mm of 
water above the top of the luminaires and the lowest 
portion is subjected to at least 1 m head of water. 
Luminaires shall be held in position by their normal 
fixing means. Luminaires for tubular fluorescent lamps 
shall be positioned horizontally, with the diffuser 
upwards, | m below the water surface. 


NOTE — This treatment is not sufficiently severe for luminaires 
intended for operation under water. 


9.2.9 Pressure watertight luminaires (second 
characteristic IP numeral 8) are heated either by switching 
on the lamp or by other suitable means, so that the 
temperature of the luminaire enclosure exceeds that of 
the water in the test tank by between 5°C and 10°C. 


The luminaires shall then be switched off and subjected 
to a water pressure of 1.3 times that pressures which 
corresponds to the rated maximum immersion depth 
for a period of 30 min. 


9.3 Humidity Test 


All luminaires shall be protected against humid 
conditions which may occur in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the humidity treatment 
described in 9.3.1, followed immediately by the tests 
of Section 10. 


Cable entries, if any, shall be left open; if knock-outs 
are provided, one of them shall be opened. 


Parts which can be removed by hand, for example 
electrical components, covers, protective glasses, etc, 
shall be removed and subjected, if necessary, to the 
humidity treatment with the main part. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


9.3.1 The luminaire is placed in the most unfavourable 
position of normal use, in a humidity cabinet containing 
air with a relative humidity maintained between 
91percent and 95 percent. The temperature of the air 
at all places where samples can be located shall be 
maintained within 1°C of any convenient value ‘?’ 
between 20°C and 30°C. 


Before being placed in the humidity cabinet, the sample 
shall be brought to a temperature between ‘£?’ and (t + 
4)°C. The sample shall be kept in the cabinet for 48 h. 


NOTE — In most cases, the sample may be brought to the 
specified temperature between ‘t’ and (t + 4)°C by keeping it 
in aroom at this temperature for at least 4 h before the humidity 
treatment. 


In order to achieve the specified conditions within the 
cabinet, it is necessary to ensure constant circulation 
of the air within, and in general to use a cabinet which 
is thermally insulated. 


After this treatment, the sample shall show no damage 
affecting compliance with the requirements of this 
standard. 


SECTION 10 INSULATION RESISTANCE 
AND ELECTRIC STRENGTH 
10.1 General 
This section specifies requirements and tests for the 
insulation resistance and electric strength of luminaires. 


10.2 Insulation Resistance and Electric Strength 


The insulation resistance and the electric strength of 
luminaires shall be adequate. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 10.2.1 and 10.2.2 
in the humidity cabinet or the room in which the sample 


was brought to the prescribed temperature, after 
reassemble of those parts which may have been removed. 


This switch, if any, shall be placed in the ‘ON’ positions 
for all tests, except for tests between live parts which 
are separated by the action of a switch. 


During these tests the following components shall be 
disconnected, so that the test voltages are applied to 
the insulation of the components, but not to the 
capacitate or inductive functional elements of these 
components, as appropriate: 


a) Shunt-connected capacitors; 


b) Capacitors between live parts and the body; 
and 


c) Chokes or transformers connected between 
live parts. 


If it is impossible to place metal foil in position on 
linings or barriers, the tests shall be made on three 
pieces of the lining or barrier which have been taken 
out and placed between two metal balls having a 
diameter of 20 mm, which shall be pressed together 
with a force of 2 + 0.5 N. 


The conditions of test for transistorized ballasts shall 
be as specified in IS 6616. 


NOTE — The insulation between live parts and the body, as 
well as between accessible metal parts and metal foil on the 
inside of insulating linings and barriers, are tested according to 
the required type of insulation. The term ‘body’ includes 
accessible metal parts, accessible fixing screws and metal foil 
in contact with accessible parts of insulating material. 


10.2.1 Test-Insulation Resistance 


The insulation resistance shall be measured with a d.c. 
voltages of approximately 500 V, 1 min after the 
application of the voltage. 


Table 10.1 Minimum Insulation Resistance 
(Clause 10.2.1) 


SI Insulation of Parts Minimum Insulation Resistance 
No. MQ 
Class I Class II Class II 
Luminaires Luminaires Luminaires 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) SELV: 
ii) Between current-carrying parts of different polarity a a a 
iii) Between current-carrying parts and the mounting surface” a a a 
iv) Between current-carrying parts and metal parts of the luminaire a a a 
v) Other than SELV: 
vi) Between live parts of different polarity b b — 
vii) Between live parts and the mounting surface” b b and c, or d — 
viii) Between live parts and metal parts of the luminaires b b and c, or d — 
ix) Between live parts which can become of different polarity through action of a switch b b and c, or d — 
x) Basic insulation for voltage of SELV (a) 1 — 
xi) Basic insulation for voltages other than SELV (b) — 2 — 
xii) Supplementary insulation (c) — 2 — 
xiii) Double or reinforced insulation (d) — 4 — 


D The mounting surface is covered with metal foil for the purpose of this test. 


For the insulation of SELV parts of luminaires, the dc 
voltage to be used for measurement is 100 V. 


The insulation resistance shall be not less than the 
values specified in Table 10.1. 


The insulation between live parts and the body of 
Class II luminaires shall not be tested, if the basic 
insulation and the supplementary insulation can be 
tested separately. 


Insulating linings and barriers shall be tested only, if 
the distance between live parts and accessible metal 
parts, without the lining or barrier, would be less than 
that prescribed in Section 11. 


For the tests on the insulation of bushings, cord grips, 
wire carriers and clips, the cable or cord shall be 
covered by metal foil or replaced by a metal rod of the 
same diameter. 


These requirements do not apply to starting aids which 
are purposely connected to the mains, if they are not 
live parts. 


NOTE — See Annex A for a test for live parts. 


10.2.2 Test-Electrical Strength 


A voltage of substantially sine-wave form, having a 
frequency of 50 Hz and the value specified in 
Table 10.2, shall be applied for 1 min across the 
insulation shown in that table. 


Initially, no more than half the prescribed voltage shall 
be applied, then it is raised gradually to the full value. 


For the high-voltage transformers used for the test, 
when the output terminals are short-circuited after the 
output voltages has been adjusted to the appropriate 
test voltage, the output current shall be at least 
200 mA. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


The over current relay shall not trip when the output 
current is less than 100 mA. 


Care shall be taken that the r.m.s. value of the test 
voltage applied is measured within + 3 percent. 


Care shall also be taken that the metal foil is so placed 
that no flashover occurs at the edges of the insulation. 


For Class II luminaires incorporating both reinforced 
and double insulation, care shall be taken that the 
voltage applied to the reinforced insulation does not 
overstress the basic insulation or the supplementary 
insulation. 


Glow discharges without drop in voltage are ignored. 
No flashover or breakdown shall occur during the test. 


These requirements do not apply to starting aids which 
are purposely connected to the mains, if they are not 
live parts. 


For luminaires with ignitors, the electric strength of 
parts of the luminaire that are stressed by the pulse 
voltage is tested with the ignitor operating, to ensures 
that the luminaire insulation, wiring and similar parts 
are adequate. 


For luminaires with ignitors and lampholders which, 
according to the lampholder manufacturer’s 
instructions achieve their maximum impulse voltage 
protection only with a lamp inserted, a dummy lamp 
shall be inserted for this test. 


NOTES 


1 The dummy lamps should be supplied with the type test 
sample. 


2 This requirement enables the cap/holder design to be kept to 
a reasonable size while allowing the pulse voltage to rise to a 
level which will ensure hot restarting of a discharge lamp (for 
example in studio applications). 


Table 10.2 Electric Strength 
(Clause 10.2.2) 


SI Insulation of Parts Test VoltageV 
No. 
Class I Class II Class M 
Luminaires Luminaires Luminaires 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) SELV: 
ii) Between current-carrying parts of different polarity a a a 
iii) Between current-carrying parts and the mounting surface” a a a 
iv) Between current-carrying parts and metal parts of the luminaires a a a 
v) Other than SELV: — 
vi) Between live parts of different polarity b b — 
vii) Between live parts and the mounting surface” b b and c, or d — 
viii) Between live parts and metal parts of the luminaries b b and c, or d — 
ix) Between live parts which can be become of different polarity through action of a switch b b and c, or d | — 
x) Basic insulation for voltages of SLEV (a) — 500 — 
xi) Basic insulation for voltages other than SELV (b) — 2U + 1 000 — 
xii) Supplementary insulation (c) — 2U + 1750 — 
xiii) Double or reinforced insulation (d) — 4U +2750 — 


D The mounting surface is covered with metal foil for the purpose of this test. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


The luminaire with ignitors is connected to a supply 
of 100 percent rated voltage, for a period of 24 h. 
Ignitors that become defective during this period are 
replaced immediately. The electric strength test with 
the values specified in Table 10.2 is then applied to 
the luminaire with all the terminals (except any earthing 
terminal) of the ignitor connected together. 


For luminaire with manual ignitors such as push- 
buttons, the luminaire is connected to a supply of 
100 percent rated voltage and subjected to ‘3 s on/10 s 
off’ switching cycle for a total period of 1 h. Only one 
ignitor is used for this test. 


Luminaires with ignitors provided with ballasts which 
are marked for the exclusive use with an ignitor having 
a time limitation device, conforming to relevant Indian 
Standards if any, shall be subjected to the same test 
but for a period consisting of 250 on/off cycles, keeping 
an off-period of 2 min. 


No flashover or breakdown shall occur during the 
electric strength test. 


10.3 Leakage Current 


The leakage current that may occur during normal 
operating of the luminaire between each pole of the 
supply source and the body of the luminaire (see Table 
10.2) and shall not exceeds the values of Table 10.3. 


Table 10.3 Leakage Current 
(Clause 10.3) 


Sl Luminaires Type Maximum, rms Values 
No. of Leakage Current 
mA 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Class II 0.5 
ii) Portable, Class I 1.0 
iii) Fixed, Class I up to 1 kVA rated 1.0 


input increasing by 1.0 mA/KVA 
up to a maximum of 5.0 mA 


NOTE — For luminaire incorporating a.c. supplied electronic 
ballasts, the leakage current may be greatly dependent upon 
the spacing between the lamp and the earthed starting aid, due 
to the high frequency operation of the lamp. 


SECTION 11 CREEPAGE DISTANCES 
AND CLEARANCES 


11.1 General 


This section specifies minimum requirements for 
creepage distances and clearances in luminaires. 


11.2 Creepage Distances and Clearances 


Live parts and adjacent metal parts shall be adequately 
spaced. SELV parts of luminaires shall also be 
adequately spaced. Creepage distances and clearances 
for ordinary luminaires shall be not less than the values 
given in Tables 11.1 and 11.3 as appropriate, for 
luminaires classified IPX1 or higher not less than the 
values given in Tables 11.2 and 11.3 as appropriate. 


Distances between current-carrying parts of opposite 
polarity shall comply with the requirements for basic 
insulation. 


NOTE — For details of pollution degrees or over voltage 
categories, IS 15382 (Part 1) should be consulted. 


For ordinary luminaires, the minimum distances 
specified in Tables 11.1 and 11.3 are based on the 
following criteria: 


a) Pollution degree 2 where normally only non- 
conductive pollution occurs but occasionally 
a temporary conductivity caused by 
condensation is to be expected; 


b) For basic insulation over voltage Category I; 
and 

c) Forsupplementary and reinforced insulation, 
over voltage Category II. 


Table 11.1 Minimum Distances for ac (50 Hz) Sinusoidal Voltages for Ordinary Luminaires 
(Conversion Guide in Annex M) 
(Clause 11.2) 


SI RMS Working Voltage not Exceeding 50 150 250 500 750 1 000 
No. V 
Distances in mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Creepage distances: 
a) Basic insulation PTL’ > 600 0.6 1.4 1.7 3 4 5.5 
< 600 1.2 1.6 25: 5 8 10 
b) Supplementary insulation PTI” 2 600 — 3.2 3.6 4.8 6 8 
< 600 — 3.2 3.6 5 8 10 
c) Reinforced insulation — 5.5 6.5 9 12 14 
ii) Clearances: 
a) Basic insulation 0.2 1.4 1.7 3 4 5.5 
b) Supplementary insulation — 3.2 3.6 4.8 6 8 
c) Reinforced insulation — 5.5 6.5 9 12 14 


DPTI (proof tracking index) in accordance with IS 2824. 


38 


For luminaires classified IPX1 or higher, the minimum 
distances specified in Tables 11.2 and 11.3 are based 
on the following criteria: 


a) Pollution degree 3 where dry non-conductive 
pollution occurs which becomes conductive 
due to condensation which can be expected; 
and 


b) For all insulations, over voltage Category II. 


11.2.1 Compliance is checked by measurements made 
with and without conductors of the largest section 
connected to the terminals of the luminaires. 


The contribution to the creepage distance of any groove 
less than 1 mm wide is limited to its width. 


Any air gap less than 1 mm wide is ignored in 
calculating the total clearance, unless the required 
distance is 1 mm or less. 


For luminaires provided with an appliance inlet, the 
measurements are made with an appropriate connector 
inserted. 


Distances through slots or openings in external parts 
of insulating material are measured with metal foil in 
contact with the accessible surface. The foil is pushed 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


into corners and similar places by means of the standard 
test finger specified in IS 12063, but it is not pressed 
into openings. 


Internal creepage distances in permanently sealed 
components are not measured. Examples of 
permanently sealed components are components 
sealed-off or compound filled. 


The values in the table do not apply to components for 
which separate Indian standard exists, but apply only 
to the mounting distances in the luminaire. 


Creepage distances at a supply terminal shall be 
measured from the live part in the terminal to any 
accessible metal parts, and the clearance shall be 
measured between incoming supply wiring and 
accessible metal parts, i.e. from a bare conductor of 
the largest section to the metal parts which can be 
accessible. At the internal wiring side of the terminal 
the clearance shall be measured between live parts of 
the terminal and accessible metal parts (see Fig. 24). 


NOTE — The measurements of the clearances from supply and 
from internal wiring differ because the luminaire manufacturer 
does not have control over the length of insulation removed 
from the supply wiring by the installer. 


Table 11.2 Minimum Distances for a.c. (50 Hz) Sinusoidal Voltages for Luminaires 
Classified IPX1 or Higher (Conversion Guide in Annex M) 
(Clause 11.2) 


SI RMS Working Voltage 50 150 250 500 750 1000 
No. not Exceeding 
V 
Distances in mm 
ad) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Creepage distance: 
a) Basic insulation PTI” > 600 1.5 2 3.2 6.3 10 12.5 
b) PTI 2175 1.9 2.5 4 8 12.5 16 
< 600 
c) Supplementary insulation — 3.2 3 8 12:5 16 
d) Reinforced insulation — 5.5 6.5 9 12.5 16 
ii) Clearances 
a) Basic insulation 0.8 1:5 3 4 5.5 8 
b) Supplementary insulation 3:2 3.6 4.8 6 8 
c) Reinforced insulation — 5.5 6.5 9 12 14 


D PTI (proof tracking index) in accordance with IS 2824. 


Table 11.3 Minimum Distances for Sinusoidal or Non-Sinusoidal Pulse Voltages 
(Clause 11.2) 


SI Rated Pulse Peak Voltage 
No. kV 
=o aaiae 
2.0 2:5 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 8.0 10 12 
i) Minimum clearance, in mm 1 1.5 2 3 4 5.5 8 11 14 
Rated Pulse Peak Voltage 
kV 
15 20 25 30 40 50 60 80 100 
ii) Minimum clearance, in mm 18 25 33 40 60 75 90 130 170 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Values of creepage distances and clearances may be 
found for intermediate values of working voltages by 
linear interpolation between tabulated values. No 
values are specified for working voltages below 25V 
as the voltage test of Table 10.2 is considered sufficient. 


In the case of creepage distance to parts not energized, 
or not intended to be earthed, where tracking cannot 
occur, the values specified for material with PTI 2 600 
shall apply for all materials (in spite of the real PTI). 


For creepage distances subjected to working voltages 
of less than 60 s duration, the values specified for 
materials with PTI 2 600 shall apply for all materials. 


For creepage distances not liable to contamination by 
dust or moisture, the values specified for material with 
PTI 2 600 shall apply (independent of the real PTT). 


Creepage distances shall not be less than the required 
minimum clearance. 


For distances subjected to both sinusoidal voltage as 
well as non-sinusoidal pulses, the minimum required 
distance shall be not less than the highest value 
indicated in either table. 


SECTION 12 ENDURANCE TEST AND 
THERMAL TEST 


12.1 General 


This section specifies requirements relating to the 
endurance test and thermal tests of luminaires. 


12.2 Selection of Lamps and Ballasts 


Lamps used for the tests of this section shall be selected 
in accordance with Annex B. 


The lamps used in the endurance test are operated 
above their rated wattage for extended periods, and 
shall not be used for the thermal tests. However, it is 
usually convenient to retain in the thermal test for 
abnormal operation those lamps that have been used 
in the thermal test for normal operation. 


If the luminaire requires a separate ballast and this is 
not supplied with the luminaire, a ballast shall be 
selected for test purposes which is typical of normal 
production, and which complies with the relevant 
ballast specification. The power delivered to a 
reference lamp by the ballast under reference 
conditions shall be within + 3 percent of rated lamp 
power. 


NOTES 

1 For reference conditions, see the relevant Indian standards 
for lamp auxiliary. 

2 In the relevant lamp performance standards the rated wattage 
may still be indicated as ‘objective’ wattage. This wording will 
be corrected in future editions of these standards. 


40 


12.3 Endurance Test 


Under conditions representing cyclic heating and 
cooling in service, the luminaire shall not become 
unsafe or fail prematurely. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out the test 
described in 12.3.1. 


12.3.1 Test 


a) The luminaire shall be mounted in a thermal 
enclosure with means for controlling the 
ambient temperature within the enclosure. 


The luminaire shall be positioned on a similar 
supporting surface (and in the same operating 
position) as for the normal operation thermal 
test (see 12.4.1). 

The ambient temperature within the enclosure 
shall be maintained within + 2°C of (t, + 10)°C 
during the test t, is 27°C unless otherwise 
marked on the luminaire. 


b) 


The ambient temperature within the enclosure 
shall be measured in accordance with 
Annex K. Ballasts for operation separate from 
the luminaire shall be mounted in free air, not 
necessarily in the thermal enclosure, and shall 
be operated in an ambient temperature 
27 + 5°C. 

The luminaire shall be tested in the enclosure 
for a total duration of 168 h consisting of 
seven successive cycles of 24 h. Supply 
voltage as specified in 12.3.1(d) below shall 
be applied to the luminaire for the first 21 h 
and disconnected for the remaining 3 h of 
each cycle. The initial heating period of the 
luminaire is part of the first test cycle. 


c) 


The circuit condition shall be as in normal 
operation for the first six cycles, and as in 
abnormal operation (see Annex C) for the 
seventh cycle. For luminaires containing an 
electrical motor (for example, a fan) the 
abnormal condition which most adversely 
affects the result of the test shall be selected. 
For luminaires for which there is no abnormal 
condition for example fixed non-adjustable 
filament lump luminaires, the total test 
duration shall be 240 h (that is, 10 x 24 cycles 
at normal operation). 
d) During operating periods, the supply voltage 
for filament lamp luminaires shall be 
1.05 + 0.015 times the voltage at which the 
rated wattage of the lamp is obtained and 
1.10 + 0.015 times (the rated voltage or the 
maximum of the rated voltage range) for 
tubular fluorescent and other discharge lamp 
luminaires. 


e) Ifthe luminaire ceases to operate because of 
a failure, the following shall apply: 


For chance failure of a part of the luminaire (including 
the lamp), the instructions of 12.4.1 (g) shall apply. 


If a thermal protective device operates during the first 
six cycles the test shall be modified as follows: 


1) For luminaires with cyclic protective devices, 
the luminaire shall be allowed to cool until 
the device resets. For luminaires with one- 
shot thermal protective devices (thermal 
links), the device shall be replaced. 

For all kinds of luminaires the test shall then 
be continued up to 240 h in total with the 
circuit and the temperature adjusted in such a 
way that the protective device just fails to 
operate. The luminaire is deemed to have 
failed the test, if adjustment below the 
luminaires rated characteristics is necessary 
to prevent the protective device operating. 


2) 


If a thermal protective device operates during the 
seventh (abnormal conditions) cycle it shall either be 
allowed to cool, or, in the case of one-shot device, it 
shall be replaced, and the test continued with the circuit 
and temperature adjusted in such a way that the 
protective device just fails to operate. 


NOTE — It is considered that, if a cut-out device operates 
during the seventh (abnormal condition) cycle then the 
functioning of the intended protection has been proven. 


Arrangements should be made to signal a break in 
operation. The effective test duration shall not be 
reduced as a consequence of such a break. 


12.3.2 Compliance 


After the test of 12.3.1 the luminaire, and for track- 
mounted luminaires also the track and component parts 
of the track system, shall be visually inspected. No 
part of the luminaire shall have become unserviceable 
{other than as a chance failure as described in 12.3.1(e) 
and plastic ES lampholders shall not be deformed. The 
luminaire shall not have become unsafe and shall not 
have caused damage to the track system. The marking 
of the luminaire shall be legible. 


NOTE — Symptoms of possible unsafe conditions include 
cracks, scorches and deformation. 


12.4 Thermal Test (Normal Operation) 


Under conditions representing normal service, no part 
of the luminaire (including the lamp), the supply wiring 
within the luminaire, or the mounting surface shall 
attain a temperature which would impair safety. 


During the test for compliance, the ‘Through’ wiring 
shall not be loaded. 


41 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


In addition, parts intended to be touched, handled, 
adjusted or gripped by hand while the luminaire is at 
operating temperature shall not be too hot for the 
purpose. 


Luminaires shall not cause excessive heating of lighted 
objects. 


Track-mounted luminaires shall not cause excessive 
heating of tracks on which they are mounted. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out the test 
described in 12.4.1. 


For luminaires containing an electrical motor, this 
motor shall operate as intended during the test. 


12.4.1 Test 


The temperature shall be measured as indicated 
in 12.4.2 in accordance with the following conditions: 


a) The luminaire shall be tested in a draught- 
proof enclosure designed to avoid excessive 
changes in ambient temperature. A luminaire 
suitable for surface mounting shall be 
mounted on a surface as described in 
Annex D. An example of a draught-proof 
enclosure is given in Annex D, but other types 
of enclosure may be used, if the results 
obtained are compatible with those that would 
be obtained by the use of the enclosure 
described in Annex D. [For ballasts separate 
from the luminaire see 12.4.1 (h)]. 


The luminaire shall be connected to the power 
supply with the wiring and any materials (for 
example, insulating sleeves) supplied with the 
luminaire for the purpose. 


In general, connection shall be in accordance 
with the instructions provided with the 
luminaire or marked on it. Otherwise, wiring 
required to connect the luminaire under test 
to the supply and not supplied with it should 
be of a type representative of common 
practice. Such wiring not supplied with the 
luminaire is hereafter referred to as the test 
piece. 
Temperature measurements shall be made in 
accordance with Annexes E and K. 
b) The operating position shall be the thermally 
most onerous operating position which may 
reasonably be adopted in service. For fixed 
non-adjustable luminaires, a position shall not 
be selected if it is stated to be not permissible 
in instructions supplied with, or marked on, 
the luminaire. For adjustable luminaires, the 
required distance from lighted objects shall 
be respected if marked on the luminaire, 
except for luminaires without provision for 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


d) 


e) 


mechanical looking in any position, when the 
front rim of the reflector if any, otherwise the 
lamp, shall be positioned 100 mm from the 
mounting surface. 


The ambient temperature within the draught- 
proof enclosure shall be within the range 10°C 
to 30°C and should preferably be 27°C. It 
shall not vary by more than +1°C during 
measurements and during a preceding period 
long enough to affect the results. 


If, however, a lamp has temperature-sensitive 
characteristics (for example, a fluorescent 
lamp), or if the f, rating of the luminaire 
exceeds 30°C, the ambient temperature within 
the draught-proof enclosure shall be within 
5°C of the t, rating and should preferably be 
the same as the f, rating. 


The test voltage for the luminaire shall be as 
follows: 


i) Filament lamp luminaires, that voltage 
which produces 1.05 times the rated 
wattage of the test lamp (see Annex B) 
except that heat test source (HTS) lamps 
are always operated at the voltage marked 
on the lamp. 


ii) Tubular fluorescent and other discharge 
lamp luminaires, 1.06 times the rated 
voltage or the maximum of the rated 
voltage range. 


iii) For motors contained in luminaires, 1.06 
times the rated voltage (or the maximum 
of the rated voltage range of the 
luminaire). 

Exception: 


For determination of the average temperature 
of the winding of a component with t, 
marking and for the determination of the case 
temperature of a component with t, marking, 
except capacitors, the test voltage shall be 1.00 
times the rated voltage. This exception applies 
only to the measurement of the winding or 
case temperature and does not apply, for 
example to the measurement of a terminal 
block on the same component. 


Capacitors whether carrying t, or not are 
tested at 1.06 times related voltage when 
operated within fluorescent and other 
discharge luminaires. 

NOTE — If a luminaire contains both a filament lamp 
and a tubular fluorescent or other discharge lamp or a 


motor, it may be necessary to provide it temporarily 
with two separate supplies. 


During and immediately before a 
measurement, the supply voltage shall be held 


42 


h) 


J) 


within +1 percent and preferably within + 0.5 
percent of the test voltage. The supply voltage 
shall be held within +1percent of the test 
voltage during such preceding period as may 
affect the measurement; this period shall be 
not less than 10 min. 


Measurements shall not be taken until the 
luminaire has stabilized thermally, that is, 
temperatures are changing at a rate less than 
1°C/h. 


If the luminaire ceases to operate because of 
a defective part of the luminaire (including 
the lamp), the part should be replaced and the 
test continued. Measurements already made 
need not be repeated, but the luminaire shall 
be stabilized before further measurements are 
made. If, however, a hazardous condition has 
arisen, or if any part becomes unserviceable 
as a type defect, then the luminaire is deemed 
to have failed the test. If a protective device 
in the luminaire operates, the luminaire is 
deemed to have failed. 


If remote control gear/components are 
supplied as part of a luminaire, they shall be 
mounted and operated in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Temperatures of 
all parts shall comply with the limits specified 
in Section 12. 


If remote control gear is not supplied as part 
of the luminaire, the manufacturer shall 
provide control gear typical of normal use. 
The control gear shall be operated in free air 
and in an ambient temperature of 27 + 5°C. 
The temperature of the control gear shall not 
be measured. 


In case of doubt in the test for filament lamp 
luminaires, the test shall be repeated with heat 
test source (HTS) lamps, if available. For 
temperatures which are mainly governed by 
the cap temperature of the lamp, the values 
obtained by HTS lamps are decisive. For those 
temperatures which are mainly governed by 
radiation, the values obtained by normal 
production lamps with clear bulbs are 
decisive. 

The light beam from the luminaire, for 
luminaires covered by 3.2.13, is directed 
towards a matt black painted wooden vertical 
surface similar to that described in Annex D. 
Luminaires are mounted at the distance from 
the surface which is marked on the luminaire. 


During the tests, measurements shall be made 
of the temperature of certain insulating parts, 
as required for the tests of Section 13. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Table 12.1 Maximum Temperatures Under the Test Conditions 12.4.2, for Principal Parts 
(Clause 12.4.2) 


SI No. Part Maximum Temperature 
a 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Lamp caps As specified in the appropriate lamp standard” 
ii) Windings in ballasts or transformers with ¢,, marking ty 
iii) Case (of capacitor, starting device, ballast or convertor, etc): 
a) If t, is marked t? 
b) Ift, is not marked 50 


2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 


iv) Windings in transformers, motors, etc, if the winding insulation system 
according to IS 1271 is: 


a) of class A material” 100 
b) of class E material® 115 
c) of class B material” 120 
d) of class F material” 140 
e) of class H material” 165 
v) Insulation of wiring: See Table 12.2 and 12.4 (b) and 12.4.2 (c) 
vi) Contacts of ceramic lampholders and insulating material of lampholders and 
starterholders: 
vii) T, or T, marked (B15 and B22)” (See IS 1258) 165 for T, and 210 for T, 


viii) Other types without T marking: 
ix) (See IS 10276 (Part 2), IS 3323: IS...for miscellaneous lampholders” and IS T marking 


1258) 
x) Other types without T marking:(E14, B15) (See IS 10276 and IS 1258) 135 
xi) (E27, B22) (See IS 10276 and IS 1258) 165 
xii) (E40) (See IS 10276) 225 


xiii) Fluorescent lamp holder/starter holders and miscellaneous lampholders without 80 
T marking (See IS 3323 and IS.....Miscellaneous lampholders”) 
xiv) Switches marked with individual ratings: 


xv) With T marking T marking 
xvi) Without T marking 55 
xvii) Other parts of the luminaire (according to material and use): See Table 12.2 and 12.4.2 (b) 
xviii) Mounting surface: 
xix) Normally flammable surface 90 
xx) Non-combustible surface Not measured 
xxi) Parts intended to be handled or touched frequently»: 
a) Metal parts 70 
b) Non-metal parts 85 
xxii) Parts intended to be gripped by hand: 
a) Metal parts 60 
b) Non-metal parts 15 
xxiii) Objects lighted by spotlights [See 12.4.1(J)] 90 (of test surface) 
xxiv) Track (for track-mounted luminaires) As stated by the track manufacturer 
xxv) Mains socket-outlet-mounted-luminaire and plug-ballast/transformer: 
a) case parts intended to be gripped by hand LS 
b) the plug/socket interface 70 
c) all other parts 85 
xxvi) Replaceable glow-starting devices 80 


For luminaires marked with information concerning the use of special lamps, or if it is obvious that special lamps are to be used, a 
higher value, as specified by the lamp manufacturer, is allowed. IS 12948 provide information for the measurement of pinch 
temperature for tungsten halogen lamps. These measurements are required for performance criteria of lamps and not safety criteria of 
the luminaire. (Single-capped fluorescent lamps are excluded from being measured under normal operation test conditions 
see Table 12.3). This does not apply to lamps covered by the scope of IS 12948. The relevant information in this standard for 
luminaire design shall be observed. 

Measured at the given reference point marked by the device manufacturer. 

Not applicable to parts intended to be touched only occasionally during adjustment, for example, parts of spotlights. 

Temperature measured on the rim of a corresponding cap. 

For bi-pin lampholders, in case of doubt, the average of the contact temperature measurements should be used. 

The material classification is in accordance with IS 1271 and IS 7809 series. 


43 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Table 12.2 Maximum Temperature Under the Test Conditions of 12.4.2, for Common 
Materials Used in Luminaires 
(Clause 12.4.2) 


SI No. Part Maximum Temperature 
°C 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Insulation of wiring (internal and external), supplied with luminaire”: 
a) Glass fibre silicone-varnish impregnated 200” 
b) Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 250 
c) Silicone rubber (not stressed) 200 
d) Silicone rubber (compressive stress only) 170 
e) Ordinary polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 90” 
f) Heat-resisting polyvinyl chloride (PVC) 105) 
g) Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) 140” 
ii) Insulation of fixed wiring (as a fixed part of the installation not supplied with the luminaire): 
a) Unsleeved 90°) 
b) Appropriate sleeving supplied with the luminaire 120 
iii) Thermoplastics: 
a) Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) 95 
b) Cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB) 95 
c) Polymethyl methacrylate (acrylic) 90 
d) Polystyrene 75 
e) Polypropylene 100 
f) Polycarbonate 130 
g) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) (where NOT used for electrical insulation) 100 
h) Polyamide (nylon) 120 
iv) Thermosetting plastics: 
a) Mineral-filled phenol-formaldehyde (PF) 165 
b) Cellulose-filled phenol-formaldehyde (PF) 140 
c) Urea-formaldehyde (UF) 90 
d) Melamine 100 
e) Glass fibre-reinforced polyester (GRP) 130 
v) Other materials: 
a) Resin-bonded paper/fabric 125 
b) Silicone rubber (where NOT used for electrical insulation) 230 
c) Rubber (where NOT used for electrical insulation) 70 
d) Wood, paper, textiles and the like 90 


D Reduced by 15°C where insulation is stressed, for example clamped or flexed. 


2) 


than the test conditions given in this specification. 
3) 


Cable specifications usually quote different maximum temperatures but these are based on continuous operating temperatures rather 


These temperatures are the maximum permitted under the artificial test conditions given in this test specification, for example, draught- 


proof enclosure and test supply voltage above the rated value for the luminaire. It is important to note that, IS 694 on PVC insulated 
cables specify a temperature of 70°C to be the maximum that PVC fixed wiring can sustain in normal continuous operation. 


k) For the measurement of lampholder 
temperatures for double-capped fluorescent 
lamps, the hot junction of the thermocouple 
shall be located flush with that surface of the 
holder adjacent to the lamp cap. If this is not 
possible, it should be placed as close as 
possible to this point but without touching the 
lamp cap. 

NOTE — It is recommended that the luminaire 
manufacturer provides the type test sample already with 


a thermocouple attached to the lampholder. Usually, 
only one lampholder should be prepared in such a way. 


12.4.2 Compliance 


In the test of 12.4.1, none of the temperatures shall 
exceed the appropriate values given in Tables 12.1 and 
12.2 (subject only to the concession of item a) of this 
subclause when the luminaire is operated at its rated 
ambient temperature t,. 


44 


In those cases where the temperature in the test 
enclosure differs from t,, this difference shall be taken 
into account when applying the limits in the tables 
[see 12.4.1(c)]. 


a) The temperature shall not exceed the values 
shown in Tables 12.1 and 12.2 by more than 
DG: 

NOTE — The allowance of 5°C is made to take into 


account the inevitable variability of temperature 
measurements in luminaires. 


b) The temperature of any part of the luminaire 
liable to thermal degradation in service shall 
not exceed a value which corresponds to a 
reasonable service period for the particular 
type of luminaire. Generally agreed values for 
principal parts of luminaires are given in Table 
12.1 and values for common materials, when 


used in luminaires, are listed in Table 12.2. 


These values are prescribed here to obtain 
uniform assessment; slightly different values 
may be quoted elsewhere on the basis of other 
forms of materials testing or for other 
applications. 
If materials are used which are claimed to 
withstand higher temperatures than those 
shown in Table 12.2, or if other materials are 
used, they shall not be exposed to 
temperatures in excess of those which have 
been proved permissible for these materials. 
c) The temperature of the test piece [see 12.4.1 
(a)] if PVC — insulated shall not exceed 90°C 
(or 75°C where it is stressed, for example 
clamped), or such higher temperatures as may 
be indicated on the luminaire or in the 
manufacturer’s instructions supplied with the 
luminaire in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 3. The limit shall be 120°C for any 
PVC — insulated wire (internal or external 
wiring) even when additionally protected by 
a heat-resisting sleeve supplied with the 
luminaire. The sleeve shall comply with the 
requirements of 4.9.2. 


12.5 Thermal Test (Abnormal Operation) 


Under conditions representing abnormal service 
conditions (where applicable, but not representing a 
defect in the luminaire or misuse) parts of the luminaire 
and the mounting surface shall not be exceed the 
temperatures given in Table 12.3 and the wiring within 
the luminaire shall not become unsafe. 


NOTE — Symptoms of possible unsafe conditions include 
cracks, scorches and deformation. 


During the test for compliance, the through wiring shall 
not be loaded. 


Track-mounted luminaires shall not cause excessive 
heating of tracks on which they are mounted. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out the test 
described in 12.5.1. 


12.5.1 Test 


Temperatures of parts listed in Table 12.3 shall be 
measured in accordance with the following conditions. 


a) The test shall be made, if during service, the 
luminaire could be in an abnormal condition 
as in cases (1), (2), (3) or (4), and if this 
condition would cause any part to be at a 
higher temperature than during normal 
operation (in which case a preliminary trial 
may be needed). 

If more than one abnormal condition is 
possible, that condition shall be selected 


45 


b) 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


which most adversely affects the results of 

the tests. 

The test is not applicable to fixed non- 

adjustable filament lamp luminaires except in 

case (3): 

1) A possibly unsafe operating position 
arising other than from misuse; for 
example if by accident an adjustable 
luminaire is bent close to the supporting 
surface using a force not exceeding 30 N. 


2) A possibly unsafe circuit condition 
arising other than from defective 
manufacture or misuse; for example a 
circuit condition occurring at the end of 
the service period of a lamp or of a starter 
(see Annex C). 

3) A possibly unsafe operation condition 
arising from the use of a GLS lamp in a 
filament lamp luminaire intended for a 
special lamp; for example, if, temporarily, 
a special lamp is replaced by a GLS lamp 
of the same wattage. 

4) A possible unsafe circuit condition 
arising from a short circuit in the 
secondary circuit (including the 
transformer itself) of a luminaire with 
transformer fitted for lamp voltage 
supply. 


Test as per 12.5.1(2) is applicable only to 
tubular fluorescent and other discharge lamp 
luminaires. 


Test as per 12.5.1(4) shall be made with a 
short-circuit in the lampholder as per 
12.5.1(4), the temperature rise due to heat 
emanating from the lamp to the mounting 
surface shall be checked by the test according 
to 12.5.1(1), while the temperature rise due 
to heat emanating from the transformer shall 
be measured with the contacts of the 
lampholder being short-circuited. 
Luminaires containing an electrical motor are 
operated with the rotor locked against 
rotation. 


NOTE — In the case of the presence of one or more 
motors, the test should be made in accordance with the 
most critical condition (see Annex C). 


The luminaire shall be tested under the 
conditions specified in 12.4.1 (a), (c), (e), (£), 
and (h). In addition the following shall apply. 


The test voltage shall be as follows: 


Filament lamp luminaires: as specified in 
12.4.1 (d). 


Tubular fluorescent and other discharge lamp 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Table 12.3 Maximum Temperatures Under the Test Conditions of 12.5.2 
(Clause 12.5.2) 


SI No. Part Maximum Temperature 
°C 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Caps of single-capped fluorescent lamps As specified in the appropriate Indian lamp standard” 
ii) Windings in ballasts or transformers with ¢,, marking) See Tables 12.4 and 12.5 


iii) Windings in transformers, motors etc, if the winding insulation system 
according to IS 1271 is 


a) of class A material” 150 

b) of class E material” 165 

c) of class B material” 175 

d) of class F material” 190 

e) of class H material” 210 
iv) Capacitor case: 

a) If tc is not marked 60 

b) If tc is marked t+ 10 
v) Mounting surface: 

a) Surface illuminated by the lamp (adjustable luminaires according to 175 

12.5.1a) 1) 


b) Surface heated by the lamp (portable luminaires according to 4.12 175 
of IS 10322 (Part 5/Sec 4) 
S7 130 
c) Normally flammable surface (luminaires with marking) 
W Not measured 
d) Non-combustible surface (luminaires without symbol) 
e) Track (for track-mounted luminaires) As stated by the track manufacturer 
f) Mains socket-outlet-mounted-luminaires and plug-ballast/trans- 75 
former case parts intended to be gripped by hand 


D Unless otherwise marked on the ballast, the maximum temperatures specified in the col S 4.5 of Table 12.4 or 12.5 apply. 

>?) The material classification is in accordance with IS 1271 and IS 7809 (all parts). 

») Information regarding point(s) of measurement and temperature limits are given in IS 15687 (Part 1) (Single capped lamps, Safety 
requirements. 


Table 12.4 Maximum Temperature of Windings Under Abnormal Operating Conditions and 
at 110 Percent of Rated Voltage for Lamp Controlgear 
(Table 12.3) 


SI Maximum Temperature 

No. oC 

d) (2) (3) (4) 
—_—_———o OO 
Constant S 84.5 S5 S6 S8 S11 S16 
i) Forty= 90 171 161 147 131 119 110 
ii) 95 178 168 154 138 125 115 
iii) 100 186 176 161 144 131 121 
iv) 105 194 183 168 150 137 126 
v) 110 201 190 175 156 143 132 
vi) 115 209 198 181 163 149 137 
vii) 120 217 205 188 169 154 143 
viii) 125 224 212 195 175 160 149 
ix) 130 232 220 202 182 166 154 
x) 135 240 227 209 188 172 160 
xi) 140 248 235 216 195 178 166 
xii) 145 256 242 223 201 184 171 
xiii) 150 264 250 230 207 190 177 


46 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Table 12.5 Maximum Temperature of Windings Under Abnormal Operating Conditions and at 110 
Percent of Rated Voltage for Lamp Controlgear Marked ‘D6’ 
(Table 12.3) 


Constant S 
For ty = 90 


c) 


d) 


(2) 


$4.5 S5 
158 
95 165 
172 
179 
187 
194 
201 
208 
216 
223 
231 
238 
246 


140 
145 
150 


luminaires, 1.1 times the rated voltage or the 
maximum of the rated voltage range. 


For motors contained in luminaires, 1.1 times 
the rated voltage (or the maximum of the rated 
voltage range of the luminaire). 


During short-circuit according to as per 
12.5.1 (4) between 0.9 and 1.1 times the rated 
supply voltage. 


NOTE — If a luminaire contains both a filament lamp 
and a tubular fluorescent or other discharge lamp, or a 
motor, it may be necessary to provide it temporarily with 
two separate supplies. 


If the luminaire ceases to operate because of 
a defective part of the luminaire (including 
the lamp), the part should be replaced and the 
test continued. Measurements already made 
need not be repeated but the luminaire shall 
be stabilized before further measurements are 
made. If, however, a hazardous condition has 
arisen, or if any part becomes unserviceable 
as a type defect, then the luminaire is deemed 
to have failed the test. 

If a protective device in the luminaire (for 
example, a thermal or current cut-out of the 
one-short or cycling type) operates during the 
test, the highest temperatures reached should 
be taken as the final temperatures. 


If the luminaire incorporates a capacitor (other 
than a capacitor connected directly across the 
supply), this capacitor shall be short-circuit, 
notwithstanding the requirements of Annex 
C, if the voltage across it under test conditions 
would exceed 1.25 times its rated voltage for 
self-healing capacitors or 1.3 times its rated 
voltage for non-self-healing capacitors. 


Maximum Temperature 


C 

(4) 
S6 S8 S11 S16 
139 125 115 107 
145 131 121 112 
152 137 127 118 
158 144 132 123 
165 150 138 129 
171 156 144 134 
178 162 150 140 
184 168 155 145 
191 174 161 151 
198 180 167 156 
204 186 173 162 
211 193 179 168 
218 199 184 173 


e) Luminaires for metal halide lamps which 
according to the lamp specification can lead 
to ballast or transformer overheating are tested 
in accordance with 2 (b) of Annex C. The 
values given in Table 12.3 shall not be 
exceeded. 


12.5.2 Compliance 


In the test of 12.5.1, none of the temperatures shall 
exceed the appropriate value given in Table 12.3 
(subject only to the concession of 12.5.2 (a) when the 
luminaire is operated at its rated ambient temperature 
t, In cases where the temperature of the test enclosure 
differs from t, the difference shall be taken into account 
when applying the limits given in the table. 


a) Temperatures shall not exceed the values 
shown in Table 12.3 by more than 5°C. 


NOTE — The allowance of 5°C is made to take into 
account the inevitable variability of temperature 
measurements in luminaires. 


NOTE — For lamp control gear subjected to an endurance test 
duration other than 30 or 60 days, equation (2) specified in the 
relevant standards on auxiliary for lamps should be used to 
calculate the maximum temperature which should correspond 
to the number of days equal to two-thirds of the theoretical 
endurance test. 


(An explanation of the constant S and its use is given 
in the relevant standard on auxiliary for lamps). 


12.6 Thermal Test (Failed Lamp Controlgear 
Conditions) 


These tests apply only to luminaires marked with the 
\/ symbol and incorporating lamp controlgear that 
either does not meet the spacing requirements of 4.16.1 
or does not provide thermal protection in accordance 
with 4.16.2. Electronic lamp controlgear and small 


47 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


wound devices that may be incorporated into these 
components are exempt from the requirements of this 
clause. 


12.6.1 Test for Luminaires without Thermal Cut-Outs 


The luminaire shall be tested under the conditions 
specified in 12.4.1 (a), (c), (e), (f) and (h). In addition, 
the following shall apply. 


20 percent of the lamp circuits in the luminaire, and 
not less than one lamp circuit, shall be subjected to 
abnormal conditions [see 12.5.1(a)]. 


The circuits which have the most thermal influence on 
the mounting surface shall be chosen, and other lamp 
circuits shall be operated at rated voltage, or at the 
maximum of the rated voltage range under normal 
conditions. 


Circuits subjected to abnormal conditions shall then 
be operated at 1.1 times the rated voltage, or the 
maximum of the rated voltage range. 


For fluorescent lamp luminaires with an a.c. supplied 
electronic lamp control gear incorporating a filter coil, 
the filter coil shall be tested separately by applying a 
test voltage across the coil adjusted to give the 
nominal operating current. All other parts of the lamp 
control gear and the lamp shall be inoperative for this 
test. 


NOTE — For the purpose of this test specially prepared lamp 
control gear is needed. 


Compliance is checked as follows: 


a) The temperature of the mounting surface shall 
not exceed 130°C when the lamp circuit(s), 
subjected to abnormal conditions, is (are) 
operated at 1.1 times rated voltage. 

b) The values of the ambient temperature and 

the temperature measured at 1.1 times (the 

rated voltage or the maximum of the rated 
voltage range) are plotted on a graph (see 

Fig. 9) and the best straight line obtained 

using linear regression is drawn through these 

points. The extrapolation of this straight line 

shall not reach a point representing a 

mounting surface temperature of 180°C at a 

ballast or transformer winding temperature of 

less than 350°C. 


For track-mounted luminaires, no part of the 
track shall show symptoms of unsafe 
deterioration, for example cracks, scorches or 
deformation. 


12.6.2 Test for luminaires with temperature sensing 
controls external to the ballast or transformer and 
luminaires with temperature declared thermally 
protected ballasts symbol \/ with a marked value 
above 130°C. 


48 


The luminaire shall be set up for this test as described 
in 12.6.1. 


The circuits subjected to the above conditions shall be 
operated with a slowly and steadily increasing current 
through the windings until the thermal cut-out operates. 
Time intervals and increments in current shall be such 
that thermal equilibrium between winding temperatures 
and mounting surface temperatures is achieved as far 
as is practicable. 


During the test, the highest temperature of any part of 
the surface on which the luminaire is mounted shall be 
continuously measured. This completes the test for 
luminaires fitted with thermal links. 


For luminaires fitted with manual-reset thermal 
cut-outs, the test shall be repeated three times, allowing 
a 30 min interval between tests. At the end of each 
30 min interval, the cut-out shall be reset. 


For luminaires fitted with auto-reset thermal cut-outs, 
the test shall be continued until a stable mounting 
surface temperature is achieved. The auto-reset thermal 
cut-out shall operate three times by switching the 
ballast off and on, under the given conditions. 


Conformity is checked as follows: 


During the test the temperature of any part of the 
mounting surface shall not exceed 135°C and shall be 
not more than 110°C when the protector recloses the 
circuit (with a resetting type protector) except that: 


During any cycle of operation of the protector during 
the test, the surface temperature may be more than 
135°C provided that the length of time between the 
instant when the surface temperature first exceeds the 
limit and the instant of attainment of the maximum 
temperature indicated in Table 12.6 does not exceed 
the time correspondingly indicated in the table. 


Table 12.6 Temperature Overshoot 
Time Limitation 
(Clause 12.6.2) 


SI Maximum Maximum Time for 

No. Temperature of the Attainment of the Maximum 
Mounting Surface Temperature from 135°C 
°C 
d) (2) (3) 
i) over 180 0 

ii) between 175 and 180 15 

iii) between 170 and 175 20 

iv) between 165 and 170 25 

v) between 160 and 165 30 

vi) between 155 and 160 40 

vii) between 150 and 155 50 
vili) between 145 and 150 60 

ix) between 140 and 145 90 

x) between 135 and 140 120 


After the test, the following applies: 


The highest temperature of any part of the mounting 
surface shall not exceed 180°C at any time during 
tests for thermal links and manual-reset thermal 
cut-outs, or 130°C during tests for auto-reset thermal 
cut-outs. 


For track-mounted luminaires, after the test no part of 
the track shall show symptoms of unsafe deterioration, 
for example cracks, scorches or deformation. 

NOTE — Associated transformers not tested with their own 


enclosure should be subjected to the test since these 
characteristics are not verified by the component standard. 


12.7 Thermal Test in Regard to Fault Conditions 
in Lamp Controlgear or Electronic Devices in 
Plastic Luminaries 


The test applies only to luminaires with a thermoplastic 
housing not fitted with an extra mechanical 
temperature-independent device as per 4.15.2. 


12.7.1 Test for Luminaires without Temperature 
Sensing Controls 


The luminaire shall be tested under the conditions 
specified in 12.4.1 (a), (c), (e), (f) and (h). In addition, 
the following shall applies. 


20 percent of the lamp circuits in the luminaire, and 
not less than one lamp circuit, shall be subjected to 
abnormal conditions [see of 12.5.1(a)]. 


The circuits which have the most thermal influence on 
the fixation point and exposed parts shall be chosen 
and other lamp circuits shall be operated at rated 
voltage under normal conditions. 


The circuits subjected to abnormal conditions shall 
be operated at 1.1 times (the rated voltage or the 
maximum of the rated voltage range). When 
conditions are stable, the highest winding temperature 
and highest temperature of fixing points and most 
thermally influenced exposed parts shall be measured. 
It is not necessary to measure the temperature of small 
wound devices that are incorporated within electronic 
circuits. 


Compliance is checked as follows: 


The values of the ambient temperature and the 
temperature measured at 1.1 times (the rated voltage 
or the maximum of the voltage range) are used for 
the linear regression formula in calculating the 
temperature of fixing points and other exposed parts 
in relation to a ballast/transformer winding 
temperature of 350°C. The calculated value shall not 
exceed the temperature of the deflection under load 
of the material in accordance with method A as 
defined in ISO 75 (1987). 


49 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


12.7.2 Test for luminaires with Temperature Sensing 
Controls Internal/External to the Ballast or Transformer 


The luminaires shall be set up for this test as described 
in the first three paragraphs of 12.7.1. 


The circuits subjected to abnormal conditions shall be 
operated with a slowly and steadily increasing current 
through the windings until the temperature sensing 
control operates. 


Time intervals and increments in current shall be such 
that thermal equilibrium between winding temperatures 
and temperature of fixing points and most thermally 
influenced exposed parts is achieved as far as is 
practicable. During the test, the highest temperature 
of the spots tested shall be continuously measured. 


For luminaires fitted out with manual-reset thermal 
cut-outs, the test shall be repeated six times allowing 
30 min intervals between tests. At the end of each 
30 min interval, the cut-out shall be reset. 


For luminaires fitted out with auto-reset thermal cut- 
outs, the tests shall be continued until a stable 
temperature is achieved. 


Compliance is checked as follows: 


The highest temperature of the fixing points and most 
thermally influenced exposed parts, shall not exceed 
the temperature of deflection under load of the material. 


SECTION 13 RESISTANCE TO HEAT, FIRE 
AND TRACKING 


13.1 General 


This section specifies requirements and tests relating 
to the resistance to heat, fire and tracking of certain 
parts of insulating material of luminaries. 


For printed wiring boards, reference should be made 
to the requirements of IS 5921 (Part 1). 


13.2 Resistance to Heat 


External parts of insulating material providing 
protection against electric shock, and parts of insulating 
material retaining current-carrying parts or SELV parts 
in position shall be sufficiently resistant to heat. 


The ball pressure test does not have to be applied to 
plastic parts of a luminaire which provide 
supplementary insulation. 


13.2.1 Compliance is checked by the following test: 


The test is not made on parts of ceramic material or on 
insulation of wiring. 


The test shall be made in a heating cabinet having a 
temperature of 27 + 5°C in excess of the operating 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


temperature of the relevant part determined during the 
temperature test (normal operation) of Section 12, with 
a minimum temperature of 125°C when parts retaining 
current-carrying parts or SELV parts in position are 
tested, and 75°C for other parts. 


The surface of the part to be tested shall be placed in 
the horizontal position and a steel ball of 5 mm diameter 
pressed against this surface with a force of 20 N. A 
suitable apparatus for this test is shown in Fig. 10. If 
the surface under test bends, the part where the ball 
presses should be supported. 


After 1 h the ball shall be removed from the sample, 
and the sample be cooled by immersion in cold water 
for 10 s. The diameter of the impression shall be 
measured and shall not exceed 2 mm. 


13.3 Resistance to Fame and Ignition 


Parts of insulating material retaining current-carrying 
parts or SELV parts in position, and external parts of 
insulating material providing protection against electric 
shock shall be resistant to flame and ignition. 


For materials other than ceramic, compliance is 
checked by the test of 13.3.1 or 13.3.2, as appropriate. 


13.3.1 Parts of insulating material retaining current- 
carrying parts in position shall withstand the following 
tests: 


The parts to be tested are subjected to the needle-flame 
test of IS 11000 (Part 2/Sec 2), the test flame being 
applied to the sample for 10 s at the point where the 
highest temperatures are likely to occur, measured if 
necessary during the thermal tests of Section 12. 


The duration of burning shall not exceed 30 s after 
removal of the test flame, and any burning drop from 
the sample shall not ignite the underlying parts or tissue 
paper spread out horizontally 200 + 5 mm below the 
sample. 


The requirements of this subclause do not apply in 
those cases where the luminaire provides an effective 
barrier to burning drops. 


13.3.2 Parts of insulating material which do not retain 
live parts in position, but which provide protection 
against electric shock, and parts of insulating material 
retaining SELV, parts in position shall withstand the 
following test: 


Parts are subjected to a test using a nickel-chromium 
glow-wire heated to 650°C. The test apparatus and test 
procedure shall be those described in IS 11000 (Part 2/ 
Sec 1). 


Any flame or glowing of the sample shall extinguish 
within 30 s of withdrawing the glow-wire, and any 


50 


burning or molten drop shall not ignite a single layer 
of tissue paper spread out horizontally 200 +5 mm 
below the sample. 


The requirements of this subclause do not apply in 
those cases where the luminaires provide an effective 
barrier to burning drops or where the insulation 
material is ceramic. 


13.4 Resistance to Tracking 


Insulating parts of luminaires, other than ordinary 
luminaires, which retain current-carrying parts or 
SELV parts in position or are in contact with such parts, 
shall be of material resistant to tracking unless they 
are protected against dust and moisture. 


13.4.1 Compliance is checked by the following test, 
which is made at three places on the test sample. 


For materials other than ceramic, compliance is 
checked by the proof tracking test in accordance with 
IS 2824 subject to the following details: 


a) Ifthe specimen has no flat surface of at least 
15 mm x 15 mm, the test may be carried out 
on a flat surface with reduced dimensions 
provided drops of liquid do not flow off the 
specimen during the test. No artificial means 
should, however, be used to retain the liquid 
on the surface. In case of doubt the test may 
be made on a separate strip of the same 
material, having the required dimensions and 
manufactured by the same process. 

b) Ifthe thickness of the specimen is less than 

3 mm, two, or if necessary more, specimens 

should be stacked to obtain a thickness of at 

least 3 mm. 


The test shall be made at three places of the specimen 
or on three specimens. 


The electrodes shall be of platinum and test solution 
A, described in IS 1401, shall be used. 


13.4.2 The specimen shall withstand 50 drops without 
failure at a test voltage of PTI 175. 


A failure has occurred, if a current of 0.5 A or more 
flows for at least 2 s by a conducing path between the 
electrodes on the surface of the specimen, thus 
operating the over current relay, or if the specimen 
burns without releasing the over current relay. 


The Note 1 of 6.4, of IS 2824 regarding determination 
of erosion does not apply. 


The Note 2 of 3, of IS 2824 regarding surface treatment, 
does not apply. 


SECTION 14 SCREW TERMINALS 


14.1 General 


This section specifies requirements for all types of 
terminals which employ screws incorporated in 
luminaires. 


Examples of screw terminals are shown in Fig. 12 
to Fig. 16. 


14.2 Terminology 


14.2.1 Pillar Terminal — A terminal in which the 
conductor is inserted in a hole or cavity, where it is 
clamped under the shank of the screw or screws. The 
clamping pressure may be applied directly by the shank 
of the screw or through an intermediate clamping 
member to which pressure is applied by the shank of 
the screw. 


Examples of pillar terminals are shown in Fig. 12. 


14.2.2 Screw Terminal — A terminal in which the 
conductor is clamped under the head of the screw. The 
clamping pressure may be applied directly by the head 
of the screw or through an intermediate part, such as a 
washer, clamping plate or anti-spread device. 


Examples of screw terminals are shown in Fig. 13. 


14.2.3 Stud Terminal — A terminal in which the 
conductor is clamped under a nut. The clamping 
pressure may be applied directly by a suitably shaped 
nut or through an intermediate part, such as a washer, 
clamping plate or antispread device. 


Examples of stud terminals are shown in Fig. 13. 


14.2.4 Saddle Terminal — A terminal in which the 
conductor is clamped under a saddled by means of two 
or more screws or nuts. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Examples of saddle terminals are shown in Fig. 14. 


14.2.5 Lug Terminal — A screw terminal or a stud 
terminal, designed for clamping a cable lug or bar by 
means of a screw or nut. 


Examples of lug terminals are shown in Fig. 15. 


14.2.6 Mantle Terminal — A terminal in which the 
conductor is clamped against the base of a slot by a 
suitably shaped washer under the nut, by a central peg, 
if the nut is a cap nut, or by equally effective means 
for transmitting the pressure from the nut to the 
conductor within the slot. 


Examples of mantle terminals are shown in Fig. 16. 


14.3 General Requirements and Basic Principles 


14.3.1 These requirements apply to terminals with 
screw clamping carrying a current not exceeding 63 A, 
intended for the connection, by clamping only, of 
copper conductors of cables and flexible cords. 


These requirements do not exclude terminals of types 
other than those shown in Fig. 12 to Fig. 16. 


14.3.2 Terminals are of varied design and have different 
shapes: they include, among others, terminals in which 
the conductor is clamped directly or indirectly under 
the shank of the screw, terminals in which the 
conductor is clamped or indirectly under the head of 
the screw, terminals in which the conductor is clamped 
directly or indirectly under a nut, and terminals 
intended solely for use with cable lugs or bars. 


The basic principles governing these requirements are 
specified in 14.3.2.1 to 14.3.2.3. 


14.3.2.1 Terminals are primarily for the connection of 
only one conductor, although, owing to the wide range 
of conductors that each terminal is required to clamp, 


Table 14.1 Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas of Conductors According to Terminal Sizes 
(Clause 14.3.2.3) 


SI Terminal Flexible Conductors 


Rigid Conductors, Solid or Stranded 


No. Size ————————-x$ _iu_r—_~.  -———————— ————@@"9"VWVV“T“T"T"-—"——-_——" 
Nominal Cross-sectional Areas Diameter of Nominal Cross-sectional Areas Diameter of 

mm? Largest Conductor mm? Largest Conductor 
ne mm auauua mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) o” 0.5 0.75 1 1.45 — 
ii) 1” 0.75 1 1.5 1.73 0.75 1 1.5 1.45 
iii) 2 1 1.5 2.5 2.21 1 1:5 25 2.13 
iv) 3 1.5 2.5 4 2.84 1.5 2.5 4 2.72 
v) 49) 2.5 4 6 3.87 2.5 4 6 3.34 
vi) 5 2.5 4 6 4.19 4 6 10 4.32 
vii) 6 4 6 10 5.31 6 10 16 5.46 
viii) 7 6 10 16 6.81 10 16 25 6.83 


itself. 


Not suitable for rigid conductors. Suitable for flexible conductors of 0.4 mm? cross-sectional area (see 5.3.1). 
Also suitable for flexible conductors having a nominal cross-sectional area of 0.5 mm? if the end of the conductor is folded back on 


Not suitable for 6 mm’ flexible conductors of some special constructions. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


they may in some cases be suitable for clamping two 
conductors having the same nominal cross-sectional 
area, which is smaller than the maximum value for 
which the terminal is designed. 


Certain types of terminals, in particular pillar terminals 
and mantle terminals, may be used for looping-in, when 
two or more conductors of the same or different 
nominal cross-sectional area or composition have to 
be connected. In such cases, the terminal sizes specified 
in this standard may not be applicable. 


14.3.2.2 In general, terminals shall be suitable for the 
connection of cables and flexible cords without special 
preparation of the conductor but provision is made in 
certain cases for connection by means of cable lugs or 
for connection to bars. 


14.3.2.3 A numerical classification for terminals is 
adopted, based on the nominal cross-sectional areas 
of the conductors that the terminal can accept. 
According to this classification each terminal can 
accept any one of three successive sizes of conductors 
in the range of nominal cross-sectional areas specified 
in IS 694 or IS 9968 (Part 1). 


With one exception, the sizes of the conductors within 
each range advance by one step for each increase in 
the size of the terminal. 


The nominal cross-sectional areas of the conductors 
assigned to each terminal are given in Table 14.1, which 
also gives the diameter of the largest conductor that 
each terminal can accept. 


Terminals may be used with conductors smaller than 
the nominal given range, provided the conductor is 
clamped with sufficient pressure to ensure adequate 
electrical and mechanical connection. 


14.3.3 Terminals shall allow the proper connection of 
copper conductors having nominal cross-sectional 
areas as given in Table 14.2 and the conductor space 
shall be at least that given in Fig. 12, 13, 14 or 16, as 
appropriate. 


These requirements do not apply to lug terminals. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by fitting conductors of the smallest and largest 
cross-sectional areas specified. 


14.3.4 Terminals shall provide adequate connection of 
the conductors. 


Compliance is checked by carrying out all tests of 14.4. 


14.4 Mechanical Tests 


14.4.1 For pillar terminals, the distance between the 
clamping screw and the end of the conductor, when 
fully inserted, shall be at least that given in Fig. 12. 


The minimum distance between the clamping screw 
and the end of the conductor applies only to pillar 
terminals through which the conductor cannot pass. 


For mantle terminals, the distance between the fixed 
part and the end of the conductor, when fully inserted, 
shall be at least that given in Fig. 16. 


Compliance is checked by measurement, after a solid 
conductor of the largest cross-sectional area given in 
Table 14.2 has been fully inserted and fully clamped. 


14.4.2 Terminals shall be so designed or placed that 
neither a solid conductor nor a strand of a stranded 
conductor can slip out while the clamping screws or 
nuts are being tightened. 


This requirement does not apply to lug terminals. 


Table 14.2 Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas of Conductors According to Maximum Current 
(Clauses 14.3.3 and 14.4.7) 


SI Maximum Flexible Conductors Rigid Conductors Solid or Stranded 
No. Current 
Carried by the Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas” Terminal Size Nominal Cross-Sectional Areas” Terminal Size 
Terminal mm? tin? 
A 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
ii) 6 0.50 - 01.0 0 0.75 - 01.5 1 
iii) 10 0.75 - 01.5 1 1.00 - 02.5 2 
iv) 16 1.00 - 02.5 2 1.50 - 04.0 3 
v) 20 1.50 - 04.0 3 1.50 - 04.0 3 
vi) 25 1.50 - 04.0 3 2.50 - 06.0 4 
vii) 32 2.50 - 06.0 4 or 5? 4.00 - 10.0 5 
viii) 40 4.00 - 10.0 6 6.00 - 16.0 6 
ix) 63 6.00 - 16.0 7 10.00 - 25.0 a 


These requirements do not apply to terminals used for the interconnections of different components of luminaires by means of cables or 
flexible cords not complying with IS 694 or IS 9968 (Part 1), if the other requirements of this standard are met. 


2 Terminal size 4 is not suitable for 6 mm? of flexible conductors of some special constructions, in which case terminal size 5 should be 


used. 


52 


For fixed luminaires intended solely for permanent 
connection to fixed (external) wiring this requirement 
applies only to the use of solid or rigid stranded 
conductors. The test is made with rigid stranded 
conductors. 


Compliance is checked by the following test. 
Terminals are fitted with a conductor having the 


composition given in Table 14.3. 


Table 14.3 Composition of Conductors 
(Clause 14.3) 


SINo. Terminal Number of Strands and Nominal 
Size Diameter of Strands (n x mm) 
Flexible Rigid Stranded 
Conductors Conductors 
a) 2) G3) (4) 
i) 0 32 x 0.20 — 

ii) 1 30 x 0.25 7 x 0.50 
iii) 2 50 x 0.25 7 x 0.67 
iv) 3 56 x 0.30 7x 0.85 

v) 4 84 x 0.30 7x 1.04 
vi) 5 84 x 0.30 7x1.35 
vii) 6 80 x 0.40 7x 1.70 

viii) 7 126 x 0.40 7x2.14 


Before insertion in the terminal, strands of rigid 
conductors are straightened and flexible conductors are 
twisted in one direction so that there is a uniform twist 
of one complete turn in a length of approximately 
20 mm. 


The conductor is inserted in the terminal for the 
minimum distance prescribed or, where no distance is 
prescribed, until it just projects from the far side of the 
terminal and in the position most likely to assist the 
strand to slip out. The clamping screw is then tightened 
with a torque equal to two-thirds of that given in the 
appropriate column of Table 14.4. 


For flexible conductors, the test is repeated with a new 
conductor which is twisted as before, but in the opposite 
direction. 


After the test, no stand of the conductor shall have 
slipped out through the gap between the clamping 
means and the retaining device. 


14.4.3 Terminal sizes up to and including size 5 shall 
allow the conductor to be connected without special 
preparation. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


The bonding together by heating of the tinned strands 
of a flexible conductor without the addition of solder 
is not considered special preparation. 

NOTE — The term ‘special preparation’ covers the application 


of additional solder to the strands of the conductor, use of cable 
lugs, formation of eyelets, etc, but not the re-shaping of the 


53 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 
Table 14.4 Torque to be Applied to 
Screws and Nuts 
(Clause 14.4.2) 
SI Nominal Diameter Torque 
No. of Thread Nm 
mm aali 
I N MIV V 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 6) © @ 
i) Upto and including 2.8 02 — 04 04 — 
ii) Over 2.8 up to and including 3.0 0.25 — 05 05 — 
iii) Over 3.0 up to and including 3.2 0.3 — 06 06 — 
iv) Over 3.2 up to and including 3.6 0.4 — 08 0.8 — 
v) Over 3.6 up to and including 4.1 0.7 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 
vi) Over 4.1 up to and including 4.7 0.8 1.2 18 18 1.8 
vii) Over 4.7 up to and including 5.3 0.8 1.4 2.0 2.0 2.0 
viii) Over 5.3 up to and including 6.0 — 1.8 2.5 3.0 3.0 
ix) Over 6.0 up to and including 8.0 — 2.5 35 6.0 4.0 
x) Over 8.0 up to and including — 3.5 4.0 10.0 6.0 
10.0 
xi) Over 10.0 up to and including — 40 — — 8.0 
12.0 
xii) Over 12.0 up to and including — 5.0 — — 10.0 
15.0 


conductor for its introduction into the terminal or the twisting 
of a stranded conductor to consolidate the end. 


14.4.4 Terminals shall have adequate mechanical 
strength. 


Screws and nuts for clamping the conductors shall have 
a metric ISO thread. Terminals for external wiring shall 
not serve to fix any other component, except that they 
may also clamp internal conductors, if these are so 
arranged that they are unlikely to be displaced when 
fitting external conductors. 


Screws shall not be of metal which is soft or liable to 
creep, such as zinc or aluminum. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests 
of 14.3.3, 14.4.6, 14.4.7 and 14.4.8. 


14.4.5 Terminals shall be resistant to corrosion. 


Compliance is checked by the corrosion test specified 
in Section 4. 


14.4.6 Terminals shall be fixed to the luminaires or to 
a terminal block or otherwise fixed in position. When 
the clamping screws or nuts are tightened or loosened, 
the terminals shall not work loose, terminal wiring shall 
not be subjected to stress, and creepage distances and 
clearances shall not be reduced below the values 
specified in Section 11. 


These requirements do not imply that the terminals 
should be so designed that their rotation or 
displacement is prevented, but any movement shall be 
sufficiently limited so as to ensure compliance with 
this standard. 


Covering with sealing compound or resin is sufficient 
to prevent a terminal from working loose, provided 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


that the sealing compound or resin is not subject to 
stress during normal use and the effectiveness of the 
sealing compound or resin is not impaired by 
temperatures attained by the terminal under the most 
unfavourable conditions specified in Section 12. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, 
measurements and by the following test. 


by 


A rigid copper conductor of the largest cross-sectional 
area given in Table 14.2 is placed in the terminal. 
Screws and nuts are tightened and loosened five times 
by means of a suitable test screwdriver or wrench, the 
torque applied when tightened being equal to that given 
in the appropriate column of Table 14.4 or in the 
appropriate table of Fig. 12, 13, 14, 15 or 16, whichever 
is the higher. 


The conductor is moved each time the screw or nut is 
loosened. 


Col I applies to screws without heads if the screw when 
tightened does not protrude from the hole, and to other 
screws which cannot be tightened by means of a 
screwdriver with a blade wider than the diameter of 
the screw. 


Col II applies to the nuts of mantle terminals with 
cap nuts which are tightened by means of a 
screwdriver. 


Col III applies to other screws which are tightened by 
means of a screwdriver. 


Col IV applies to screw and nuts, other than nuts of 
mantle terminals, which are tightened by means other 
than a screwdriver. 


Col V applies to nuts of mantle terminals in which the 
nut is tightened by means other than a screwdriver. 


Where a screw has a hexagonal head with means for 
tightening with a screwdriver and the values in Col III 
and IV are different, the test is made twice, first 
applying to the hexagonal head the torque given in 
Col IV, and then on another set of samples, applying 
the torque given in column III by means of a 
screwdriver. If the values in Col II and IV are the 
same, only the test with the screwdriver is made. 


During the test, terminals shall not work and there shall 
be no damage, such as breakage of screws or damage 
to the head slots, threads, washers or stirrups that will 
impair the further use of the terminals. 


NOTE — For mantle terminals, the specific nominal diameter 
is that of the slotted stud. The shape of the blade of the test 
screwdriver shall suit the head of the screw to be tested. The 
screws and nuts shall not be tightened in jerks. 


14.4.7 Terminals shall clamp the conductor reliably 
between metal surfaces. 


54 


For lug terminals, a spring washer, or equally effective 
locking means, shall be provided and the surface within 
the clamping area shall be smooth. 


For mantle terminals, the bottom of the conductor space 
shall be slightly rounded in order to obtain a reliable 
connection. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and by the 
following test. 


The terminals are fitted with rigid conductors of the 
smallest and largest cross-sectional areas given in 
Table 14.2, the terminal screws being tightened with a 
torque equal to two-thirds of that given in the 
appropriate column of Table 14.4. 


If the screw has a hexagonal head with a slot, the torque 
applied is equal to two-thirds of that given in Col III 
of that table. 


Each conductor is then subjected to a pull of the value, 
in Newton’s, given in Table 14.5; the pull is applied 
without jerks, for 1 min, in the direction of the axis of 
the conductor space. 


During the test, the conductor shall not move noticeably 
in the terminal. 
Table 14.5 Pull to be Applied to Conductor 
(Clause 14.4.7) 


0 1 2 3 
30 40 


4 5 6 7 
90 100 


Terminal Size 
Pull (N) 


14.4.8 Terminals shall clamp the conductor without 
undue damage to the conductor. 


Compliance is checked by inspection of the conductors, 
after conductors of the smallest and largest cross- 
sectional areas given in Table 14.2 have been clamped 
once and loosened, the torque applied to clamp the 
conductor being equal to two-thirds of that given in 
Table 14.4. 


If the screw has a hexagonal head with a slot, the torque 
applied is equal to two-thirds of that given in col IV of 
Table 14.4. 


NOTE — Conductors are unduly damaged if they show deep 
or sharp indentations. 


SECTION 15 SCREWLESS TERMINALS 
AND ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS 


15.1 General 


This section specifies requirements for all types of 
terminals and electrical connections, that do not employ 
screws, for solid or stranded copper conductors up to 


2.5 mm? for internal wiring of luminaires and for 
connectors to external wiring of luminaires. 


Some examples of screw less terminals and electrical 
connections are shown in Figs. 17, 18 and 19. 


15.2 Terminology 


15.2.1 Screw Less Terminals — Parts required to make 
connections in electrical circuits by mechanical means 
without screws. 


15.2.2 Permanent Connections — Connectors 
designed to be made only once with the same conductor 
(for example, wire wrapping or crimping). 


15.2.3 Non-Permanent Connections — Connectors 
which allow lead assemblies or conductors to be 
connected and disconnected several times (for 
example, pin or tab and receptacle, or some spring- 
type terminals). 


15.2.4 Lead Assemblies — Conductors fitted with 
auxiliary parts, usually by permanent connection. 


15.2.5 Non-Prepared Conductors — Conductors 
without special preparation or auxiliary parts. 
Insulation may, however, be stripped to expose the 
conductor. 


NOTE — The term ‘special preparation’ covers the application 
of additional solder to the strands of the conductor, use of cable 
lugs, tabs and receptacles, formation of eyelets, etc., but not 
the reshaping of the conductor for its introduction into the 
terminal or the twisting of a stranded conductor to consolidate 
the end. 


The bonding together by heating of the tinned strands 
of a flexible conductor without the addition of solder 
is not considered to be special preparation. 


15.2.6 Test Current — Current assigned to a terminal 
or connection by the manufacturer. When terminals 
are part of a component, the test current shall be the 
rated current of the component. 


15.3 General Requirements 


15.3.1 Parts of terminals or connections for carrying 
current shall be made of one of the following materials: 


a) Copper; 

b) Analloy containing at least 58 percent copper 
for parts that are worked cold or at least 50 
percent copper for other parts; and 

Another metal no less resistant to corrosion 
than copper and having mechanical properties 
no less suitable. 


c) 


15.3.2 Terminals and connections shall clamp the 
conductor with sufficient pressure and without undue 
damage to the conductor. 


55 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


The conductor shall be clamped between metal 
surfaces. However, terminals for circuits having a rated 
current not exceeding 2 A may have one non-metallic 
surface, if the requirements of 15.3.5 are met. 


Insulation piercing terminals are acceptable only, if 
used in the SELV circuits of luminaires or as 
permanent, non-rewireable connections in other 
luminaires. 


NOTE — Conductors are unduly damaged, if they show deep 
or sharp indentations. 


15.3.3 Terminals shall be so designed that, when the 
conductor has been adequately inserted into the 
terminal, further insertion of its end is prevented by a 
stop. 


15.3.4 Terminals other than those for lead assemblies, 
shall accept ‘non-prepared conductors’ (see 15.2.5). 


Compliance with the requirements of 15.3.2, 15.3.3 
and 15.3.4 is checked by inspection of the terminals 
or connections, after fitting with appropriate 
conductors, and after the heating test of 15.6.2 
or 15.9.2. 


15.3.5 Electrical connectors shall be so designed that 
the pressure essential for good electrical conductivity 
is not transmitted through insulating material other than 
ceramic, pure mica, or other material with 
characteristics no less suitable, unless there is sufficient 
resilience in the metallic parts to compensate for any 
possible shrinking of the insulating material (see 
Fig. 17 and Fig. 18). 


15.3.6 It shall be clear in which way the connection of 
the conductor to, and the disconnection from, spring- 
type non-permanent screwless terminals is effected. 


The disconnection of a conductor shall require an 
operation other than a pull of the conductor and shall 
be such that it can be made by hand or with the aid of 
a simple, generally available device. 


15.3.7 Terminals for connection to several conductors 
under spring clamps shall clamp each conductor 
independently. 


For terminals designed for non-permanent connections, 
it shall be possible to withdraw the conductors together 
or separately. 


15.3.8 Terminals shall be suitably fixed to the 
equipment or to a terminal block or otherwise fixed in 
position. They shall not work loose when conductors 
are inserted or withdrawn. 


Compliance is checked by inspection and, if there is a 
doubt, by applying the mechanical test given in 15.5 
or 15.8. During the test, the terminals shall not work 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


loose and there shall be no damage that shall impair 
their further use. 


The above conditions apply not only to terminals which 
are fixed to equipment but also to terminals which are 
delivered separately. Covering with sealing compound 
without other means of locking is not sufficient. Self- 
hardening resins may however be used to lock 
terminals which are not subject to torsion in normal 
use. 


15.3.9 Terminals and connections shall withstand the 
mechanical, electrical and thermal stresses occurring 
in normal use. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 15.5, 15.6, 15.8 
or 15.9 as appropriate. 


15.3.10 Manufacturers shall state the conductor size 
or sizes for which the component is designed and the 
type of conductor, for example, solid or stranded. 


15.4 General Instructions on Tests 
15.4.1 Preparation of Samples 


The ‘tests for ingress of dust and moisture’ of Section 
9, if appropriate, shall be carried out before testing 
terminals or connections contained within the 
luminaires. 


15.4.2 Test Conductors 


Tests shall be carried out with copper conductors of 
the types and dimensions recommended by the 
manufacturer. If a range of conductors is specified, 
the smallest and largest shall be selected for testing. 


15.4.3 Multi-conductor Terminals 


Screwless terminals having provision for the 
simultaneous connection of several conductors shall 
be tested with the number of conductors indicated in 
the data provided by the manufacturer. 


15.4.4 Multi-way Terminals 


Each terminal in a group or strip of terminals, for 
example, a terminal block on a ballast, may be used as 
a separate sample. 


15.4.5 Test Quantities 


The tests described in 15.5 to 15.8 are carried out on 
four terminals (or connections). At least three terminals 
shall meet the requirements. If one terminal fails, four 
further terminals are tested and these shall meet the 
requirements. 


The tests described in 15.9 are carried out on ten 
terminals. 


56 


TERMINALS AND CONNECTIONS FOR 
INTERNAL WIRING 


15.5 Mechanical Tests 


Terminals and connections shall have adequate 
mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 15.5.1 
and 15.5.2. 


15.5.1 Non-Permanent Connections 


The mechanical strength of the terminals (or 
connections) is checked on a set of four terminals. If 
all the terminals contained within the luminaire are not 
of the same design, one set of four terminals of each 
design is subjected to the test. 


This test shall only be applied to devices on which the 
user may work to complete assembly of the luminaire 
before it is put into service. 


15.5.1.1 In the case of spring-type terminals (see 
Fig. 18) the test is made with solid copper conductors 
of the size or sizes specified by the manufacturer. If a 
range of conductors is specified, the smallest and 
largest are selected for testing. 


Of the four terminals, two are tested with conductors 
having the smallest cross-sectional area and the two 
remaining samples with conductors having the largest 
cross-sectional area. These conductors are connected 
to, and disconnected from, each terminal five times. 


For the first four connections, new conductors are used 
each time. For the fifth connection, the same conductor 
is used as for the fourth connection and it is clamped 
at the same place. For each connection, the conductors 
are pushed into the terminals as far as the stop. 


If the terminal is suitable for stranded conductors, an 
additional test is then made with one rigid stranded 
copper conductor. If, however, a range of conductors 
is specified, those with the smallest and largest cross- 
sectional areas are selected for testing. Each conductor 
is subjected to only one connection and disconnection 
with the corresponding terminal used for the testing 
with solid conductors. 


After the final connection, each conductor is subjected 
to a test pull of 4 N. 


15.5.1.2 Pin or tab and receptacle type connections are 
also subjected to a test pull of 4 N. 


The pull is applied without jerks, for 1 min, in the 
direction opposite to that used for the application or 
insertion of the conductor or lead assembly. 


During the test, the conductor or lead assembly shall 
not move from the terminal and neither the terminal 


nor the conductor or lead assembly shall undergo any 
alteration impairing its future use. 


The maximum force for the application or insertion of 
the conductor or lead assembly shall not exceed 50 N, 
and in the case of pin or tab and receptacle type 
connections the force for disconnection shall not 
exceed this value. 


15.5.2 Permanent Connections 


The connection shall remain fully effective when a 
pull-off force of 20 N is applied, for 1 min, in a 
direction opposite to that used for the application or 
insertion of the conductors. 


In some cases, a special tool may be used to apply the 
force correctly (for example, in the case of wire- 
wrapped terminals). 


Multi-conductor terminals are tested with the above 
force applied to each conductor in turn. 


15.6 Electrical Tests 


Terminals and connections shall have adequate 
electrical performance. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 15.6.1 
and 15.6.2. 


15.6.1 Contact Resistance Test 


The electrical performance of terminals (or 
connections) is checked on a set of four terminals. If 
all the terminals contained within the luminaires are 
not of the same design, one set of four terminals of 
each design is subjected to the test. 


15.6.1.1 For spring-type terminals, the test according 
to 15.6.1.3 is made with four solid copper non-insulated 
conductors. 


If a range of conductors is specified, two of the 
terminals are tested with conductors having the smallest 
cross-sectional area and the two remaining terminals 
with conductors having the largest cross-sectional area. 


15.6.1.2 In the case of pin or tab and receptacle type 
terminals, the test of 15.6.1.3 is made with lead 
assemblies. 


15.6.1.3 Each terminal with its conductor is loaded with 
the test current (a.c. or d.c.) and after 1h, the voltage 
drop across the terminal, still at the test current, is 
measured. The measuring points are located as close 
as possible to the contact point across which the voltage 
drop is being measured. The measured voltage drop 
shall not exceed 15 mV. 


The voltage drop for each joint or contact is considered 
separately, for example, the junction of conductor to 


57 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


receptacle is considered separately from the junction 
of receptacle to pin. 


The total voltage drop of two inseparable joints, when 
measured together, shall not exceed twice the value 
given in this sub-clause. 


15.6.2 Heating Tests 


15.6.2.1 Terminals (or connections) with rated current 
up to and including 6 A are then subjected to an ageing 
test, without current, of 25 cycles duration, each cycle 
comprising 30 min at a temperature of T + 5°C or 
100 + 5°C, whichever is the higher, followed by a 
cooling down period to a temperature between 15°C 
and 35°C. Terminals (or connections) with rated 
current exceeding 6 A are subjected to an ageing test 
of 100 such cycles. 


NOTE — The temperature T is the marked maximum rated 
temperature for T-marked components such as lampholders. 


15.6.2.2 The voltage drop is again measured on each 
terminal: 


a) After the 10th and 25th cycles for terminals 
with rated current up to and including 6 A; 
b) After the 50th and 100th cycles for terminals 


with rated current greater than 6 A. 


If, for all terminals, the voltage drop, in both cases, 
does not exceed by more than 50 percent the voltage 
drop measurements on the same terminal tested 
under 15.6.1, or if the increase in voltage drop is less 
than 2 mV, the terminals comply with the requirements. 


If the voltage drop of any of the terminals exceeds 
22.5 mV, the terminals are rejected. 


If, for one of the terminals, the voltage drop measured 
under 15.6.2.2(a) or (b) exceeds by more than 50 
percent with a minimum of 2 mV, the voltage drop 
measured on the same terminal under 15.6.1 but does 
not exceed 22.5 mV, the four terminals are subjected 
to a new ageing test, according to current rating, of 25 
cycles or 100 cycles duration without current. 


After the 10th and 25th or 50th and 100th cycles 
(according to the rating), the voltage drops are again 


Table 15.1 Conductor Rating 
(Clause 15.7) 


Sl Maximum Rated Nominal Cross-sectional 
No. Current of Terminals Areas of Conductors 
A mm’ 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 6 0.5 to 1 
ii) 10 >1to 1.5 
iii) 16 > 1.5 to 2.5 


NOTE — Terminals are usually referred to by a designation. Size 
0, for example, is generally a 6 A rating. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


measured. For any terminal, the voltage drop shall not 
exceed 22.5 mV. 


The total voltage drop of tow inseparable joints, when 
measured together, shall not exceed twice the values 
given in this subclause. 


15.6.2.3 If a terminal is so designed that the conductor 
is tightened against a surface of insulating material, 
this surface shall not be deformed during these heating 
tests. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


TERMINALS AND CONNECTIONS FOR 
EXTERNAL WIRING 


15.7 Conductors 


Spring-type terminals shall be suitable for the 
connection of rigid conductors, solid or stranded, with 
the nominal cross-sectional areas of conductors given 
in Table 15.1. 


If the component rating is less than the technical 
capacity, the component rating is used. 


Compliance is checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by fitting conductors of the smallest and largest 
cross-sectional areas specified. 


15.8 Mechanical Tests 


Terminals and connections shall have adequate 
mechanical strength. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 15.8.1 
and 15.8.2, which are made on one terminal of each of 
four samples. 


15.8.1 In the case of spring-type terminals, the test is 
made alternately with solid copper conductors having 
the largest and then the smallest cross-sectional areas 
specified in 15.7. These conductors are connected to, 
and disconnected from, each terminal five times. If all 
the terminals contained within the luminaire are not of 
the same design, one terminal of each design is 
subjected to the test. 


For the first four connections, new conductors are used 
each time. For the fifth connection, the same conductor 
is used as for the fourth connection and it is clamped 
at the same place. For each connection, the conductors 
are pushed into the terminals as far as the stop. 


If the terminal is stated by the manufacturer to be 
suitable for stranded conductors (see 15.3.10), an 
additional test is then made with two rigid stranded 
copper conductors, the first having the largest cross- 
sectional area specified in 15.7, and the second having 
the smallest cross-sectional area. These conductors 


58 


Table 15.2 Conductor Pull Force 
(Clause 15.8.1) 


SI Maximum Pull 
No. Rated Current N 
of Terminals aeo ee aN 
A Spring- Type Pin or Tab and 
Receptacle Type 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 6 20 8 
ii) 10 30 15 
iii) 16 30 15 
NOTE — If the component rating is less than the terminal 


capacity, the component rating is used. 


are subjected to only one connection and 
disconnection. 


After the final connection, each conductor is subjected 
to a pull test according to Table 15.2. 


15.8.2 Pin or tab and receptacle type connections are 
also subjected to a pull test according to Table 15.2. 


The pull is applied without jerks, for 1 min, in the 
direction opposite to that used for the application or 
insertion of the conductor or lead assembly. 


During the test, the conductor or lead assembly shall 
not move out from the terminal and neither the terminal 
nor the conductor or lead assembly shall undergo any 
alternation impairing its future use. 


15.9 Electrical Tests 


Terminals and connections shall have adequate 
electrical performance. 


Compliance is checked by the tests of 15.9.1 
and 15.9.2. 


15.9.1 Contact Resistance Test 


The electrical performance of terminals (or 
connections) is checked on a set of ten terminals. If all 
the terminals contained within the luminaire are not of 
the same design, one set of ten terminals of each design 
is subjected to the test. 


15.9.1.1 For spring-type terminals, the test according 
to 15.9.1.3 is made with ten solid copper non-insulated 
conductors. 


Five conductors having the smallest cross-sectional 
areas specified in 15.7 are connected as in normal use, 
each to one terminal. 


Five conductors having the smallest cross-sectional 
areas specified in 15.7 are connected as in normal use, 
each to one of the five remaining terminals. 


15.9.1.2 In the case of pin or tab and receptacle type 
terminals, the test according to 15.9.1.3 is made with 
lead assemblies. 


15.9.1.3 Each terminal with its conductor is loaded with 
the test current (a.c. or d.c.) and after 1 h the voltage 
drop across the terminal, still at the test current is 
measured. The measuring points are located as close 
as possible to the contact point across which the voltage 
drop is being measured. 


The measured voltage drop shall not exceed 15 mV. 


The total voltage drop of two inseparable joints, when 
measured together, shall not exceed twice the value 
given in this subclause. 


15.9.2 Heating Tests 


The thermal performance of terminals (or connections) 
is checked on the terminals which have been subjected 
to the test of 15.9.1. 


15.9.2.1 After having cooled down to the ambient 
temperature, each conductor is replaced by a new solid 
copper non-insulated conductor having the largest cross- 
sectional area specified in 15.7 and each lead assembly 
is replaced by a new appropriate lead assembly which 
is then connected to, and withdrawn from, the terminal 
or the relevant part of the connection five times. 


The conductors are then replaced by new non-insulated 
conductors. 


15.9.2.2 Each terminal with its conductor is loaded with 
the test current (a.c. or d.c.) for a time just sufficient 
for the voltage drop to be measured. For these 
measurements and the measurements of 15.9.2.4, the 
requirements of 15.9.1 shall apply. 


15.9.2.3 Terminals (or connections) with rated current 
up to and including 6 A are then subjected to an ageing 
test, without current, of 25 cycles duration, each cycle 
comprising 30 min at a temperature of T + 5°C or 
100 + 5°C, whichever is the higher, followed by a 
cooling down period to a temperature between 15°C 


59 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


and 30°C. Terminals (or connections) with rated current 
exceeding 6 A are subjected to an ageing test of 100 
such cycles. 


NOTE — The temperature T is the maximum rated temperature 
for T-marked components, such as lampholders. 


15.9.2.4 The voltage drop is again measured on each 
terminal, 


a) after the 10th and 25th cycles for terminals 
with rated current up to and including 6 A; 
and 

b) after the 50th and 100th cycles for terminals 


with rated current greater than 6 A. 


If, for all terminals, the voltage drop, in both cases, 
does not exceed by more than 50 percent the voltage 
drop measurements on the same terminal tested under 
15.9.2.2, or if the increase in voltage drop is less than 
2 mV, the terminals comply with the requirement. 


If the voltage drop of any of the terminals exceeds 
22.5 mV, the terminals are rejected. 


If, the one of the terminals, the voltage drop measured 
under a) or b) exceeds by more than 50 percent, with a 
minimum of 2 mV, the voltage drop measured on the 
same terminal under 15.9.2.2 but does not exceed 
22.5 mV, the ten terminals are subjected to a new 
ageing test, according to current rating, of 25 cycles 
or 100 cycles duration without current. 


After the 10th and 25th or 50th and 100th cycles 
(according to current rating), the voltage drops are 
again measured. For any terminal, the voltage drop 
shall not exceed 22.5 mV. 


The total voltage drop of two inseparable joints, when 
measured together, shall not exceed twice the value 
given in this sub-clause. 


15.9.2.5 If a terminal is so designed that the conductor 
is tightened against is surface of insulating material, 
this surface shall not become deformed during these 
heating tests. 


Compliance is checked by inspection. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 
Amperes 
Frequency (hertz) 


Volts 
Watts 


a.c. supply 


d.c. supply 


d.c. and a.c. supply 


Class II 


Class III 


Rated maximum ambient temperature 


Warning against the use of cool-beam lamps 


Minimum distance from lighted object (metres) 


Luminaires suitable for direct mounting on flammable surfaces 


Luminaires not suitable for direct mounting on normally flammable surfaces 
(suitable only for mounting on non-flammable surfaces) 


Luminaires suitable for mounting in/on normally flammable surfaces when 
thermally insulating may cover the luminaire 


NOTE — The marking of the symbols corresponding to IP numerals is 
optional 


Ordinary 


Drip-proof 


Rain-proof 


Splash-proof 


Jet-proof 


Fic. 1 SYMBOLS 


60 


IPX3 


IPX4 


No symbol 


(One drop) 


(One drop in a square) 


(One drop in a triangle) 


(Two triangles with one 
drop in each) 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Powerful water jet-proof IPX6 No symbol 
Watertight (immersible) IPX7 4 4 (Two drops) 
Pressure-watertight (submersible) IPX8 4 4 —-m (Two drops followed by an 
indication of the maximum depth of submersion in metres) 
Protected against solid object greater than 2.5 mm IPX3 No symbol 
Protected against solid objects greater than 1 mm IPX4 No symbol 
Dust-proof RK 
IPSX (A mesh without a frame) 
Dust-tight 
IP6X (A mesh with a frame) 


Use of heat resistant supply cables, interconnecting cables or external wiring 
(The number of cores shown 
is optional) 


Luminaires designed for use with bowl mirror lamps 


Rough service luminaires 


Luminaires for use with high pressure sodium lamps that require an external 
ignitor (to the lamp) 


Luminaires for use with high pressure sodium lamps having an internal 
starting device 


Replace any cracked protective shield 


rg real 


(Rectangular) 
or 


l 
(Round) 


Luminaires designed for use with self-shielded tungsten halogen lamps only 


Fic. | SYMBOLS 


61 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Width for each line 


aN Leads (tails) 
10 10 on luminaire 


20 


25 


Incoming 
cable 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 TERMINAL BLOCK ARRANGEMENT FOR INSTALLATION TEST FOR LUMINARIES WITH 
CONNECTING LEADs (TAILS) 


Fic. 3 Voip 


62 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Flammable 
va i 
j material 
Z 
Flammable 
Screen material 
Ballast 
o ee 
H 


han omn y 


Aan 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 4 ILLUSTRATION OF THE REQUIREMENTS OF CLAUSE 4.15 


Fic. 5 Voip 


63 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Glass 
wnidow 


Equipment | 
under test 


Talcum 
powder 
Guard screen \——~~~---- 


Vibrator 


Circulating pump 


Fic. 6 APPARATUS FOR PROVIDING PROTECTION AGAINST DUST 


Minimum internal 
diameter 15 mm 


es A a- - 


Water supply 


Turntable 


Holes 
50,4 mm 
Luminaire Protection 
Rain Proof Splash Proof 
Oscillation half-angle + 60° + 180° 
Holes within half angle + 60° + 180° 


Fic. 7 APPARATUS FOR TESTING PROTECTION AGAINST RAIN AND SPLASHING 


64 


NWN ke 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


60° 


O16 


D’ = 6*3 mm for the test of 9.2.6 (second characteristic numeral 5) 
D’ = 125 mm for the test of 9.2.7 (second characteristic numeral 6) 


Detail of nozzle 


Pressure gauge 


Nozzle 
Hose 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 8 NOZZLE FOR SPRAY TEST 


150 
130 


25 a : 
25 ef 200 Ò 300 350 400 x 


Y Mounting surface temperature °C 
X Winding temperature °C 


Y = Mounting surface temperature °C 
X = Winding temperature °C 


Limiting value of mounting surface temperature in case of failed winding. 
Limiting value of mounting surface temperature during abnormal operation at 1.1 times rated voltage {see 12.6.1(a)}. 
Measuring point at 1.1 times rated voltage {see 12.6.1 (b)}. 


Straight line drawn through the single measuring points and the 25°C point indicating a satisfactory luminaire as the extrapolation 
of the line to a winding temperature of 350°C is below a mounting surface temperature of 180°C. 


Straight dashed line drawn through two measuring points and indicating a luminaire which fails the test because the extrapolation 
of the line exceeds a mounting surface temperature of 180°C before reaching a winding temperature of 350°C. 


Assumed maximum values of the winding temperature of a failed winding. 


Fic. 9 RELATION BETWEEN WINDING TEMPERATURE AND MOUNTING SURFACE TEMPERATURE 


65 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Fic. 10 BALL PREssuRE APPARATUS 


60° 
A, Electrode 


Sample 


5 + Ost 2+ 0+1 
—_ —_ þa 

ar r] 
N 30° 
N 
2 
oO 
N 

Slightly rounded ) 
i edge ~n~ 


|_0%15 + 005 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 11 ARRANGEMENTS AND DIMENSIONS OF THE ELECTRODES FOR THE TRACKING TEST 


66 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Terminals without pressure plate Terminals with pressure plate 


D = conductor space G = distance between clamping screw and 
end of conductor when fully inserted 


NOTE — The part of the terminal containing the threaded hole and the part of the terminal against which the conductor is clamped by 
the screw may be two separate parts, as in the case of terminals provided with a stirrup. 


The space of the conductor may differ from those shown, provided a circle with a diameter equal to the minimum 
value specified for D can be inscribed. 


Terminal Minimum Minimum Distance G between Torque 
Size Diameter D Clamping Screw and End of Nm 
of Conductor Conductor when Fully pa O eS 
Space Inserted I 1” Iv’ 
mm eS, TO 
One screw Two screw One screw Twoscrew Onescrew Twoscrew Onescrew Two screw 
1 2.5 1.5 1.5 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 
2 3.0 1.5 1.5 0.25 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.4 
3 3.6 1.8 1.5 0.4 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 
4 4.0 1.8 1.5 0.4 0.25 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.5 
5 4.5 2.0 1.5 0.7 0.25 1.2 0.5 1.2 0.5 
6 5.5 2:5) 2.0 0.8 0.7 2.0 1.2 2.0 12 
7 7.0 3.0 2.0 12 0.7 2.5 1.2 3.0 1.2 


The values specified apply to the screws covered by the corresponding columns in Table 14.4 


Fic. 12 PILLAR TERMINALS 


67 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Screw not requiring washer Screw requiring washer 
or clamping plate or clamping plate 


Optional 
mene Optional 
m. A 


ee 


Optional 


Screw terminals 


STUD TERMINALS 


Key 
A = fixed part 

B = washer or clamping plate 
C = anti-spread device 

D = conductor space 

E 


= stud 


NOTE — The part which retains the conductor in position may be of insulating material provided the pressure necessary to clamp the 
conductor is not transmitting through the insulating material. 


Fic. 13 Screw TERMINALS AND STUD TERMINALS (Continued) 


68 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


SI Terminal Size Minimum Torque 
No. Diameter D of Nm 
Conductor Space pa aI S555 EE 
mm mm” Iv” 
oT aAa 
One Screw Two Screw One Screw or Stud Two Screw or Stud 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) 0 1.4 0.4 — 0.4 
ii) 1 Lf 0.5 — 0.5 
iii) 2 2.0 0.8 — 0.8 
iv) 3 Qe. 1.2 0.5 1.2 0.5 
v) 4 3.6 2.0 1.2 2.0 1.2 
vi) 5 4.3 2.0 1.2 2.0 1.2 
vii) 6 39. 2.0 1.2 2.0 1.2 
viii) 7 7.0 23 2.0 3.0 2.0 


D The values specified apply to the screws or studs covered by the corresponding columns in Table 14.4 


Fic. 13 ScREw TERMINALS AND STUD TERMINALS (Concluded) 


69 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Key 
A = saddle B = fixed part 
C = stud D = conductor space 


NOTE — The shape of the section of the conductor space may differ from those shown in the figures, provided a circle with a 
diameter equal to the minimum value specified for D can be inscribed. 


The shape of the upper and lower faces of the saddle may be different, to accommodate conductors of either 
small or large cross-sectional area, by reversing the saddle. 


The terminals may have more than two clamping screws or studs. 


Terminal Size | Minimum Diameter D of Conductor Space | Torque 
mm Nm 
3 3.0 0.5 
4 4.0 0.8 
5 4.5 12 
6 5.5 1.2 
7 7.0 2.0 


Key 

A = locking means F = stud 

B = cable lug or bar G = distance between edge of hole and 
E = fixed part side of clamping area 


NOTE — For certain types of equipment, the use of terminals of a size smaller than those specified is allowed. 


Terminal Size Minimum Distance G Between Edge of Hole and Side of Clamping Area Torque 
mm S/F 
TI” Iv” 
6 7.5 2.0 2.0 
7 9.0 2.5 3.0 


The value specified apply to the studs covered by the corresponding columns in Table 14.4 


Fic. 15 Luc TERMINALS 


70 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Key 
A = . fixed part 
D = conductor space 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Terminal Size Minimum Diameter D Minimum Distance Between Fixed Part and 


of Conductor Space” End of Conductor when Fully Inserted 
0 1.4 1.5 
1 1.7 1.5 
2 2.0 1.5 
3 2T 1.8 
4 3.6 1.8 
5 4.3 2.0 
6 5.5 239 
7 7.0 3.0 


D The torque value to be applied is that specified in column II or V of Table 14.4 as 
appropriate. 


Fic. 16 MANTLE TERMINALS 


Acceptable 


Welded or soldered 


Not acceptable 


Fic. 17 CONSTRUCTION OF ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONSACCEPTABLE 


71 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Receptacle (for tab) 


Tab connector 


Receptacle (for pin) 


Pin connector 


Crimp connectors 


+ dH 


Wire-wrapped terminal/connector 


Fic. 19 FURTHER EXAMPLES OF SCREWLESS TERMINALS 


73 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Luminaire A Luminaire B 


Incoming cables Outgoing cables 


20 A ILLUSTRATION OF THE TERM “LOOPING-IN (FEED THROUGH)” 


Key 
1 = terminals 5 = lamp 
2 = supply 6 = luminaire A 
3 7 ballast 7 = luminaire B 
4 = starter 

20B ILLUSTRATION OF THE TERM “THROUGH WIRING’ TERMINATING IN THE LUMINAIRE 
Key 
1 = terminals 5 = lamp 
2 supply 6 = luminaire A 
3 = ballast 7 = luminaire B 
4 = starter 


20C ILLUSTRATION OF THE TERM “THROUGH WIRING’ NOT TERMINATING IN THE LUMINAIRE 


Fic. 20 ILLUSTRATION OF THE TERM ‘LOOPING-IN’ AND ‘THROUGH WIRING’ 


74 


Sample 


de 
Rigid supporting surface 


NOTE — The rigid supporting surface should be arranged 
vertically for a side impact test. 


Fic. 21 APPARATUS FOR BALL Impact TEST 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


II - -ANN - 


Self-tapping screew: pointed or flat 


Thread-forming screw (thread formed by deformation} 


Fic. 22 EXAMPLES OF SELF-TAPPING, THREAD- 
CUTTING AND THREAD-FORMING SCREWS 


Fic. 23 Voip 


H 


Internal wiring 


Key 

A = creepage distance 

C = clearance (internal wiring) 
E = insulation 


Na 
LLL 


i om 
Kid a lle 


R 


N 
KE 
APA | 


<= 


clearance (supply wiring) 


Supply wiring 


conductor 


Fic. 24 ILLUSTRATION OF CREEPAGE AND CLEARANCE MEASUREMENTS AT A SUPPLY TERMINAL 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


_ 


Steel plate 


500 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


NOTE — The width of the tumbling barrel is not specified. 


Fic. 25 TUMBLING BARREL 


Luminaire Measuring device 


Ballast 


ignitor 


impedance 
volmeter 


NOTE — The polarity of the diode to be reversed, if necessary. 


Fic. 26 TEST CIRCUIT FOR SAFETY DURING INSERTION 


76 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


500 = 
450 T = 


400 t 


350 p 


300 


250 


200 


180 


Ignition temperature of wood °C 


150 


100 


Time Minutes Hours Days Years 
NOTE — The polarity of the diode to be reversed, if necessary. 


Fic. 27 IGNITION TEMPERATURE OF WOOD AS A FUNCTION OF TIME 


Cable 


Clamp screw Multi-strand conductor 


Soldered end 


Fic. 28 EXAMPLE OF PERMITTED DEGREE OF SOLDERING 


77 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 1.2, 4.15, 8.1, 10.2) 


TEST TO ESTABLISH WHETHER A CONDUCTIVE PART MAY CAUSE AN ELECTRIC SHOCK 


A-1 In order to determine whether a conductive part is 
a live part which may cause an electric shock, the 
luminaire is operated at rated supply voltage and 
nominal frequency and the following tests conducted: 


a) The current flowing between the part 
concerned and earth is measured, the 
measuring circuit having a non-inductive 
resistance of 2 000 + 50 Q. The part concerned 
is a live part if an a.c. current of more than 
0.7 mA (peak) or 2 mA d.c. is measured. 
For frequencies above 1 kHz, the limit of 
0.7 mA is multiplied by the values of the 
frequency, in kHz, but shall not exceed 70 mA 


(peak). The limits of the leakage current 
components are cumulative. 
b) The voltage between the part concerned and 
any accessible part is measured, the measuring 
circuit having a non-inductive resistance of 
50 000 Q. The part concerned is a live part if 
a voltage of more than 34 V (peak) is 
measured. 
For the above tests, one pole of the test supply shall be 
at earth potential. 


NOTE — A simplified method of measurement is under 
consideration. 


ANNEX B 
[Clauses 12.2 and 12.4.1 (d)] 


TEST LAMPS 


B-1 For the tests of Section 12, it is convenient to keep 
a stock of lamp types commonly required. These are 
selected from normal production lamps for 
characteristics as close as possible to the objective 
characteristics listed in the appropriate standards. The 
selected lamps are aged (at least 24 h for filament lamps 
and at least 100 h for tubular fluorescent and other 
discharge lamps, with occasional off periods), and a 
further check is made that there characteristics are still 
satisfactory and stable. Lamps shall not be retained as 
test lamps for longer than about three-quarters of their 
typical operating period in normal service. Lamps are 
inspected before each test for any damage or signs of 
approaching unserviceability. Discharge lamps shall 
be checked regularly to ensure that there has been no 
appreciable shift in electrical characteristics which 
would influence the temperatures in luminaires. 


If a lamp can be inserted in a circuit in more than one 
position, for example in the case of a fluorescent lamp, 
marks shall be made to assist consistent insertion. Great 
care shall be taken in handling test lamps; in particular, 
sodium and mercury-halide discharge lamps and 
amalgam fluorescent lamps shall not be moved while 
still hot. 


A lamp selected for a particular test shall be of a rating 
and type for which the luminaire is claimed to be 
suitable. If a choice of lamp shape, construction or 


78 


finish is indicated by the manufacturer, the thermally 
most onerous shall be taken. Otherwise, the most 
common type shall be used. 


The following requirements refer to the selection of 
lamps as test lamps, and to lamp selection for a 
particular test of a luminaire. 


B-2 FILAMENT LAMPS 


In seeking to test the luminaire with lamps which 
develop the most onerous conditions within it, 
consideration needs to be given to two principal modes 
of heat transfer, radiation and conduction: 


a) Radiation 


The materials of the luminaire are heated by radiation 
from the lamp filament, supplemented, for the area 
immediately around and especially above the lamp, 
by convected heat from the bulb surface. In general, 
for testing such conditions, clear lamps are used. The 
filament shapes used in most HV lamps provide a 
slightly irregular radiation pattern but are unlikely to 
have highly directional properties. There is more 
variation in lamps designed for LV (100-130 V), as 
lamps with transverse or axial filaments may produce 
different heating patterns which could be important in 
certain designs. Where reflector lamps are involved, 
note is taken of clear areas in the neck region. If it is 


intended to use lamps with heat transmitting reflectors, 
such lamps are used for tests. Light centre length also 
plays a role. 


b) Conduction 


The lampholder and associated wiring receive heat by 
conduction from the lamp cap and if the luminaire can 
operate with the lamp in the cap-up position, by 
convection transfer from the outer surface of the lamp. 


Where HTS lamps are not available, an alternative heat 
test source (AHTS) lamp is used. This is defined as 
follows: 


An Alternative Heat Test Source (AHTS) represents a 
commercial lamp of the same category which has a 
At, value from 5°C below to the specified value of 
Table 3 of IS 15118 (Part 1) when measured under the 
conditions specified in IS 8913. 


The following guidelines shall help in selection of 
suitable lamps: 


Compared with clear or frosted lamps, higher cap 
temperatures are principally to be found on lamps 
which have: 


a) a white coated or dark coloured bulb; 
b) asmaller bulb; and 


c) 


Small differences from the specified At, Table 3 of 
IS 15118 (Part 1) are corrected for the adjustment of 
the HTS lamp by the test voltage, but such adjustment 
shall not cause the wattage to exceed 105 percent of 
the rated wattage (corresponding to 103.2 percent 
voltage). 


a shorter light centre length. 


Additionally, for the thermal test by conduction only, 
the outer surface of a lamp may be hand painted with 
a suitable high temperature paint, commencing in the 
area of the cap and, if necessary, extending over all 
the bulb surface. 


For reflector and bowl mirror lamps, only the test 
voltage shall be used for adjustment of the temperature. 


For endurance testing, HTS lamps which have been 
modified to give increased cap temperature are not 
used. 


If the luminaire is provided with a marking for special 
lamps, or if it is obvious that special lamps are to be 
used in the luminaire, the tests are made with such 
special lamps. 


79 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Lamps are chosen in accordance with the maximum 
wattage for which the luminaire is marked. In case of 
doubt for luminaires marked with a maximum 60 W, 
E27 or B22 cap, test shall also be made with a 40 W 
round bulb lamp. 


The voltage rating of the test lamps shall be typical of 
the voltage rating in the market for which the luminaire 
is intended. If the luminaire is intended for two or more 
different groups of voltages supply, for example for 
200-250 V and for 100-130 V, then the testing shall at 
least be carried out with lamps in the low voltage range 
(that is, with the higher current). 


When choosing the range of lamps for testing, the 
requirement of 3.2.8 should be taken into account. 


If a lamp is operated by a transformer or similar device 
within or external to the luminaire, the rating of the 
test lamp shall correspond to the marking on the 
luminaire, transformer or similar instructions. 


B-2 TUBULAR FLUORESCENT AND OTHER 
DISCHARGE LAMPS 


When a lamp is operated under reference conditions 
(according to the relevant lamp standard), the lamp 
voltage, current and power shall be as close as possible 
to the lamp rated values, and shall be within 2.5 percent 
of these values. 


If a reference ballast is not available, lamps are selected 
using a production ballast which at the calibration 
current has an impedance within +1 percent of that of 
the reference ballast. 


If the luminaire is for use with either filament or 
discharge lamps, it should be tested with the more 
onerous (or, if not known, with each in turn). 


It is usually found that translucent materials attain a 
higher temperature with a discharge lamp or a discharge 
lamp incorporating a series filament than with a 
filament lamp, for a given lamp power. 


NOTES 


1 Self-ballasted lamps are considered as fluorescent or other 
discharge lamps for the purpose of Section 12. If the luminaire 
is for use with filament lamps and self-ballasted lamps or other 
discharge lamps incorporating series filaments, it should be 
tested with the most onerous lamp (which in general will be 
with filament lamps). 

2 If the luminaire is for use with a combination of lamp types 
(for example, filament lamp plus a discharge lamp), it should 
be tested with the thermally most onerous. 


3 If the luminaire is designed for a lamp type for which 
specifications have not yet been established, a test lamp should 
be selected after consultation with the lamp manufacturer. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX C 
[Clauses 12.3.1 (c), and 12.5.1] 


ABNORMAL CIRCUIT CONDITIONS 


C-1 The following is a list of abnormal circuit 
conditions which are applicable to a tubular fluorescent 
or other discharge lamp luminaire and from which the 
thermally most onerous condition shall be taken (see 
12.5.1). If the luminaire contains more than one lamp, 
the abnormal conditions shall be applied only to the 
one lamp, which leads to the most adverse results. The 
abnormal conditions shall be set up before the test is 
started. Conditions 4) and 5) refer only to lamps with 
two pre-heated electrodes (for example, fluorescent 
lamps). The descriptions include instructions on test 
arrangements. Conveniently the abnormal circuit 
condition is produced or simulated by remote switching 
so that it is not necessary to disturb a luminaire which 
has just completed the test of normal operation. 


(1) Short-Circuit of Starter Contacts 


The condition applies to starters with moving contacts, 
including starters incorporated in lamps. 


(2) Lamp Rectification 


a) Luminaires for fluorescent lamps (Fig. C-1 
and C-2) 
This is a fault conditions which may occur 
after extended use in luminaires employing 
starterless ballasts with capacitive reactance 
control. When testing luminaires for the 
rectifying effect, the circuit shown in Fig. C- 
1 shall be used. The lamp is connected to the 
midpoint of the appropriate equivalent 
resistors. The rectifier polarity is chosen so 
as to give the most unfavourable operating 
conditions. If necessary, the lamp is started 
using a suitable starting device. 
The rectifier characteristics shall be: 


2 800 V 
Reverse leakage current < 10 yA 


Peak inverse voltage 


> 3 times nominal 
lamp running 
current 


< 50 us 


Forward current 


Transition time 


Luminaires for tubular fluorescent lamps 
having Fa6 caps however, shall be tested as 
follows: 

Initially the lamp is operated under normal 
conditions with a short-circuited rectifier in 
series with the lamp. Then the bridging of the 
rectifier is opened. The rectifier shall be 
inserted in both polarities. The test is finished, 


80 


if the lamp extinguishes. If not, the following 
test is carried out: 


The lamp is operated as shown in Fig. C-2. 
The rectifier polarity shall be chosen so as to 
give the most unfavourable operating 
conditions. If necessary, the lamp is started 
using a suitable starting device. 


b) Luminaires for metal halide lamps which, 
according to the lamp specification, can lead 
to ballast, transformer or starting device 
overloading (see Fig. C-3). 

i) Luminaires not containing special 
devices and whose safety is covered by 
design only. 

The lamp in the luminaire is replaced by 
the test circuit as shown in Fig. C-3. By 
varying the resistor R,, the lamp current 
is adjusted to maximum, but in any case 
not higher than three times the normal 
lamp current. 

ii) Luminaires containing a special device 
within the luminaire but outside the 
ballast, transformer or starting device or 
incorporated into the ballast, transformer 
or starting device, where the ballast, 
transformer or starting device is marked 
accordingly. 

The lamp in the luminaire is replaced by the 
test circuit as shown in Fig. C-3. By varying 
the resistor R,, the lamp current is adjusted to 
a value equal to twice the normal lamp 
current. After having reached steady 
conditions the current is increased in suitable 
steps until the protection device has reacted. 
Care is taken to achieve steady conditions as 
far as possible at each step. 


(3) Lamps Removed and not Replaced 
(4) One Electrode of lamp Open-Circuited 


The conditions may be produced by switching. 


(Alternatively, a test lamp may be suitably modified.) 


The electrode selected shall be that which more 
adversely affects the results. 


(5) Lamp shall not Started but Both Electrodes are 
Intact. For this Condition, a Non-Serviceable or 
Modified Test Lamp may be Used 


(6) Blockage of the Motor(s) Contained in the 
Luminaire 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Resistor 


Ballast 
under 
test 


Supply 


Rectifier 


Fic. C-1 Circuit For TESTING RECTIFYING EFFECT 
(Some Capacitive Starterless Ballasts Only) 


Starter 


Lamp 
Ballast 
under 
test 


Rectifier 


Fic. C-2 CIRCUIT FOR TESTING RECTIFYING EFFECT 
(Ballasts for Single Pin Lamps) 


Key 

A = _ 0.1uF/400-V/low attenuation R,=0....... 100 continuous 
or 

D = 100 A, inverse voltage Oiri 1 Q continuous 

R, =  2009/50Qļ9 Tsp 10 Q continuous 


10....... 50 Q continuous 
DOM Aes. 100 Q continuous 


NOTE — The components specifications given are typical for a circuit replacing a 75 W lamp. The wattage of the resistors should be 
increased, if allowance has to be made for a replacement for lamps of a higher wattage. 


Fic. C-3 TEST CIRCUIT FOR THE OPERATION OF METAL HALIDE LAMP LUMINAIRE 


81 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX D 
[Clause 12.4.1 (a) and (j)] 


DRAUGHT-PROOF ENCLOSURE 


D-1 The following recommendations refer to the 
construction and use of a suitable draught-proof 
enclosure for luminaires, as required for the tests of 
normal and abnormal operation. Alternative 
constructions for draught-proof enclosures are suitable 
if it is established that similar results are obtained. 


The draught-proof enclosure is rectangular, with a 
double skin on top and on at least three sides and with 
a solid base. The double skins are of perforated metal, 
spaced approximately 150 mm apart, with regular 
perforations of 1 mm to 2 mm diameter, occupying 
about 40 percent of the whole area of each skin. 


The internal surfaces are painted with a matt paint. The 
three principal internal dimensions are each at least 
900 mm. There shall be a clearance of at least 200 mm 
between the internal surfaces and any part of the largest 
luminaire for which the enclosure is designed. 


NOTE — If it is required to test two or more luminaires in a 
large enclosure, care should be taken that radiation from one 
luminaire cannot affect any other. 


There is a clearance of at least 300 mm above the top 
of the enclosure and around the perforated sides. The 
enclosure is at a location protected as far as possible 
from draughts and sudden changes in air temperature; 
it is also protected from sources of radiant heat. 


A luminaire under test is positioned as far away as 
possible from the six internal surfaces of the enclosure. 
The luminaire is mounted (subject to the requirements 
of 12.4.1 and 12.5.1) as under service conditions. 


A luminaire for direct fixing to a ceiling or wall should 
be fixed to a mounting surface comprising a wood or 
wood-fibre board. A non-combustible insulating 
material is used if the luminaire is not suitable for 
mounting on a combustible surface. The board is 15 
mm to 20 mm thick and extends not less than 100 mm 
(but preferably not more than 200 mm) beyond the 
normal projection of the smoothed outline of the 
luminaire. There is a clearance of at least 100 mm 
between the board and the internal surfaces of the 
enclosure. The board is painted black with a matt non- 
metallic paint. 


A luminaire for corner-fixing is fixed in a corner 
comprising two boards, each complying with the 
preceding requirements. 


A third board is required, if the luminaire is to be fixed 
in a vertical corner immediately below a simulated 
ceiling. 


82 


Luminaires shall not cause the recess to attain 
temperatures likely to cause a hazard or fire risk and 
compliance is checked by the following test. 


Recessed luminaires are mounted in a test recess, 
consisting of a suspended ceiling, on top of which is a 
rectangular box with vertical sides and horizontal top. 


The suspended ceiling is made of a 12 mm thick porous 
wood-fibre board, in which a suitable opening has been 
made for the luminaire. The wood-fibre board shall 
extend at least 100 mm outside the projection of the 
luminaire on this board. The vertical sides of the box 
are made of 19 mm thick laminated wood and the top 
of 12 mm thick porous wood-fibre board tightly sealed 
to the sides. 


The position of the recessed luminaire within the test 
box shall be as follows: 


a) F mark insulating ceilings — W 

Sealed box touching luminaire all round with 
two sheets of insulating material 100 mm 
thick and with a coefficient of thermal 
conductivity equal to 0.04 W/mK (see Note) 


tightly fitting the outside shape of the test box. 


NOTE — This may be achieved by insulating material 
of 5 m? k/W. 


F mark — WZ 


During the test, the sides of the box are placed 
at a distance of 50 mm to 75 mm from the 
luminaire, where it is mounted in the 
suspended ceiling. 


b) 


NOTE — The distance of 50 mm to 75 mm takes into 
account circular luminaires tested in rectangular boxes. 


The top of the luminaire shall be in contact 
with the inside top of the test recess. 
c) NoF mark (see Fig. 1), or warning notice — 
Luminaires suitable for direct mounting on 


non-combustible surfaces only. 


For recessed luminaires of this kind, the test 
recess shall be of the same materials. The 
same dimensions as those used for 
marked luminaires shall apply but with 25 mm 
spacing between the top of the luminaire and 
the box unless the manufacturers’ installation 
instructions indicate otherwise for any of these 
dimensions. Non-combustible insulating 
material may have to be used for the test recess 
construction. 


The 25 mm dimension shall be measured from the 
inside top of the box to the substantially flat top surface 
of the luminaire. If there are spacers or connecting 
boxes on top of the luminaire which project more than 
25 mm above its top surface, these spacers or 
connection boxes are placed in direct contact with the 
top of the test box. 


If a luminaire is provided having separated parts 
intended for recessed mounting (for example, having 
separate lamp enclosure and control gear enclosure), 
the test recess shall be constructed as a single box 
observing the manufacturers’ recommendations for 
minimum spacing between parts (see Fig. D-1). Where 
no spacing information is provided, separate test 
recesses shall be used for each part. 


For F-mark and F-mark insulated ceilings, if there are 
projecting spacers or connecting boxes on the top or 
sides of the luminaire, then these spacers or connecting 
boxes shall be placed in direct contact with respectively 
the test box or insulating material. 


The suspended ceiling and the interior of the box are 
painted black with a matt non-metallic paint and there 
shall be a gap of not = 100 mm between this assembly 
and the inside walls, ceiling and floor of the test 
enclosure. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


When a luminaire is intended to be recessed into a wall, 
the test is made using a test recess similar to that 
described above, but with the board placed vertically. 


No part of the test recess shall exceed 90°C during the 
normal operation thermal test and 130°C during the 
abnormal operation thermal test. For luminaires 
marked with a F symbol, no part of the test recess shall 
exceed the temperature permitted for the mounting 
surface, as in Table 12.1. 


A track-mounted luminaire is connected to a track 
system appropriate to the luminaire. The track is 
mounted as in normal use, according to the 
manufacturer’s installation instructions. The luminaire 
is connected to the track in the most onerous thermal 
position of normal use permitted by the mounting 
instructions or marking. The luminaire is operated 
under the conditions specified in 12.4.1 and 12.5.1. 


All spacing shall be measured from the extremes of 
the positions of movement where luminaires are 
adjustable in overall dimension or position in either 
axis when fully installed and during normal operation 
(see Fig. D-2). 


Figure D-2 illustrates the correct test box size for a 
luminaire which is adjustable in both axis and thus 
needs space within a ceiling for the adjustment. 


a = 


Other distances are in accordance with Annex D 


Z 
CLL LLL LLL LLL LLL 


minimum separation as specified by the manufacturer. 


Fic. D-1 EXAMPLES oF TEST RECESSES WHERE A LUMINAIRE COMPRISES SEPARATE PARTS 


83 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Touching 


Extreme path of 
rotated fitting 
when tilted 


Fitting rotates 350° 


Fic. D-2 Correct Test Box SIze F MARK AND F MARK(INSULATING CEILINGS) FOR ADJUSTABLE LUMINAIRE 


84 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX E 
[Clause 12.4.1 (a)] 


DETERMINATION OF WINDING TEMPERATURE RISES BY THE 
INCREASE-IN-RESISTANCE METHOD 


NOTE — Reference to ballasts also applies to similar 
components such as transformers. 


E-1 Before commencing the test, arrangements are 
made whereby the ballast may be quickly connected 
by appropriate means of negligible resistance to a 
Wheatstone bridge, or other suitable measuring 
instrument, after the luminaire has been disconnected 
from the supply. 


A chronometer with an easily-read second hand is 
essential. The test procedure is as follows: 


The luminaire remains unenergized for a period long 
enough to ensure that the complete luminaire, including 
the ballast windings, is thermally stable in a 
substantially constant ambient temperature (¢,), which 
shall not change by more than 3°C during this period. 


The resistance (R,) of the cold ballast winding is 
measured and f, noted. The luminaire is operated until 
thermal stability has been achieved as indicated by a 
suitable temperature measuring device attached to the 
body of the ballast. The ambient air temperature (f,) in 
the draught-proof enclosure is noted. 


The luminaire is then disconnected from the supply, 
the time noted and the ballast connected immediately 
to the Wheatstone bridge. The resistance is measured 
as quickly as possible and the corresponding time 
noted. 


Further resistance measurements, if necessary, are 
made of suitable intervals whilst the ballast is cooling, 
the times at which the measurements made are being 
recorded. These measurements enable a time/resistance 
curve to be plotted which is extrapolated back to the 
point corresponding to the instant of disconnection of 
the supply and the resistance R, of the hot winding is 
read. 


Since the resistance of copper varies in direct 
proportion to the temperatures as measured from a 
reference point of —234.5°C, the hot temperature t, may 
be calculated from the ratio of the hot resistance R, to 
the cold resistance R, by means of the equation: 


R, #2345 
234.5 


Ree 
The constant 234.5 relates to copper windings; for 
aluminium this constant is 229. Hence, for windings 
of copper wire: 


e 


234.5) - 234.5 


The temperature rise is the difference between the 
calculated temperature t, and the ambient air 
temperature t, at the conclusion of the test, that is: 
temperature rise = (t, — t,) K 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 4.18 ) 


TEST FOR RESISTANCE TO STRESS CORROSION OF COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS 


F-1 TEST CABINET 


Closeable glass vessels shall be used for the test. These 
may be, for example desiccator vessels or sample glass 
troughs with ground rim and lid. The vessels volume 
shall be at least 10 : 1. A certain ratio of test space to 
volume of test solution shall be maintained (20 : 1 to 
10: 1). 


85 


F-2 TEST SOLUTION 
Preparation of 1.0 litre of solution: 


Dissolve 107 g of ammonium chloride (reagent grade 
NH,Cl) is about 0.75 litre of distilled or fully 
demineralized water and add as much of 30 percent 
sodium hydroxide solution (prepared from reagent 
NaOH and distilled or fully demineralized water) as is 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


necessary to reach a pH value of 10 at 22 °C. For other 
temperatures, adjust this solution to the corresponding 
DH values specified in Table F-1. 


After the pH adjustment, make up to 1.01 with distilled 
or fully demineralized water. 


This does not change the pH value any more. 


Keep the temperature in any event constant to within 
+1°C during the pH adjustment, carry out the pH 
measurement using an instrument which permits an 
adjustment of the pH value to within + 0.02. 


The test solution may be used over a prolonged period, 
but the pH value which represents a measure of the 
ammonia concentration in the vapour atmosphere, shall 
be checked at least every three weeks and adjusted, if 
necessary. 


Table F-1 pH Value of the Test Solution 


SI Temperature Test Solution 
No. ae pH 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 22+1 10.0+0.1 
ii) 25241 9.9+0.1 
iii) 27+1 9.8+0.1 
iv) 30+1 9741 


F-3 TEST PIECE 


The test is a made on test pieces taken from the 


luminaires. 
F-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


The surfaces of the test pieces shall be carefully 
cleaned, varnish being removed by acetone grease and 
finger prints by petroleum spirit or similar product. 


The test cabinet containing the test solution shall be 
brought to a temperature of 30 + 1°C. The test pieces, 
pre-heated to 30°C shall be placed in the test cabinet 
as quickly as possible in such a way that the ammonia 
vapour can take effect unhindered. The test pieces shall 
preferably be suspended so that they do not dip into 
the test solution nor touch each other. Supports or 
suspension devices shall be made of materials which 
are not susceptible to attack by ammonia vapour, for 
example glass or porcelain. 


Testing shall be carried out at a constant temperature 
of 30 + 1°C to exclude visible condensed water 
formation caused by temperature fluctuations, which 
could severely distort the test results. The test period 
shall commence when the test cabinet is closed and 
shall last for 24 h. After this treatment the test pieces 
shall be washed in running water; 24 h later they shall 
show no cracks when inspected at an optical 
magnification of 8X. 


NOTE — In order not to influence the results of the test, the 
test pieces shall be handled with care. 


ANNEX G 
Void 


ANNEX H 
Void 


86 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX J 
(Clauses 3.2.6, 9.2) 


EXPLANATION OF IP NUMBERS FOR DEGREE OF PROTECTION 


J-1 For full details see IS 12063 from which the b) Protection of the equipment inside the 
following is an extract. enclosure against harmful ingress of water. 


The type of protection covered by this system of The designation to indicate the degrees of protection 
classification is as follows: consists of the characteristic letters IP followed by two 
numerals (the characteristic numerals) indicating 
conformity with the conditions stated in Tables J-1 and 
J-2 respectively. The first numeral indicates the degree 
of protection described under (a) and the second 
numeral the degree of protection described under (b). 


a) Protection of persons against contact with or 
approach to live parts and against contact with 
moving parts (other than smooth rotating 
shafts and the like) inside the enclosure and 
protection of the equipment against ingress 
of solid foreign bodies. 


Degrees of Protection Indicated by the First Characteristic Numeral 


SI First Characteristic Degree of Protection 
No. Numeral 
Degree of Protection Brief Details of Objects which shall be ‘Excluded’ from the Enclosure 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 0 Non-protected No special protection 
li) 1 Protected against solid objects A large surface of the body, such as a hand (but no protection against 
greater than SO mm deliberate access). Solid objects exceeding 50 mm in diameter 
iii) 2 Protected against solid objects Fingers or similar objects not exceeding 80 mm in length. Solid objects 
greater than 12 mm exceeding 12 mm in diameter 
iv) 3 Protected against solid objects Tools, wires, etc, of diameter or thickness greater than 2.5 mm. Solid objects 
greater than 2.5 mm exceeding 2.5 mm in diameter 
v) 4 Protected against solid objects Wires or strips of thickness greater than 1.0 mm. Solid objects exceeding 
greater than 1.0 mm 1.0 mm in diameter 
vi) 5 Dust-protected Ingress of dust is not totally prevented but dust does not enter in sufficient 
quantity to interfere with satisfactory operation of the equipment 
vii) 6 Dust-tight No ingress of dust 


Degrees of Protection Indicated by the Second Characteristic Numeral 


SI Second Characteristic Degree of Protection Degree of Protection 
No. Numeral 
Short Description Details of the Type of Protection Provided by the Enclosure 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 0 Non-protected No special protection 
ii) 1 Protected against dripping water Dripping water (vertically falling drops) shall have no harmful effect 
iii) 2 Protected against dripping water Vertically dripping water shall have no harmful effect when the 
when tilted up to 15°C enclosure is titled at any angle up to 15° from its normal position 
iv) 3 Protected against spraying water Water falling as a spray at an angle up to 60° from the vertical shall 
have no harmful effect 
v) 4 Protected against splashing water Water splashed against the enclosure from any direction shall have no 
harmful effect 
vi) 5 Protected against water jets Water projected by a nozzle against the enclosure from any direction 
shall have no harmful effect 
vii) 6 Protected against heavy seas Water from heavy seas or water projected in powerful jets shall not 
enter the enclosure in harmful quantities 
viii) 7 Protected against the effects of Ingress of water in a harmful quantity shall not be possible when the 
immersion enclosure is immersed in water under defined conditions of pressure 
and time 
ix) 8 Protected against submersion The equipment is suitable for continuous submersion in water under 


conditions which shall be specified by the manufacturer. 


NOTE — Normally, this shall mean that the equipment is hermetically sealed. However with certain types of equipment it can mean that 
water can enter but only in such a manner that it produces no harmful effects. 


Specialist cleaning techniques are not covered by IP ratings. Manufacturers are recommended to give appropriate information regarding 
cleaning techniques, where necessary. This is in line with the recommendations contained within IS 12063 for specialist cleaning 
techniques. 


87 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX K 
[Clause 12.3.1, 12.4.1 (a)] 


TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


K-1.1 The following recommendations refer to 
methods of making temperature measurements on 
luminaires in a draught-proof enclosure in accordance 
with 12.4.1. These methods of measurement have 
evolved as being particularly suitable for luminaires; 
alternative methods may be used, if it is established 
that they are of at least equal precision and accuracy. 


Temperatures of solid materials are usually measured 
by means of thermocouples. The output voltage is read 
by a high-impedance device such as a potentiometer. 
With a direct-reading instrument it is important to 
check that its input impedance is suited to the 
impedance of the thermocouple. Temperature- 
indicators of the chemical type are at present suitable 
only for rough checks of measurement. 


The thermocouple wires should be of low thermal 
conductivity. A suitable thermocouple consists of 80/20 
nickel-chromium paired with 40/60 nickel-copper (or 
with 40/60 nickel-aluminium). Each of the two wires 
(usually of strip form, or circular in section) is fine 
enough to pass through a 0.3 mm hole. All the end- 
portions of the wires liable to be exposed to radiation 
have a high-reflectance metal finish. The insulation of 
each wire is of suitable temperature and voltage rating; 
it is also thin but robust. 


Thermocouples are attached to the measuring point 
with minimum disturbance of thermal conditions and 
with low-resistance thermal contact. If a particular 
point on a part is not specified, the point of highest 
temperature should be found by preliminary 
exploration (for this purpose, a thermocouple may be 
mounted in a holder made of material of low thermal 
conductance; instruments using thermistors are also 
convenient). It is important to explore materials such 
as glass, since the temperature may vary rapidly with 
position. Thermocouples mounted within or near a 
luminaire should have minimum exposure to conducted 
or radiant heat. Care should be taken to avoid voltages 
from current-carrying parts. 


The following methods have been found useful for 
attaching thermocouple junctions at measuring points: 


a) Mechanical clamping, for example, under a 
fixing device (clamping under current- 
carrying parts should be avoided). 

b) Soldering to a metal surface (with a minimum 

amount of solder). 


By an adhesive (minimum amount required). 
The adhesive should not separate the 


88 


thermocouple from the measuring point. An 
adhesive used with a translucent material 
should be as translucent as possible. A suitable 
adhesive for use with glass is formed of one 
part of sodium silicate to two parts of calcium 
sulphate, with water medium. 

On non-metal parts the last 20 mm of the 
thermocouple are attached to the surface to 
offset the flow of heat from the measuring 


point. 

d) Cables. The insulation is slit and the 
thermocouple inserted (without touching a 
conductor); the insulation is then bound up. 

e) Mounting surfaces (see Annex D). A 


thermocouple is attached to a copper disc 
(approximately 15 mm in diameter, 1 mm 
thick and with a matt black finish), sunk level 
with the surface at the hotest point. 


The average ambient temperature in the draught-proof 
enclosure is taken to be the air temperature at a position 
near one of the perforated walls on a level with the 
centre of the luminaire. The temperature is usually 
measured by a mercury-in-glass thermometer the bulb 
of which is shielded against radiation by a double- 
walled cylinder of polished metal. 


The average temperature throughout a winding is 
measured by the increase-in-resistance method. The 
procedure to be followed is described in Annex E. 


NOTE — It is found that errors are often made in the estimated 
calculation. An independent rough check should be made by 
measuring the case temperature of the component and adding 
a winding-to-case differential appropriate to the construction. 


It is important that all temperature measuring 
instruments should be checked regularly. It is also 
recommended that measuring authorities should 
interchange luminaires to improve consistency in the 
measurement of different materials at different 
temperature levels. 


K-1.2 Temperature Measurement of the Insulation 
Parts of Lampholders 


Thermocouples should be applied on the following 
measuring points, as shown in Fig. K-1: 


a) Lampholder rim (not on metal or ceramic 
lampholders); 

b) At the point of contact between the lamp cap 

and the lampholder (if made of insulation 


material other than ceramic). 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


It is the intention that measurement takes c) At bifurcation of cable with a maximum of 
place on the lampholder and should be as near 10 mm from the lampholder terminals (if any, 
as possible to the point of contact between this measuring point being important as the 
the lamp cap and the lampholder without wiring may touch it). 

touching the lamp cap; NOTE — Lampholder may be either ES or BC. 


10 mm max. 


NOTE — Lampholder may be either ES or BC. 


Fic. K-1 PLACING OF THERMOCOUPLES ON A TYPICAL LAMPHOLDER 


89 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX L 
(Clauses 4.1, and 4.18.3) 


GUIDE TO GOOD PRACTICE IN LUMINAIRE DESIGN 


L-1 SCOPE 


This guide to good practice is intended to advise 
luminaire manufacturers on the behaviour of plastic 
materials and finishes under the influence of 
temperature, UV radiation, moisture and aggressive 
atmospheres and to offer good practice in reflector 
design. 


It applies to luminaires for indoor and outdoor use and 
advises on generally accepted constructions but is not 
exhaustive. This guide should therefore never be 
interpreted as a requirement since other solutions can 
be equally effective or even better in certain specific 
applications. 


A classification of external influences is given in 
IS 15382 (Part 3). 


L-2 PLASTICS IN LUMINAIRES 


In luminaire construction, plastic components have 
become important and proven functional elements. 
This applies to internal parts and wiring and to 
components such as translucent covers, shields and 
parts for structural support. 


The applications relative to the ‘normal’ usage of 
luminaires determine the normal running life (ageing) 
of these plastic parts. 


Excessive hard usage and damaging influences 
diminish the resistance to ageing. 


Damaging Influences 


Sl Damaging Cause Effects” 
No. Influence 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) High operating Operating voltage too Deformation 
temperature high 
Ambient temperature Embrittlement 
too high 
Inappropriate mounting Discoloration 
ii) UV radiation Mercury-dosed high- Yellowing 
pressure lamps with 
excessive UV component 
Germicidal lamps Embrittlement 
ili) Aggressive Softeners (plasticizers) | Cracking 


substance 
Incorrect cleaning (with Reduced strength 
disinfecting means) Outer surface 
damage 


D All causes can relate to all effects. 


Special attention should be given to, 


a) continuous service temperature; 

b) UV and visible radiation; 

c) static and dynamic mechanical impact; and 
d) oxidizing atmospheres. 


Some combinations of these influences have particular 
importance and may make the material unsuitable for 
the intended application. For example, the combination 
UV radiation and heat may produce a green substance 
from PVC cable insulation, indicating the degradation 
of the insulation. The properties published in respect 
of particular materials of given generic names can differ 
depending on the fillers or inhibitors used, the 
manufacturing procedure and the design. 


L-3 RUST RESISTANCE 


Luminaires for use in normal indoor atmospheres may 
be made from a wide variety of materials. 


Sheet metal components of the luminaire should be 
suitably pre-treated and surface finished, for example 
stove-enamelled. 


Unpainted aluminium reflectors and louvers should be 
of an aluminium alloy with an anodic coating. 


Auxiliary components of luminaires, such as clips, 
hinges, etc, when electroplated with suitable materials 
will give satisfactory service in normal indoor 
atmospheres. Suitable coatings are zinc, nickel/ 
chromium and tin. 


NOTE — The electrical safety of luminaires for indoor use 
under humid conditions is checked by the tests of Section 9. 


L-4 CORROSION RESISTANCE 


Luminaires for use outdoors, or indoors in atmospheres 
of high humidity should have adequate resistance to 
corrosion. Although it is assumed that these luminaires 
will not be required to operate in conditions where 
chemical vapours are present, it should be remembered 
that all atmospheres contain a small proportion of 
corrosive gases such as sulphur dioxide and that in the 
presence of moisture these can cause severe corrosion 
over a long period of time. 


In the assessment of the resistance to corrosion of a 
luminaire, it should be borne in mind that the interior 
of a closed luminaire (even if it has one or more drain- 


holes) is much less subject to corrosion than the 
exterior. 


The following metals or combinations are known to 
provide adequate corrosion resistance: 


a) Copper and bronze, or brass containing not 
less than 80 percent copper; 

b) Stainless steel; 

c) Aluminium (sheet, extruded or cast) and die- 
cast zinc, known to be resistant to atmospheric 
corrosion; 

d) Cast iron or malleable iron at least 3.2 mm 
thick, coated with a minimum of 0.05 mm zinc 
on the outside surfaces and a visible coating 
of such material on the inside surface; 

e) Sheet steel, zinc-coated, average coating 
thickness 0.02 mm; 

f) Polymeric materials (see L-1). 


Metal components in contact with one another should 
be made from metals which lie close to each other in 
the galvanic series to avoid electrolytic corrosion. For 
example, brass or other copper alloys should not be 
used in contact with aluminium or aluminium alloys; 
contact between either of these groups of materials and 
stainless steel is much more acceptable. 


Plastic materials used outdoors should usually be 
chosen from those whose characteristics do not change 
significantly during long periods of service, for 
example acrylics. 


Cellulose materials are in general unsatisfactory for 
conditions of high humidity, either indoors or outdoors 
and others including polystyrene, while suitable for 
use indoors, are liable to severe deterioration if used 
outdoors owing to the combination of moisture and 
solar radiation. 


Where the construction of plastic luminaires intended 
for high humidity conditions (indoor or outdoors) 
includes cemented joints, it is essential that the cement 
used be able to withstand continuous exposure to 
moisture for long periods without deterioration. 


NOTE — The electrical safety of luminaires for outdoor use 
under humid conditions is checked by the tests of Section 9. 


L-5 CHEMICALLY CORROSIVE ATMOSPHERES 


Luminaires to be used in atmospheres where 
chemically corrosive vapour or gases may be present 
in considerable concentration and especially whereas 


91 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


condensation appears, require precautions given above 
for outdoor luminaires be observed and that the 
following additional precautions be taken: 


a) In general, luminaires whose bodies are made 
by casting a corrosion-resistant metal shall 
give better service than sheet metal luminaires. 
b) Where metals are used they should, as far as 
possible, be chosen for resistance to the 
particular corrosive substance present, as most 
metals are subject to attack by some corrosive 
substance. Die-cast aluminium shall be 
satisfactory for most applications. 

c) Similarly, the paints or other protective 
systems used should be chosen with regard 
to particular corrosive substances or groups 
of corrosive substances. For example, paints 
which are highly acid-resistant may not be 
able to withstand attack by some alkalis. 

d) Plastics such as acrylics, PVC and polystyrene 
are very resistant to attack by most inorganic 
acids and alkalis. They are, however, liable 
to attack by a number of organic liquids and 
vapours and as the effect depends on both the 
type of plastic and the particular chemical, 
materials should be chosen to suit the 
particular conditions. 

e) Vitreous enamel finishes are resistant to many 
chemicals, but it is essential that the enamel 
coating be free from broken areas or cracks if 
satisfactory service is to be obtained in highly 


corrosive atmospheres. 


L-6 REFLECTOR DESIGN 


The materials used in the reflection of light also reflect 
the infra-red spectrum in a very similar manner. Thus 
an optically efficient reflector will also reflect most 
IR radiation from the luminaire thus reducing 
overheating effects. 


It is very important that hot spot are not concentrated 
on parts of the luminaire and lamp where they can affect 
performance or reduce the durability of materials. In 
particular, it is recommended that reflected light (and 
IR) is not focused back onto the lamp wall, lamp 
filament or arc tube. This will affect the life of the lamp 
and in extreme cases may cause failure of the lamp 
envelope or arc tube. 


The maximum operating temperatures given in the 
lamp standards should not be exceeded (see 0.2). 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX M 
(Table 11.2) 


CONVERSION GUIDE TO TABLE 11.1 — DETERMINATION OF CREEPAGE 
DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES 


M-1 The presence of informative Annex M is for guidance only and should not be used as a compliance clause. 


Sl Creepage Distances and Clearances in Between Luminaires of Luminaires of Luminaires of 
No. mm Class I Class II Class MI 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Maximum working voltage (not exceeding), V 24 250 500 1 000 24 250 500 50 
ii) Live parts of different polarity Basic insulation Basic insulation Basic insulation 
Creepage or clearance Creepage or clearance Creepage or clearance 
PTI 2 or < 600 PTI > or < 600 PTI > or < 600 
iii) Live parts and accessible metal parts, also between live parts Basic insulation Reinforced insulation Basic insulation 
and the outer accessible surface of insulating parts Creepage or clearance Creepage or clearance Creepage or clearance 
PTI 2 or < 600 PTI 2 or < 600 PTI 2 or 600 
iv) Parts which may become live due to the breakdown of Supplementary 
functional” insulation in luminaires of class II and accessible insulation 
metal parts Creepage or clearance 
PTI 2 or < 600 
v) The outer surface of a flexible cord or cable and an accessible Supplementary 
metal part to which it is secured by means of a cord grip, insulation 
cable carrier or clip of insulating material Creepage or clearance 
PTI 2 or < 600 
vi) Not used 
vii) Live parts and other metal parts, between them and the Supplementary Reinforced insulation Basic insulation 
supporting surface (ceiling, wall, table, etc) or between live insulation 


parts and the supporting surface where there is no intervening 


metal 


DIn this context functional insulation is understood to be basic insulation. 


ANNEX N 
(Clause 4.16.3) 


EXPLANATION OF LUMINAIRE A MARKING 


N-1 When a luminaire is provided with the symbol 
\/, this denotes that it is suitable for direct mounting 
on normally flammable surfaces. Normally flammable 
surfaces re defined to include building materials such 
as wood and materials based on wood, or more than 2 
mm thickness. 


Originally the relevant luminaire requirements applied 
only to luminaires incorporating a ballast or 
transformer. Since the use of the symbol W7, has 
received wide acceptance over the last ten years, the 
use of the symbol is extended to cover all luminaires, 
including luminaires for incandescent lamps. 


The original \/ marking requirements were based on 
two distinct characteristics: 


a) Protection against flames, which were 
expected to be possible at the end of ballast 
life. 


92 


b) Protection against heat produced by the ballast 
both during abnormal condition (short- 
circuited starter) as well as due to accidental 
failure. 


N-1 PROTECTION AGAINST FLAME 


Practical experience over the last ten years has shown 
no evidence in regard to the supposed emission of 
flames from ballast windings at the end of ballast life. 


Other components, such as capacitors, are subjected 
to a destruction test to verify that these components 
will fail in a safe way. 


Other components, such as capacitors, are subjected 
to a destruction test to verify that these components 
will fail in a safe way. 


Further bearing in mind that extinguishing properties 
of flammable luminaire materials are tested in 


accordance with 4.15, it was concluded that there was 
no evidence which justified to keep the requirement 
for intervening material between windings and 
mounting surface. 


N-2 PROTECTION AGAINST HEAT 


To safeguard the mounting surface against excessive 
heat, three equivalent protection options are given by 
the standard, at the choice of the manufacturer: 


a) spacing; 
b) temperature measurement; and 
c) thermal protector. 


N-2.1 Spacing 


The ballast or transformer is spaced from the mounting 
surface by a minimum distance of either, 


a) 10 mm, including a minimum of 3 mm air 
space between the outer surface of the 
luminaire case and the mounting surface of 
the luminaire and a minimum of 3 mm air 
space between the ballast or transformer and 


the inner surface of the luminaire case. 


If there is no ballast or transformer case, the 
distance of 10 mm shall apply from the active 
part, for example winding of the ballast. 


The luminaire case should be substantially 
continuous in the protected area of the ballast/ 
transformer permitting a separation of less 
than 35 mm between the active part of the 
ballast/transformer and the mounting surface, 
otherwise the requirement of item b) applies. 
There are no requirements with regard to the 
substance of the luminaire case material, 
which can be insulating material complying 
with 4.15. 


If there is no luminaire case between ballast 
or transformer and the luminaire mounting 
surface, then the distance between the two 
should be at least 35 mm. 
b) 35 mm The spacing of 35 mm is primarily to 
take account of stirrup mounted luminaires 
where the ballast/transformer to mounting 
surface distance is often much greater than 


10 mm. 


N-2.2 Temperature Measurements of Mounting 
Surface under Abnormal or Failed Ballast 
Conditions 


Temperature measurements can be carried out to verify 
that the luminaire mounting surface will not reach too 
high temperatures whether under abnormal conditions 
or under failed ballast conditions. 


93 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


These requirements and tests are based on the 
assumption that during failure of the ballast or 
transformer, for example owing to short-circuited 
windings, the ballast winding temperature will not 
exceed 350°C for a duration of more than 15 min and 
that the related temperature of the mounting surface 
will then not exceed 180°C for a duration of more than 
15 min. 


Similarly, during abnormal ballast conditions the 
temperature of the mounting surface shall not exceed 
130°C. At ambient temperature and at 1.1 times the 
supply voltage, the temperature of the windings and 
mounting surface are measured and plotted on a graph; 
then a straight line is drawn through these points. The 
extrapolation of this straight line shall not reach a point 
representing a mounting surface temperature of 180°C 
at a winding temperature 350°C (see Fig. 9). 


For normally flammable surfaces, the limiting 
temperatures for the mounting surface related to the 
ignition temperature of wood as a function of time (see 
Fig. 27). 


N-3 THERMAL PROTECTORS 


Thermal protectors can be part of the ballast or external 
to the ballast. 


Requirements for thermally protected ballasts are 
covered by the relevant ballast standard. 


Thermally protected ballasts are marked with the 
symbol W7 or \/. The dots are replaced by the rated 


maximum case temperature, in °C, when the protector 
opens the circuit. 


Thermally protected ballasts with the symbol \7 or 


\/ with values up to and including 130°C provide 
complete protection of the luminaire mounting surface 
without any additional measures in the luminaire being 
necessary. This implies compliance on a time related 
basis with the maximum case temperature permitted 
under abnormal conditions i.e. 130°C, and, under failed 
ballast conditions, with a mounting surface temperature 
not exceeding 180°C. 


Thermally protected ballasts with a symbol \/ with 
values above 130°C have to be checked in combination 
with the luminaire as specified for luminaires with a 
thermal protector external to the ballast. 


Luminaires with a thermal protector external to the 
ballast, and luminaires with thermally protected ballasts 
with a marked value above 130°C, are checked by 
measuring the temperature of the luminaire mounting 
surface until the thermal protector opens the circuit. 
During the test the temperature of the luminaire 
mounting surface is recorded and shall not exceed, the 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


maximum temperature permitted under abnormal 
conditions, i.e. 130°C nor on time related basis up to 


the maximum temperature under failed ballast 
conditions (see Table N-1). 


Table N-1 Thermal Protection Operation 


SI No. Maximum Temperature of the Mounting Surface Maximum Time for Attainment of Maximum 
°C Temperature from 135°C 

min 
a) (2) (3) 
i) Over 180 0 
ii) Between 175 and 180 15 
iii) Between 170 and 175 20 
iv) Between 165 and 170 25 
v) Between 160 and 165 30 
vi) Between 155 and 160 40 
vii) Between 150 and 155 50 
viii) Between 145 and 150 60 
ix) Between 140 and 145 90 
x) Between 135 and 140 120 


ANNEX P 
(Clause 4.24) 


REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROTECTIVE SHIELD TO BE FITTED TO LUMINAIRES USING 
METAL HALIDE LAMPS FOR PROTECTIVE MEASURES AGAINST UV RADIATION 


P-1 INTRODUCTION 


Luminaires, intended for use with metal halide lamps 
for which protective measures regarding emitted UV 
radiation are required, shall be fitted with an adequate 
protective shield. The following procedure shall be 
used for the selection of the shield. 


P-2 PROCEDURE A 


a) 


b) 


Establish the maximum P,,, value for the lamp 
from information made available by the lamp 


manufacturer. 


NOTES 


1 P.* stands for specific effective power of an 
unshielded lamp and is defined as the effective power 
of the UV radiation P,,,* related to the luminous flux. 
For practical reasons its dimension is: mW/klm. 


2 P.,* is obtained by weighting the spectral power 
distribution of the lamp with the action spectrum. 


3 The range of the action spectrum will be extended 
from 200 nm to 315 nm to 200 nm to 400 nm; however, 
for the purpose of this estimation the weighting between 
200 nm and 315 nm should suffice for white-light 
sources for general lighting purposes. 


Estimate the requirements for the protective 
shield regarding the UV radiation in terms of 
its transmission characteristics T for the 
practical situation as follows, taking into 
account the expected application of the 
luminaire: 


94 


c) 


TR DEE 1000 
3.6. Pets E, 
where 
T Maximum transmission at 
operating temperature for any 
wavelength between 200 nm and 
315 nm; 
DEL Daily Exposure Limit (= 300 J/m?); 
t, Expected maximum exposure time 
per day in hours; and 
E, Expected maximum illuminance in 


lux. 
The equation can be simplified to be: 


8.3.10° 


Paets Ea 


T< 


NOTE — The formula is valid under the assumption 
that common reflector materials, for example anodized 
aluminium have the same reflectivity for UV radiation 
as for the visible radiation, which is the case within the 
necessary accuracy. 


Choose a protective shield that has a 
transmission throughout the region 
200 nm-315 nm in accordance with the 
calculated value T. 


Example 
Pope*® = 50 mW/klm 
f = 8h per day 
E, = 2001x 
T < 0.01. The transmission of the protective shield 


should be lower than 1 percent throughout the actinic 
region of the spectrum. 


The procedure described in P-2 (a), (b) and (c) will 
ensure the interchangeability of metal halide lamps and 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


to check the suitability of the shield and the influence 
of reflector materials having significant differences in 
reflectance for UV and visible radiation, for example 
when non-metallic Finishes are used. 


The result of the direct measurement for a luminaire 
E, * shall comply to the following requirement: 


also in the case of different metal halide additives, where 
provided that the maximum P, * value of a lamp is Ep“ = measured specific effective irradiance, 
observed. defined as the effective irradiance of the 
PaPROCEDURER UV radiation E,,-related to the illuminance. 
f ; * mW 

In the case of doubt, direct measurement of the UV The dimension of Ess | ae klx 
radiation from a luminaire shall be performed in order 

ANNEX Q 


CONFORMITY TESTING DURING MANUFACTURE 


Q-1 GENERAL 


The tests specified in this annex should be carried out 
by the manufacturer on each luminaire after production 
and are intended to reveal, as far as safety is concerned, 
unacceptable variations in material and manufacture. 
These tests are intended not to impair the properties 
and the reliability of the luminaire, and they vary from 
certain type tests in the standard by the lower voltages 
utilized. 


More tests may have to be conducted to ensure that 
every luminaire conforms with the sample approved 
under the type test to this specification. The 
manufacturer should determine these tests from his 
experience. 


Within the framework of the quality manual, the 
manufacturer may vary this test procedure and its 
values to one better suited to his production 
arrangements, and may make certain tests at an 
appropriate stage during manufacture, provided it can 


95 


be proved that at least the same degree of safety is 
ensured as specified in this Annex. 


Q-2 TESTING 


Electrical tests should be conducted on 100 percent of 
all units produced as scheduled in Table Q-1. Failed 
products are to be quarantined for scrap or rebuild. 


Visual inspection should take place to ensure that, 


a) all specified labels are securely in place; 

b) manufacturers’ instructions are placed within 
the luminaire, where necessary; 

c) luminaire is complete and that mechanical 


check against a checklist for the product has 
been carried out. 


All products passing these tests should be suitably 
identified. 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


Table Q-1 Minimum Values for Electrical Tests 


Test Class of Luminaire and Compliance 
porna Ee 
Class I Luminaires Class I Luminaires Class I Metal Encased Class H and Class III 


Metal Encased with Supply Above 25 Luminaires Insulation 
V Encased 
FUNCTION TEST/CIRCUIT Generally at normal operating voltage 
CONTINUITY (with lamp or simulation 
lamp) 
EARTH CONTINUITY Maximum resistance Not applicable 
Applied between earthing terminal on 0.50 Q 
luminaire and the most accessible parts Measured by passing 
likely to become live. Adjustable a minimum current of 
luminaires placed in most onerous 10 A at between 6V 
position and 12V for at least 1 
s. 
a) Electric Strength Maximum breakdown Maximum breakdown Maximum breakdown Not applicable 
current 5 mA. current 5 mA. current 5 mA. 


Measured by applying Measured by applying Measured by applying 
a minimum voltage of a minimum voltage of a minimum voltage of 
1.5 kV ac. for a 1.5 kV ac. for a 400 V ac. for a 
minimum of 1 s or minimum of | s or minimum of 1 s or 400 


1.5 d.c. kV 1.5 d.c. kV d.c. V 
OR OR OR OR 
b) Insulation Resistance Minimum resistance 2 Minimum resistance 2 Minimum resistance 2 
MQ MQ MQ 
Measured between the live and neutral Measured by applying Measured by applying Measured by applying 
terminals linked together and the earth 500 V d.c. for 1 s 500 V d.c. for 1 s 100 V d.c. for 1 s 
terminal or between the conductors of 
class II and class I luminaires and the 
metal enclosure 
POLARITY Where necessary for Not applicable 
Tested at incoming terminals correct functioning of 
luminaire 


ANNEX R 
(Clause 4.3) 


SCHEDULE OF AMENDED CLAUSES CONTAINING MORE SERIOUS/CRITICAL 
REQUIREMENTS WHICH REQUIRE PRODUCTS TO BE RETESTED 


NOTE — Clauses marked ‘R’ and scheduled in this annex is under consideration. 


96 


IS 10322 (Part 1) : 2014 


ANNEX S 
(Clause 0.4.2) 


REQUIREMENTS FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF A FAMILY OR RANGE OF 
LUMINAIRES FOR TYPE TESTING 


S-1 GENERAL 1) tungsten including tungsten halogen 


When selecting type test sample(s) from a range of tamps; 


luminaires of similar construction for type test 2) fluorescent lamps; and 


verification, the luminaire(s) chosen shall be those 3) discharge lamps. 
which represent the most unfavourable combination c) within the same class of protection against 
of components and housing. electrical shocks; and 


d ithin th IP classification. 
S-2 RANGE FOR FAMILY OF LUMINAIRES A T S 
x bag ad at i Compliance shall be established by conformity with S-2. 
A range or family of luminaires of similar construction 


shall be considered to be, NOTE — Each range of luminaires requires a case-by-case 
consideration. The range of luminaires should be manufactured 

a) in compliance with the same of the applicable by the same manufacturer, under the same quality assurance 
standard; system. The type variants of the range should be essentially 


i . identical in respect of materials used, components and 
b) equipped with lamps of the same nature as; technology applied. Type test sample(s) should be selected with 
the cooperation of the manufacturer and the testing station. 


97 


(Continued from second cover) 


Improvements in safety to take account of the state of the art technology are incorporated in the standards with 
revisions and amendments on an ongoing basis. Regional standardization bodies may include statements in their 
derived standards to cover products which have complied with the pervious document as shown by the manufacturer 
or standardization body. The statements may require that for such products the previous standard may continue 
to apply to production until a defined date after which the new standard shall apply. 


The list of various sections of Part 5 of this standard are as follows: 


Section 1 Fixed general purpose luminaries 
Section 2 Recessed luminaries 

Section3 Luminaires for road and street lighting 
Section4 Portable general purpose luminaries 
Section5 Floodlights 

Section6 Handlamps 

Section 7 Lighting chains 

Section 8 Emergency lighting 


With the publication of this standard, following parts of IS 10322 shall be treated as withdrawn: 


Part 2 Constructional requirements 
Part3 Screw and screwless terminals 
Part4 Method of tests 


This standard is based on IEC 60598-1(2003-10), Edition 6 ‘Luminaires, Part 1 ‘General requirements and tests’, 
issued by International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ET 24 (5797). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


