**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  11795  (1996) :  Guidelines  for  ash  softening  studies  on 
solid  reductants  for  direct  reduction  [MTD  30:  Sponge  Iron 
and  Smelting  Reduction] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y%K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


1811795:1996 

Indian  Standard 

GUIDELINES  FOR  ASH  SOFTENING  STUDIES  ON 
SOLID  REDUCTANTS  FOR  DIRECT  REDUCTION 

(First  Revision) 

ICS    77.020 


©  BIS  1996 

BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN.  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

August  1996  **""  Group  2 


Sponge  Iron  and  Smelting  Reduction  Sectional  Committee,  MTD  30 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (First  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Sponge  Iron  and  Smelting  Reduction  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Metallurgical 
Engineering  Division  Council. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1986.  While  reviewing  the  standard  in  the  light  of  the  experience 
gained  during  these  years,  the  Committee  had  decided  that  the  standard  may  be  revised.  In  this  revision, 
various  clauses  have  been  aligned  with  the  recent  practices  being  followed.  The  following  modifications 
have  been  made  in  the  revised  standard: 

a)  Definition  of  ash  characteristics,  temperatures  have  been  modified. 

b)  The  values  for  maximum  acceptable  difference  (repeatability)  have  been  reduced. 

Suitability  of  a  solid  reductant  in  making  sponge  iron/direct  reduced  iron  (DRI)  depends,  amongst  others,  on 
the  ash  soAening  characteristics  of  the  same.  As  a  result,  increasing  attention  is  being  paid  to  assess  this 
property  to  attain  higher  kiln  availability  and  longer  compaign  life. 

Ash  softening  characteristics  are  determined  under  both  oxidizing  and  reducing  conditions  and  in  this  standard, 
the  typical  acceptable  values  have  been  indicated. 

Ash  softening  characteristcs  of  solid  reductant  are  useful  in  selecting  the  optimum  kiln  operating  temperature. 
However,  it  must  be  remembered  that  within  the  kiln,  the  coal  ash  gets  intimately  mixed  with  many  other 
chemical  species,  forming  a  variety  of  possible  cutectic  mixtures  whose  melting  points  may  be  significantly 
lower  than  that  of  the  pure  ash.  The  ash  softening  data,  therefore,  should  be  used  for  initial  evaluation  only. 

In  reporting  the  results  of  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed 
or  calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  ofif,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off 
numerical  values  (revisecf)'. 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1  NOVEMBER  2007 

TO 

IS  11795  :  1996  GUIDELINES  FOR  ASH  SOFTENING 

STUDIES  ON  SOLID  REDUCTANTS  FOR  DIRECT 

REDUCTION 

(  First  Revision  ) 

(Page  1,  clause  1.1,  line  3)  —  Substitute  'reductants' ybr  'reductant'. 

(Page    1,    clause   2.1,    Heading)   —   Substitute    'Initial    Deformation 
Temperature' ybr  *Ash  Softening  Temperature*. 

(Page     1,     clause     2.2,     Heading)     —     Substitute     'Hemispherical 
Temperature' /or  'Ash  Fusion  Temperature'. 

(Page  2,  clause  5.1,  line  2)  —  Substitute  'of /or  'or'. 

(Page  2,  clause  5.1,  line  7)  —  Substitute  'a'/br  'an'. 

(Page  2,  clause  7.2,  line  4)  —  Insert  'Full  stop'  after  'bubbles'.  Delete 
'and'  and  substitute  'In '/or  in'. 

(Page  2,  clause  7.3,  line  1)  —  Substitute  'observations' /or  'observation'. 

(Page  2,  clause  8.1,  line  2)  —  Substitute  'results' /or  'result'. 

(Page  3,  clause  8.2,  line  4)  —  Substitute  'preparation' /or  'oreparation'. 

(Page  3,  clause  8.2,  //we  5)  —  Substitute  'amount'/?r  'amounts'. 


(MTD  30) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


IS  11795; :  1996 


Indian  Standard 

GUIDELINES  FOR  ASH  SOFTENING  STUDIES  ON 
SOLID  REDUCTANTS  FOR  DIRECT  REDUCTION 

(  First  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  the  guidelines  for 
determination  of  softening  characteristic  of  ash  using 
a  heating  microscope  for  all  solid  reductant  used  in 
direct  reduction  in  making  sponge  iron/direct  reduced 
iron(DRI). 

2  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following 
defmitions  shall  apply 

2. 1  Ash  Softening  Temperature 

It  IS  the  temperature  at  which  the  first  sign  of  rounding 
of  the  edges  of  the  ash  cube  or  cylinder  occur.  This 
ma}'  also  be  called  Initial  Deformation  Temperature  and 
termed  as  IDT  ( Fig.  1 A  and  Fig.  IB ). 


Fi(i.  1 A  Orkhnai  Shapioftku:  Samhi 


V\(\.  IH  SHAPt  OMHF  SaMH.I:  Al  Soi'lLNINC,  IV-MPIKAnikJ 

2.2  Ash  Fusion  Temperature 

It  is  the  temperature  at  which  the  ash  fuses  completely 
into  a  hemispherical  blob,  for  example  when  the  height 
of  the  sample  becomes  equal  to  half  the  base  diameter, 
as  observed  visually  This  may  also  be  called  Ash  Melting 
Temperature  and  termed  as  AFT  (Fig.  2) 


Fkj.  2  Shaph  oFTHii  Samplf-  Af  Ash  l-i  sion  / 

HiiMISPHtRK  Al/rEMPERATl)Rt-/;=  2  /^^ 

2.3  Ash  Flow  Point 

It  is  the  temperature  at  which  the  ash  sample  spreads 
out  in  a  flat  layer,  the  height  of  which  is  approximately 
equal  to  one-third  of  that  of  the  test  piece  at  the  ash 
fusion  temperature  and  termed  as  FFT  (Fig  3) 


l^Kj.  3  vShapt^ or  ihf:  Samm  i  at  ihi  Ash  1  i ow  Poivi 
h'=  \  H 

3  PRINCIPIJE 

A  test  piece  made  from  the  ash  is  heated  under  sfxx:ified 
conditions  and  is  continuously  observed  Ihc 
temperature  at  which  characteristic  changes  of  shape 
occur,  are  recorded  The  ash  characteristic  temperatures 
are  given  al  2 

4  Ti:ST CONDITIONS 

4.1  Shape  of  Test  Piece 

The  lest  piece  shall  have  sharp  edges  to  facihiaic 
observation  and  shall  not  bend  during  the  deterininaUon 
The  mass  of  the  test  piece  shall  be  such  that  it  ensures 
cqualiAilion  of  temperature  witliin  the  test  body  Hence, 
too  large  dimensions  shall  be  avoided 

The  following  sh.'^nes  and  dimensions  arc  acceptable 

a)  Cube  with  each  side  as  2  mm  or  3  mm  and 

b)  Cylinder  with  dia  2  mm  or  3  mm  and  height 
equal  to  its  diameter 


IS  1I79&:  1996 


The  coal  ash  can  be  moistened  with  a  few  drops  of 
clear  filtered  1 0  percent  solution  of  the  dextrin  containing 

0  i  percent  salicylic  acid  as  a  preservative  and  the  sample 
prepared  manually 

4.2  Test  Atmosphere 

4.2.1  Mild  Reducing  Atmosphere 

An  atmosphere  in  which  the  volume  ratio  of  reducing 
gases  to  oxidizing  gases  falls  within  limits  4  :  1  and 

1  : 4  respectively.  For  this  purpose^  carbon  dioxide  and 
water  vapour  are  considered  as  oxidizing  gases  and 
hydrogen  and  carbon  monoxide  are  considered  as 
reducing  gases. 

4.2. 2  Oxidizing  A  tmosphere 

An  atmosphere  in  which  the  volume  ratio  of  reducing 
gases  to  oxidizing  gases  is  less  than  1:4.  The  oxidizing 
atmosphere  is  obtained  with  air  or  carbon  dioxide  but 
the  rate  of  flow  is  not  critical. 

5  APPARATUS 

5.1  The  heating  microscope  permits  the  observation 
and  photographic  recording  or  various  phases  of  the 
characteristic  changes  of  physical  state  of  ash.  Samples 
of  substances  to  be  investigated  are  microscopically 
observed  during  heating  in  an  electric  furnace  and  their 
images  can  be  projected  on  a  24  mm  x  36  mm  ground 
glass  screen.  In  an  detachable  camera,  the  entire  process 
of  heating  the  sample  up  to  the  fusion  point  or  melting 
point  may  be  recorded  by  taking  a  series  of 
photographs 

5.2  Furnace 

The  furnace  is  electrically  heated  and  is  capable  of: 

a)  reaching  the  maximum  temperature  at  which 
the  properties  of  the  ash  are  to  be  determined 
(a  temperature  of  1  (A)ffC  or  higher,  if  required); 

b)  providing  an  adequate  zone  of  uniform 
temperature  to  heat  the  test  piece; 

c)  providing  means  of  heating  the  test  piece  at 
a  uniform  rate,  the  maximum  being  10  Omin; 

d)  maintaining  around  the  test  piece,  an 
atmosphere  of  composition  vidthin  the  desired 
limits,  and 

e)  providmg  means  of  observing  the  change  of 
shape  of  test  piece  during  heating. 

5.3  Pyrometer 

The  temperature  shall  be  measured  by  means  of  platinum 
rhodium  thermocouple.  The  calibration  of  the  pyrometer 
shall  be  carried  out  from  time  to  time. 


5.4  Mould  for  Preparing  the  Test  Piece 

Sample  shall  be  mounted  by  hand  pressing  for  the 
preparation  of  cubical  sample  up  to  3  mm  in  height  and 
cylindrical  samples  up  to  3  mm  in  diameter. 

5.5  Support  for  the  Test  Piece 

The  support  shall  be  made  of  such  a  material  that  it 
shall  neither  get  distorted,  nor  shall  it  react  with  the 
constituents.  It  shall  also  not  absorb  ash  during  the 
determination.  Generally,  the  sample  support  may  be 
made  of  steatite,  sipolax  or  aluminium  oxide  (Alj  O,). 

5.6  Optical  Instrument 

An  instument  which  enables  the  profile  of  test  piece 
to  be  observed  throughtout  the  determination.  The 
relative  dimensions  may  be  conveniently  assessed  by 
the  use  of  a  graticule. 

6  PREPARATION  OF  TESTPIECE 

The  ash  sample  is  prepared  by  igniting  coal  samples 
in  a  well  ventilated  muffle  furnace  maintained  at  80(>"C. 
It  should  be  ensured  that  the  incineration  of  the  sample 
xi  complete.  The  ash  sample  is  ground  in  an  agate  mortar 
until  the  maximum  particle  size  is  100  percent  less  than 
0.076  mm 

7  PROCEDURE 

7.1  The  lest  piece  is  transferred  on  its  support  to  the 
fiimace  and  the  furnace  is  preheated  to  a  temperature 
of  815°C.  The  temperature  of  the  furancc  is  raised  at 
the  rate  of  about  lOX/min.  At8i5''C,  the  composition 
and  flow  rate  of  the  atmosphere  is  adjusted  according 
to  the  test  conditions.  The  temperatures  are  recorded 
at  which  the  characteristic  changes  of  shape  occur.  The 
slower  rate  of  heating  is  preferable  for  larger  test  pieces 
However,  for  smaller  test  pieces,  a  rate  of  temperature 
rise  up  to  lO^C/mm  may  be  satisfactory 

7.2  With  some  ashes,  diflTicultics  may  be  encountered 
owing  to  such  effects  as  b'  stcring,  distortion,  shrinkage, 
swelling,  non-welting  of  the  support  and  bursting  of 
internal  gas  bubbles  and  in  such  cases  it  is  desirable 
to  record  these  phenomena  and  possibly  repeat  the 
experiment  using  a  different  type  of  support 

7.3  The  observation  arc  recorded  at  intervals  of  20°C 
approximately  and  after  the  temperature  of  1  OOOT  is 
reached,  the  following  three  defined  temperatures  arc 
noted  specifically: 

a)  Ash  softening  temperature, 

b)  Ash  fusion  temperature,  and 

c)  Ash  flow  point. 

8  PRECISION  OF  TEST  METHOD 

8.1  The  maximum  acceptable  differences  among  the 
result  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  1 


Table  1  Maiimum  Acceptable  Difrercnces  Between 
the  Results 

(  Clause  8  1 ) 


IS  11795:  1996 
iv)    Size  and  shape  of  the  test  piece, 

v)     Composition  of  the  atmosphere,  and 


SI                 Softening               Maximuin  Acceptable 

\i)    Nature  of  the  support 

No.          Characteristics                    Differences 

(Repeatability) 

It  is  also  desirable  to  report  any  phenomena  which  could 

i)       Ash  softening  temperature             25  C 

have  influenced  the  results 

ii)       Ash  fusion  temperature                   25  C 

iti)       Ash  flow  point                                 40 *C 

9.2  Typical  acceptable  values  for  solid  rcductanls  used 

in  direct  reduction 
Softening 

are  as  follows 
Oxidizing 

8.2  Repeatability 

Mild 

The  results  of  duplicate  determinations  carried  out  at 

Characteristics 

Conditions 

Reducing 

different  times  in  the  same  laboratory  by  the  same 

(Indicative) 

Conditions 

operator  with  the  same  apparatus  on  the  same 

{Indicative) 

©reparation  of  ash,  shall  not  differ  by  more  than  the 

alx)ve  amounts. 

Ash  softening 

, 

temperature 

120()°C,  M/i 

I  150X,  A/// 

9  TEST  RESULTS 

9.1  The  test  report  shall  state: 

Ash  fusion 

^ 

temperature 

13()()^C,  AY/« 

1225X,  A/m 

i)      Ash  softening 

Each  rounded 

temperature 

.  off  to  the 

Ash  flow  point 

UOO^C,  A//AI 

1275X,  A//>7 

ii)     Ash  Fusion  temperture 

nearest  10  ""C 

lii)     Ash  flow  point 

Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  A  ci,  1 986  to  promote  harmonious 
development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and  attending  to 
connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form  without 
the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing  the 
standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designaf  ons.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  arc 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  refc:  ring  to  the  latest  issue 
of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  ^Standards    Mortbly  AddiliousV 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  MTD  30  (  4057  ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 

Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU     OF     INDIAN     STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002  Telegrams;  Manaksanstha 

Telephones  :  323  0131,  323  94  02,  323  83  75  (  Common  to 

all  offices ) 

Regional  Offices:  Telephone 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  f  323  76  17 

NEW  DELHI  110002  1323  3841 

Eastern  :  1/14  C,  I  T.  Scheme  VIl  M,  V.  I.  P  Road,  Maniktola  f   337  84  99,  337  85  61 

CALCUTTA  700054  I   337  86  26,  337  86  62 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  [  60  38  43 

1  60  20  25 

Southern  :  C.  I.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  6001 13  f  235  02  16,  235  04  42 

\  235  15  19,235  23  15 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC.  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  f  832  92  95,  832  78  58 

MUMBAI  400093  I  832  78  91,  832  78  92 

Branches :  AHMAD ABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.       FARIDABAD.      GHAZIABAD.       GUWAHATI.         HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  PATNA.     THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Pnnled  tx  New  Indi«  Printing  Preis.  Khurja.  Indu 


