Waa HTA IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


wile wa gama at Rafi 
varat 
aM 3 aaa sae (aa, we, anf sik 
ani aia) 
( ZAT FRAT ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
Iron and Steel 
Part 3 Long Products (Including Bars, Rods, 


Sections and Wires) 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.77; 77.140.01 


© BIS 2019 


ada AM SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF WH, 9 Re BHC APT, Ae fercit-110002 
wi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 6 


Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, MTD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 3) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1975. While reviewing this standard, in the 
light of experience gained during these years, the Committee decided to revise it to bring in line with the present 
practices being followed by the Indian industry and corresponding International standards on terminology. 


In this revision the following changes have been made: 
a) All the 3 amendments have been incorporated. 


b) The requirements of IS 1956 (Part 5) : 1976 ‘Glossary of terms relating to iron and steel : Part 5 Bright 
steel bar and steel wire (first revision)’ have been incorporated in the standard. 


c) Clauses 2.2 and 2.3 covers product related definitions, clause 2.4 covers process related definitions and 
clause 2.5 covers defects related definitions. 


The revised standard shall supersede IS 1956 (Part 5) : 1976. 


This standard is published in eight parts. The other parts in the series are: 


Part 1 General metallurgy, heat treatment and testing 
Part 2 Steel making 

Part 4 Flat products 

Part 6 Forging (including drop forging) 

Part 7 Wrought iron 

Part 8 Steel tubes and pipes 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following publications: 
ISO 6929 : 1987 Steel products — Definitions and classifications 
BS EN 10079 : 2007 Definitions of steel products 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO IRON 
AND STEEL 


PART 3 LONG PRODUCTS (INCLUDING BARS, RODS, SECTIONS AND WIRES) 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) defines terms for steel products 
according to, 


a) stage of manufacture; 
b) their shape and dimensions; and 
c) their appearance and surface condition. 


NOTES 


1 Although the products are generally defined independently 
of their end uses or manufacturing processes, it has sometimes 
been necessary to make reference to these criteria. 


2 All dimensions given in this standard are nominal. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following terms 
and definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Liquid Steel — Steel in the liquid state ready for 
pouring and obtained from the melting of raw materials. 


2.2 Ingot and Semi-Finished Products 


2.2.1 Ingot — Products obtained by pouring liquid steel 
into moulds of a shape appropriate to the subsequent 
processing into semi-finished products, or flat or long 
products, generally by hot rolling or forging. 


NOTES 


1 The shape generally resembles a truncated pyramid or 
truncated cone; the side surfaces may be corrugated and the 
corners more or less rounded. Depending on subsequent 
conversion requirements, ingots may be dressed and/or hot 
scarfed or cropped without altering their status as ‘ingots’. 


2 According to the cross-section, a distinction is made between 
the following: 


a) Ingots, having a cross-section that may be square, 
rectangular (of width up to twice the thickness), polygonal, 
round, oval or shaped according to the profile to be rolled; 
and 


b) Slab ingots, of rectangular cross-section of width twice 
the thickness or over. 


2.2.2 Semi-finished Products — Continuously cast 
products and products generally obtained by forging 
or rolling ingots and intended for transformation into 
finished products. The cross-section is generally square, 
rectangular with angles more or less rounded; the 
section has uniform dimension all along the length of 
the piece. The tolerances are generally wider than those 


for finished products. The surfaces can be partially or 
totally conditioned by scarfing, chipping, grinding, 
planning or milling and turning. 


2.2.2.1 Semi-finished products of square cross- 
section — Semi-finished products with sides of 50 mm 
or over, generally described as blooms, if the sides are 
greater than 200 mm or as billets, if smaller. 


NOTE — These dimensions may be less for certain types of 
steel, for example high-speed steels. 


2.2.2.2 Semi-finished products of rectangular cross- 
section — Semi-finished product of cross-sectional area 
of 2 500 mm? or over of width up to twice the thickness, 
generally described as blooms, if the cross-sectional 
area is greater than 40 000 mm? or as billets, if smaller. 


2.2.2.2.1 Slab —A semi-finished product of rectangular 
cross-section with a thickness of at least 50 mm and a 
width of at least twice the thickness, described as a 
slab. 


2.2.2.2.2 Sheet bar (Slab bars) — Semi-finished 
products of rectangular section, of a thickness not less 
than 6 mm, width not less than 150 mm and of such 
dimensions that the thickness does not exceed one 
quarter of the width. This product also includes the 
product tinplate bars. 


2.2.2.2.3 Tin Bar — A type of bar suitable for rolling 
tin plate. 


2.2.2.2.4 Sheet Slab — A slab of suitable size for rolling 
into sheet. 


2.2.2.3 Round semi-finished products — Continuously 
cast or forged semi-finished products of circular cross- 
section. 


2.2.2.4 Blank for sections — Semi-finished products 
intended for the manufacture of specific sections that 
have been preformed for that purpose. 


NOTE —The cross-sectional area is generally over 2 500 mm’. 
2.2.2.5 Blank for tubes and pipes — Semi-finished 
product, usually shaped as round bars, intended for the 


manufacture of tubes and pipes that have been 
preformed for that purpose. 


2.2.2.6 VAR ingot — Semi-finished product, usually 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


shaped as round ingots or blooms, obtained by melting 
press-formed metallic raw material or by remelting 
ingots or blooms using a vacuum arc remelting (VAR) 
furnace 


NOTE —Vacuum arc remelting results in products with 
improved chemical homogeneity and inclusion cleanliness. 


2.2.2.7 ESR ingot — Semi-finished product, usually 
shaped as round ingots or blooms, obtained by melting 
press-formed metallic raw material or by remelting 
ingots or blooms using an electro slag remelting (ESR) 
furnace. 


NOTE — Use of electro slag remelting results in products with 
improved chemical homogeneity and inclusion cleanliness. 


2.3 Long Products 


2.3.1 General — Long products have a constant cross- 
section that is usually defined by a standard that 
establishes the normal size ranges and the tolerances 
on shape and dimensions. The surface is generally 
smooth, but in certain cases, for example reinforcing 
bars, may have a regularly raised or indented pattern. 


2.3.2 Rod — Hot rolled long product having a nominal 
size generally 5 mm or above and wound into irregular 
coils. 


NOTE — The cross-section may be round, oval, square, 
rectangular, hexagonal, octagonal, half-round or of any similar 
shape. Its surface is smooth. Rod is generally intended to 
undergo further processing. It may also be used, with or without 
further processing, for example cold deforming, for the 
fabrication of welded mesh or for other elements used to 
reinforce concrete. 


2.3.2.1 Wire rod — Rod in the coiled form generally 
intended for conversion into wire. 


2.3.3 Wire — Product of constant full cross-section 
along its length, obtained by cold drawing rod through 
a reducing die or passing under pressure between rollers 
and rewinding the drawn product. 


NOTES 

1 A product in coil form obtained from wire rod, generally in 
round, half round, square, hexagonal, flat or of any other section 
including grooved section, characterized by the fact that it has 
been subjected to cold drawing through a die or by other 
mechanical means. It is usually more severely cold drawn than 
bright bars. 

2 The manufacturing processes give close control of geometric 
(size, surface condition) and mechanical properties. Wire may 
be supplied uncoated (as drawn, annealed) or coated (for 
example with zinc, copper, nickel or plastic materials). 

3 Heat treatments and/or surface treatments may be carried out 
during the course of manufacture to improve the properties of wire. 


2.3.3.1 Annealed, cleaned and limed wire — Annealed 
wire, pickled to remove scale, washed in water, dipped 
in hot lime water and dried. 


2.3.3.2 Bench drawn (Rack drawn) — Bars bright 
drawn in straight lengths on a draw bench. 


2.3.3.3 Best patented steel wire — Rope wire drawn to 
tensile strength of 1 255 to 1 460 N/mm? (128 to 147 
kgf/mm”). 


2.3.3.4 Best plough steel wire — Patented rope 
wiredrawn to tensile strength of 1 520 to 1 655 N/mm? 
(155 to 170 kgf/ mm’). 


2.3.3.5 Binders (Bands, tie wires) — Soft wires used 
for tying bundles or coils of wire. 


2.3.3.6 Black annealed wire — Wires annealed without 
protective atmosphere. 


2.3.3.7 Block drawn — Wire drawn in coil on a block. 


2.3.3.8 Blue annealed wire (Turned bar) — Wire with 
a scale-free surface, but oxidized to a blue temper 
colour during annealing. 


2.3.3.9 Bright annealed wire (White annealed wire) — 
Wire which has been annealed in a controlled 
atmosphere to prevent surface oxidation. 


2.3.3.10 Bundle — Two or more coils or a number of 
lengths securely bound together. 


2.3.3.11 Cast (of Wire) — The behaviour of waps of 
wire in a coil. 


2.3.3.12 Bad cast — A coil in which the waps when 
released do not conform to the desired shape. 


2.3.3.12.1 Dead cast — A coil in which the wire lies in 
circles of uniform diameter. 


2.3.3.12.2 Helical cast — A coil in which the wire tend 
to spring out from the coil in spirals. 


2.3.3.12.3 Straight cast — A coil in which the wire 
when unwound will run out approximately straight. 


2.3.3.13 Catchweight coil — A coil of non-standard 
weight. 


2.3.3.14 Chilled spring wire — Wire drawn from 
quenched and age hardened mild steel. 


2.3.3.15 Coppered wire — A wire produced by wet 
drawing with a copper sulphate or copper tin sulphate 
solution for improving drawability. The colour depends 
upon the chemicals used and the drawing operation 
imparts a lustre to the wire, resulting in improved 
appearance and a limited amount of corrosion 
resistance. 


2.3.3.16 Drawn coppered wire — Wire coppered at 
the base size and drawn to the final size. 


2.3.3.17 Drawn galvanized wire — Wire galvanized 
at the base size and drawn to the final size. 


2.3.3.18 Drawn tinned wire — Wire tinned at the base 
size and drawn to the final size 


2.3.3.19 Hard-drawn wire — Wire drawn with a 


relatively large reduction from the rod heat treatment. 


2.3.3.20 Inter annealed wire — Wire drawn to an 
intermediate stage, annealed and drawn to the size 
required. 


2.3.3.21 Length — A straight piece of wire or bar cut 
to a specified or random length. 


2.3.3.22 Mild-drawn wire (Soft-drawn wire) — Wire 
drawn from the rod or annealed base with a reduction 
in area of less than 10 percent. 


2.3.3.23 Multiple lengths — Length from which a given 
number of pieces of specified lengths can be cut with 
minimum waste. 


2.3.3.24 Oil-hardened and tempered wire — Wires that 
are heat treated in the following way: they are first 
transformed into austenite, quenched in oil or other 
suitable medium and then tempered at an appropriate 
temperature. 


2.3.3.25 Patented cold-drawn steel wire — Wire drawn 
to intermediate size by cold deformation of a starting 
material that has been subjected to a thermal treatment 
of patenting. 


2.3.3.26 Piano wire (Music wire) — A very high quality 
high carbon (usually 0.80 to 0.95 percent), patented 
drawn and polished wire having a tensile strength in 
excess of 1 865 N/ mm? (190 kgf/mm’) and generally 
in sizes of 1.6 mm and finer. The term music wire also 
includes wire intended for mandolins. 


2.3.3.27 Plough steel wire 


2.3.3.27.1 Best plough steel wire — Patented rope wire 
drawn to a tensile strength of 1 570 to 1 655 N/mm? 
(155 to 170 kgf/mm’). 


2.3.3.27.2 Special improved plough steel wire — 
Patented rope wire drawn to a tensile strength of 1 665 
to 1 815 N/mm? (170 to 185 kgf/ mm’). 


2.3.3.27.3 Extra special improved plough steel wire — 
Patented rope wire drawn to a tensile strength of 1 765 
to 1 910N/mm? (180 to 195 kgf/mm’). 


2.3.3.28 Soap-drawn wire — A wire drawn to the 
finished size using soap as lubricant. 


2.3.3.29 Tinned wire — Finished wire tinned by 
electrotinning or hot dip tinning process. 


2.3.3.30 Wet-drawn wire (Lacquer-drawn wire) — A 
wire passing through a liquid lubricant. This imparts a 
bright surface to the wire. 


2.3.3.31 Wiped galvanized wire — Wire that has been 
hot dip galvanized and drawn through liquid suitable 
wipers while the zinc is in the molten state. The term is 
also applied to electrogalvanized wire of uniform 
coating. 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


2.3.4 Hot-finished bars — Product supplied in straight 
lengths but not in coils, thus differentiating them from 
rod. 


2.3.4.1 Hot rolled bars — Hot rolled products in 
straight lengths of constant transverse section having a 
solid (convex) cross-section as defined in 2.3.4.1.1 
to 2.3.4.1.4. 


2.3.4.1.1 Rounds — Bars having a circular cross- 
section of diameter generally 8 mm or above. 


2.3.4.1.2 Square, hexagon and octagon bar — Bars 
having a square, hexagonal or octagonal cross-section; 
the side is generally 8 mm or over for squares, or 13 mm 
or over for hexagons. 


NOTE — Squares of sides up to 50 mm with rounded corners 
are considered to be square bars. 


2.3.4.1.3 Flat bar — Bars of rectangular cross-section 
rolled on the four faces of thickness generally 5 mm or 
above and with a width not over 150 mm. 


2.3.4.1.4 Bars of special shape — Products hot rolled 
in lengths of particular full cross-sectional shapes 
including in particular trapezoids, bevels, triangles, bars 
for grooved springs, semi-rounds and half flat semi- 
rounds such as BULB BAR / Z bar. 


2.3.4.2 Forged bars — Products obtained by forging 
and that do not undergo subsequent hot conversion. 


NOTE — These products are mainly in the form of rounds or 
squares. 


2.3.4.3 Hollow mining drill bar — Bar with an internal 
hollow of any cross-sectional shape, suitable for the 
manufacture of drill bits, with an external cross- 
sectional dimension over 15 mm up to and including 
52 mm that is at least twice the maximum dimension 
of the cross-section of the internal hollow. 


2.3.5 Bright Bar — Round bar of various cross- 
sectional shapes obtained by drawing or turning 


2.3.5.1 Drawn product — Products of various cross- 
sectional shapes obtained by drawing of hot rolled bars 
or rod, on a draw bench (cold deformation without 
removing material), after descaling. 


NOTE — This operation gives the product special features with 
respect to shape, dimensional accuracy and surface finish. In 
addition, the process causes cold working of the product that 
can be eliminated by subsequent heat treatment. Products in 
lengths are delivered straightened regardless of size. 


2.3.5.2 Turned product — Round bars produced by 
turning on a lathe where the product can be further 
processed by straightening and polishing. 


NOTES 


1 This operation gives the bar special features with respect to 
shape, dimensional accuracy and surface finish. The removal 
of metal is carried out in such a way that the bright product is 
generally free from rolling defects and surface decarburization. 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


2 For technical reasons, some bars ordered as hot rolled products 
may be delivered roughly turned (peeled); nevertheless, such 
products are treated as hot rolled products and not bright 
products. 


2.3.5.3 Ground product — Drawn or turned round bars 
given an improved surface quality and dimensional 
accuracy by grinding or grinding and polishing. 


2.3.6 Deformed product for reinforcement and 
prestressing of concrete — Products with a cross- 
section that is round or almost round, with 
crenelated or ribbed surfaces, for reinforcement and 
prestressing of concrete and supplied in the forms 
defined in 2.3.2, 2.3.3 and 2.3.4. 


NOTE — These bars may, after hot rolling, have undergone a 
controlled cold deformation, for example lengthening or twisting 
about their longitudinal axis. 


2.3.7 Hot rolled section — Product of various cross- 
sectional shapes obtained by hot rolling. 


2.3.7.1 Railway material — Product used in the 
construction of railway tracks and other systems of rails. 


2.3.7.1.1 Railway track product — Hot rolled railway 
products as follows: 


a) Heavy railway products 


1) Rails of linear mass 20 kg/m or over 
(except those in 2.3.7.1.2); and 


2) Sleepers of linear mass 15 kg/m or over. 


NOTE — The purpose of steel rails is to form a 
continuous runway or track, which has sufficient 
strength for carrying, required moving wheel loads. 
Rails are now designed with a head for wheel 
treads and for guiding the wheels flange a web for 
girder strength and fastening the rail to its support. 
A proper proportioning of the head, web and base 
in section design is an important consideration in 
the manufacture of the rails as well as in their 
efficient utility. 


b) Light railway product — Railway product 

including, 

1) rails of linear mass up to 20 kg/m except 
those in 2.3.7.1.2; 

2) sleepers of linear mass up to 15 kg/m; 

3) conductor rails with specified electrical 
resistivity properties; 

4) rails for switches and crossings; 

5) guide rails; 

6) brake rails; 

7) fish plates; and 


8) base plates (also known as sole, tie or 
bearing plates). 


c) Products for other rail systems — Hot rolled 
products for other rail systems as follows: 
1) Crane rails; and 
2) Grooved rails. 


2.3.7.2 Piling — Product used for piling. 


NOTE —According to the product shape and application, 
products are classified in 2.3.7.2.1 to 2.3.7.2.3. 


2.3.7.2.1 Sheet piling — Product obtained by hot rolling 
or cold forming (drawing, bending, roll forming, etc) 
to a shape such that, by interlocking of the joints or by 
fitting of longitudinal grooves or by means of special 
fasteners, it forms partitions or continuous walls. 


NOTE — Sheet piling is distinguished according to its form in 
cross-section and its application; See Fig. 1A, Fig. 1B, Fig 1C 
for examples. 


a) C, U and Z sheet piling; 
b) Straight web or flat sheet piling; 
c) Fabricated sheet piling; 


d) Boxed piles: fabricated from U or Z sheet piles and steel 
plates; 


e) Combined walls: 
1) Interlocking H-sheet piling; 
2) H-piles with intermediary Z-sheet piling; 
3) Interlocking tubular piles; 
4) Tubular piles with intermediate sheet piling; and 
5) Combined walls using boxed piles. 
f) | Cold formed sheet piling: 
1) Sheet piling Q (Omega) and Z; and 
2) Trench sheeting. 
g) Corner sections. 
2.3.7.2.2 Fabricated bearing piling — Fabricated 
piling, made up from steel elements and used for 
bearing purposes. 


NOTE — Boxed piles may be used as fabricated bearing piling. 


2.3.7.2.3 Tubular fabricated bearing piling — Tube 
or circular, square or rectangular cross-section, driven 
into the ground to transmit the weight of structures to 
the soil by resistance developed at its base and by 
friction along its surface. 


NOTE — The terms sheet piling and bearing piling include 
piling that has undergone certain finishing operations such as 
piercing or welding of attachments. 


2.3.7.3 Mining frame sections — Products with cross- 
sections resembling the letter I or the Greek capital 
letter Omega (Q). 


NOTE — Mining frame I sections are distinguished from other 
I sections by a greater slope of the inside face of the flanges. 
Generally, they also have a flange width over 0.70 of the nominal 
web height (see Fig. 2). 


2.3.7.4 Heavy section — Hot rolled product with cross- 
section resembling the letter I, H or U (see Fig. 3). 


NOTES 
1 They have the following characteristics: 
a) Web height of 80 mm or over; 


b) Surfaces of the webs are continued by fillets to the inside 
faces of the flange; 


c) Flanges are generally symmetrical and of equal widths 
(see also 2.3.7.4.5); 


d) Outside faces of the flanges are parallel; and 


e) 


ÜU sheet | RLN - 
| piling | 
| | 

| 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


(a) Z sheet 
piling 


LSI. 


(6) Flat | Dl Ç A 
sheet piling | 


| (c) 


| (d.1) Boxed 
| pile 


Fabricated | 
sheet piling 
| f \ H 
| 
| 
i 


lid 2) Boxed | 
| pile 
j 


i 
i 
i 
i 


(a3) Boxed 
| pile | 


j 
f 
| 


E R 
| Interlocking 
H-Piling 


| (e n) H piles l 
with i 


i intermediary | 
| Z sheet 
| piling 

| 


fi 


Fic. 1B ILLUSTRATIONS OF TYPICAL SHEET PILING 


Flanges are either of decreasing thickness from the web 
to the edge (‘tapered flanged’), or of uniform thickness 
(‘parallel flanged’). 


2 A distinction is made between: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Parent sections — Sections with web and flange 
thickness considered as standard. 


Thin sections — Sections manufactured with the same 
series of rolls as used in producing the corresponding 
parent section but which, for an approximately equal 
web height, have thinner web and/or flanges (as a result 
of adjustment of the vertical or horizontal rolls). 


Thick sections — Sections manufactured with the same 


series of rolls as used in producing the corresponding 
parent section but which, for an approximately equal 
web height, have a thicker web and/or flanges (as a result 
of adjustment of the vertical or horizontal rolls). 


2.3.7.4.1 I sections (narrow and medium flanges) — 
Sections having a cross-sectional shape resembling the 
letter I where the flange are not wider than 0.66 of the 
nominal height of the section and less than 300 mm. 


2.3.7.4.2 H sections (wide flanged beams) — Sections 
having a cross-sectional shape resembling the letter H 
where the flange are wider than 0.66 of the nominal 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


(e.iv) 
Tubular pile 
with 
intermediate 
sheet piling 


| 


(e.v1) 
Boxed pile | 
combined | 


(e.v2) 

Boxed pile 

combined 
"wall 


| (fi) Cold 


(fii) Trench 
sheeting 


| 
formed 
sheet piling 
QandZ 
j AA i 


| (9) Corner 
sections 


Fic. 1C ILLUSTRATIONS OF TYPICAL SHEET PILING 


height of 300 mm or over. Sections with flanges wider 
than 0.8 of the nominal height are sometimes called 
‘columns’. 


2.3.7.4.3 U sections (channels) — Sections having a 
cross-sectional shape resembling the letter U. 


NOTE — In the standardized series the flanges have a maximum 
width of (h/2 + 25) mm where h is the overall height including 
the flanges. 


2.3.7.4.4 Bearing piles — Sections having a cross- 
sectional shape resembling the letters H or I where the 
thicknesses of the web and flanges are identical. 


NOTE — Bearing piles may also be equipped with laggings 
(enlargements along the length of the pile or at its bottom). 


2.3.7.4.5 Special heavy sections — Sections having I, 
H, U or similar cross-sectional shapes with a web height 
of 80 mm or above but with features such as unequal 
or asymmetric flanges or non-standard web thickness. 


NOTE — These products are generally manufactured in limited 
quantities. 


2.3.7.5 Other sections 


2.3.7.5.1 Small U, I and H sections — Sections having 
a cross-section resembling the letters U, I or H and 
where the web height is less than 80 mm (see Fig. 3). 


2.3.7.5.2 Angles — Sections having a cross-section 
resembling the letter L. 


NOTE — Angles can be defined as equal or unequal angles 


depending on the ratio of the flange widths. The corners of the 
flanges are rounded. 


2.3.7.5.3 T sections with equal flanges — Sections 
having a cross-section resembling the letter T, where 
the corners are rounded, and the flanges and web are 
slightly tapered, and where the flanges are of equal 
width. 


NOTE — T Sections can also be fabricated from H Sections 
that are split along the web. These have parallel web and flange 
profiles. 


2.3.7.5.4 Bulb flats — Generally rectangular cross- 
sectional shapes with a bulge along the full length of a 
longitudinal edge of one of the wider surfaces and a 
width generally up to 430 mm. 


2.3.7.5.5 Special sections — Products hot rolled in 
lengths usually of small open cross-section or of very 
special shape that are generally rolled in limited 
quantities, and are not covered by 2.3.7.4 or 2.3.7.5.1 
to 2.3.7.5.4. 


NOTES 


1 This class includes in particular Z sections, T sections with 
unequal flanges, square-edged L, U and T sections, track shoe 
sections, etc. 


2 These sections may also be obtained by hot extrusion. 


2.3.8 Welded Sections — Long products of open cross- 
sections that have cross-sectional shapes similar to the 
products defined in 2.3.7.4 and 2.3.7.5, but instead of 
being obtained directly by hot rolling, are made up by 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


Fic. 2 ILLUSTRATIONS OF TYPICAL MINING FRAME SECTIONS 


r = = 
H section 
1 Section 
[ | =p 
U Section 
7 ~ ~ Parallel flanged Tapered flanged 


Fic. 3 ILLUSTRATIONS OF TYPICAL HEAVY SECTIONS 


welding together combinations of hot rolled long 
products, hot rolled flat products or cold rolled flat 
products. 


2.3.9 Cold Formed Sections — Cold formed long 
products having various cross-sectional shapes similar 
to the either open or with edges abutting, constant along 
their length. 


NOTE — Cold formed sections are made from coated or 
uncoated hot or cold rolled flat products whose thicknesses are 
only slightly modified by the cold forming processes (for 
example profiling, drawing, press forming, flanging, etc). They 
comprise of: 


a) General purpose cold formed sections, for example L, 
U, C, Z, Q (Omega) sections; 

b) Products for general applications including cold formed 
sheet piling (see 2.3.7.2), crash barriers, building frames, 
door frames, lorry and wagon chassis. 


2.4 Terms and Definitions — Process Related 


2.4.1 Baking — Heat treatment permitting the release 
of hydrogen absorbed in a ferrous product without 
modifying its structure. 


NOTE — This treatment is generally carried out following an 
electrolytic plating or pickling, or a welding operation. 


2.4.2 Base Size (Common Drawn Size) — The 
intermediate size in which wire is annealed or patented 
before final drawing; in the case of drawn galvanized 
or drawn tinned or drawn tinned wire, the size in which 
it is galvanized or tinned. 


NOTE — Also used for the finished product to denote the ranges 
of sizes sold at minimum price. 


2.4.3 Cast (Heat or Melt) — Usually the product of a 
single furnace charge. Sometimes the furnace contents 
are tapped into two or more ladles when the product of 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


each ladle may be called a separate cast. 


2.4.4 Chipping — Removing surface defects by manual 
or pneumatic chisel. 


2.4.5 Coating 


a) Covering the wire with a film to act as vehicle 
for the lubricant used in drawing, for example, 
hydrated lime or sull. 

b) Covering the surface of wire with protective 
film, for example, zinc, tin, etc. 


2.4.6 Cogging (Roughing) — The reducing operation 
in hot working an ingot into a billet with a forging 
hammer or a forging press. 


2.4.7 Coiling — The process of laying or winding the 
product (usually wire rods and wires) in the form of 
coils 


2.4.8 Cold Drawing (Drawing, Bright Drawing) — 
Reducing the cross-sectional area by pulling, when 
cold, through a die. The process produces a bright 
surface on the material. 


2.4.9 Controlled Coiling — Coiling from the final hot 
forming (rolling, forging, etc) or heat treatment 
operation in a predetermined pattern to control camber, 
prevent flaking, reduce scaling, improve properties, etc. 


2.4.10 Cropping (Cutting, Shearing) — Shearing off 
discard from the ends of an ingot or bloom or forged 
products prior to further working. Ends discard shearing 
of semi-finished or finished products is also called 
cropping. 


2.4.11 Cross Rolling — Rolling in the direction 
transverse to the longitudinal axis of the ingot or slab, 
as in the production of plate or sheet. 


2.4.12 Cut Length — Wire straightened and cut to a 
given length. 


2.4.13 Descaling — Removal of surface scale from a 
hot worked or heat treated product by pickling, shot 
blasting, etc. Also removal of scale during product hot 
working by the application of water, coal dust, 
brushwood, oil, etc. 


2.4.14 Deseaming (Scarfing) — The removal of surface 
defects from ingots or semi-finished products by an 
oxy-gas flame. 


2.4.15 Die — A tool having a prepared hole, for cold 
drawing. 


2.4.16 Discard — Those portions corresponding to the 
top and bottom of the ingot, which are removed to 
ensure that the reminder of the material is of satisfactory 
quality. Also defective material produced in rolling or 
forging, to be cut off from one or both ends of the semi- 
finished product. 


2.4.17 Draft (or Draught) — The amount of reduction 
in the cross-sectional areas during drawing. 


2.4.18 Dressing — Removing surface defects from an 
ingot, bloom or slab by chipping, deseaming or other 
methods. 


2.4.19 Edging — The application of rolls to the edges 
of a rectangular section, for example, slab, plate, sheet 
and flat, with the object of controlling width and giving 
a smooth edge during the rolling process. 


2.4.20 Electrogalvanizing — The electroplating of zinc 
or zinc alloys upon iron or steel. 


2.4.21 Electrotinning — 
electrodeposition. 


Tin coating by 


2.4.22 Exact Length — Material cut to specified length 
and agreed tolerance. 


2.4.23 Finished Products — Rolled or forged products 
whose transformation in an iron and steel plant is 
completed. Their cross-section is uniform and is often 
defined by a standard which fixes the ranges of nominal 
dimensions as well as the tolerance of form and 
dimensions. The outline of the cross-section and the 
surface finish is such that quite often the user has only 
cut to the required dimensions. 


2.4.24 Finishing — The later stages ofa rolling process 
wherein the material is brought to the desired shape 
and dimensions. It also refers to the process of cutting 
to length, drilling, machining, straightening, dressing, 
oiling, etc, of the finished products. 


2.4.25 Finishing Temperature — The temperature at 
which hot working is completed. 


2.4.26 Galvanizing — Process of depositing zinc on a 
metallic surface. 


2.4.27 Gauge — The thickness of sheet or diameter of 
wire. The various standards are arbitrary and differ with 
regard to ferrous and nonferrous products as well as 
sheet and wire. 


2.4.28 Ground Finish — Wire or rod bright finished 
by grinding to given limits. 
2.4.29 Hot Bed — A cooling bank for accommodating 


hot-rolled products to minimize distortion during 
subsequent cooling. 


2.4.30 Hot-Dip Galvanizing — Coating with zinc by 
immersion in a bath of molten zinc. 


2.4.31 Hot-Dip Tinning — Coating with tin by 
immersion in a bath of molten tin. 


2.4.32 Liming — The application of a film of hydrated 
lime to pickled material prior to drawing, to neutralize 
any traces of acid and to protect from rusting. 


2.4.33 Machine Straightening — Straightening by 
reeling, spinning or other mechanical means. 


2.4.34 Mangling — Flattening of plates, hot or cold, 
by passing through a multi-roll straightening machine. 


2.4.35 Oiled Finish — Material immersed or otherwise 
coated with oil after cold working or annealing. 


2.4.36 Oiling — Coating with oil as a temporary rust 
preventive. 


2.4.37 Patenting — In wire making, a heat treatment 
applied to medium- or high-carbon steel before drawing 
of wire or between drafts. This process consists of 
heating to a temperature above the transformation range 
and then cooling to a temperature below Ae, in air or 
in a bath of molten lead or salt. 


2.4.38 Pickling — The removal of scale by chemical 
or electrochemical treatment with dilute acids or other 
chemicals followed by washing. 


2.4.39 Planishing — Producing a smooth finish on 
metal by arapid succession of blows delivered by highly 
polished dies or by a hammer designed for the purpose, 
or by rolling in a planishing mill. 


2.4.40 Plate (Wire Drawers) — A steel tool containing 
a series of tapered hole through which wire is drawn. 


2.4.41 Polishing — Producing a scratch free or mirror 
like finish. 


2.4.42 Precision Ground — Material ground to very 
accurate dimensions. 


2.4.43 Punch — A tapered tool used by wire drawers 
for imparting the correct contour and size to the hole 
in a wire drawers plate or wortle. 


2.4.44 Ragging — A series of grooves usually 
horizontal, made in the surface of a roll in order to 
assist the roll to bite the steel and to prevent skidding 
between the roll and the work. Ragging is usually found 
in roughing and forming passes. 


2.4.45 Reeling — Straightening (and planishing) a 
round bar by feeding it between contoured steel rolls 
in a direction approximately parallel to the principal 
axes of the rolls. 


2.4.46 Reheating — Heating of steel to a uniform 
temperature in readiness for hot working. 


2.4.47 Roll Straightening — The straightening of metal 
stock of various shapes by passing it through a series 
of staggered rolls, the rolls usually being in horizontal 
and vertical planes, or by reeling in two-roll 
straightening machines. 


2.4.48 Rolling — The shaping of metal by pressing it 
between two rotating rolls. 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


2.4.49 Roll Pass (Pass) — Openings of definite shapes 
formed between a set of rolls through which hot steel 
passes for taking up the given shape or undergoing a 
desired amount of reduction in sectional area. This term 
also applies to a single passage through a pair of rolls 
for the purpose of altering the shape and/or reducing 
the cross-sectional area. 


2.4.50 Shearing — This term is often used for cropping, 
which is done with shears. Also cutting approximately 
given lengths not within any given tolerance. 


2.4.51 Spinning — Straightening by feeding through 
rotating rollers or dies. The bar or wire does not rotate. 


2.4.52 Straightening — Straightening either by machine 
or hand. 


2.4.53 Tolerance (Rolling Margin) — The permitted 
deviation from a specified dimension or weight usually 
expressed as plus minus on that quantity. 


2.4.54 Swift — A rotating devices on which the coils 
of wires are placed for unwinding. 


2.4.55 Tagging (Pointing) — Tapering one ends of a 
rod or wire before drawing. 


2.4.56 Tolerance (Rolling Margin) — The permitted 
deviation from a specified dimension or weight usually 
expressed as plus or minus on that quantity. 


2.4.57 Turned Finish — The bright finish on a bar 
produced by turning. 


2.4.58 Universal Rolling — Rolling in a universal mill 
provided with edging rolls for obtaining closer width 
tolerance and better edges in plates and slabs. 


2.4.59 Wap — The single turn in a coil. 


2.4.60 Wash Heating (Sweating) — The soaking of an 
ingot or part cogged ingot (after limited rolling) at high 
temperature under oxidizing conditions so that surface 
melts and runs off as fluid slag. Surface defects of an 
ingot or partly cogged ingot may be removed in this 
way. 


2.4.61 Wortle — A hard plate for wire drawing 
containing series of straight lines. 


2.4.62 Wire Drawing — Reducing cross-sectional area 
of a wire by pulling through a die or plate (see 2.4.8 
and 2.4.39). 


2.5 Terms and Definitions — Defects 


2.5.1 Blister — A small raised area on the surface 
resulting from the expansion of gas concentrated at a 
sub-surface inclusion or other imperfections. May occur 
as isolated spots, but often found in longitudinal streaks. 


2.5.2 Broken Back (Cracked Back) — A band of 
transverse cracks along a drawn wire. 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


2.5.3 Broken Corners — Wide but usually short cracks 
across the edges of semi-finished products (such as 
blooms, billets and slabs). 


2.5.4 Broken Edges — Broken edges occurring during 
hot rolling, caused by overheating or burning. 


2.5.5 Burr — The sharp fringe of metal left on a sheared 
or saw-cut bottom edge. 


2.5.6 Camber — The curvature observed in long 
products caused by differential cooling or faulty setting 
of the rolls. It is measured by the maximum deviation 
of the middle region from the straight line joining the 
ends. 


2.5.7 Checked Edges — Cracked edges in sheet bars 
and strips occurring during hot rolling. 


2.5.8 Chill Crack (Fire Cracks) — Marks on a rolled 
surface resulting from cracks in the surface of a roll 
used for hot rolling. A particular form of roll mark, 
surface cracks, found on rolls is usually caused by 
alternate heating and cooling or by overheating of the 
rolls in service in which case it is called a fire crack. 


2.5.9 Clink — Internal rupture produced by too rapid 
heating of the cold material in the soaking pit or 
reheating furnace, or external rupture caused by the 
rapid chilling of the surface of the as-cast ingot or 
reheated material. In the first case a high tensile stress 
is developed internally, so that the material fractures 
internally; in the second case, the formation of a high 
tensile stress in the outer skin produces external 
cracking. 


2.5.10 Cracked Edges — Cracks across the edges (that 
is, at right angles to the direction of rolling) of rolled 
products. The term broken corners is used in connection 
with large sections, for example, blooms, billets and 
slabs. 


2.5.11 Cuppiness or Cupping — An internal transverse 
crack in wire, which may eventually, results in fracture 
of the cup and cone type. It may be caused by excessive 
cold work (over drawing) or segregation where the 
harder centre is less ductile than the surface. 


2.5.12 Decarburization — Depletion of carbon from 
the surface layer of a ferrous product. This depletion 
may be either partial (partial decarburization) or 
nominally complete (complete decarburization). 


The sum of the two types of decarburization (partial 
and complete) is termed total decarburization. 


2.5.13 Die Mark (Die, Score, Die Scratch) — Scratch 
marks made during drawing due to poor condition of 
dies or gritty material being drawn in the die along with 
the wire. 


2.5.14 Drawn-in Scale — Local patches of scale, which 


10 


the pickling has failed to remove, and which have 
consequently become embedded in the surface by cold 
drawing. 


2.5.15 Fash (Burr, Flash) — Sharp and jagged edges 
left after shearing or sawing. 


2.5.16 Fin (Overfill, Flash) — A protruding rib of metal 
running longitudinally along a rolled product, as results 
from overfilling a pass. 


2.5.17 Fish Tail — The V-shaped cavity which may 
develop at the end of the piece during hot rolling. 


2.5.18 Guide Marks — Scoring of the steel caused by 
defective or badly set guides, or by extraneous material 
adhering to the guides. Guide marks are always straight 
and easy to recognize if put in during the final pass, 
but may be mistaken for splits or seams if put in during 
the earlier passes. 


2.5.19 Hair Line Cracks (Hair Cracks) — Internal 
ruptures in steel caused by stresses which probably arise 
from the combination of several factors, such as volume 
changes due to transformation, brittleness due to the 
presence of hydrogen, and the arrangement of the 
microstructure, resulting from hot working. The size 
of such ruptures may vary considerably, but they are 
usually comparatively short in length when viewed on 
a surface cut at right angles to the plane of defect, and 
generally are so fine that they cannot be discerned other 
than after etching or by magnetic crack detection. 


2.5.19.1 Snowflakes — When hairline cracks are 
exposed by fracturing, they appear as bright crystalline 
areas of almost circular form, sometimes known as 
snowflakes. 


2.5.20 Heat Waste (Fire Waste) — The loss of material 
by scaling in a reheating or hot-working process. 


2.5.21 Inclusions — Particles of oxides, sulphides, 
silicates, refractories, etc, embedded in the metal. These 
are products of oxidation. 


2.5.22 Ingotism — The extremely coarse dendritic 
structure which exists in unannealed ingots and castings. 
It is aterm which is also used to describe microstructure 
of forgings which show coarse dendritic pattern. Pattern 
of ingot structure is observed in sulphur prints of 
blooms and billets. 


2.5.23 Laminations — A defect in rolled materials, 
characterized by a tendency to split into layers along 
the direction of rolling usually due to the presence of 
non-metallic inclusions or other discontinuity in the 
steel. 


2.5.24 Laps — Oxidized folds in the skin of the product 
produced during rolling, which may be difficult to 
distinguish superficially from splits arising from 


longitudinal ingot cracks. Broadly speaking, in cross- 
section, splits and seams tend to run at right angles to 
the surface, whereas laps usually run at a relatively small 
angle to the surface. 


Further rolling of lapped material often results in 
shelliness, owing to portions of the lap breaking away. 


2.5.25 Overheating — Heating to such a high 
temperature that an undesirable coarse grained structure 
is produced. Severe overheating may result in the 
properties being permanently impaired. 


2.5.26 Over-Pickled — Pickled longer than necessary 
resulting in pronounced chemical attack causing pitting 
and roughness on the surface. 


2.5.27 Phosphide Streak — An elongated area of 
phosphides, which is revealed, on etching. 


2.5.28 Pipe (Contraction Cavity, Shrinkage Cavity) — 
An axial cavity caused by contraction during 
solidification of an ingot. Also the defect arising from 
the axial cavity in the semi-finished or finished 
products. It may also refer to tubular products. 


2.5.29 Pulls — Characteristically forked or Y-shaped 
defects, produced from transverse ingot cracks which 
have elongated and forked in the direction of rolling. 


2.5.30 Pitted Surface — A surface containing small 
pits or depression resulting from unsatisfactory 
processing. 


2.5.31 Reed — A internal discontinuity originating from 
a subcutaneous blowhole which has become oxidized 
and has been elongated during rolling. 


2.5.32 Rod Crack — A longitudinal defect in wire rod 
or wire due to unsatisfactory rolling technique. 


2.5.33 Rokes — A term which should be restricted to 
isolated deep seams having their origin in large 
blowholes or in large non-metallic inclusions, and 
which are associated with oxide and decarburization. 


2.5.34 Roll Marks — Roll marks produced in the 
finishing mill passes are observable at regular intervals 
along the length of the product. They may arise from 
damaged rolls or from pieces of steel adhering to the 
rolls. 


2.5.35 Rolled Rolled-in Scale — Patches of scale which 
have not been satisfactorily removed during rolling or 
forging, and which have persisted throughout to the 
final product. 


2.5.36 Running Out (Non-Sizing) — An excessive 
progressive increase in the size of wire during drawing, 
due to abnormal wear of the die. 


11 


IS 1956 (Part 3) : 2019 


2.5.37 Scab — Irregular shaped patches of metal on 
ingot surface arising from cavities in mould walls or 
caused by loosely adhering layers of metal. 


2.5.38 Seams — Numerous shallow grooves or 
striations, most obvious when the piece is up-ended, 
cross-cut or pickled. They are generally formed by the 
elongation during rolling of oxidized surface or sub- 
surface blowholes present in the ingot. They may also 
arise from a badly rippled surface or from recurrent 
teeming laps. 


This defect is sometimes known as ‘reeds’ and ‘rokes’. 


2.5.39 Segregation — A non-uniform distribution of 
some constituents and/or impurities in a cast product 
characterized by the mode of solidification of alloys. 
Segregation usually persists through subsequent hot and 
cold working. Generally, the concentration of low 
melting point constituents tend to be higher in the centre 
than the surface. Sometimes the reverse of this 
phenomenon takes place and is known as inverse 
segregation. 


2.5.40 Shells — A flaky surface appearance resulting 
from ingot defects ‘double skin’, ‘splash’, ‘flash’, ‘fin’, 
or ‘scab’. 


Shells may also arise during rolling from the exposure 
and oxidation of subcutaneous blowholes in the soaking 
pits, or as a result of faulty manipulation. 


2.5.41 Snarl — A kink, which has been drawn tight in 
a wire. 


2.5.42 Sulling (Rusting) — Formation of a thin coating 
of hydrated oxide of iron on a coil or wire or rod 
obtained by keeping the coil wet spraying water in fine 
jets after pickling. 


2.5.43 Tramlines — An overfill or lap usually occurring 
in parallel pairs of lines. Long straight marks due to 
drawn out inclusion on rolled sheet are also called 
tramlines. 


2.5.44 Underfilled — A condition produced during 
rolling when less metal is present than is required to 
give the desired section, the deficiency of metal giving 
rise to an obviously ‘lean’ and sometimes ‘raw’ place 
in the section during the final pass. 


Underfilling in the earlier passes, causing severe 
elongation without roll contact, and particularly when 
the steel has been standing at rolling heat for an undue 
length of time, may result in a spongy or ‘honeycomb’ 
structure which on subsequent rolling with roll contact 
produces a series of small ‘fish-scale’ shells. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 04 (11309). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


