IS:106004883 1llX _ _ _ 721%13 ._ - Indian Standard
IS0

2848-l 974

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

m

I
(,iSO Title

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MODULAR CO-ORDINATION PRINCIPLES AND RULES
: Modular Co-ordination Principles and Rules)

Elational Foreword This Indian Standard which is identical.with IS0 2848-1974 `Modular co-ordination Principles and rules' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted ~bythe Indian Standards institution on the recommendation of the Modular Co-ordination Sectional Committee and approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. Wherever the words `international should be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they

Cross

References International Standard co-ordination Basic Corresponding Indian Standard

IS0 1006-1973 Modular module

IS : 10316-1983 Recommendations for modular co-ordination - Basic module (Identical) IS : 7921-1975 Recommendations for modular co-ordination multimodules and preferred sizes for horizontal co-ordinating and control!ing dlmensions (Partially corresponds) IS : 4993-1983 Glossary of terms to modular co-ordination (second (Technically equivalent) relating

IS0 1040-1973 Modular co-ordination - Multimodules for horizontal co-ordinating dimensions

IS0 1791-1973 Vocabulary

Modular

co-ordination

-

rewisianj

IS0 1803-1973 Tolerances Vocabulary

for

building

-

IS : 4993-1.983 Glossary of terms relating to modular co-ordination (second revision) (Partially corresponds) IS : 79211975 Recommendations for modular co-ordination multi-module and preferred sizes for horizontal co-ordinatin~g and controlling dimensions (Partially corresponds)

ISO 1790-1970 Modular co-ordination - Reference lines of horizontal co-ntroliing coordinating dimensions

<
Adopted 31 May 1933 I ~t'lDDAN\,S?ANDARDS MANAK BHAd$4& Q BAHADUR INSTITUTION SHAH ZAFAR

0 July lQ34, ISI

6r3

MARG

NEW DELHI 11QQQP

IS
*

`.

10666498j ,284~1974

IS0

1 SCOPE This International Standard specifies the aims of modular co-ordination and states the general principles and rules to be -applied in determining the sizes of building components and equipment, and of assemblies and buildings themselves.

interchangeability of 5) to permit the these components, whatever their material, form or method of manufacture; 6) to simplify site operations by rationalizing setting out, positioning and assembly of building components; 7) to ensure dimensional co-ordination between installations `+quipments, storage units, other fitted furniture, etc.) and the rest of the building.

2

FIELD OF APPLICATION

Modular co-ordination applies to the design and construction of buildings of all types and to the production of building components of all kinds used for their construction.

5 BASIS OF MODULAR

CO-ORDINATION

Modular co-ordination is essentially based on : 1) the use of multimodules; modules : the basic module and

3

DEFINITIONS Standard, the

For the purpose of this International definitions given in IS0 1791 apply.

2) the use of a reference system to define co-ordinating spaces and zones for building elements and for the components which form them; 3) rules for location reference system; building elements wm-nn the

4

AIMS OF MODULAR

CO-ORDINATION

The principal object of modular co-ordination is to assist rationalization and industrialization within the buiLdding industry snd associated industries, by standardization in such a way that components may be manufactured on an industrial scale, and/or erected efficiently on site, thereby improving the economics of building. 6 In addition, modular co-ordination is intended :

4) rules for sizing building determine their work sizes;

components

in order to

5) rules for defining preferred sizes for building components and controlling dimensions for buildings.

MODULES Basic module unit of size in

1) to facilitate co-operation between building designers, manufacturers, distributors and contractors;
2) to permit the use of building components of standard sizes to construct different types of building; ~3) in design work, to simplify the preparation of building drawings and make possible the determination of the sizes and position of each building component in relation to ot&r components and to the building as a whole; 4) to optimrze the number of standard sizes of building compcnents;

6.1

The basic module is the fundamental modular co-ordination1 ).

The co-ordinating sizes of building components, of the parts of buildings they form and of buildings themselves shall be multiples of the basic module. 6.2 Multimodules

Multimodules are selected multiples of the basic module; different multimodules will suit particular applications. However, since their values must not be chosen arbitrarily

1)

See IS0

1006.

The symbol of the basic module

is M and its value 1 M = 100 mm.

Is:106004983 190 28484974

if dimensional co-ordination is to be achieved, International Standards for their sizes are necessary' ). Using multimodules, it is possible to achieve a substantial reduction in the number of co-ordinating sizes.

.

The advantage of using grids is that they provide a continuous reference system in a project. The position of components and their co-ordinating dimensions can thus be recognized both by those preparing drawings and by those reading them. 8.2.1 Basic module grid

A further reduction in the number of co-ordinating sizes may be achieved by means of general series of multimodular sizes based on selected multimodules. Such a reduction is particularly recommended for components having at least one dimension equal to one of the dimensions of the functional element of which they are a part.

The fundamental modular grid is that in which the spacing of consecutive parallel lines is equal to the basic module. (See IS0 1006.) 8.2.2 Multimodular grids

7

CO-ORDINATION

OF NON-MODULAR

SIZES*)

The full use of modular co-ordination will not always be possible or economical, so that the use of non-modular sizes must be envisaged. In particular, the thicknesses of many building components and assemblies may be non-modular. Such thicknesses are determined by economic and functional considerations. In some cases, such sizes could be co-ordinated by the use of simple fractions to the basic module (submodules)" ). The determination of size for multimodules modules shall not be based on submodules. and planning

In addition to the basic module grid, multimodular grids in which the spacing of the lines is a multimodule may be used, This multimodule may differ for each of the two directions of the grid. Lines in a multimodular grid normally coincrde wtrh lanes in the basic module grid. In practice, however, it may be advantageous to displace modular grids used for different purposes in relation to each other. 8.2.3 Interruptions and displacements of modular grids

8

REFERENCE

SYSTEM

It may be necessary to interrupt a modular grid (for example, in order to accommodate dividing elements). The width of the zone of interruption of the modular grid may be modular or non-modular (neutral zone). When several modular grids are used in designing the same plan, it may be advantageous to displace the grids with reference to each other in one or both directions. The displacement between the grids shall be chosen so as to produce a solution appropriate to the project as a whole. (An example is shown in figure 2.) 8.3 Controlling reference system

~.

The reference system is a system of points, lines and planes to which the sizes and positions of building components or assemblies relate. A reference system should be used during the design stage, and may also form the basis of the system of lines from which measurements on site are set out. 8.1 Modular spaw-grid

A modular space-grid is a three-dimensional system of planes within which a building and its components are located. The distance between the planes in such a system is equal to the basic module, or to a multimodule. (An example is shown in figure 1.)
NOTE This multimodule may differ directions of the modular space-grid. for each oi tne three

The reference system described above can be further elaborated. The planes in the modular space grid form a fundamental system of reference for the elements of and therefore are termed "controlling construction, planes". The zones for floors, walls, etc. lying between controlling planes are referred to as "controlling zones". On plans, sections and elevations, controlling planes are indicated by "controlling lines". The dimensions between controlling planes are known as "controlling dimensions". Controlling planes divide the volume of a building into controlling zones and the usable spaces between them. Controlling zones are occupied (but not always entirely filled) by components. Usable spaces are bounded horizontally by floor and ceiling planes, and vertically by load-bearing wall and column zones.

8.2

Modular grids

Designs have to be expressed in two dimensions. To this end, horizontal and vertical projections of the modular space grid are used, which are known as modular grids. Different modular grids may be superimposed on the same plan or elevation for different purposes.

1) See IS0 1040. national standards. 2) 3) See IS0 1791,

In this International

Standard,

the use of brackets

signifies a size of limited applicability

which will only appear in specific

terms 2.1.12

and 2.1.15.

The values of these have yet to be determined.

IS : 106004083

IS0

28404074

Controlling planes also indicate where joints between elements of construction are most likely to occur. The dimensions of these elements, therefore, are directly related to controlling dimensions.

may be located asymmetrically plane or line.

in relation to a modular

9

LOCATION

AND DIMENSIONING

In practice, work-sizes1 ) of components and assemblies are derived from co-ordinating sizes, Allowances must be made in particular for manufacturing, site setting-out and erection deviations.1 )

For the purposes of design, each building component and assembly is assumed to be located in a space within the reference system defined by reference planes or lines - its "coordinating space". This space includes the space required for joints and tolerances (deviations). In modular planning, different methods of locating components may be used. The modular plane or line defining the location of a component may be boundary (see figure 3) or axial (see figure 4). Sometimes a component

10

PREFERRED

SIZES

In order to permit further reduction in the ranges of sizes resulting from ,the application of modular sizes to building components and assemblies and to controlling dimensions, general series of preferred multimodular sizes can be used. Preferred sizes for various components and assemblies and for various controlling dimensions will be specified in future International Standards.

FIGURE

1-

Exampleof

a modular spac+@l

1) For definitions, see IS0 1803,

Tolerances

for building

-

Vocabulary.

4

IS : 106004983 IS0 28484974

FIGURE 2 --Example of modular grid dispk@ment

1 /
nxM

C
\

FIGURE

3 -

Exampleof modulation batwwn boundary planes(Seealso lSO/R

1790)

0
_-.~__.q+_.+q_-fi_~ I

P
nxM nxM
I

P

I I

I +_-_+++_+$_-__~_
FIGURE 4 - EMpIo

I

j

I!
E X -C

___o

d intuoxi~l moduhtiin

6

-Printed

at Simco PrIntIngPress,

Delhi, Indr

