( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS t 1956 ( Part VIII) - 1976

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMSRELATING TO IRON AND STEEL
PART VIII STEEL TUBES AND PIPES

f First Revision )
Metal Standards Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI A. K. BEATXNEAFC~A Members JOINT DIRECTOR ( M & C ) ( Alternates to Shri A. K. Bhattacharyya ) ASSISTANT DIRECTOR ( MS ) > SHRI M. ANJANEYULU Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, Durgapur SHRI N. V. RAQHAVAN ( Alternate ) DR A. S. BHADURI National Test House, Calcutta SHRI D. D. BHUPTANI Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI 0. N. AQARWAL ( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. CHAKRAVARTY Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI M. C. KUMARASWAMY ( Alternate ) SHRI G. CHATTERJEE Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI K. C. SOM ( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. CHATY~ERJEE Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI N. S. CHAUDHARY Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SRRI J. S. SEENI ( Alternate ) SIIRI K. V. CHIN&~-A International Nickel ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. N. DAB National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jamshedpur SHRI N. T. GEORQE Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI A. K. GUHA Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SRRI P. C. MUBTAFI ( Altnnair ) DR S. S. KH.4NNA Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI A. N. RAO ( Alternate ) DR D. M. LAEEIANI Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur SHRI T. K. DUTTA ( Alternate ) SHRI U. MORAN RAO Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SRRI B. K. MURTHY Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SERI N. GOPALKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on @age 2 ) Representing Ministry of Railways

SMDC 1

INDIAN

@ Copyright 1976 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copytight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright unc`s:r the said Act.
I
.--ml"._

_-.a%-

"-"_-,

I

IS : 1956 (Part VIII) - 1976
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing

Bkarat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hardwar SHRI S. K. OHRI Ministry of Steel and Heavy Engineering DR S. R. PRAMANIK The Binani Metal Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. K. RAO SHRI A. K. CHA~ERJEE ( Alternate ) Indian Non-ferrous Metal Manufacturers' SHRI S. Roy tion. Calcutta SHRI A. K. BASU ( Altcmute ) Institute of Indian Foundrymen, Calcutta SHRI V. K. WAZIR HON SECRETARY ( Altuna& ) Director General, . IS1 ( Mcmbrr ) SHRI C, R. RAMA RAO. . Ex-o&o I Director ( Strut & uet ) Sscrdary

Associa-

KUMAR Assistant Director ( Metals ), IS1
SHRI VIJAY

Subcommittee for Terminology, Classification Designation of Steels, SMDC 1 : 1 Conoew
SHRI K. V. CHINNAPPA Members SH~I R. M. BALANI Directorate Delhi General of Technical International

and

Nickel ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay Development, New

Visveswaraya Iron & Steel Ltd, Bhadravati SHI~I B. G. BASAVRAJ SHRI K. B. D. BEERAIAH ( Alternate ) Guest, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah SHRI S. K. BASU Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI D. D. BEUPTANI Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI P. K. CHAKRAvAnTY SHRI M. C. KUMARASWAMY ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI P. K. CHATTERJEE Ministry of Railways CHEMIST AND METALLURGIST Hindustan Steel Ltd, Durgapur SHRI M. K. DU~A Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur SHRI R. DUTTA SHRI T. K. DUTTA ( Alternate) Central Board of Excise and Customs, New Delhi SHRI S. K. GH~SHAL Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI A. K. Gu~a ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SHRI P. C. MUSTABI ( Altcmate ) Iron & Steel Control, Calcutta SHRI R. M. KlXISHNAN Research & Development Organisation, Hindustan DR V. RAMASW~~~Y Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI S. R. MEDIRATTB ( Alternate ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. M. SHENOY Mahindra Ugine Steel Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. N. SINQH Directorate General Ordnance Factories, Calcutta SHRI Y. G. SUBRAMANYA

IS : 1956(Part

VllI) - 1976

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO IRON AND STEEL
PART VIII STEEL TUBES AND PIPES

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part VIII ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 21 May 1976, after the draft finalized by the Metal Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council.
As a result of experience 0.2 This standard was first published in 1962. gained during these years, certain modifications have been made in some The Sectional Committee while of the meanings of various terms. issuing this revision felt it desirable to issue the standard in separate parts. Other parts of the standard are as follows: Part Part Part Part I II III IV General Hot-rolled Steel Bright Forging Wrought metallurgy, heat treatment ( excluding and testing sheet and strip ) Steel making steel products sheet and strip steel bar and steel wire ( including iron drop forging )

Part V Part VI Part VII

0.3 This standard has been prepared to assist the manufacturers and the users in uniform interpretation of the common terms used in the iron and steel industry.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard the terms relating ( Part VIII ) is intended to steel tubes and pipes. 3 to convey the meanings
of

2.1 Air Hator Tubas - Tubes used for beating air by means of hot, gases, the air passing either inside or outside the tubes. pipe having a particular series of 25 tit&Con StanQnd P&erelated outside diameters and thicknemes in common use in America. 2,3 Ammonia 2.4 Artesian well boring. Pipe SG~ 2.129. ' used in water subsequent heat A term embrrrcirrall t&es /" condition without

Well Tuk

2.5 Aa Drawn - In the cold dmm treatment. 2.6 Asphalt Coating - See2.15. 2.7 Asphalt Lining - See2.16. 2.g Asphalt Sheathing See2.17.

1 2.9 Atomic Hydrogm Woldod Tabe - Tube made by forming strip, usually of stainless or heaWes&tiag steel, into tubular form, and welding the joint by the atomic hydq'prociss. 2.10 Automatic Process See 2.124. 2.11 Bakers' Ovtn `hbtt ( Ovtu Tab=) - Tubes partially filled with water and closed at the ends, in which steam is generated for the heating of bakers' ovens. 2.12 Bar Drawing -.See 2.36. of a bevel on tube ends, generally for

2.13 Btvelling - The forming end-to-end welding.

2.14 Bitumen-Asbestos Mastic - Material consisting of asphaltic bitumen dissolved in hydrocarbon solvent `together with inert filler in the form of finely divided asbestos. The mastic is applied cold, gejnerally to the external surface. 2.15 Bitumen Coating ( Asphalt Coating ) - An internal and/or external coating obtained either by dipping in a bath of molten asphaltic bitumen or by painting or dipping in a suitable asphaltic bitumen solution. 2.16 Bitumen Liking ( Asphalt Lining) - An consisting of suitable bitumen, usually reinforced filler, applied hot by centrifugal means. internal protection with inert mineral

2.17 Bitumen Sheathing ( Asphalt Sheathing) - An external protection consisting of bitumen reinforced with inert mineral filler which may he of 3 fibrous nature. The sheathing is applied hot.

IS : 1956 ( Part VIII) - 1976 2.18 Bituminous Solution - A paint made from bituminous materials hydrocarbon solvents.

dissolved in appropriate

2.19 Boiler Tubes ( Smoke Tubes ) -Tubes which form part of the heating surface of a boiler, as distinct from superheater tubes. The tubes may contain water and be surrounded by the furnace gases as in a water tube boiler, or they may act as flues and be surrounded by water as in a smoke tube boiler.
2.20 Bore -

Commonly used to indicate inside diameter ( see also 2.102 ). welded tube

2.21 Bright Electrically Welded Tube - Electrically made from cold rolled or cold rolled close-annealed strip. 2.22 Brine
Pipe See 2.129.

Process - A process for making welded steel or wrought iron tubes, in which a length of strip, at welding temperature, is drawn through a ` bell' or ` die' which forms it into a cylinder, and at the same time forces its edges into such intimate contact as to weld them together. 2.23 Buttweld

2.24 Cased Tube - A close-joint tube of steel, over which a close-joint or seamless or welded tube of another metal is drawn. used for lining bore holes to 2.25 Casing ( Oil Well Casing) -Tubes prevent caving in of the surrounding strata and the undesired entry df water. 2.26 Chamfering The removal of sharp edges.
is practically synonymous with NOTE - The term restricted application.

` hevelling `, but has a less

2.27 Close-Joint Tube - Tube made by forming strip into the desired section, the edges being brought close together but not welded. the cross-sectional area of a tube, 2.28 Cold Drawing -Reducing when cold, by drawing through a die. The tubes are occasionally pushed through the die. ( See also 2.96,2.122 and 2.148 ). 2.29 Cold Drawn drawn.
Welded Tube -

Welded

tube

subsequently

cold

2.30 Cold Sinking - Reducing the cross-sectional a tube by dra`wing when cold through a die.

area and diameter of

2.31 Composite Tube -Tube made from two or more tubes of the same or different materials one inside the other, the tubes being in intimate contact. 2.32 Compressed compressed air.
Air Pipe-Pipe

used

for

the

conveyance

of

5

IS : 1956 ( Part VIII ) - 1976 2.33 Condenser Tubes -Tubes

into a liquid by cooling.

used in the conversion

of a vapour

2.34 Continuous Weld Process ( Fretz-Moon Process ) - A process for making welded steel tubes, in which a continuous strip is passed ( by joining the ends of the coils ) through a tunnel furnace, from which it emerges at welding temperature to enter a series of rolls which form it into a tube and weld the abutting edges together. The resulting continuous tube is cut to the desired length. 2.35 Coupler 2.36 Coupler
2.37 Coupling

-

See 2.37.
See 2.38. -

Tubes

screwed and socketed joint. 2.38 Coupling Tubes sions for the production 2.39 Cressing
tltzaFrop -

_(Coupler)

An alternative
Tubes ) -

term for the socket used in a Tubes of suitable dimen-

( Coupler

of couplings.

See 2.166.

.

End -

The portion Removing
-

of a tube cut from the ends as process the fin from the outside of an electrically Removing the uneven'edges at the ends of

.

2.41 Deburring welded tube.
2.42 Defrasing

( Frasing)

cut tubes.

2.43 Descaling - Removal of surface scale from a hot worked or heat treated product by pickling, shot-blasting, etc. Also removal of scale during hot working by the application of water, coal dust, brushwood, oil, etc. 2.44 Die - A tool having a prepared hole through passed in the drawing or pushbench process. which tubes are

2.45 Die Lines-Longitudinal lines on the outer surface of a drawn tube, caused by localized seizure between the tube and the die (see also 2.142 ) . 2.46 Dimensions
2.46.1 Ajpoximate - A near value to which tubes may be ordered and not necessarily the value to which manufacturing tolerances apply.

2.46.2 Maximum - The largest value obtained in actual measurement or permitied by a specified tolerance on a given dimension. 6

IS : 1956 (Part

VIII)

- 1976

2.46.3 Minimum - The smallest value obtained in actual measurement or permitted by a specified tolerance on a given dimension. 2.47 Draft or Draught - The amount of reduction in the crosssectional area during rolling or drawing; often as in drawing, it might refer only to reduction in thickness. 2.48 Drill Pipe ( Oil Drill Pipe ) - Tubes forming cutting tool used in the rotary drilling of bore holes. the stem of the

2.49 Drive Pipe - Screwed and socketed tubes in which the ends butt in the middle of the socket. They are normally restricted in use to certain well boring operations where heavy percussion loads are imposed. 2.50 Eccentricity - Lack of coincidence of the centre of the bore of a tube with that of the outside circumference, resulting in variation in wall thickness. 2.51 Economizer Tubes See 2.61.

2.52 Electric Resistance Buttwelded Tube - Electrically welded tube made from steel strip which is formed into tubular shape and welded by passing a heavy current across the longitudinal joint. 2.53 2.54 Ends Bevelled Ends Rounded See 2.13. See 2.139. The ends cut perpendicular See 2.125. to the length.

2.55 Ends Squared 2.56 Erhardt

Process

2.57 Extrusion - The production of a seamless tube from a hot billet by forcing the latter to flow through a die over a mandrel positioned centrally in the die. 2.58 Extrusion Billet - A short either solid or with a central hole. 2.59 Extrusion Discard at the length of billet or hot rolled bar,

a) A small portion of the billet which is left in the container end of the stroke of the extruding ram. b) A short length which is cut from tube. 2.60 Feed Pipe A pipe through which the front

end of the extruded

water is forced into a boiler. ) Tubes used an

2.61 Feed Water Heater Tubes ( Economizer Tubes in the heating of feed water before it enters a boiler. 2.62 Fin Cutting - Removing electrically welded tube. the external and/or

internal

fin from

7

IS t 1956 ( Part VIII ) - 1976 2.63 Fin ( Flash) - A projecting of an electrically welded tube. 2.64 Flanging a) The turning back of a small portion to the axis of the tube. b) The attaching 2.65 2.66 Flash See 2.63. See 2.164. strip into tubular form by passing through of flanges of a tube end at right angles rib of mate1 running along the weld

to the tube ends.

Flue Tubes -

2.67 Forming - Shaping suitably shaped rolls. 2.68 Frasing See 2.42. Process

2.69 Fretz-Moon

-See

2.34.

2.70 Gas-List - & long established price list applicable to a type of screwed and socketed tubes and associated fittings, sizes 150 mm nominal bore and smaller. For many years the term `Gas' has had no special significance, although the list originated for tubes for gas. 2.71 Gas Pipe Pipe used for the conveyance in terms of a standard of gas. wire gauge number or

2.72 Gauge - Thickness in any accepted unit.

2.73 Grooving - The machining of a groove or grooves tubes or the faces of flanges for jointing purposes.

on the ends of

with a smaller reduction in cross2.74 Half Hard - Gold drawn sectional area than usual, giving a hardness intermediate between that in the annealed condition and that produced by a normal drawing pass. 2.75 Handling Tight on sockets or fittings wrench. - The degree of tightness to prevent their removal degree of tightness necessary in screwing except by the use of obtained in assembling

2.76 Hand Tight -The screwed joints by hand.

2.77 Heat Exchanger Tubes -Tubes used in a unit of transferring heat from one medium to another. 2.78 Hessian Wrapping See 2.185. tube from which

for the purpose

2.79 Hollow manufactured.

The hot finished

a cold

drawn

tube is

a

IS : 1956 ( Part VIII ) - 1976
in diameter, or 2.80 Hot Drawn - Tubes which have been reduced diameter and thickness both, by drawing hot on a mandrel through a die. 2.81 Hot Finished-Tubes Generally applied process. made and finished to seamless tubes. by a hot-working

NOTE - Other kinds of tubes are also hot finished, for example, by the continuous weld process and lapweld process.

2.82 Hot Rolled employing rolls.

-

Tubes

produced

hot by one of the several

processes

NOTE - It is incorrect the term is obsolete.

to use the term except in this sense and, generally speaking,

2.83 Hydraulic Lapweld Process ( Water-Gas Lapweld Process ) A process for making large diameter welded tubes in which a steel plate The overlapping edges is bent into cylindrical shape in bending rolls. are heated for short distances to welding temperature and subsequently The heating and welded by pressing them together by hydraulic power. The tube is then heated pressing is repeated until the length is welded. For certain sizes, two plates all over and passed through rounding rolls. may be required to make the necessary circumference. 2.84 Hydraulic Piercing - Hot forging by hydraulic power in which a billet is partially pierced to form a hollow cylinder preparatory to being ' elongated and formed into a tube. 2.85 Hydraulic Pipe - Pipe used for the conveyance pressure in connection with hydraulic machinery. of a liquid under

2.86 Inter Pass Annealing - Annealing applied to tubes after one or more cold drawing passes, in order to soften them for further cold drawing. marks on the surface of a cold drawn 2.87 Jarring Marks - Transverse tube, caused by irregular movement through the die. 2.88 Joints - The term `joints ' refers to the means of connecting lengths The more common types of pipe, or of connecting pipes to other units. are as foll0WS:

4

Flange 1) Fixed Jange - A bolted joint made with flanges attached to the ends of the pipes (see Fig. 1A 1. which are

2 ) Loose JEange - A bolted joint made with flanges which abut on shoulders formed on the ends of the pipes ( see Fig. 1B).

b)

Flexible - A term applied to joints which permit the assembly of pipes at angles of varying degrees in order to facilitate pipe laying. They may also permit movement of the pipes after assembly ( see Fig. 1C ). 9

IS t 1956 ( Part VIIl

) - 1976

4

Screwed A joint in which two pipe ends, each screwed externally, are connected by means of an internally screwed socket or coupling (see Fig. 1D ). 2) Screwed inserted - A joint in which an externally screwed end of a pipe is connected to an expanded and internally screwed end of another pipe ( see Fig. 1E ). 3) Screwed jlush butt and butt - A joint formed by screwing one ipe end into an adjoining pipe end. It differs from the \.p,; screwed inserted joint in that the screw on both ends is formed about the middle of the tube wall, the inner and outer surfaces of the tubes being flush when connected ( see Fig. 1F ) . Spigot and Socket - A joint in which one pipe end, the spigot, fits into a connecting pipe end, which is expanded to form a socket. Usually there is a space between the spigot and socket in which material, for example, lead, is compacted to obtain leakproofing (see Fig. 16).
1) Screwed and socketed ( screwed and coupled ) -

4

4

A joint ( see Fig. 1H ).
Welded -

in which the pipes are connected

by welding

2.89 Lathe Straightened - A misnomer. A term .which refers to specially straightened tubes whose straightness is checked by revolving them in a lathe. 2.90 Lengths About a> usually

Associated with the following terms.

Lengths with less variation than that of random lengths, amounting to f 150 mm. b) Average - Lengths which may cary over a specified range, an average value being maintained. actual length that a tube contributes when 4 Effective -The assembled in a stretch of pipe, for example, the effective length of a spigot and socket tube is the overall length less the length to which the spigot of one pipe enters the socket of the next. 4 Exact - A term applied to tubes cut to a specified length but on which a small tolerance is allowed. 4 Half Random - Lengths in the range of one-half of the usual random lengths. f> Jointers - Two lengths jointed together to make a single length within the random length range. Multiple - Lengths from which a number of pieces of a specified d length may be cut with the minimum of waste. h) Random - Normal manufacturing lengths which may vary over a range of several metres. Alternatively, a length range agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacture. 10

IS : 1956 ( Part

VIII ) - 1976

IA

Fixed

Flange
CIRCULAR CLAMP II(

1B

Loose Flange

1C

Flexible

1D

Screwed

and Socketed and Coupled )

( Screwed

t-t-+
I

1E

Screwed

Inserted

1F

Screwed

Flush Butt and Butt

1G

Spigot

and Socket

1H

Welded

Pm. 1 PIPE JOINTS
11

IS : 1956 ( Part VIII ) - 1976 2.91 Lifting - Increasing the bore of a drilled billet prior to extrusion, by forcing a tool of suitable diameter through it in the hot condition. 2.92 Lime Washing wrapped tubes. Lime wash applied to bitumen sheathed or

2.93 Line Pipe ( Oil Line Pipe ) - An American term usually associated with the oil industry and applying to pipes used for the conveyance of oil or natural gas, excluding the pipes in the well. 2.94 Machine Tight - The pm-determined degree of tightness obtained on screwing on sockets or fittings by means of a power-driven machine. 2.95 Main - A broad term denoting usually a single line of pipe for carryinda, bulk supply of a gas or liquid. 2.96 Mandrel Drawing ( Bar Drawing) - Cold drawing in which a tube is drawn through a die together with a mandrel which supports it internally. The tube and the bar are o&asionally pushed through the die together. The release of bar is accomplished by roiling which has the affect of expanding the bore of the tubes sufficiently to release the mandrel. 2.97 Mannesmann Process - A process in which either a solid or a semi-pierced cylindrical piece of steel, at forging temperature, is formed into a thick hollow cylinder by being passed through angled barrel rolls, and at the same time, over a plug of suitable size and shape. 2.98 Mechanical Tubes - A term applied broadly to tubes used for mechanical engineering purposes as distinct from tubes used for structures or for the conveyance of &id. 2.99 MiddlingThe inter-pass cutting of tubes into two or more lengths during cold drawing operations, when they become too long for subsequent passes on the drawbench. 2.100 MouIding Box - A container, usually of metal, which is placed round,a joint and into which molten bitumen is poured and allowed to set. This ensures continuity of the prvtection of sheathed or otherwise protected pipes. 2.101 Moulding Mixture - A mixture consisting of bitumen reinforced with inert mineral filler. f bore, which may be the actual bore or an 2.102 Nominal Bore -A approximation to it, which is standardized formally or by general usage. The tubes have standard outside diameters but thicknesses according to the purpose for which they are used. 2.103 Nozzling - Preparing a hollow for cold drawing by reducing the diameter at one end sufficiently to hold the head of a pin, the latter being used to pull the hollow through the die.

IS : 1956 ( Part VIII ) - 1976 2.104 2.105 Oil Drill Pipe -,See 2.48.

Oil Line Pipk -

See 2.93. See 2.25. See 2.176. the

2.106 Oil Well Casing 2.107 Oil Well Tubing -

2.108 Open-Joint Tube - Tube made by forming a strip cold into desired section, an appreciable gap being left between the edges. 2.109 Ovality - Lack of a tube of nominally 2.110 Oven Tubes -

of roundness of the bore or outside circumference circular crass section. See 2.11. paint as a rust preventive or for identification or

2.111 Painting purposes.

Applying

2.112 Pass - One passage of the tube through through a train of rolls as in reducing.

a die as in drawing,

2.113 Pickling - The removal of scale by chemical or electrochemical treatment with dilute acids or other chemicals, followed by washing. 2.114 Pick Up - Adhesion or partial welding of particles of steel from the tube to the surface of the die or plug during cold drawing. 2.115 Pilfer-Proof - The degree of tightness adopted in the assembly of screwed sockets to prevent their being readily removed by hand. 2.116 Pilger Process - A process for making seamless steel tubes, in which a solid cylindrical piece of steel, at forging temperature, is first formed into a thick hollow cylinder, then forged into a tube on mandrel by means of gap rolls known as pilger rolls. 2.117 Pipe See 2.173.

with tubes or pipes, but the term is usually 2.118 Piping - Synonymous restricted to assembled pipework. 2.119 2.120 2.121 Pitted Plain Piug

from unsatisfactory longitudinal

Surface - A surface processing.

containing

small

cavities angles

resulting
to the

Ends - Ends of tubes which are cut at right ;iris and without additional workmanship. -- See 2.122.

Ciold drawing in which 2.122 Plug Drawlng(iF,I\\`i, ,(iS L'.i;l a die .riid aver a aiatioriary pi!,>. 13

.

a

seamless

tube

js

_--_ __ __~~. .~ 18 : 1956 (Part VIII)-1976 2.123 Plug Lines tube, caused plug drawing Longitudinal lines in the bore of a cold drawn by localized seizure between the tube and the plug during ( see also 2.122 and 2.142 ).

Process ( Automatic Process ) - A process for making seamless steel tubes, in which a round bar is first pierced in a rotary piercing mill at forging temperature and then passed through driven grooved rolls over a plug.
2.125 Pushbench Process ( Erhardt Process ) - A process for making seamless steel tubes in which a billet of suitable shape, at forging temperature, is first formed into a thick hollow cylinder, generally with a solid end, then placed on a long mandrel bar and `pushed ' through a series of successively decreasing dies or rolls. 2.126 Reaming cut tubes. The removal of the ragged inside edge at the ends of

2.124 Plug Mill

2.127 Reducing - A term which usually denotes reducing the diameter of a hot tube by passing it through successive pairs of rolls. In its broader application the term includes reducing the diameter of tubes for azshort distance at the ends.

2.128 Reeling a) Loosening
a tube from a mandrel bar by passing the tube and mandrel between barrel shaped rolls which simultaneously rotate and draw them forward causing a slight expansion of the tube. It is commonly used in the pushbench process and in mandrel drawing. of tubes by passing them through inclined

b) The straightening rolls.

2.123 Refrigeration Pipe ( Ammonia for conveying refrigerants. 2.136 Rising Main - A main from a lower level to a:higher called vertical rising main.

Pipe; Brine Pipe ) -

Pipe used

( or pipeline ) used to convey a fluid When the main is vertical, it is level.

2.131 Rodding - The passing of a short plug ( sometimes of a specified diameter) through small diameter tubes to ensure a clear bore. 2.132 Roller Finish - A term used to describe and tolerances applied to roller tubes. 2.133 Roller machinery. Tubes the special requirements

Tubes used as rollers in paper,

textile

and other

14

IS : 1956 (Part 2.134 Roll

VIII)

- 1976

Lapweld ' Process - A process for making welded steel tubes, in which a length of steel strip OF plate is bent into cylindrical shape with its edges overlapping. It is then brought to welding temperature and passed through rolls over an internal mandrel, when the pressure of the rolls welds the overlapping edges and produces a tube of uniform thickness.

2.135 Rail Marks - Periodic surface defects, due to some imperfection on the surface of a roll. 2.136 Rotary Elongation - The extension of a hollow cylinder at forging temperature, by passing it through specially shaped and angled rolls which rotate the piece and pass it over a pl;lg. 2.137 Rotary Forge Process - A process for making seamless steel tubes, in which a solid piece of steel of suitable shape, at forging temperature, is formed in multiple stages into a hollow cylinder, then forged into a tube on a mandrel by means of gap rolls. 2.138 Rotary Piercing - The forming of a hollow cylinder, at forging temperature, by passing a solid cylindrical piece of steel through specially shaped rolls which simultaneously rotate the piece and pass it over a plug. 2.139 Rounding - A hot or cold operation on the body or on the ends of tubes to obtain special accuracy of roundness where this is necessary. 2.140 Run -See 2.141 Scaffolding 2.142 Scores 2.161.
Tubes -

Tubes used for scaffolding.
2.45

Longitudinal surface roughness ( ste also )-

and 2.123 ).

2.143 Screwing (Threading tube or tubular product. 2.144 Seamless joint or weld. Steel Tube

The cutting of a screw thread on a A tube without a longitudinal

or Pipe -

2.145 Section Tubes 2.146 Shell Thickness is not recommended. 2.147 Sink hot drawing.

Tube with a cross section other than circular.
-

A term synonymous

with thickness.

Its use

The reduction

in the diameter of a tube during cold or

2.148 Sinking - Cold or hot drawing of tubes without the use of an internal plug or mandrel bar. By this means, the wall thickness is increased while the tube is increased in length and reduced in diameter. 15

IS : 1956 (Part VIII)
thickness,

- 1976
Generally defined by nominal and thickness. bore and

2.149 Size of Tube or Type or outside diameter

2.156 Sizing - A term which usually denotes the passing of a tube between sizing rolls ( or cold drawing it ) in order to bring its outside In its more general application diameter within the permitted tolerance. it covers also sizing of ends of tubes and tubular products, and differs from rounding which does not necessarily produce any change in mean outside diameter. 2.151 Skelp Strip.

NOTE - Historically, the term is coined from the word `skelping', an operation in which long narrow strip was beaten into the shape of a tube which was heated to a very high temperature and rolled, resulting in forge welding of the seam.

2.152 Slug?- The
piercing 2.153

cylindrical piece of steel pushed out of a solid billet at the commencement of extrusion.

during

the

Smoke Tube -

See2.19.

2.154 Socket -

Commonly refers to the internally screwed sleeve for connecting the screwed pipe ends of a screwed and socketed oint ( see also 2.37 and 2.88).

2.155

Spinning - The revolving of a tube against alter its shape over a short distance.

a former in order

to

2.156 Standard Tubes or Pipes - Tubes or pipes which have become ` standard ' as regards material, outside diameter and thickness by virtue of demand. the thickening or 2.157 Staving ( Thickening ) - A term denoting upsetting of the ends of tubes, or forming of the ends into special shapes by means of end pressure. 2.158 Stay Tubes - Tubes used to support They may also serve as smoke tubes. 2.153 Steam Pipes the end plates of a boiler.

Pipes used for the conveyance Tubes used in various

of steam. in

2.160 Still Tubes oil refinery service.

types for stills, generally of pipe comprising bar from a tube. purposes.

(Run) - A specified length 2.161 Stretch Emre lengths jointed together.

two or

2.162 Stripping 2.163 Structural 2.164 Superheater
t::LWs l.M!r! 21s ._

-

Removing Tubes -

the mandrel

Tubes used for structural ) -

Flue Tubes ( Flue Tubes 11~.2.t * i-or s:.! ttsllieater tubes. 16

Large diameter smoke

IS : 1956 (-PM 2.165 Superheater

VIII)

- 1976

Tubes - Tubes through which the steam generated in a boiler is passed in order to raise its temperature, that is, tubes used for the conversion of saturated steam into superheated steam.

2.166 Swaging (Cressing ) - Reducing the diameter, usually for short distances, at the ends of tubes. 2.167 Swelling of tubes. Increasing the diameter for short distances at the ends

2.168 Tagging - Preparing a tube for cold drawing by reducing the diameter of a short length at one end, the reduced .portion, or tag, being gripped for pulling through the die. 2.169 Tapping -The cutting of an internal screw thread. 2.170 Thickening 2.171 Threading See 2.157. See 2.143.

The permitted deviation from a specified dimension 2.172 Tolerance or weight, usually expressed as ` plus ' or ` minus ' on that quantity. 2.173 Tube (Pipe) - A long, hollow, open-ended object of circular or other cross section. The terms ` tube ' and ` pipe ' are often used synonymously. pipesand tubesare distinguished by size but the terms NOTE - In tubularsectmns are generallysynonymous.
2.174 Tubes, Types of - The following are the types of tubes classified according to the process of manufacture: Fretz-Moon process tube Atomic hydrogen welded tube Hot drawn tube Automatic process tube

Bright electrically Cased tube Close-joint tube Cold drawing tube

welded tube

Hot finished tube Hydraulic lapweld process tube Mannesmann process tube Open-joint tube Pilger process tube Plug mill process tube Pushbench process tube Roll lapweld process tube Rotary forge process tube Seamless steel tube or pipe Water-gas lapweld tube or pipe 17 process

Buttweld process tube

Cold drawn welded tube Composite tube Continuous weld process tube Electric resistance buttwelded tube Erhardt process tube Extrusion tube

IS : 1956 ( Part VIII ) - 1976 2.175 Tubing - Sometimes used to denote tubes collectively, restricted use in the oil industry to denote oil well tubing. but has a

2.176 Tubing, Oil Well - Tubes used for conveying oil from the bottom ofthe well to the delivery line. 2.177 Varnishing - Coating tubes with varnish as a rust preventive. The varnish may be air or stove hardened. 2.178 Vertical Rising Main See2.139.

2.179 Wall Thickness 2.186 Water&as 2.181 Water

A term synonymous with thickness. See2.83.

Lapweld Process -

Pipe -

Pipe used for the conveyance of water.

2.182 Weight of Tubes - Commonly specificed in metric units, that is, kilograms per metre, and calculated, from the outside diameter and thickness. For steel tubes other than stainless, weight is based on O-785 kg/cm2 of cross-sectional area per metre run. - _-- -__ _ _ _ - _ A tube with a iongitudinai weid. 2.183 Welded Tube or Pipe2.184 Weldless Tube Another term for seamless tube, now little used.

2.185 Wrapping - An external protection consisting of a spiral overlapping wrapping of suitable material impregnated and coated with bitumen or other protective compound.

18

