NAT HIAF IS 15493 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Gaseous Fire Extinguishing 
Systems — General Requirements 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 11 


Firefighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Firefighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


As India is a signatory to the Montreal Protocol, the country programme was drafted earlier, wherein suitable 
alternative clean agents were identified in the place of halons 1301 and 1211. As per the approved programme, this 
standard was formulated for the identified alternatives. The agents covered in this standard were thus introduced 
in response to international restrictions on the production of certain halon fire extinguishing agents under the 
Protocol signed in 1992, as amended from time to time. 


It is important that the fire protection of a building or plant be considered as a whole. Gaseous clean agent systems 
form only a part, though an important part, of the available facilities, but it should not be assumed that their 
adoption necessarily removes the need to consider supplementary measures, such as the provision of portable fire 
extinguishers or other mobile appliances for first aid or emergency use, or to deal with special hazards. Gaseous 
fire suppression systems covered in this standard are designed to provide a supply of gaseous extinguishing 
medium for the extinction of fire involving high value assets. 


Gaseous clean agents have for many years been a recognized effective medium for the extinguishing of flammable 
liquid fires and fires in the presence of electrical and ordinary Class A hazards, but it should not be forgotten, in 
the planning of comprehensive schemes, that there may be hazards for which these media are not suitable, or 
that in certain circumstances or situations there may be dangers in their use requiring special precautions. These 
difficulties have been addressed in this standard. 


Various methods of supplying clean agent to, and applying it at the required point of discharge for fire extinguishing 
were developed some time back, and there was a need for dissemination of information on established systems 
and methods. This standard was first published in 2004 to meet this need. Requirements to eliminate the need 
to release clean agents during testing and commissioning procedures were included in the standard. These were 
linked to the inclusion of enclosure integrity testing. 


The requirements of this standard were made in the light of the best technical data available then despite the fact 
that a wide field was covered. It is assumed then that the execution of the provisions of the standard is entrusted 
to people appropriately qualified and experienced in the specification, design, installation, testing, approval, 
inspection, operation and maintenance of systems and equipment, for whose guidance it was prepared, and who 
can be expected to exercise a duty of care to avoid unnecessary release of clean agent. 


Specific requirements and advice on these matters can be obtained from the appropriate manufacturer of the 
clean agent or the extinguishing system. Information may also be sought from the appropriate fire authority, the 
health and safety authorities and insurers. In addition, reference should be made as necessary to other statutory 
regulations. It is essential that fire equipment be carefully maintained to ensure instant readiness when required. 
Routine maintenance is liable to be overlooked or given insufficient attention by the owner of the system. The 
importance of maintenance cannot be too highly emphasized. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 
a) New provision on description of the installation has been included. 
b) Suitability and application of gaseous fire extinguishing system has been updated. 
c) List of halocarbon agents and their properties have been updated. 
d) New provisions on monitoring of gas extinguishing systems have been included. 
e) Requirements of regular inspection towards effective functioning have been included. 
f) Terminology has been updated. 
g) All the cross-referred Indian Standards have been updated and the lists made comprehensive. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GASEOUS FIRE EXTINGUISHING 
SYSTEMS — GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies provisions and recommendations 
for general requirements, type of clean agents and 
their containers, container arrangement, distribution 
systems, such as piping, nozzles, pipe supports, alarm 
system, type of enclosure, etc. 


NOTES 


1 This standard covers the general requirements applicable 
to total flooding clean agent systems like halo-carbon agents 
and inert gas agents. In addition, individual requirements for 
each type of clean agent system are covered under separate 
standards, namely IS 15497, IS 15501, IS 15505, IS 15506, 
IS 15517, IS 15525, IS 15821 and IS 15835. Detailed design 
guidelines are specified in these standards. Hence, before 
designing a protection with a particular clean agent, both 
the standards should be read together. Wherever there is a 
difference, the individual standard takes precedence. 


2 This standard prescribes minimum requirements for total 
flooding clean agent fire extinguishing systems. Protection 
with carbon dioxide is not covered in this standard for which 
IS 15528 may be referred. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and the parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to apply the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 7673, IS 8757 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Adjusted Minimum Design Quantity 
(AMDQ) — The minimum design quantity of agent 
that has been adjusted in consideration of design 
factors. 


3.2 Approved — Acceptable to a relevant authority. 
In determining the capability of the installations, the 
authorities may base their acceptance with appropriate 
standards. The design and system approval shall be 
from national or international approving authority or 
laboratory of repute. 


3.3 Authority — The organization, office or individual 
responsible for approving an installation or equipment 
or a procedure. 


3.4 Automatic — Performing a function without the 
necessity of human intervention. 


3.5 Automatic/Manual Switch — A means of 
converting the system from automatic to manual 
(manual override) and vice-versa. 


3.6 Class A Fires — Fire in ordinary combustible 
materials, such as wood, cloth, paper, rubber, many 
plastics, electrical and electronic hazards without any 
flammable fluid or gas. 


3.7 Class B Fires — Fire in flammable liquids, oils, 
greases, tars, oil-based paints, lacquers and the like. 


3.8 Class C Fires — A fire that involves energized 
electrical equipment. 


3.9 Clean Agent — Electrically non-conducting, 
vapourizing, or gaseous clean agent that does not leave 
a residue upon evaporation. The word agent wherever 
appearing in this standard shall mean clean agent unless 
otherwise indicated. 


3.10 Clearance — The air distance between clean 
agent equipment, including piping and nozzles and 
unenclosed or uninsulated live electrical components at 
other than ground potential. 


3.11 Containers — Cylinders or other vessels used to 
store the clean agent. 


3.12 Container Discharge Valve — A valve directly 
connected to a container which when actuated releases 
the clean agent into the distribution piping. 


3.13 Control Device — A device to control the 
sequence of events leading to the release of clean agent. 


3.14 Concentration 


3.14.1 Design Concentration — The concentration 
(including safety factor) of the clean agent necessary to 
extinguish a fire from a particular fuel. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


3.14.2 Adjusted Minimum Design Concentration 
(AMDC) — The target minimum design concentration 
after the safety factor and the design factors have been 
taken into account. 


3.14.3 Final Design Concentration (FDC) — The 
actual concentration of agent discharged into the 
enclosure. 


3.14.4 Extinguishing Concentration — The 
concentration (without safety factor) of the agent 
necessary to extinguish a flame of a particular fuel at 
atmospheric pressure. 


3.14.5 Hazardous Concentration — The concentration 
that exceeds the LOAEL (see 3.30) for the agent used. 


3.14.6 Injected Concentration — The concentration 
of the agent necessary to develop under free efflux 
conditions the required design concentration. 


3.14.7 Maximum Concentration — The concentration 
achieved from the actual clean agent quantity at the 
maximum ambient temperature. 


3.14.8 Residual Oxygen Concentration — The resulting 
concentration of oxygen achieved within a protected 
area after the discharge of agent into the area. 


3.15 Design Factor (DF) — A fraction of the agent 
minimum design quantity (MDQ) added thereto deemed 
appropriate due to a specific feature of the protection 
application or design of the suppression system. 


3.16 Directional Valve — A device for controlling 
the passage of the clean agent from a supply manifold 
and directed to pre-selected area(s) of protection 
(also known as selector valve). 


3.17 Discharge Inhibit Switch — A manually 
operated switch that prevents the automatic discharge 
of the clean agent. 


3.18 Distribution System — All the pipe work and 
fittings downstream of any container discharge valve. 


3.19 Engineered Systems — A system requiring 
individual calculation and design to determine the 
flow rates, nozzle pressures, pipe size, area or volume 
protected by each nozzle, quantity of agent, and the 
number and types of nozzles and their placement in a 
specific system. 


3.20 Fill Density — The mass of gaseous agent per 
unit volume of container expressed in kg/m’. 


3.21 Final Design Quantity (FDQ) — A quantity 
of agent determined from the agent minimum design 
quantity as adjusted to account for design factors and 
pressure adjustment. 


3.22 Flooding Quantity — Mass or volume of clean 
agent required to achieve the design concentration 
within the protected volume within the specified 
discharge time. 


3.23 Gross Volume — The volume enclosed by the 
building elements around the protected enclosure, less 
the volume of any permanent impermeable building 
elements within the enclosure. 


3.24 Halocarbon Agent — An agent that contains as 
primary components one or more organic compounds 
containing one or more of the elements fluorine, 
chlorine, bromine, or iodine. 


3.25 Holding Time — Period of time during which 
a concentration of clean agent greater than the fire 
extinguishing concentration surrounds the hazard. 


3.26 Inert Gas Agent — An agent that contains as 
primary components one or more of the gases helium, 
neon, argon, or nitrogen. Inert gas agents that are blends 
of gases can also contain carbon dioxide as a secondary 
component. 


3.27 Inerting — The prevention of re-ignition of a 
flammable or explosive atmosphere by establishing a 
suitable concentration of the clean agent. 


3.28 Liquefied Gas — A gas or gas mixture (normally 
a halocarbon) which is liquid at the container 
pressurization level at room temperature (20 °C). 


3.29 Lock-off Valve — A mechanically operated device 
which prevents a clean agent from being discharged 
through distribution pipe work to the protected area. 


3.30 Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level 
(LOAEL) — The lowest concentration of clean agent 
at which an adverse toxicological or physiological 
effect has been observed. 


3.31 Maintenance — Thorough check, comprising 
a thorough examination and any necessary repair or 
replacement of system component, to give maximum 
assurance that the extinguishing system will operate as 
intended. 


3.32 Manual — Requires a human intervention to 
accomplish a function or task. 


3.33 Maximum Working Pressure — Equilibrium 
pressure within a cylinder at the maximum working 
temperature. For liquefied gases, this is at maximum 
fill density and may include super-pressurization, if 
applicable. 


3.34 Minimum Design Quantity (MDQ) — The 
quantity of agent required to achieve the calculated 
minimum design concentration. 


3.35 Monitoring — The supervision of the operating 
integrity of an electrical, mechanical, pneumatic or 
hydraulic control feature of a system. 


3.36 No Observed Adverse’ Effect Level 
(NOAEL) — The highest concentration of a clean 
agent at which no adverse toxicological or physiological 
effect has been observed. 


3.37 Non-liquefied Gas — Gas or gas mixture 
which, under reserve pressure and allowable reserve 
temperature conditions, is always present in a gaseous 
form. 


3.38 Normally Occupied Area — An area where, 
under normal circumstances, humans are present. 


3.39 Normally Unoccupied Area — Area not 
occupied by people but may be occasionally entered for 
brief periods. 


3.40 Nominal Size — A numerical designation of size 
which is common to all components in a piping system 
other than components designated by outside diameters 
or by thread size. It is a convenient round number 
for reference purposes and is only loosely related to 
manufacturing dimensions. 


3.41 Operating Device — Any component involved 
between actuation and release mechanisms. 


3.42 Pre-engineered Systems — Those having 
pre-determined flow rates, nozzle pressures and 
quantities of clean agent. These systems have the 
specific pipe size, maximum and minimum pipe 
lengths, flexible hose specifications, number of fittings 
and number and types of nozzles prescribed by a testing 
laboratory. 
NOTE — The hazards protected by these systems are 
specifically limited as to type and size by a testing laboratory 
based upon actual fire tests. Limitations on hazards that can be 
protected by these systems are contained in the manufacturer’s 
installation manual, which is referenced as part of the listing. 


3.43 Primary Release — Release of clean agent 
initiated by detection system or manual operation under 
normal operating conditions. 


3.44 Release — The opening of the cylinder and 
directional valves leading to the physical discharge or 
emission of clean agent into the enclosure. 


3.45 Safety Factor (SF) — A multiplier of the agent 
flame extinguishing or inerting concentration to 
determine the agent minimum design concentration. 


3.46 Safety Interlock — A switch that monitors the 
occupation of the protected area and automatically 
inhibits the discharge of the clean agent when the area 
is occupied. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


3.47 Sea Level Equivalent of Agent — The agent 
concentration (volume, percent) at sea level for which 
the partial pressure of agent matches the ambient partial 
pressure of agent at a given altitude. 


3.48 Sea Level Equivalent of Oxygen — The oxygen 
concentration (volume, percent) at sea level for which 
the partial pressure of oxygen matches the ambient 
partial pressure of oxygen at a given altitude. 


3.49 Secondary Release (Slave) — A release that is 
a consequence and dependent on the operation of the 
primary release, for example, pneumatic connection. 


3.50 Super-pressurization — The addition of a gas to 
the clean agent container, where necessary, to achieve 
the required pressure for proper system operation. 


3.51 Total Flooding — The act and manner of 
discharging an agent for the purpose of achieving a 
specified minimum agent concentration throughout a 
hazard volume. 


3.52 Total Flooding Systems — A firefighting system 
that is arranged to discharge clean agent into an enclosed 
space to achieve the appropriate design concentration. 


3.53 Unoccupiable Area — Area which cannot 
be occupied due to dimensional or other physical 
constraints (like shallow voids, cabinets, etc). 


4 GENERAL INFORMATION 


4.1 General Clauses 


4.1.1 Extinguishing gases are three-dimensional agents 
that are used effectively to suppress fire through physical 
or chemical action. Separate properties of specific gases 
are provided in other parts of this standard. 


4.1.2 Gaseous total flooding systems may be used 
to contain fires of classes A, B, C type as defined in 
3.6 to 3.8. However, for containing fires where 
flammable gases may be present, the possibility of 
explosion during and after system discharge should be 
considered. 


4.1.3 Clean agent gas extinguishing systems are useful 
within the limits of this standard in extinguishing fires 
in specific hazards or equipment and in occupancies 
where an electrically non-conductive medium is 
essential or desirable, or where cleanup of other media 
poses a problem. 


4.1.4 Where clean agent gas extinguishing systems 
are used, a fixed enclosure shall be provided about 
the hazard that is adequate to enable the specific 
concentration to be achieved and maintained for the 
specified period of time. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


4.1.5 The effects of agent decomposition on fire 
protection effectiveness shall be considered when 
using clean agents in hazards with high temperatures 
(for example, furnaces and ovens, etc). 


4.1.6 The design, installation, service and maintenance 
of the gas extinguishing systems shall be performed by 
those competent in the respective field in accordance 
with IS 15496. 


4.1.7 The installer of the clean agent system shall 
be certified by a reputed national/international 
agency/laboratory and such certification shall be valid 
at the time of installation. 


4.2 Description of the Installation 


4.2.1 The schematic diagram shown in Fig. | illustrates 
the functional interaction between the components 
which shall (solid lines) or may (dotted lines) be present 
in an installation. 


4.2.2 Halocarbon gas installations, in general, consist 
of gas containers, valves, fixed pipework with 
appropriately located nozzles in the protected zone and 


devices for detecting the fire, alarms, triggering and 
release. 


4.2.3 The gas is stored in pressurized containers at 
room temperature. 


4.2.4 Automatic detection and triggering devices 
or manual triggering devices are used to actuate the 
system. This may be achieved using any approved 
method or device which can be used to recognize and 
indicate the presence of heat, flames or smoke in the 
protected zone. 


4.2.5 The control equipment starts alarm devices, 
if necessary a delay device, and activates the release 
mechanism of containers and if available selector 
valves. Automatic triggering and release might be 
done by mechanical, pneumatic or electrical systems or 
respective combination of these systems. 


4.2.6 The installation may be equipped with automatic 
devices used to switch off machinery and close fire 
doors and other equipment, the purpose being to build 
up and to hold the desired gas concentration. 


NOTE: FIGURES IN BOLD IN PARENTHESES DENOTE 
DESIGN NODES FOR CALCULATIONS 


Fic. 1 TypicAL BALANCED SYSTEM 


4.3 Suitability and Application 


4.3.1 Total Flooding Systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing systems are used primarily 
to protect hazards that are in enclosures or equipment 
that, in itself, includes an enclosure to contain the 
agent for establishment of required concentration and 
maintenance thereof for the required period. Some 
typical hazards that may be suitable include, but or not 
limited to, the following: 


a) Enclosures, such as rooms, vaults, enclosed 
machines, containers, storage tanks and bins. 


b) Enclosed electrical hazards, such as transformers, 
control cubicles, switchboards, circuit breakers, 
and rotating equipment. 


c) Enclosed flammable liquid/gas 
processing areas. 


storage and 


d) Engines using flammable fuels. 


e) Electronic hazards, such as 
data processing equipment, 
telecommunication facilities. 


computers, 
control room, 


f) Sub-floors and other concealed spaces. 
g) Other high value assets. 


4.3.2 Gaseous fire extinguishing systems may also be 
used for explosion prevention and suppression where 
flammable materials may collect in confined area. 


4.3.3 The effects of agent decomposition (in case 
of halocarbon clean agents) on fire protection 
effectiveness and equipment shall be considered where 
they are used in hazards with high ambient temperatures 
(for example, furnaces and ovens). 


4.4 Limitations 


4.4.1 Gaseous fire extinguishing systems shall not be 
used on fires involving the following materials unless 
they are pre-evaluated for the purpose: 


a) Certain chemicals or mixture of chemicals, such 
as cellulose nitrate, gun powder, etc, which are 
capable of rapid oxidation in the absence of air. 


b) Reactive metals, such as lithium, sodium, 
potassium, magnesium, titanium, zirconium, and 
plutonium. 


c) Metal hydrides or metal amides, some of which 
may react violently with some gaseous agents. 


d) Chemicals capable of undergoing auto-thermal 
decomposition, such as certain organic peroxides 
and hydrazine. 


e) Mixtures containing oxidizing materials, such as 
sodium chlorate or sodium nitrate. 


f) Environments where significant surface areas 
exist at temperatures greater than the breakdown 
temperature of the extinguishing agent and are 
heated by means other than the fire. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


4.4.2 Electrostatic charging of non-grounded 
conductors may occur during the discharge of gaseous 
fire extinguishing systems. These conductors may 
discharge to other objects, causing an electric arc of 
sufficient charge to initiate explosion in potentially 
explosive atmospheres. Where this system is used for 
inerting, pipework shall be adequately bonded and 
earthed. 


4.5 Other Information 


4.5.1 All devices in respect of the gaseous fire 
extinguishing systems shall be designed for the service 
they will encounter and shall not be readily rendered 
inoperative or susceptible to accidental operation. 
Normally, the system components shall be designed to 
function properly from —21 °C to 55 °C or marked to 
indicate temperature limitations in accordance with the 
specifications. 


4.5.2 Gaseous fire extinguishing systems may be 
employed to protect more than one enclosure, if 
necessary, by means of directional valves. Where there 
are two or more enclosures simultaneously involved in 
a fire by reason of their proximity, such enclosures shall 
be protected by: 


a) Individual systems designed to allow simultaneous 
operation; or 

b) Asingle system sized and arranged to discharge on 
all potentially involved hazards simultaneously. 


4.5.3 Systems employing simultaneous discharge of 
different agents to protect the same enclosure shall not 
be permitted. 


4.6 Applicability of Clean Agents 


4.6.1 The fire extinguishing clean agents addressed in 
the standard are electrically non-conducting and leave 
no residue upon evaporation. 


4.6.2 Tables 1 and 2 show the details of clean agents 
that are covered in this standard. While requirements 
that are common to all these agents are prescribed in 
this standard, individual requirements for each agent 
are covered under separate standards. 


Table 1 Inert Gas Agents 


( Clause 4.6.2 ) 
SI Commercial Clean Chemical Name 
No. Name Agent 
u) (2) (3) (4) 
i) IG-0l Ar Argon (100 percent) 
ii) IG-100 N, Nitrogen (100 percent) 
iii) IG-541 N; Nitrogen (52 percent) 
Ar Argon (40 percent) 
CO, Carbon dioxide (8 percent) 
iv) IG-55 N Nitrogen (50 percent) 


2 
Ar Argon (50 percent) 


NOTE — Composition ofinert gas agents is given in percent by volume. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Table 2 Halocarbon Agents 
( Clause 4.6.2 ) 


SI No. Commercial Name Clean Agent Formulae Chemical Name 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) HCFC Blend A CHCL,CF, Dichlorodifluoroethane 
(see Note) (HCFC-123, 4.75 percent) 
CHCIF, Chlorodifluoromethane 
(HCFC-22, 82 percent) 
CHCIFCF, Chlorotetrafluoroethane 
(HCFC-124, 9.5 percent) 
ii) HFC-227ea CF ,CHFCF, Heptafluoropropane 
ili) FK-5-1-12 CF,CF,C(O)CF(CF,), Dodecafluoro-2-methylpentan-3-one 
iv) FIC-1311 CF,I Trifluoroiodomethane 


NOTE — Composition of HCFC Blend A is given in percent by weight. 


4.6.3 Physical properties of the agents covered in this 
standard are indicated in Tables 3 and 4. 


Table 3 Physical Properties of Clean Halocarbon Agents 


( Clause 4.6.3 ) 


SI No. Properties Units HCFC Blend A HFC-227ea FK-5-1-12 FIC-1311 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Molecular weight N/A 92.90 170.03 316.04 195.91 
ii) Boiling point at 760 mm of Hg °C —38.3 —16.4 49.2 -22.5 
iii) Freezing point °C -107.2 -131 —108 —110 
iv) Critical temperature IC 124.7 —101.7 168.66 122 
v) Critical pressure kPa 6 647 2912 1865 4041 
vi) Critical volume cm?/mole 162 274 494.5 225 
vii) Critical density kg/m? 577 621 639.1 871 
viii) Specific heat, liquid at 25 °C kJ/kg °C 1.256 1.184 1.103 0.592 
ix) Specific heat, vapour at constant kJ/kg °C 0.67 0.808 0.891 0.3 618 
pressure (1 atm) 
x) Heat of vapourization at boiling point kJ/kg 225.6 132.6 88 112.4 
xi) Thermal conductivity of liquid at25°C W/m °C 0.090 0.069 0.059 0.070 
xii) Viscosity of liquid at 25 °C Centipoise 0.21 0.184 0.524 0.196 
xiii) Relative dielectric strength at 1 atm at N/A 1.32 at 25 °C 2at25°C 2.3a125°C 1.41 at 25 °C 
734 mm Hg (N,=1) 
xiv) Solubility of water in agent ppm 0.12 percent by 0.06 percent by < 0.001 1.006 2 percent 
weight weight by weight 
xv) Ozone depletion potential (ODP) N/A 0.048 0 0 0 
xvi) Global warming potential (GWP) N/A 1.500 3.350 <l <1 
(reported over 100 years of time 
horizon) 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Table 4 Physical Properties of Inert Gas Agents 
( Clause 4.6.3 ) 


SI No. Properties Units 1G-01 IG-100 IG-541 IG-55 
0) 2 (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Molecular weight N/A 39.9 28.0 34.0 33.95 
ii) Boiling point at 760 mm of Hg 2G —189.85 —195.8 —196 —190.1 
iii) Freezing point °C —189.35 —201.0 -78.5 —199.7 
iv) Critical temperature °C -122.3 —146.9 N/A —134.7 
v) Critical pressure kPa 4 903 3 399 N/A 4150 
vi) Specific heat, vapour at constant kJ/kg °C 0.519 1.04 0.574 0.782 
pressure (1 atm) and 25 °C 
vii) Heat of vapourization at boiling point kJ/kg 163 199 220 181 
viii) Relative dielectric strength at 1 atm at N/A 1.01 1.0 1.03 1.01 
734 mm Hg, 25 °C (N, = 1.0) 
ix) Solubility of water in agent at 25 °C percent 0.006 0.001 3 0.015 0.006 


4.6.4 As such, both these standards that is for general 
this standard and individual requirements should 
be read together before designing a system. Where 
requirements in both the standards differ, the standard 
covering individual requirements shall take precedence. 


NOTE — Other agents could be covered later as and these 
those are available and used. 


5 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING SUBMISSION 
OF PLANS 


Plans shall contain sufficient details to enable an 
evaluation of the protected enclosure(s) or local 
protection(s) vis-à-vis the effectiveness of the system. 
Details shall include the property involved in the 
hazard(s), location(s), the enclosure limits and isolation 
of the hazards and the exposure of the hazards. 


5. 1 Plans for submission to the authorities shall be drawn 
up in accordance with the following requirements: 


a) Plans shall be clear, contain all required details 
including scale and point of compass and shall be 
clearly dated. 


b) Name of the enterprise, location and detailed 
postal address. 


c) Location and construction of the protected 
enclosures, walls and partitions. 


d) Cross and longitudinal sectional elevations of 
the protected enclosures showing the full height, 
schematic diagram, ceilings, false floors, etc. 


e) Type of clean agent proposed to be used. 


f) Concentration summary that is 
extinguishing, injected and inerting, etc. 


design, 


g) Type of the hazards proposed to be protected 
including descriptions of the occupancies, 
surroundings, wall/ceiling openings, etc. 


h) Location of the gas containers and details of 
the contents such as volume, pressure, nominal 
capacity in agent mass at standard conditions of 
temperatures and pressures. 


j) Description of pipes and fittings indicating also 
their specifications, pressure ratings, etc. 


k) Description of nozzles employed indicating their 
size, orifice area, etc and their locations. 


m) Electrical cabling and terminations. 


n) Description of detectors employed indicating their 
locations, mounting, etc. 


p) Bill of material and equipment schedule for 
each component proposed for the system, 
suppliers/manufacturers names, details of 
approvals, quantity, etc. 


q) Isometric drawings showing the agent distribution 
system indicating the lengths and diameters of each 
pipe segment, nodal reference, fittings including 
unions, reducers, orifices, strainers, nozzles, flow 
rates in all segments, equivalent orifice areas, etc. 


r) Plan view of the enclosures showing the entire 
agent piping system along with ceiling, floors, 
false floors, walls, partitions, pipe supports, agent 
containers, cabling, panels, detectors, etc. 


s) Details showing the pipe supports, agent container 
securement, etc. 


t) Location of ducts and similar devices, dampers, 
air handling systems, venting arrangements and 
their details with supporting calculations, etc. 


u) Schematic display of the operation of the system 
giving chronological sequence of operations prior 
to the discharge of the agent into the protected 
enclosures. 


v) Schematic diagrams showing the location and 
lay-out of all the power and indicating equipment 


IS 15493 : 2021 


connections, control panels, annunciator panels, 
etc. 


w) Tables showing the calculations for enclosure 
volumes, agent quantity, methods used to 
determine number and location of audible and 
visual indicating equipment, number and location 
of detectors, etc. 


y) Other features like interconnection with other type 
of fire protection systems, etc with the proposed 
system. 


z) To indicate fire rating of walls between rooms or 
enclosure for the areas protected. 


5.2 The details of the system shall include information 
and calculations on the amount of agent, container 
storage pressure internal volume of the containers, the 
location, type and flow rate of each nozzle including 
equivalent orifice area, the location, size and equivalent 
lengths of pipe, fittings, siphon tube, valve, discharge 
head and flexible connector hose, and the location 
and size of the storage facility. Pipe size reductions 
and orientation of ‘tees’ shall be clearly indicated. 
Details shall be available on location and function of 
the detection devices, operating devices, auxiliary 
equipment and electrical circuitry. All the apparatus, 
equipment used in the system shall be easily identifiable. 


5.3 An ‘as built’ drawing shall be submitted upon 
completion of the installation for approval. Instruction 
and maintenance manuals that include a full sequence 
of operations and a full set of drawings and calculations 
shall be available on site. 


5.4 Flow Calculations 


System flow calculations along with the working 
drawings shall be submitted to the authorities in 
advance for approval. The hydraulic calculations shall 
be performed using calculation method approved by 
the authorities. 


6 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Safety Precautions (Personnel) 


6.1.1 Halocarbon clean agents are potentially 
cardio-toxic while inert gas clean agents can present 
physiological effects associated with a hypoxic 
(that is, low oxygen) atmosphere. The experimentally 
determined no observed adverse effects level (NOAEL) 
and lowest observed adverse effects level (LOAEL) 
values, which are indicated in Table 5 for the halocarbon 
agents. The corresponding NOAEL and LOAEL values 
for the inert gas agents have been set at 12 percent 
oxygen (43 percent inert gas concentration) and 
10 percent oxygen (52 percent inert gas concentration) 
respectively. Inert gas mixture concentrations 
(for example, IG 541) can only be determined indirectly 


by measuring the oxygen concentration within an 
enclosure. 


6.1.2 The clean agent system design extinguishing 
concentration ideally should be less than the NOAEL 
for the specific clean agent for occupiable areas. Also, 


a) discharge of some of the gas agents in fire 
extinguishing concentrations creates serious 
hazards for personnel in both the protected area 
and the areas to which the gas may migrate and 
also to properties in the vicinity of agent discharge. 
These hazards may include reduced visibility and 
suffocation, during and after the discharge period. 
The relevant information on the above is available 
in Annex B. 


b) the toxicity information on the gaseous fire agents 
is given in Table 5. More details are specified in 
other parts (that is for the individual clean agents) 
of this standard. Where hazardous concentrations 
of agent may exist, lock-off valves shall be fitted 
to the system. 


c) in areas, where there is a likelihood of significant 
difference between gross and net volumes of 
the enclosure, utmost care shall be exercised in 
proper system design to ensure that maximum 
concentrations are not exceeded. 


6.1.3 The decomposition products generated by the 
clean agent breaking down in the presence of very high 
degrees of heat can be hazardous. All of the present 
halocarbon agents contain fluorine. In the presence 
of available hydrogen (from water vapour or the 
combustion process itself), the main decomposition 
product is hydrogen fluoride (HF). 


6.1.4 Safety Precautions (For Protected Areas) 


a) Normally Occupied Areas — The minimum safety 
precautions taken shall be in accordance with 
Table 6 and provisions therein. 


b) Normally Unoccupied Areas — The maximum 

concentration shall not exceed the LOEAL for the 
agent used unless a lock-off valve is fitted. 
NOTE — Any change to the enclosure volume, or addition or 
removal of contents that was not covered in the original design 
will affect the concentration of agent. In such instances the 
system shall be re-calculated to ensure that the required design 
concentration is achieved and that the NOEAL or the LOEAL 
are not exceeded. 


6.1.5 Protection of Occupants 


In any use of the gaseous system, where there is a 
possibility that people may enter or have difficulty 
seeking egress from the protected enclosure, suitable 
safeguards shall be provided. Such safety aspects as 
personal training, warning signs, pre-discharge alarms 
and safety interlocks shall be provided. Means of 
proper ventilation after fire should be readily available. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Table 5 Toxicity Information on Clean Agent Suppression Systems 
[ Clauses 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 (b) ] 


SI No. Clean Agent Chemical Formula NOAEL LOAEL LC,, or ALC 
4 percent by volume N 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) HCFC blend A CHCL,CF, (4.75 percent) 10 > 10 64 
CHCIF, (82 percent) 


CHCICF, (9.5 preent) 
Detoxifier (3.75 percent) 


ii) HFC-227ea CF,CHFCF, 9 10.5 > 80 
iii) FK-5-1-12 CF,CF,C(O)CF(CF,), 10 >10 64 
iv) FIC-1311 CFI 0.2 0.4 > 12.8 
v) 1G-541 Nitrogen (52 percent) 43 52 Not applicable 
Argon (40 percent) 
Carbon dioxide (8 percent) 
vi) IG-100 Nitrogen 43 52 Not applicable 
vii) IG-55 Nitrogen (50 percent) 43 52 Not applicable 
Argon (50 percent) 
viii) IG-01 Argon (100 percent) 43 52 Not applicable 
NOTES 


1 LC, is the concentration lethal to 50 percent of a rat population during a 4 h exposure. 


2 The ALC is the approximate lethal concentration. 


Table 6 Minimum Safety Precautions 
[ Clause 6.1.4 (a) ] 


SI No. Agent Levels Requirements 
Inhibit Switch and Egress in 30 s Safety Interlock Lock-off Valve 
Time Delay 
o) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) HCFC blend A Required Not required Not required Not required 
ii) HFC-227ea Required Required Required Not required 
iii) FK-5-1-12 Required Not required Required Required 
NOTES 


1 The purpose of the table is to avoid unnecessary exposure of occupants to the agent discharged. Factors such as the time for egress and the risk to 
the occupants by the fire must be considered when determining the system discharge time delay. 


2 Concentration levels above LOAEL are not permitted in occupied areas and question of egress does not arise. 


6.2 Safety Precautions (Total Flooding Systems) 2) Safety interlocks and lock-off valves shall 
: be provided wherever required as per Table 2 
6.2.1 In areas protected by total flooding systems, that under 6.1.4(a). 


are capable of being occupied, the provision of the 


following safety aspects shall apply: 3) Exit routes which shall be kept clear at all 


times; and the provision of emergency lighting 


a) Mandatory Requirements and adequate direction signs to minimize 
1) A time delay shall be provided for evacuation travel distances. 
prior to agent discharge. The agent discharge 4) Outward swinging self-closing doors which 
delay time shall be based on an engineering can be opened from inside including when 
assessment of egress time for occupants in the locked from the outside. 


area protected. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


5) Continuous visual and audible alarms at 
entrances and designated exits until the 
protected area has been made safe. 

6) Warning and instruction signs shall be arranged 

as per clause. 


7 


Sa” 


Pre-discharge alarms within such areas that 
are distinctive from all other alarm signals and 
that will operate immediately upon detection 
of fire. 


Means of prompt ventilation of such areas 
after any discharge of agent. Forced draft 
ventilation will often be necessary. Care shall 
be taken to completely dissipate hazardous 
atmospheres and not just move them to other 
locations, as agents are generally heavier than 
air. 


8 


wa 


9 


~ 


Instructions and drills of all personnel within 
or in the vicinity of protected areas, including 
maintenance and construction personnel who 
may be brought into the area, to ensure their 
correct actions when the system operates. 


b) Recommendatory Requirements 


1) Adding an odour to the agent so that the 
hazardous atmospheres are recognizable. 


2) Availability of self-contained breathing 
apparatus and personnel trained for its use. 


3) Means to detect a hazardous atmosphere in or 
around the protected area. 


6.2.2 Electrostatic Discharge 


To avoid a situation as stated in 4.4.2, the components 
of the inerting system, such as pipe work, etc shall be 
bonded and earthed as per SP 30. 


6.3 Electrical Hazards 


6.3.1 All system components shall be located to 
maintain no less than minimum clearances from 
energized electrical parts. Installation shall conform to 
various requirements prescribed in SP 30. 


6.3.2 Where the design basic insulation level (BIL) is 
not available and where nominal voltage is used for the 
design criteria, the highest minimum clearance listed in 
SP 30 shall be used. 


6.3.3 The selected clearance to ground shall satisfy the 
greater of the switching surge rather than being based 
on nominal voltage. 


6.3.4 The clearance between uninsulated, energized 
parts of the electrical system equipment and any 
portion of the clean agent system shall not be less than 
the minimum clearance provided for electrical system 
insulation on any individual component. 


6.3.5 Where BIL is not available and where nominal 
voltage is used for the design criteria, the highest 
minimum clearance listed in SP 30 shall be used. 


10 


6.4 Miscellaneous Hazards 


Certain other types of hazards associated with the usage 
of gaseous systems are as under: 


a) Noise — Discharge of a gaseous system can cause 
a noise loud enough to be startling, but not enough 
to cause traumatic injury. 


b 


wm 


Turbulence — The turbulence caused by the high 
velocity discharge from nozzles may be sufficient 
to dislodge substantial objects directly in its path, 
such as ceiling tiles and light fittings. Therefore, 
tiles and light fittings should be properly anchored. 
System discharge may also cause enough general 
turbulence in the enclosure to move unsecured 
paper and light objects. 

c) Electrical clearance — Where exposed electrical 
conductors are present, all system components 
shall be located no less than the minimum 
required clearances from the energized parts. The 
clearances stipulated in SP 30 shall be maintained 
for safe operating conditions. Where the design 
basic insulation level is not available and where 
nominal voltage is used for the design criteria the 
highest minimum clearance listed for the purpose 
shall be used. 


Other Hazards — If any, appropriate to the 


selected gaseous agent as specified in the other 
parts of this standard shall be given due attention. 


d) 


7 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE PROTECTED 
ENCLOSURES 


7.1 Unclosable Openings 
Some of the unclosable openings are listed below: 


a) The protected enclosure shall have sufficient 
structural strength and integrity to contain the 
agent discharge. 


b 


wm 


The area of the unclosable openings such as 
ventilator openings within the enclosure shall be 
kept to as least as possible to avoid ingress of 
the agent through the leakages to the adjoining 
areas. Where confinement of the agent within 
the enclosure is not practicable, protection shall 
be extended to include the adjacent connected 
hazards or work areas. 


c 


wm 


Particular attention should be given to openings 
around cable, duct and pipelines (similar utility 
services) penetrating through the wall(s) and 
floor(s). 

In case of unavoidable openings, such openings 
should be restricted to as minimum as possible. 
Quantity of the agent, in such cases, shall need 
to be suitably increased in consultation with the 
authorities concerned for maintaining the desired 
concentration within the enclosure. 


d 


mw 


e) In case of (c), the openings should be effectively 
sealed or preferably fire stopped using passive 
elements rather than increasing the quantity of the 
agent. 


Injecting more quantity of agent, in most of the 
cases, will only increase the rate of loss of agent 
through such openings. Hence, openings in the 
wall(s) and floor(s) shall be kept only to optimum 
requirements with increase in quantity of agent as 
discussed in (d). 


7.2 Air Handling System and Similar Services 
The requirements shall be as given below: 


a) Humidification and air handling systems catering 
to the protected areas shall be capable of automatic 
shutdown prior to the agent discharge. Also, dampers 
shall be available inside the systems to stop flow of 
agent through ducts and similar means and these 
shall close automatically prior to agent discharge. 


b 


mS 


Where it is necessary for air handling systems to be 
kept operating to provide cooling arrangement for 
essential equipment, quantity of the agent shall need 
to be suitably increased to include the volumes of 
both air and the ventilation system in addition to 
the volume of protected enclosure in consultation 
with the authorities concerned for maintaining the 
desired concentration within the enclosure. 


c 


wm 


The operations within the enclosure that are likely to 
disperse the discharge of the agent such as pumps, 
spray guns, heaters, etc shall not be left running 
during the discharge of the agent and suitable 
provisions shall be available to shut them down 
prior to agent discharge. 


d 


we 


In case of extinguishment of deep-seated fires such 
as those involving solids, unclosable openings 
shall be provided only in the ceiling level and such 
openings near the walls and partitions shall be 
avoided. 


8 COMPONENTS 
SYSTEMS 


OF GASEOUS FLOODING 


8.1 Agent Supply and Container Arrangements 


8.1.1 Agent Supply 
The following shall be applicable: 


a) Quality Requirements The clean agent 
shall comply with quality and purity 
standards appropriate to the agent selected for 
extinguishment. Each batch of agent manufactured 
shall be tested and certified to applicable 
specifications. Agent blends shall remain 
homogeneous in storage and used within the listed 
temperature range and environmental conditions at 
the place of installation. 


b) Quantity Requirements (Main) — The amount of 
agent in the system shall be at least sufficient for 


11 


IS 15493 : 2021 


the largest single hazard or group of hazards to be 
protected simultaneously. 


c) Quantity Requirements (Reserve) Same 
quantity as that of main quantity requirements 
shall be available as reserve. However, if the 
replenishing of agent supply takes more than 
7 days at the site of installation, authority concerned 
may insist on more quantity to be kept available as 
reserve. 


d 


wat 


Uninterrupted Protection — Where uninterrupted 
protection is required, both the main and reserve 
supply shall be permanently connected to 
the distribution piping and arranged for easy 
change-over. 


8.1.2 Agent Storage 
The following shall apply: 


a) Agent shall be stored in containers designed to hold 
that specific agent at ambient temperatures. 


b) Agent containers shall be charged to a fill density or 
super-pressurization level within the range specified 
by the manufacturers. 


c) Agent storage temperatures shall not exceed 55 °C 
or be less than —21 °C. External heating or cooling 
shall be employed to keep the temperature of the 
agent storage container within the above limits if 
situation warrants so. 


d) The agent containers used in the flooding systems 
shall be designed to meet the requirements of the 
Department of Explosives, Nagpur. 


e) Each agent container shall have a permanent 
nameplate or other permanent marking that indicate 
the details as per Table 7. 


f) A reliable means shall be provided to determine the 
pressure in refillable super-pressurized containers. 


g) The agent containers connected to a common 
manifold shall conform as per the provisions in 
Table 8 and automatic by means, such as a check 
valve, shall be provided to prevent agent loss and 
to ensure personnel safety if the system is operated 
when any containers are removed for maintenance. 


Table 7 Marking on Storage Container 
[ Clause 8.1.2 (e) ] 


SI No. Clean Agent Marking Required 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Halocarbon a) Name of the agent 
clean agents b) Tare and gross weights 


<~ 


c) Super-pressurization level of 


the container 


ii) Inert gas clean a) Name of the agent 
agent b) Pressurization level of the 
container 
c) Nominal agent volume 


IS 15493 : 2021 


SI No. 


o) 


Table 8 Arrangement of Containers with 
Common Manifold 


[ Clause 8.1.2 (g) ] 


Clean Agent 
(2) 


Marking Required 
(3) 


i) 


ii) 


8.1.3 


Halocarbon 
clean agents 


Agents in a multiple container system. 
All containers supplying the same 
manifold outlet for distribution of the 
same agent shall be interchangeable, 
of same nominal size and capacity, 
filled with same nominal mass of agent 
and pressurized to the same nominal 
working pressure. 


Inert gas clean 
agent 


Agents shall be permitted to utilize 
multiple storage container sizes 
connected to the common manifold 
provided the containers are all 
pressurized to the same nominal 
working pressure. 


Storage Container Arrangement 


The arrangement of storage containers and accessories 


shall 
a) 


b) 


d) 


g) 


be as follows: 


Containers and accessories shall be located and 
arranged so that inspection, testing, recharging and 
other maintenance is facilitated, and interruption 
to protection is kept to a minimum. 


Containers should be located outside and as near 
as practical to the enclosure protected. Containers 
protecting a single risk can be located within the 
enclosure they serve, only if sited so as to minimize 
the risk of exposure to fire and explosion. 


Containers shall be located so as not to be subject 
to severe weather conditions or to mechanical, 
chemical or other damage. Where excessive 
climatic or mechanical exposures are expected, 
suitable guards or enclosures shall be provided. 


Containers shall be adequately mounted to allow 
free passage of air around the base and suitably 
supported to provide for convenient individual 
servicing or content weighing. There shall be 
enough space for a full on-site inspection of the 
base of the container. 


In manifold systems, non-return valves or other 
automatic means shall be provided to prevent 
a loss of agent and to ensure personnel safety if 
the system is operated when any containers are 
removed for maintenance. 


Containers brackets or devices integral with the 
container for attachment to structures shall be 
designed to cater for the maximum expected mass, 
vibration effects and shock loading, appropriate to 
the installation. 

Reserve containers, where provided, shall 


be permanently sited or arranged for easy 
change-over. 


h) 


If storage containers are located in areas where 
their leakage could lead to a hazardous 
concentration, consideration shall be given to 
the installation of gas detectors or other means 
to provide warning of the onset of hazardous 
conditions. 


8.2 Agent Distribution Arrangements 


8.2.1 General 


The general requirements shall be as below: 


a) 


b) 


d) 


g) 


Pipe network, fittings shall be of non-combustible 
construction, having physical and chemical 
properties such that their integrity under stress can 
be predicted with reliability. 


In severely corrosive atmospheres, special 
corrosion resistant materials shall be required for 
pipes, fittings or support brackets and steelwork. 


Before final assembly, pipes and fittings shall be 
inspected visually to ensure they are free of burrs, 
spelter and rust and that no foreign matter is inside 
and the full bore is clear. After assembly, the 
system shall be thoroughly blown through with 
dry air or compressed gas. The pipe work shall be 
free of particulate matter and oil residue before the 
installation of nozzles and discharge devices. 


A dirt trap consisting of a ‘tee’ with a capped 
nipple at least 50 mm long should be installed at 
the end of each pipe run. Drain traps should also 
be necessary if there is a possibility of a build-up 
of water. 


In systems where valve arrangements introduce 
sections of closed piping, such sections shall be 
equipped with the following: 


1) Indication of agent trapped in piping. 
2) Means for safe manual venting. 


3) Automatic relief of excess pressure, where 
required. 


Pressure relief devices, which can include the 
directional valve, shall be fitted so that the 
discharge, in the event of operation, will not 
endanger the personnel. 


In systems using pressure operated container 
valves, automatic means shall be provided to vent 
any container leakage that could build up pressure 
in the pilot system and cause unwanted opening 
of the container valve. The means provided for 
pressure venting shall not prevent operation of the 
container valve. 


8.2.2 Piping Network 


The quality (and any conformity) requirement of the 


a) 


piping network shall be as follows: 


Cast iron or non-metallic pipes shall not be used 
anywhere. 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Where used, flexible pipes, tubing, or hoses 
including connections shall be of approved 
materials with adequate temperature and pressure 
ratings. 


The thickness of the pipes shall be in accordance 
with the provisions laid down in IS 6631. The 
internal pressure used for this calculation shall not 
be less than the greater of either of the following 
values: 

in 


1) Normal charging pressure the agent 


container at 21 °C. 
2) 80 percent of the maximum pressure in the 
agent container at the maximum storage 
temperature of not less than 55 °C using the 
maximum allowable fill density specified by 


the manufacturer, if applicable. 


In no case shall the value used, for the minimum 
piping design pressure, be less than that specified 
in Tables 9 and 10 shown below for the conditions 
indicated. 


For inert gas clean agents that employ the use 
of a pressure-reducing device, Table 10 shall be 


g) 


h) 


J) 


IS 15493 : 2021 


used for piping upstream of the pressure reducer, 
and 8.2.2 (f) shall be used to determine minimum 
pipe design pressure for piping downstream of the 
pressure reducer. The pressure-reducing device 
shall be readily identifiable. 


For systems that employ the use of a pressure 
reducing device, the minimum design pressure 
for piping downstream of the pressure-reducing 
device shall be determined from the maximum 
anticipated pressure in the downstream piping as 
predicted by system flow calculations. 


For halocarbon agents, Table 9 shall be used; and 
for inert gas agents Table 10 shall be used. 


Where different fill densities, pressurization 
levels or higher storage temperatures other than 
the values shown in the Table 9 are used with 
prior acceptance of the authorities, the minimum 
design pressure for the piping shall be adjusted 
to the maximum pressure in the agent container 
at maximum temperature, using the basic design 
criteria specified (c) (1) and (c) (2). 


Pipe joints shall be either threaded, welded or 


Table 9 Minimum Design Working Pressure for Halocarbon Clean Agent System Piping 
[ Clause 8.2.2 (d) and 8.2.2 (g) ] 


SI Clean Agent Agent Container Maximum Agent Container Charging Agent Container Minimum Piping Design 
No. Fill Density Pressure at 21 °C Pressure at 55 °C Pressure at 21 °C 
kg/m? kPa kPa kPa 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) HFC-227ea 1 265 300 900 2 900 
1201 1 000 1 700 1 400 
1153 2 500 3 600 2 900 
1 153 4 200 7 100 5 700 
ii) HCFC blend A 900 4 100 5 900 4 700 
900 2 500 3 700 3 000 
iii) FK-5-1-12 1 442 1 000 1 200 1 000 
1 442 1 300 1 600 1 300 
1 442 2 500 2 800 2 500 
1201 3 400 4 000 3 400 
1 442 4 200 4 800 4 200 


NOTE — Nitrogen delivered to agent cylinder through a flow restrictor upon system actuation. Nitrogen supply cylinder pressure is 
124 bar at 21 °C. 


13 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Table 10 Minimum Design Working Pressure for Inert Gas Clean Agent System Piping 
[ Clause 8.2.2 (d), 8.2.2 (e) and 8.2.2 (g) | 


SINo. Clean Agent Agent Container Charging 


Pressure at 21 °C 
kPa 


(3) 
16 341 
20 436 
31 097 
14 997 
19 996 
31 050 
15 000 
20 000 
30 000 


a) 
i) 


(2) 
IG-01 


ii) IG 541 


iii) 1G-55 


16 575 
22 312 
28 000 


iv) IG-100 


flanged type only and other types of jointing shall 
not be allowed. 


8.2.3 Pipe Fittings 


a) The sizes and dimensions of pipe fittings shall 
be in accordance with IS 1239 (Part 2). Fittings 
shall be capable to withstand minimum rated 
working pressure equal to or greater than the 
minimum working pressure specified in 8.2.2(c) 
for the clean agent being used. For systems that 
use a pressure reducing device in the distribution 
piping, the fittings downstream the device shall 
have a minimum rated working pressure equal to 
or greater than the maximum anticipated pressure 
in the downstream piping. 

b) All threads used in joints and fittings shall comply 

with relevant Indian Standards. Cast iron fittings 

shall not be used. 

c) Welding of joints shall comply with relevant 
Indian Standards. 

d) Where copper, stainless steel, or other suitable 
tubing is jointed with compression type fittings, 
manufacturer’s pressure and temperature ratings 
of the fittings shall not be exceeded. 


8.2.4 Valves 


a) All valves shall comply with relevant Indian 
Standards. 


b) Gaskets, O-rings, sealants, and other valve 
components shall be fabricated with materials 


Agent Container Pressure at 


14 


Minimum Piping Design 


55 °C Pressure at 21 °C 
kPa kPa 
(4) (5) 

18 271 16 341 

22 781 20 436 

37 244 31 097 

17 755 14 997 

23 671 19 996 

36 950 31 050 

17 600 15 000 

23 700 20 000 

36 100 30 000 

19 299 16 575 

26 015 22 312 

32 778 28 000 


that are compatible with the agent used and 
also suitable for the anticipated pressures and 
temperatures. 


c) Valves shall be protected against mechanical, 
chemical and other types of damage. 


d) Special corrosion resistant materials or coating 
shall be used in severely corrosive atmospheres. 


e) Where directional valves are used for multi-hazard 
protection: 


1) valves shall be of approved type for use with 
the installed suppression system; and 


2) the control equipment shall be specifically 
listed for the number, type, and operation of 
those valves. 


8.2.5 Pipe Installation and Supports 


a) In the installation of pipe work, care shall be taken 
to avoid possible restrictions due to foreign matter, 
faulty fabrication or improper installation. Pipe 
ends shall be reamed after cutting, where required. 

b) Where there is a possibility of explosion, the 

piping shall be attached to supports that are least 

likely to be displaced. 


The maximum distance between supports shall 
take into account the total mass of pipe and the 
agent used. Distance between supports is indicated 
in Table 11. 


Table 11 Maximum Pipe Work Distances 
[ Clause 8.2.5 (c) ] 


SI No. Nominal Diameter Maximum Pipe Work 
of Pipe Distance 
mm m 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 6 0.5 
ii) 10 1 
iii) 15 1.5 
iv) 20 1.8 
v) 25 2.1 
vi) 32 2.4 
vii) 40 2.7 
viii) 50 3.4 
ix) 65 3.5 
x) 80 3.7 
xi) 100 4.3 
xii) 125 4.8 
xiii) 150 5.2 
xiv) 200 5.8 


8.2.6 Discharge Nozzles 


a) Nozzles, including nozzles directly attached 


b 


wm 


to containers, shall be of approved type and 
located with the geometry of the enclosure under 
consideration, 


The type, number and placement of nozzles shall 
be such that, 


1) the design concentration shall be achieved in 
all parts of the enclosure; 


the discharge shall not unduly splash 
flammable liquids or create dust clouds that 
might extend the fire, create an explosion or 
otherwise adversely affect the occupants; 


2) 


3 


wa 


the velocity of discharge shall not adversely 
affect the enclosure or its contents; 


4 


wa 


they are free of obstructions that could interfere 
with the proper distribution of the discharged 
agent in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
installation and maintenance manual; 


5 


wa 


the discharge nozzles shall be provided 
with frangible discs or blow-out caps where 
clogging by foreign materials is possible. 
These devices shall provide an unobstructed 
opening upon system operation and shall be 
arranged so they will not injure personnel; 


6) nozzle shall be suitable for the intended use 
and shall be listed or approved for discharge 
characteristics. The discharge nozzle consists 
of the orifice and any associated horn, shield 


or baffle; 


wm 


15 


IS 15493 : 2021 


7) nozzles shall be of adequate strength for 
use with the expected working pressures, 
be able to resist nominal mechanical abuse, 
and be constructed to withstand expected 
temperatures without deformation; 

8) nozzle discharge orifice inserts shall be of 

corrosion-resistant material; and 


9 


~~ 


nozzles used in local application systems shall 
be so connected and supported that they will 
not readily be moved out of alignment. 


c) In order to minimize the possibility of lifting 


or displacement of light weight ceiling tiles, 
precautions shall be taken to securely anchor the 
tiles for a minimum distance of 1.5 m from each 
discharge nozzle. 


8.2.7 Directional Valves 


a) Directional valves shall be located outside the 


b 


d 


e 


wm 


wa 


wm 


wm 


danger zone resulting from a fire in the flooding 
zone. No flammables shall be stored in the 
immediate vicinity of a directional valve. 


Directional valves shall be arranged so that 
they will not open when subjected to operating 
environmental vibration that arises when the valve 
at the supply container or other directional valves 
opening. 

Automatic actuation of a directional valve shall 
be powered by static weight and/or pneumatic 
and/or electrical means. The unit shall be designed 
in such a way that checking for proper functioning 
on site can be achieved without discharging gas. 


If it is possible to release the extinguishant, even 
though the mechanism used to automatically open 
the directional valve has failed, the emergency 
release mechanism shall not circumvent national 
standards for personnel safety the equipment 
required to prevent damage from excess pressure 
being exerted by the gas being discharged into the 
flooding zone. 


Directional valves shall open automatically and 
simultaneously with the opening of a container 
valve. 


Pressure relief devices from safety valves shall 
discharge gas into the atmosphere away from 
windows, especially in basements, ventilation 
openings, etc. In no case, shall this constitute 
a hazard to personnel. Safety valves have to be 
assembled vertically. 


9 DETECTION, ACTUATION, ALARM AND 
CONTROL SYSTEMS 


9.1 General 


9.1.1 Detection, actuation, alarm and control systems 
shall be installed, tested and maintained in accordance 
with IS 2189. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


9.1.2 Automatic detection and automatic actuation 
shall be used. 


9.2 Automatic Detection 


9.2.1 Automatic detection shall be by any approved 
method or device capable of detecting and indicating 
heat, flame, smoke, combustible vapours or an abnormal 
condition in the hazard, such as process trouble, that is 
likely to produce fire. 


9.2.2 Adequate and reliable primary and 24 h minimum 
standby sources of energy shall be used to provide 
for operation of the detection, signaling, control and 
actuation requirements of the system. 


9.2.3 When a new agent system is being installed in a 
space that has an existing detection system, an analysis 
shall be made of the detection devices to assure that 
the detection system is in good operating condition and 
will respond promptly to a fire situation. This analysis 
shall be done to assist in limiting the decomposition 
products from a suppression event. 


9.3 Operating Devices 


9.3.1 Operating devices shall include agent releasing 
devices or valves, discharge controls and shutdown 
equipment necessary for successful performance of the 
system. 


9.3.2 Operation shall be by listed mechanical, electrical 
or pneumatic means. An adequate and reliable source 
of energy shall be used. 


9.3.3 All devices shall be designed for the service 
they will encounter and shall not readily be rendered 
inoperative or susceptible to accidental operation. 
Devices normally shall be designed to function 
properly from —21 °C to 55 °C or marked to indicate 
temperature limitations. 


9.3.4 All devices shall be located, installed or suitably 
protected so that they are not subject to mechanical, 
chemical or other damage that would render them 
inoperative. 


9.3.5 A mean of manual release of the system shall 
be provided. Manual release shall be accomplished 
by a mechanical manual release or by an electrical 
manual release when the control equipment monitors 
the battery voltage level of the standby battery supply 
and will provide a low battery signal. The release shall 
cause simultaneous operation of automatically operated 
valves controlling agent release and distribution. 


9.3.6 A discharge pressure switch shall be required 
where mechanical system actuation is possible. 


9.3.7 The discharge pressure switch shall provide an 
alarm-initiating signal to the releasing panel. 


16 


9.3.8 A means of manual release shall not be required 
for automatic systems when the hazard being protected 
is unoccupiable and the hazard is in a remote location 
where personnel are not normally present. 


9.3.9 The normal manual control(s) for actuation shall 
be located for easy accessibility at all times, including 
at the time of a fire. The manual control shall preferably 
be situated outside the protective area or adjacent to 
the main exit. The manual control(s) shall be of distinct 
appearance and clearly recognizable for the purpose 
intended. Operation of any control shall cause the 
complete system to operate in its normal fashion. 


9.3.10 Manual controls shall not require a pull of more 
than 40 kg (178 N) nor a movement of more than 
355 mm to secure operation. At least one manual 
control for activation shall be located not more than 
1.2 m above the floor. 


9.3.11 Where gas pressure from the system or pilot 
containers is used as a means for releasing the remaining 
containers, the supply and discharge rate shall be 
designed for releasing all of the remaining containers. 


9.3.12 All devices for shutting down supplementary 
equipment shall be considered integral parts of the 
system and shall function with the system operation. 


9.3.13 All manual operating devices shall be identified 
as to the hazard they protect. 


9.3.14 The manual operation device shall incorporate 
a double action or other safety device to prevent 
accidental operation. The device shall be provided with 
a means for preventing operation during maintenance 
of the system. 


9.4 Control Equipment 


9.4.1 Electric Control Equipment 


a) Control equipment shall supervise the actuating 
devices and associated wiring and, as required, 
cause actuation. The control equipment shall 
be specifically listed for the number and type of 
actuating devices utilized and their compatibility 
shall have been approved. 


b 


ma 


Removal of an electric actuator from the agent 
storage container discharge valve that it controls 
shall result in an audible and visual indication of 
system impairment at the system releasing control 
panel. 


Removal of an electric actuator from the selector 
valve it controls shall result in an audible and 
visual indication of system impairment at the 
system releasing control panel. 


c 


< 


d 


wa 


The control equipment shall supervise the 
actuating devices and associated wiring and, as 
required, cause actuation. 


e) The control equipment shall be specifically 
approved for the number and type of actuating 
devices utilized, and their compatibility shall have 
been listed. 


f) Removal of the primary agent container actuating 
device from the discharge valve and/or selector 
valve shall cause a trouble or supervisory signal at 
the releasing control unit. 


9.4.2 Pneumatic Control Equipment 


a) Where pneumatic control equipment is used, 
the lines shall be protected against crimping and 
mechanical damage. 


b 


wm 


Where installations could be exposed to conditions 
that could lead to loss of integrity of the pneumatic 
lines, special precautions shall be taken to ensure 
that no loss of integrity will occur. 


c 


<~ 


The control equipment shall be specifically 
approved for the number and type of actuating 
devices utilized and their compatibility shall have 
been approved. 


9.5 Operating Alarms and Indicators 


9.5.1 Alarms or indicators or both shall be used 
to indicate the operation of the system, hazards to 
personnel, or failure of any supervised device. The 
type (audible, visual or olfactory), number, and 
location of the devices shall be such that their purpose 
is satisfactorily accomplished. The extent and type 
of alarms or indicator equipment or both shall be 
approved. 


9.5.2 Audible and visual pre-discharge alarms shall 
be provided within the protected area to give positive 
warning of impending discharge. The operation of the 
warning devices shall be continued after agent discharge 
until positive action has been taken to acknowledge the 
alarm and proceed with appropriate action. 


9.5.3 Abort switches generally are not recommended, 
however, where provided, the following requirements 
shall receive attention: 

a) Abort switches shall be located within the 
protected area and shall be located near the means 
of egress from the area. 

b) An abort switch shall not be operated unless the 
cause for the condition is known and corrective 
action can be taken. 

c) The abort switch shall be of a type that requires 
constant manual pressure to cause abort. 

d) The abort switch shall not be of a type that would 
allow the system to be left in an aborted mode 
without someone present. 

e) In all cases the normal and manual emergency 
control shall override the abort function. 


17 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Operation of the abort function shall result in both 
audible and distinct visual indication of system 
impairment. The abort switch shall be clearly 
recognizable for the purpose intended. 


9.5.4 Alarms indicating failure of supervised devices 
or equipment shall give prompt and positive indication 
of any failure and shall be distinctive from alarms 
indicating operation or hazardous conditions. 


9.5.5 Warning and instruction signs at entrances to and 
inside protected areas shall be provided. 


9.5.6 Indication lamps shall be provided to indicate 
the status of the abort switch, that is, green colour for 
‘Auto’, yellow colour for the ‘Manual’ and red colour 
for ‘Discharge’ modes. 


9.6 Time Delays 


9.6.1 For clean agent extinguishing systems, a 
pre-discharge alarm and time delay, sufficient to allow 
personnel evacuation prior to discharge, shall be 
provided. For hazard areas subject to fast growth fires, 
where the provision of a time delay would seriously 
increase the threat to life and property, a time delay 
shall be permitted to be eliminated. 


9.6.2 Time delays shall be used only for personnel 
evacuation or to prepare the hazard area for discharge. 


9.6.3 Time delays shall not be used as a means of 
confirming operation of a detection device before 
automatic actuation occurs. 


9.7 Unwanted System Function 


a) To avoid unwanted discharge of an electrically 
actuated clean agent system, a supervised 
disconnect switch shall be provided. 


b) The disconnect switch shall interrupt the releasing 
circuit to the suppression system. 


c) The disconnect switch shall cause a supervisory 
signal at the releasing control unit. 


d) The disconnect switch shall be located inside a 
lockable fire alarm control panel, inside a lockable 
enclosure, or require a key for activation of the 
switch. 

e) When the disconnect switch requires a key for 

activation, the access key shall not be removable 

while disconnected, so the suppression system can 
be quickly returned to the operational condition in 
the event of a fire. 


Suppression system disconnect achieved via 
software programming shall not be acceptable for 
use in lieu of a physical disconnect switch. 


g) The disconnect switch shall be of approved type. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


10 COMMISSIONING AND ACCEPTANCE 


10.1 The minimum requirements for the commissioning 
and acceptance of the gaseous extinguishing system 
shall be as follows. 


10.2 Tests 


10.2.1 General 


The completed system shall be reviewed and tested by a 
competent person to meet the approval of the authority. 
Only equipment and devices designed to relevance 
specification standards shall be used in the systems. To 
determine that the system has been properly installed 
and will function as specified, the tests specified 
in 10.2.2 to 10.2.9 shall be performed. 


10.2.2 Enclosure Check 


a) It shall be cross-checked that the protected 
enclosure is in general conformity with the 
approved drawings. 


b 


wm 


The enclosure shall be inspected to determine 
if penetrations have occurred that could lead to 
agent leakage, if other changes have occurred that 
could change volume of hazard, or both. Where 
the inspection indicates conditions that could 
result in the inability of the enclosure to maintain 
the clean agent concentration, the conditions shall 
be corrected. 


10.2.3 Review of Mechanical Components 


10.2.3.1 The piping distribution system shall be 
inspected to determine that it is in compliance with the 
design and installation documents. 


10.2.3.2 Nozzles and pipe sizes, and if appropriate, 
pressure-reducing devices, shall be in accordance with 
system drawings. The means for pipe size reduction 
and attitudes of tees shall be checked for conformity 
to the design. 


10.2.3.3 Piping joints, discharge nozzles and piping 
supports shall be securely fastened to prevent 
unacceptable vertical or lateral movement during 
discharge. Discharge nozzles shall be installed in such 
a manner that piping cannot become detached during 
discharge. 


10.2.3.4 During assembly, the piping distribution 
system shall be inspected internally to detect the 
possibility of any oil or particulate matter which could 
spoil the hazard area or affect the agent distribution due 
to a reduction in the effective nozzle orifice area. 


10.2.3.5 The discharge nozzles shall be oriented in such 
a manner that optimum agent dispersal can be affected. 


10.2.3.6 If nozzle deflectors are installed, they shall be 
positioned to obtain the maximum benefit. 


18 


10.2.3.7 The discharge nozzles, piping and mounting 
brackets shall be installed in such a manner that they 
will not potentially cause injury to personnel. Agent 
shall not directly impinge on areas where personnel 
may be found in the normal work area, or on any loose 
objects or shelves, cabinet tops, or similar surfaces 
where loose objects could be present and become 
missiles. 


10.2.3.8 All agent storage containers shall be properly 
located in accordance with ‘approved for construction’ 
set of system drawings. 


10.2.3.9 All containers and mounting brackets shall be 
securely fastened in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
requirements. 


10.2.3.10 An adequate quantity of agent to produce 
the desired specified concentration shall be provided. 
The actual enclosure volumes shall be checked against 
those indicated on the system drawings to ensure the 
proper quantity of agent. Fan rundown and damper 
closure time shall be taken into consideration. 


10.2.3.11 Unless the total piping contains not more 
than one change in direction fitting between the storage 
container and the discharge nozzle, and unless all 
piping has been physically checked for tightness, the 
following tests shall be carried out: 


a) All open-ended piping shall be pneumatically 
tested in a closed circuit for a period of 10 min at 
300 kPa. At the end of 10 min, the pressure drop 
shall not exceed 20 percent of the test pressure. 


All closed-section pipe work shall be 
hydrostatically tested to a minimum of 1.5 times 
the maximum working pressure for 2 min during 
which there shall be no leakage. On completion of 
the test, the pipe work shall be purged to remove 
moisture. 


b 


wm 


10.2.3.12 It is recommended that hydrostatic testing 

be carried out at the manufacturer’s works where 

practicable. 
WARNING — Pneumatic pressure testing creates a potential 
risk of injury to personnel in the area, as a result of airborne 
projectiles if rupture of the piping system occurs. Prior to 
conducting the pneumatic pressure test, the protected area shall 
be evacuated and appropriate safeguards shall be provided for 
test personnel. 


10.2.3.13 A test using nitrogen, or a suitable alternative, 
shall be performed on the piping network to verify that 
flow is continuous and that the piping and nozzles are 
unobstructed. 


10.2.3.14 Where required, suitable venting facilities 
shall be provided for the release of excessive pressure 
build-up during discharge of the agent. Individual 
standards for gaseous agents provide details for the 
design of venting facilities. 


10.2.4 Review of Electrical Components 


10.2.4.1 All wiring systems shall be properly installed 
in compliance with IS 732 and the system drawings. The 
a.c. and d.c. wiring shall not be combined in a common 
conduit unless properly shielded and grounded. 


10.2.4.2 All field circuitry shall be tested for ground 
fault and short circuit condition. When testing field 
circuitry, all electronic components (such as smoke 
and flame detectors or special electronic equipment 
for other detectors, or their mounting bases) shall be 
removed and jumpers properly installed to prevent the 
possibility of damage within these devices. Replace 
components after testing the circuits. 


10.2.4.3 Adequate and reliable primary standby sources 
of energy which comply with 9.2.2 shall be used 
to provide for operation of the detection, signaling, 
control and actuation requirements of the system. 


10.2.4.4 All auxiliary functions (such as alarm 
sounding or displaying devices, remote annunciators, 
air handling shutdown, power shutdown, etc) shall 
be checked for proper operation in accordance with 
system requirements and design specifications. 


10.2.4.5 Alarm devices shall be installed so that they 
are audible and visible under normal operating and 
environmental conditions. 


10.2.4.6 Where possible, all air handling and power 
cut-off controls should be of the type that once 
interrupted require manual restart to restore power. 


10.2.4.7 Check that for systems using alarm silencing, 
this function does not affect other auxiliary functions, 
such as air handling or power cut-off where they are 
required in the design specification. 


10.2.4.8 Check the detection devices to ensure that 
the types and locations are as specified in the system 
drawings and are in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
requirements. 


10.2.4.9 Check that manual release devices are properly 
installed, and are readily accessible, accurately 
identified and properly protected to prevent damage. 


10.2.4.10 Check that manual release devices used 
to release agents require two separate and distinct 
actions for operation. They shall be properly identified. 
Particular care shall be taken where manual release 
devices for more than one system are in close proximity 
and could be confused or the wrong system actuated. 
Manual release devices in this instance shall be clearly 
identified as to which hazard enclosure they protect. 


10.2.4.11 Check that for systems with a main/reserve 
capability, the main/reserve switch is properly installed, 
readily accessible and clearly identified. 


19 


IS 15493 : 2021 


10.2.4.12 Check that for systems using inhibit switches 
requiring constant manual force, these are properly 
installed, readily accessible within the hazard area and 
clearly identified. 


10.2.4.13 Check that the control panel is properly 
installed and readily accessible. 


10.2.5 Preliminary Functional Tests 


10.2.5.1 Where a system is connected to a remote 
central alarm station, notify the station that the fire 
system test is to be conducted and that an emergency 
response by the fire department or alarm station 
personnel is not required. Notify all concerned 
personnel at the end-user’s facility that a test is to be 
conducted and instruct them as to the sequence of 
operation. 


10.2.5.2 Disable or remove each agent storage container 
release mechanism and directional valve, where fitted, 
so that activation of the release circuit will not release 
agent. Reconnect the release circuit with a functional 
device in lieu of each agent storage container release 
mechanism. 


10.2.5.3 For electrically actuated release mechanisms, 
these devices may include suitable lamps, flash 
bulbs or circuit breakers. Pneumatically actuated 
release mechanisms may include pressure gauges, 
see IS 3624. Refer to the manufacturer’s 
recommendations in all cases. 


10.2.5.4 Check each resettable detector for proper 
response. 


10.2.5.5 Check that polarity has been observed on all 
polarized alarm devices and auxiliary relays. 


10.2.5.6 Check that all required end-of-line devices 
have been installed. 


10.2.5.7 Check all supervised circuits for correct fault 
response. 


10.2.6 System Functional Operational Test 


10.2.6.1 Operate the detection initiating circuit(s). All 
alarm functions shall occur according to the design 
specification. 


10.2.6.2 Operate the necessary circuit to initiate a second 
alarm circuit if present. Verify that all second alarm 
functions occur according to design specifications. 


10.2.6.3 Operate the manual release device. Verify that 
manual release functions occur according to design 
specifications. 


10.2.6.4 Where appropriate, operate the hold switch. 
Verify that functions occur according to the design 
specifications. Confirm that visual and audible 
supervisory signals are received at the control panel. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


10.2.6.5 Check the function of all resettable valves 
and activators, unless testing the valve will release 
agent. ‘One-shot’ valves, such as those incorporating 
frangible discs, should not be tested. 


10.2.7 Remote Operations (if Applicable) 


10.2.7.1 Disconnect the primary power supply, then 
operate one of each type of input device while on 
standby power. Verify that an alarm signal is received at 
the remote panel after the device is operated. Reconnect 
the primary power supply. 


10.2.7.2 Operate each type of alarm condition and 
verify receipt of fault condition at the remote station. 


10.2.8 Control Panel Primary Power Source 


10.2.8.1 Verify that the control panel is connected to a 
dedicated unswitched circuit and is labelled properly. 
This panel shall be readily accessible but access shall 
be restricted to authorized personnel only. 


10.2.8.2 Test a primary power failure in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s specification, with the system 
fully operated on standby power. 


10.2.9 Completion of Functional Tests 


When all functional tests are complete 
(see 10.2.5 to 10.2.8), reconnect each storage container 
so that activation of the release circuit will release 
the agent. Return the system to its fully operational 
design condition. Notify the central alarm station and 
all concerned personnel at the end-user’s facility that 
the fire system test is complete and that the system has 
been returned to full service condition by following 
the procedures specified in the manufacturer’s 
specifications. 


10.2.10 The complete installation shall be tested in one 
of the two methods narrated below: 


a) Full-scale discharge test, and 
b) Enclosure integrity test. 


Where the authorities concerned insist on full-scale 
discharge test, the test shall be conducted in accordance 
with various provisions under Annex C and results of 
the test (that is concentration achieved, discharge time, 
holding time) shall conform to various provisions 
available in other clean agent standards with particular 
reference to the agent used. Otherwise, the enclosure 
where total flooding system is installed, shall be subject 
to ‘enclosure integrity test’ to demonstrate the retention 
time (of the required concentration with the enclosure) 
as specified in other standards with particular reference 
to the agent used. 


10.3 Completion Certificate and Documentation 


The installer shall provide to the user a completion 
certificate, a complete set of instructions, calculations 
and drawings showing the system as-installed, 


20 


and a statement that the system complies with all 
the appropriate requirements of this standard and 
giving details of any departure from appropriate 
recommendations. The certificate shall give the design 
concentrations and, if carried out, reports of any 
additional test including the door fan test. 


11 SYSTEM 
CALCULATIONS 


HYDRAULIC FLOW 


11.1 General 


System flow calculations shall be carried out at a 
nominal agent storage temperature of 20 °C, shall have 
been validated by an accredited approval authority by 
appropriate tests as described in this part of standard, 
and shall be properly identified. The system design 
shall be within the manufacturer’s specified limitations. 


NOTES 
1 Variations from the nominal 20 °C storage temperature will 
affect flow conditions used in calculations. 


2 Pre-engineered systems do not require a flow calculation 
when used within approved limitations. 


11.2 Balanced and Unbalanced System 


11.2.1 A balanced system (see Fig. 1) shall be one in 
which, 


a) each actual or equivalent pipe length from the 
container to each nozzle are all within 10 percent 
of each other; and 


b) the discharge rate of each nozzle is equal. 


11.2.2 Any system that does not meet the criteria 
mentioned in 11.2.1 shall be considered to be an 
unbalanced system (see Fig. 2). 


11.3 Friction Losses 


Allowance shall be made for the friction losses in pipes 
and in container valves, dip tubes, flexible connectors, 
selector valves, time delay devices and other equipment 
(for example, pressure-reducing devices) within the 
flow line. 


NOTE — The flow of a liquefied gas will be a two-phase 
phenomenon, the fluid consisting of a mixture of liquid and 
vapour, the proportions of which are dependent on pressure 
and temperature. The pressure drop is non-linear, with an 
increasing rate of pressure loss as the line pressure reduces by 
pipe friction. 


11.4 Pressure Drop 


The pressure drop shall be calculated using two phase 
flow equations for liquefied gases and single-phase 
flow equations for non-liquefied gases. See Annex D. 


NOTE — These equations use friction factors and constants 
dependent on pressure and density obtained empirically. As the 
equations cannot be solved directly, a computer programme 
is usually used to assist with the large number of iterative 
calculations in which pipe and nozzle sizes and if appropriate, 
size of pressure reducing devices, are selected within prescribed 
pressure losses. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


NOTE: FIGURES IN BOLD IN PARENTHESES DENOTE 
DESIGN NODES FOR CALCULATIONS 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL UNBALANCED SYSTEM 


11.5 Valves and Fitting 


Valves and fittings shall be rated for resistance 
coefficient or equivalent length in terms of pipe, 
or tubing sizes with which they will be used. The 
equivalent length of the cylinder valves shall be listed 
and shall include siphon tube (where fitted), valve, 
discharge head and flexible connector. 


11.6 Piping Length 
The piping length and nozzle and fitting orientation 


shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
approved manual to ensure proper system performance. 


11.7 Drawings 


If the final installation varies from the prepared 
drawings and calculations new ‘as-built’ drawings and 
calculations shall be prepared. 


11.8 Liquefied Gases — Specific Requirements 


11.8.1 Allowance shall be made for changes in elevation 
as specified in the relevant of standard relating to the 
specific agent. 


11.8.2 Minimum discharge rate for liquefied agents 
shall be sufficient to maintain the velocity required for 
turbulent flow to prevent separation. 


21 


NOTE — If turbulent flow is not maintained, separation of 
the liquid and gaseous phases will occur, which can lead to 
unpredictable flow characteristics. 


12 MONITORING OF GAS EXTINGUISHING 
SYSTEMS 


12.1 General 


12.1.1 Halocarbon gas extinguishing systems shall be 
automatically monitored for their availability in the 
case of, 


a) systems with more than 500 m° of protected 
volume, and 


b) systems with more than 250 m° of protected 
volume where a delay time is required for life 
safety aspects. 


12.1.2 The following components indicted in 
12.2 to 12.10 shall be monitored continuously for their 
availability and faults (that is cases of non-availability) 
shall be automatically indicated. Their failure or a 
wrong operating position can prevent the emission 
of the (correct amount of) extinguishing medium 
or the functioning of the alarm and delay device in 
case of triggering, or it can cause an emission into an 
untriggered extinguishing zone. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


12.1.3 Testing of the monitoring system shall always be 
always in service. 


12.1.4 The monitoring system shall not affect the 
correct function of the gas extinguishing system. 


12.2 Disable and Triggering Devices and Selector 
Valves 


The correct operating position of the following 
components shall be monitored: 


a) Non-electrical control devices. 

b) Disable devices. 

c) Directional valves. 

d) Switch devices for main/reserve supply container. 


e) In the case of mechanical control using wire 
cables-the position of the triggering device. 


12.3 Agent Quantity Measurement 


The quantity of available extinguishant and pilot gas 
shall be monitored. Any loss of more than 10 percent 
of the content of any container shall be indicated. Also, 


a) all containers of the main supply and of the reserve 
supply permanently connected to the pipe system, 
and 


b) containers for the supply of the alarm devices 
and/or pilot containers. 


12.4 Electrical Lines 


12.4.1 Electrical lines transmitting alarm and fault 
signals or signals for the monitoring and control of 
the installation and alarm devices (monitored first 
alarm with two independent energy supplies) shall 
be monitored for line break, short circuit and earth 
fault. System shall be cross-checked with IS 2189 and 
IS 15908. 


12.4.2 Necessary additional controlling signals 
(for example, shut-off of ventilation systems, closing 
of openings of the enclosure) may be transmitted by 
non-monitored lines. 


12.5 Electrically Operated Components 


The power supply to electrically-operated components 
of the extinguishing installation shall be monitored for 
normal condition and power failure where they cannot 
be monitored by the fire detection installation. 


12.6 Monitoring and Control Lines 


12.6.1 Monitoring Lines 


Each monitoring device shall have a separate indicator. 
Amaximum of 60 monitoring devices may be connected 
to one detection line. 


12.6.2 Monitoring Lines of Disable Devices 


a) Faults of the disable device shall be indicated if 
the disable device is in a position that is neither the 


22 


ready-for service-position (open) nor the blocking 
position (closed) (see 12.2). 


b 


wm 


Independent from that, the actuation of the 
disable device shall be transmitted and indicated 
separately. 


c 


wm 


The disabled condition of the system shall not 
cause a general fault indication but the disabled 
condition of the system shall be indicated 
separately for each flooding zone. 


12.6.3 Control Lines 


a) All electrically controlled components for the 
release of the installation, operation of selector 
valves, delay devices and alarm devices shall be 
connected to lines monitored for line break, short 
circuit and earth fault. 


b) The devices shall be attached to the control lines so 
that in the case of a fault indication an unequivocal 
and quick identification of the components of 
the installation causing this fault indication is 
possible. 


c) This is relevant for, 


wm 


1) triggering devices of pilot containers, container 
batteries, isolating valves and selector valves, 
or 


2) electromagnetic locking devices for triggering 
devices and/or selector valves and solenoid 
valves for controlling the emergency-stop 
device and/or secondary flooding function. 


12.7 Storage Area 


The storage area shall be monitored for the allowable 
maximum and minimum ambient temperature where a 
dedicated heating or cooling system is installed. 


12.8 Fault Indication 


12.8.1 Indication and Transmission 


Faults of the extinguishing installation shall be indicated 
visually and audibly at a location of the premises, 
which is continuously manned. It shall be possible to 
switch off the audible signal, but the visual signal shall 
only be switched off if the fault is removed. If the plant 
does not dispose of a continuously manned location, 
the fault indication shall be transmitted automatically 
to an employee of the plant (for example, by the help of 
a telephone transmitter). 


12.8.2 Further Indications 


a) The fault indication of the following shall be 
indicated separately by, 


1) monitoring system of the gas extinguishing 
system, 


2) other monitoring systems, 
3) fire detection system, and 
4) control devices. 


b) Faults of the extinguishing installation and faults 
of the monitoring installation shall be indicated 
separately. 

NOTE — As long as a fire detection signal of the extinguishing 


installation is present, no fault detection shall be indicated at 
the monitoring control panel. 


12.9 Power Supply of the Monitoring Installation 


The power supply of the monitoring installation shall 
comply with IS 2189 and IS 15908 in all respects. 


12.10 Requirements of the 


Monitoring Installation 


for Components 


12.10.1 Protection Class 


The components of the monitoring installation shall 
fulfil at least the protection class IP 54. 


12.10.2 Switching Way 


In case of valves, the fault indications shall depend on 
the switching way of the component under monitoring. 
The switching way is the way from the just still closed 
to the totally opened position of the valve. 


12.10.3 Switching Way of Normally Open Devices 


The fault indication for valves which are situated in 
the extinguishant flow and in the pneumatic pilot lines, 
and the fault indication for other blocking devices 
which are continuously opened when the extinguishing 
installation is ready for service, shall be activated at the 
latest, when the components are closed 20 percent of 
the switching way. 


12.10.4 Switching Way of Normally Closed Devices 


In case of valves in the extinguishant flow and in 
case of valves which are not situated directly in the 
extinguishant flow and which are closed when the 
extinguishing installation is ready for service, the fault 
indication shall be activated immediately when the 
opening procedure starts. 


12.10.5 Blocking Devices of Alarm Devices, Pressure 
or Pneumatic Switches 


In case of blocking devices of alarm devices and 
pressure or pneumatic switches, the fault indication 
shall be effective already in intermediate positions. 


23 


IS 15493 : 2021 


12.10.6 Non-electrical Control Devices 


a) Non-electrical control devices shall be monitored. 
The requirement is fulfilled if the room with the 
non-electrical control device is only accessible to 
authorized persons and if opening the door causes 
a fault indication. 

b) Components may not be monitored if they are 

automatically reset into their operating position 

by the triggering energy of the installation itself. 


13 REGULAR INSPECTION EXERCISE 


13.1 Regular inspections shall be carried out to ensure 
that the system functions properly. The frequency and 
type of inspections shall depend on the nature of the 
installation, national legislation and environment, etc. 


13.2 Inspections shall be made by personnel specially 
designated for this work, thoroughly instructed in 
their duties, with a comprehensive knowledge of the 
installation. Daily, weekly and monthly inspections 
shall be carried out according to the manufacturer’s 
specifications. 

13.3 Daily Inspection 


Check all installation indications visually. 


13.4 Weekly Inspection 
a) Check fire detection system. 
b) Check quantity of gas, replacing or topping-up if a 
loss of weight or pressure in excess of 10 percent 
has occurred. 


c) Check operational position of valves. 
d) Check power supplies. 


13.5 Monthly Inspection 


a) Check equipment used to actuate fire doors and 
hatches and power supplies, etc. 


b) Check audible and visual alarm devices. 
c) Check delay device. 

d) Check nozzles (visual test). 

e) Check enclosure (visual test). 

f) Check ancillary equipment. 


13.6 Details of observation during the routine inspection 
shall be logged in a register. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


IS No. 


732 : 2019 


1239 


(Part 2) : 2011 


2189 : 2008 


3624 : 1987 


6631 : 1972 
7673 : 2004 


8757 : 1999 


15496 : 2004 


15497 : 2004 
15501 : 2004 


15505 : 2004 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 
Code of practice for 
electrical wiring installations 
(fourth revision) 
Steel tubes, tubulars and 


other wrought steel fittings — 
Specification 


Part 2 Steel pipe fittings 
(fifth revision) 
Selection, installation and 


maintenance of automatic fire 
detection and alarm system — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


Pressure and vacuum gauges 
(second revision) 

Steel Pipes for Hydraulic Purposes 
Glossary of terms for firefighting 
equipment (first revision) 

Glossary of terms associated with 
fire safety (first revision) 


Inspection and maintenance 
of gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — Code of practice 


Gaseous fire extinguishing systems 
IG 01 extinguishing systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing systems 
IG 541 extinguishing systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems HCFC Blend A 
extinguishing systems 


24 


IS No. 


15506: 


15517 


15525 


15528 


15821 


15835 


15908 


SP 30 


2004 


: 2004 


: 2004 


: 2004 


: 2008 


: 2009 


: 2021 


: 2011 


Title 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — IG 55 extinguishing 
systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — HFC 227ea (Hepta 
Fluoro Propane) extinguishing 
systems 

Gaseous fire extinguishing 


systems — IG 100 extinguishing 
systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
systems — Carbon dioxide total 
flooding and local application 
(Sub-floor and in-cabinet), high 
and low pressure (refrigerated) 
systems 


Gaseous fire extinguishing 
system — Physical properties 
and system design — CF4 


Extinguishant 


Gaseous fire extinguishing systems 
HFC — 125 Extinguishing systems 


Selection, installation and 
maintenance of control and 
indicating equipment for fire 


detection and alarm system — 
Code of practice (first revision) 


National Electrical Code 


(first revision) 


IS 15493 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
[ Clause 6.1.2 (a) ] 


INFORMATION ON SAFETY TO PERSONNEL AND DECOMPOSITION 
PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION 


B-1 Any hazard to personnel created by the discharge 
of gaseous extinguishants shall be considered in the 
design of the system, in particular with reference to the 
hazards associated with particular extinguishants in the 
other standards of clean agents. Unnecessary exposure 
to all gaseous extinguishants shall be avoided. 


B-2 The decomposition products generated by the 
clean agent breaking down in the presence of very high 
amounts of heat can be hazardous. All of the present 
halocarbon agents contain fluorine. In the presence 
of available hydrogen (from water vapour, or the 
combustion process itself), the main decomposition 
product is hydrogen fluoride (HF). 


B-3 These decomposition products have a sharp, 
acrid odour, even in minute concentrations of only a 
few parts per million. This characteristic provides a 
built-in warning system for the agent, but at the same 
time creates a noxious, irritating atmosphere for those 
who must enter the hazard following a fire. 


B-4 The amount of agent that can be expected to 
decompose in extinguishing a fire depends to a large 
extent on the size of the fire, the particular clean agent, 
the concentration of the agent, and the length of time 
the agent is in contact with the flame or heated surface. 
If there is a very rapid build-up of concentration to the 
critical value, then the fire will be extinguished quickly 
and the decomposition will be limited to the minimum 
possible with that agent. Should that agent’s specific 
composition be such that it could generate large 
quantities of decomposition products, and the time to 
achieve the critical value is lengthy, then the quantity 
of decomposition products can be quite great. The 
actual concentration of the decomposition products 
then depends on the volume of the room in which 
the fire was burning and on the degree of mixing and 
ventilation. 


B-5 Although the vapour from halocarbon gas has 
low toxicity, the decomposition products can be very 
hazardous. The most widely accepted theory is that the 


25 


vapour must decompose before the agent can inhibit 
the combustion reaction. Decomposition takes place on 
exposure to a flame or to a hot surface at a temperature 
above 480 °C. In the presence of available hydrogen 
(from water vapour or the combustion process itself), 
the main decomposition product is hydrogen fluoride 
(HF). 


B-6 The decomposition products of halocarbon agents 
have a characteristic sharp acrid odour, even in minute 
concentrations of only a few parts per million. This 
characteristic provides a built-in warning system for the 
extinguishant, but at the same time creates a noxious, 
irritating atmosphere for those who have to enter the 
enclosure following a fire. The actual concentration of 
the decomposition products depends on the volume of 
the enclosure in which fire is burning and the degree of 
mixing and ventilation. 


B-7 Longer exposure of the vapour to temperatures in 
excess of 482 °C would produce greater concentrations 
of these gases. The type and sensitivity of detection, 
coupled with the rate of discharge, should be selected 
to minimize the exposure time of the vapours to the 
elevated temperature if the concentration of breakdown 
products is to be minimized. In most cases, the area 
would be untenable for human occupancy due to the 
heat and breakdown products of the fire itself. 


B-8 Clearly, longer exposure of the agent to high 
temperatures would produce greater concentrations 
of these gases. The type and sensitivity of detection, 
coupled with the rate of discharge, should be selected to 
minimize the exposure time of the agent to the elevated 
temperature if the concentration of the breakdown 
products is to be minimized. 


B-9 Non-liquefied agents do not decompose measurably 
in extinguishing a fire. As such, toxic or corrosive 
decomposition products are not found. However, 
breakdown products of the fire like carbon monoxide 
itself can still be substantial and could make the area 
untenable for human occupancy. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 10.2.10 ) 


REQUIREMENTS FOR FULL-SCALE DISCHARGE TEST 


C-1 This clause sets out a procedure to determine 
compliance of the gaseous total flooding system with 
the requirements for discharge time, concentration and 
holding time. 


C-2 PRINCIPLE 


The system is operated, discharge time is measured and 
concentration readings are taken at a specified height at 
nominated periods. 


C-3 TEST MEDIUM 


The test medium shall be the concerned halocarbon or 
inert gas. 


C-4 APPARATUS 


The following apparatus are required: 

a) A chart recorder type concentration meter 
calibrated in strict accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions, 

b) A suitable time-measuring device, and 


c) Temperature-measuring equipment. 


C-5 PROCEDURE 


The procedure shall be as follows: 


a) Ensure that the preliminary checks in accordance 
with respective standard pertaining to gaseous fire 
extinguishing system have been completed. 


b) Electrically isolate all flooding systems serving 
adjacent enclosures. 


c) Concentration measurements should be made at a 
minimum of three points, one at the highest hazard 
level. 


d) Locate sampling points in the enclosure at the 
specified heights. 


e) Do not locate sampling points nearer than 200 mm 
to ceiling unless the combustibles being protected 
extend within that area, in which case special 
design considerations may be necessary. 


f) If more than one space or compartment is being 
simultaneously protected, locate a sampling point 


26 


in each space in accordance with the above criteria. 
Additional sampling points may be required by 
the appropriate authority. 


Where the geometry of the enclosure does not 
lend itself to sampling in the above manner, take 
a minimum of three samples at locations agreed 
upon by the appropriate authority. 


Set the continuous chart recorder type 
concentration meter for the agent concerned and 
check that the meter is calibrated in accordance 
with the manufacturer ’s instructions so that it will 
record concentration levels at each sampling point 
for 10 min from commencement of discharge. 


g) 


h) 


j) Record temperature in enclosure. 


k) Ensure that plant which is capable of affecting 
system performance, for example, air-handling 
plant is in its normal operating mode. 


m) Activate the system and record the discharge time. 
n) Record concentration readings and holding times. 


C-6 RECOMMISSIONING 


Restore all systems to a fully operational status. 


C-7 REPORTING 


The following shall be reported: 
a) Details of, 
1) installation, designer and contractor; 
2) enclosure identification; 
3) enclosure temperature prior to discharge; 
4) design concentration; and 
5) position of sampling points. 
b) Date and time of test. 
c) Discharge time. 
d) Concentrations at each sampling point at 1 and 
10 min from the commencement of discharge. 
e) System deficiencies. 
Cross-check various observed parameters with 
the respective operating clauses are in conformity 
therewith. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 11.4) 
INFORMATION ON TWO-PHASE FLOW FOR LIQUEFIED HALOCARBON GASES 


D-1 As the extinguishant in the liquid phase flows from 
the storage container, the pressure drops or recedes. The 
pressure recession varies with container fill density. It 
is assumed that there was thermodynamic equilibrium 
between the liquid and vapour phases in the storage 
container. In actual tests, it has been noted that there 
is a sharp drop in pressure during the initial rush of 
liquid into the distribution system. This is due to a lag 
between the pressure drop and the onset of boiling in the 
container. As boiling commences, the pressure returns 
to the pressures shown on the curves for respective 
gaseous extinguishants representing the calculated 
pressure in the storage container versus the percentage 
discharge of extinguishant from the container for both 
2.5 MPa and 4.2 MPa systems. 


D-2 AGENT IN PIPE WORK 


Agent flows through the distribution system in both 
liquid and vapour phase. As the liquid phase flows 
through the distribution system the pressure continues 
to drop, causing the liquid to boil. The volume of the 
vapour phase increases with the decreasing pressure 
and hence the density of the mixture drops. To maintain 
a constant flow rate, the speed through the distribution 
system must continuously increase down the pipe work. 
The pressure drop for a given flow rate is not linear, as 
it is with water, but is variable along the pipe. 


D-3 DENSITY OF AGENT IN DISTRIBUTION 
SYSTEM 


Using the thermodynamic properties of the agent 
including the nitrogen used for super-pressurization, 
the density of the two-phase mixture in the distribution 
system can be calculated. The density of the agent 
leaving the storage container varies over the course 
of the discharge. The density is lowest at the start 
of discharge and increases until the last of the liquid 
leaves the container. 


D-4 TEMPERATURE 


The drop-in container pressure as the agent flows from 
the container causes remaining agent in the container 
to cool. As a result, liquid that is below ambient 
temperature is introduced to the distribution system. 
During a system discharge the temperature of the agent 
leaving the storage container recedes as a function of 
instantaneous container pressure. 


D-5 INITIAL VAPOUR TIME 


At the start of discharge, virtually all the liquid phase of 
the agent entering the distribution system is vaporized 
before it reaches the nozzles, due to heating. 


27 


by the pipe work and the initial low pressure in the 
system. The initial vapourization limits the flow of 
agent through the distribution system because the mass 
flow of vapour is much lower than that of liquid. 


D-6 LIQUID FLOW 


There is a significant delay between the opening of the 
discharge valve and the first appearance of liquid at the 
nozzles. Some of the delay is due to the flow restriction 
presented by the container and distribution system, 
however, much of delay is due to the initial vapour 
phase flow of the agent. 


D-7 PHASE SEPARATION 


The flow of agent in the distribution system is a 
two-phase flow (containing both liquid and vapour). In 
a properly sized distribution system the flow will be 
highly turbulent throughout the system and the two 
phases will mix homogeneously. If the pipes are too 
big the phases may tend to separate, which can cause a 
variety of flow problems and can in some cases result 
in a reduced flow rate. 


D-8 AVERAGE PRESSURE CONDITIONS 


Pressure at the nozzle is not constant throughout 
discharge because the pressure in the storage container 
is constantly decreasing. If one were to attempt 
manual calculation it would be desirable to use an 
average pressure condition. It is difficult to arrive at an 
average as the volume of piping has a marked effect 
on the average nozzle (pressure, density and velocity 
conditions), all of which, have a marked effect on 
discharge quantities and times. 


D-9 AVERAGE NOZZLE PRESSURE 


The nozzle pressure used for calculations is the pressure 
when half the liquid phase has been discharged from 
the nozzle. The timing of this is used to calculate an 
average pressure drop in the distribution system. 
To calculate the correct storage container pressure, 
allowance must be made for the amount of liquid in the 
piping system. 


D-10 PERCENT IN DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 


The points outlined above are taken into consideration 
to calculate the average container pressure during 
discharge. The ratio of the pipe volume to the volume 
of agent supply expanded under flowing conditions 
varies with average container pressure. The former 
quantity shall be referred to as percent-in-the-pipe. 


IS 15493 : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety 
(DRDO), Ministry of Defence, Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, 
Mumbai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Pune 

Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 

Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Panaji 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

F. M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire & Emergency Services, J&K, Srinagar 


Fire & Security Association of India, Chennai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 
H. D. Fire protect Pvt Limited, Thane 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. K. SHAM! (Chairman) 


Suri D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
Suri P. K. DESHMUKH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Dr R. S. CHIMOTE 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JAN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suri H. S. HAvELIWwALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND P. MANDKE 


CONTROLLER QA (FE) 
Joint CONTROLLER QA (FE) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
Suri NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


Suri R. B. BHUTDA 
SHRI VIPAN GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KrisHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri ANAS Rizwi 
PRESIDENT 


SHRI S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH N. DHARAMSHI 
Suri K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


28 


Organization 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 
Johnson Controls (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, 
Bengaluru 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ MoD (Army), New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers, Mumbai 
NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 


Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 
Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 
Chennai 


The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 

Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 

West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 
In personal capacity (B-152, Ist Floor, East of 


Kailash, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4-45, Sector-70, Noida) 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MuZUMDAR 
SHRI Nitin Rastoa! (Alternate) 


SHRI RasesH H. SABADRA 
Suri Upay K. Surorr (Alternate) 


Suri K. U. RAMESH 
Suri K. Srinivasa (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. WARICK 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
Suri A. K. Durey (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. RAHANGDALE 
Suri H. D. Paras (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 


SHRIMATI SUNITA PURSWANI 
Suri R. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHWAR IYER 
Suri AJIT RAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NANDY 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI Ronit V. SHAH 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri MuKesu M. SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY D. PURANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 


SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI MuKesu D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VUAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
Suri G. K. Saxena (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
Suri S. P. Tey Kumar BenaRra (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Rao 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI KAMAL Nanpy (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


SHRI S. K. DHERI 


Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


29 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Organization 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, 
Nirman Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI R. C. SHARMA 


Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (Crvit ENGINEERING), BIS 


Fire Detection Alarms and Suppression System Subcommittee, CED 22:4 


Organization 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


ASTRAL Polytechnik Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central for Fire Explosive Environment Safety 
(DRDO), (Ministry of Defence) Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, Pune 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


DSPA Fire Suppressions India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
KNOTEK 


EAST Corp, Thane 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FOGTEC Brandschutz GmbH & Co KG, Mumbai 


F. M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


FYRPROTEK (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 
New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI (Convener) 


Suri D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI SELVAKUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RITESH PATEL 
SHRI Manos Duar (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


SHRI Rasiv GOEL 
Suri R. S. CHIMoTE (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


Cot V. V. KADAM 
CoL N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETAN UDGIR 


SHRI HEMANT KHADSE 


SHRI VIPAN GOEL 
Suri R. B. Buutpa (Alternate) 


SHRI JACKSON JOSE 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWaR (Alternate) 


30 


Organization 


Honeywell International (I) Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Institution of Fire Engineers (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


Johnson Controls (India) Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Maple Engineering Design Services (India), 
Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, 
Mumbai 


Newage Industries, Mumbai 


Nitin Fire Protection Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Realty Automation and Security Systems Pvt Ltd, 
Pune 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
SCHRACK SECONET AG, Gurugram 

Steel Authority of India Ltd, Salem 

The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 
In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior Citizens 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 


IS 15493 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MANDAR SAWANT 
SHRI AKHAND Kumar (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI ASHISH DILEEP SAWANT (Alternate) 


Suri B. S. A. NARAYAN 
Suri H. R. RANGANNATH (A/ternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK M. SHAH 
SHRI SHETUL A SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin M. SHAH 
SHRI PRAVIN SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 
SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI ANANT GOKHALE 


SHRI VARADENDRA KotI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 
SHRI AJIT SAINI 
SHRI D. KUMARESAN 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
Suri G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
SHRI S. K. DHERI 


SHRI KANWAR A. SINGH 


31 


(Continued from second cover) 


Nothing in this standard is intended to restrict new technologies or alternate arrangements provided the level of 
safety prescribed by this standard is not diluted. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has also been derived from ISO 14520-1 : 2015 ‘Gaseous 
fire-extinguishing systems — Physical properties and system design — Part 1: General requirements’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (14674). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


