IS 15363

(Part 1 ) :2003

ml&RmkaG#dhmmfl

Indian Standard GUIDE TO TEROTECHNOLOGY
PART 1 INTRODUCTION TO TEROTECHNOLOGY

Ics

03.100.01

0 BIS 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

July

2003

Price Group 7

I"OI{I:WORD
`1'his Indian
hlanagcmcn(

Standard (['art 1) was adopted by the BL]retIUof' indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the and l'roductivity Sectional Co~lln~ittee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division

~'ouncil. Itl an>' organization it is necessary to identify and then choose between the investment options open to it and to lnahc LIccisions on how best to invest the capital available. Once a decision has been made to make an investment )n $omc form of physical asset or project, then the application of tcrotechnolo:y should assist in the object of ~c[[ill~ [he [?cst Va[Llefor money from that investment and thuS juStify it. I"cr(ltecllnology is a combination of management, financial, engineering, building and other practices applied to ph} sical wsets in pusuit of economic life cycle costs. It is concerned with the specification and design for reliability a)ld tll:ii]lt:litl:ibility of physical assets such as plant, machinery, equipment, buildings and structures. The application ()]'tcrotechnology also takes into account the processes of installation, commissioning, operation, maintenance, ]nodification and replacement. Decisions are influenced by feedback of information on design, performance and CO$(S.throughout the life cycle of's project. 1[applies equally to both assets and products because the product of one organization often becomes the asset of another. Even if the product is a simple consumer item its design and cus[onlcr appeal will beneht from terotechnology and this will reflect in improved mark& security for the producer. `1'cI-[)tccl)I]cJl[>gy was developed in the context of larger organizations, with the objective of making them more eficicnt and competitive. Throughout this standard the applicability to a larger organization is used as a basis as this \vill represent the more complex situations. However the objective of maximizing value for money spent and the principles involved in achieving this, are equally applicable to small organizations. Small organizations face problems as nlLIch as those faced by the larger; more complex organizations. Their problems maybe simpler but the principles of problem solving remain the same. The small organization can therefore benefit from this guidance by selecting those parts of the decision-making process that can help them. `1'llisstandard sets out in detail all the activities that should be carried out to ensure that the organization, uses terotechnology, could compete successfully and, at the same time, achieve consumer satisfaction. `1his standard is largely based on BS 3843 (Part 1) :1992 `Guide to terotechnology assc[s) : Part 1 Introduction to tero[echnology '. which

(the economic management

of

in addition to this pw-t, this standard has the following two parts which are referred in the text: Part 2:2003 Introduction to the techniques and applications

Part 3 Guide to the available techniques

(Um'erpreparatiw)

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003

Indian Standard GUIDE TO TEROTECI-INOLOGY
PART 1 INTRODUCTION TO TEROTECHNOLOGY

SECTION 1 SCOPE

1 GENERAL

4.1.3 There is a close interrelationship between a supplier's product and the user's asset. A compatibility of approach should therefore be feasible and practicable. 4.1.4 An organization often acts both as a user and as a supplier. It acts as a user in respect to its acquisitions of assets with which it produces its own output products, In supplying these products, which might be either further assets, materials or a service, to its customers the organization is clearly acting as a supplier. It is essential that the organization gives till consideration to the acquisition and management of its own assets, using terotechnological principles. ]t is equally important that it gives due consideration to its products and how these will best satisfy the terotechnological needs and aspirations of its customers. This is valid even when the customers for the products are the general public or individual members of it. In such cases the organization should make every effort to ascertain the terotechnological needs of its customers by market research and(or any other appropriate means and then to meet these needs as far as possible. 4.2 Lowest Asset Costs Over Life Cycle

This standard (Part 1) gives a general introduction to the concepts of terotechnology. This standard describes how the principles and use ofterotechnology can assist the decision making processes, the benefits which can be obtained from its adoption and the overall resources required for efficient implementation. 2 REFERENCE The standard contains provision which, through reference in this text, constitutes, provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: IS No, 9990:1998 Title Glossary of terms in terotechnology (fht revision)

3 DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this standard the definitions given in IS 9990 shall apply: SECTION 2 CONCEPT OF TEROTECHNOLOGY 4.2.1 Terotechnology is applied to the assessment of the total costs involved with the asset over its full life cycle up to and including its disposal. This will include the cost of financing as well as the initial capital costs and subsequent revenue or running costs. These will be related to a defined level of performance and the expected life cycle. This latter may be determined by the perceived market for the product rather than the practicable life of the asset itself. 4.3 Approach to Objectives 4.3.1 In most cases the life cycle cost assessment will be influenced by the relationship between the producer of the product and the customer who acquires it. The customer or client, who orders a product specifically designed to satisfy his particular requirements will usually have a close liaison with designer and producer. He will therefore have a direct interest in the cost of ownership of the asset he will be acquiring and consequently in the life cycle costing implications of the different solutions which may satisfy his requirements. However, even a bespoke product may incorporate sub-assemblies, equipment or articles which are standard items and from which choices may be made. 4.3.2 1 On the other hand the manufacturer of a

4 OBJECTIVES

OF TEROTECHNOLOGY

4.1 Primary Objective 4.1.1 Terotechnology is aimed at achieving the best possible value for money for a user from the procurement and subsequent employment of a physical asset. This may range from a complex building or engineering plant to a domestic appliance. Terotechnology can be applied with advantage by organizations of any complexity or even individuals. 4.1.2 A user would employ the principles of terotechnology in the selection of the asset and then in the subsequent management of it. A supplier, on the other hand, applies the principles in the design, manufacture and support for his product. This can achieve improved customer satisfaction generally. It may also act as a valuable incentive to potential customer, especially if they, as prospective users, are selecting their assets on the basis of terotechnology principles.

IS 15363 (Part l) :2003
mass-produced item may have no direct personal involvement with the eventual purchaser. In order to establish the best market for his product he may therefore have to rely on techniques such as market research to identify the life cycle costs and reliability which will ensure satisfactory value for money. There will also be variations between those two extremes. 4.3.3 Nevertheless, in all cases there should be a need to identify the options which may be available in the procurement of the asset so that the most economic solution may be chosen which best fits the user's requirement. This solution will largely depend on a price/cost equation or a cost benefit analysis. 4.3.4 The full terotechnology cycle begins at the investment appraisal stage and ends with the disposal of the asset, but the application of terotechnology can be made at any stage in the life of a physical asset and continue for some or all of the remaining life cycle periods until disposal or replacement. 4.3.5 Maximum benefit will be obtained from applying the complete principles of terotechnology. However, many aspects of terotechnology are already being very successful ly practiced by many organizations under different names. The following list, which is not exhaustive, may help managers to identify those parts ofterotechnology with which they are already familiar: a) Asset management management); c) Life cycle costing; d) Cost of ownership; e) Total commitment for life; f) Womb to tomb costing; ) Cradle to grave management; !3 h) Design for life costing; j) Life long care; k) Costs-in-use; and m) Through life costing. (including physical asset a) Selection and provision of permanent (that is, not consumable) physical resources used in the production of goods and services; b) Caring for those efficiently; resources effectively and

c) Coordinating them to help achieve overall minimum costs over their life cycle; and d) Feeding back information to improve them.

5.1.2 The successful application of terotechnolo.gy depends upon ability to-balance factors which a~e uniquely important for a particular situation. R requires an understanding of management and accounting sciences and a general knowledge of engineering associated with the technological expertize appropriate to a particular industry. 5.1.3 In more specific terms, the application of terotechnology brings together the whole or parts of a number of techniques and disciplines. The blend and depth required of each will depend on the particular circumstances in which terotechnology is being applied. These techniques and disciplines include the following: a) Investment appraisal; b) Operational c) Replacement d) Marketing; e) Purchasing; 8 Accounting; i%) Design for reliability and maintainability; h) Preparation of specifications; j) Installation; k) Commissioning; m) Maintenance n) Information P) Programming; procedures systems; and and technology; research; analysis;

b) Resource management;

q) Technical communications. 5.1.4 The life cycle and performance of a total asset will be affected by the "individual life cycles and performance of its constituent parts. 5.2 Participation of the Whole Organization

4.3.6. Terotechnology is concerned with helping to optimize life cycle costs. In a case where the life cycle is short, the trade-off between initial and upkeep costs might point towards buying an asset with the lowest purchase price. This approach would obviously be undesirable where there was the possibility of retaining, for example, a plant for a longer period than originally intended. Such a policy would almost certainly result in unreliability and high unkeep costs, but the opposite does not necessarily follow. 5 PRINCIPLES OF TEROTECHNOLOGY

5.2.1 It will be seen from the outline of the scope of terotechnology given in 4.1 that it is essential that the whole of an organization is involved. 5.2.2 Terotechnology is essentially a multi-disciplinary contribution to optimizing life cycle costs and the experience and skills of a number of specialists are required for its implementation. The basic principles of terotechnology can be applied within an enterprize without changing organizational structures (except where these are defective in themselves) and there is no need to create a new breed of specialist (a 2

5.1 Scope of Terotechnology 5.1.1 Terotechnology following: is essentially concerned with the

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003
terotechnologist). Save in exceptional circumstances, the range of skills and breadth of knowledge and experience necessary for its full implementation is unlikely to be acquired by any one individual. 5.2.3 Although terotechnology can be easily understood and applied by line management, engineers, accountants and others, in their daily working lives, the subject can be applied successfully at company level on Iy with the active participation and understanding of senior management. 5.3 Interprofessional Cooperation decisions are made on the basis of achieving the best balance of cost and performance for the organization as a whole. 5.5 Collection and Analysis of Data

5.5.1 To action the optimization objectives described in 4.2 to 4.4, it will be clear that each individual department will require suitable quantitative data from all other interacting departments. These data need tu be those required for the department to optimize its own decisions in the overall interest of the organization as a whole. 5.5.2 It is essential that there are communication channels between departments (see 4.3). It shou Id be emphasized that part of the communications through these channels needs to be the data needed by other departments to carry out their own optimization exercises, on an organization-wide basis. 5.5.3 Furthermore, this can, and frequently does, require a department to collect data not required for its own purposes but necessary for proper use by other departments. 5.5.4 This collection, analysis and dissemination of data does not necessarily remain within the organization but can and should extend to the suppliers of the assets used by the organization. Only in this way, can the supplier organization refine its designs in the overall interests of its customer organizations. 5.5.5 Data may be required for central decision making. These may be central data or they maybe departmental data, but they should be collected in a form which satisfies both the central and the departmental needs. 5.5.6 Experience to date has shown that in many organizations there is an advantage in appointing a senior person to oversee adoption of the principles of terotechnology throughout the organization. This person should be appointed by and be responsible to, the Board of Management. Ideally he should be independent of any particular department, but in any case he needs to be free to cut across departmental boundaries. 5.6 Minimum Activities Necessary for Implementing Terotechnology 5.6.1 The minimum activities implementation of terotechnology a) Decide what production be met; necessary for the are the following

5.3.1 The application of terotechnology demands that all those involved have abroad recognition of their own contribution together with that of their colleagues in other disciplines and its success is dependent upon effective communication between all parties. It requires an understanding of management and accounting and knowledge of the technology associated with the particular industry or asset. The following are two examples illustrate this principle: which may help to

a) The designer of a product should take into account the feasibility of producing his design and its cost to the consumer in operation and maintenance. b) When assessing the proposed design of a product the management will require feedback data on the price the market may be prepared to pay for the product and the cost of producing it. 5.3.2 However, it should be remembered that these are only two examples of a wide range of interrelationships and each member of the team should endeavour to prepare his own list of the ways in which his role should interact with the whole team. This is discussed in more detail in Section 3. 5.4 Interdepartmental Cooperation

5.4.1 It is common practice for senior management of an organization to require individual departments to optimize their individual activities. Unfortunately if this is taken as the primary objective of departments it can result in a less than optimum performance of the organization as a whole. This arises from the inevitable interaction of decisions between departments. Examples of this are not hard to find. If a purchasing department acquires the cheapest possible asset it is Iikely that the operating and/or maintenance costs will tend to be higher. Similarly inadequate maintenance, to reduce maintenance costs, invariably results in penalties in the cost of operation and/or a shorter working life of the asset. 5.4.2 Consequent upon the above, the primary objective of all departments working under the principles of terotechnology, is that their individual 3

and cost targets are to

b) Decide what physical assets are needed and how to use them to achieve the targets over a specified period, taking into account their forecast cost of ownership and use; c) Specify the performance acquired; of the assets to be

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003
d) Acquire, install and commission e) Care for them; O Monitor their use; and g) Replace and improve the assets and improve their care, using information from them to help minimize total life cycle costs. 6 BENEFITS FROM TEROTECHNOLOGY INTRODUCING 7.2 The main costs associated with terotechnology are: data those assets; 7 COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING TEROTECHNOLOGY 7.1 One of the principal obstacles to the implementation of terotechnology has been the lack of data. Data are an essential input for implementing terotechnology, and this may include detailed cost, performance [see Note to 6,1 (b)] and marketing information.

The benefits which may be gained by the use of terotechnology maybe broadly described as: a) Improved control by the client or senior management in the making of vital decisions; leading to; b) Better investment 1) decisions arising from :

a) Cost of collecting additional data, not already collected for management purposes; b) Cost of making existing data compatible the needs of terotechnology; c) Cost of any additional analysis; and d) Cost of supplying feedback information processing feedback received. or of with

Improved information regarding costs and performance requirements; as related to particular patterns of expenditure and design choice.
NOTE -- Performanceincludessuch things as: i) Reliability; ii) Durability and life expectancy/requirement; iii) Quality control; iv) How well the product does its job; v) Safety, including statutory liability and product liability;

7.3 However, with the improvements in information technology now taking place there is a vast increase in data availability and the cost of collecting and processing data is reducing dramatically as time goes on. Solutions to some of the other problems involving the implementation of terotechnology are dealt within Section 3. SECTION 3 TEROTECHNOLOGY 8 GENERAL 8.1 Terotechnology requires no new techniques or disciplines. It is essentially a new way of examining, and grouping some familiar activities and involves a bringing-together of well tried methods in a new way which can be used to improve management of physical assets in accordance with the objectives of an enterprize. 8.2 Terotechnology is a combination of management and technology and can be applied by both users and manufacturers in industry, building and commerce. Its basic principles can be applied at company level and also by management, engineers, accountant and other specialists in their day-to-day working lives. 8.3 No matter what a company or undertaking designs, constructs, manufactures, processes or purchases, terotechnology has a vital effect upon efficiency, profits and market share. 9 MANAGEMENT PARTICIPATION INTRODUCING TO AN ORGANIZATION

2)

Improved client identification of requirements and development of a brief for the asset acquisition; Information regarding the cost consequences of the options under consideration; Better investment analysis of cost options available; leading to; and

3) 4)

c) Better value for money from the final product andlor an improved market for the product. Other benefits may include: a) Increased profitability through a reduction in the total cost of ownership; b) Improved production control process; of the product and the

c) As a result of common orientation on cost and performance from the perspective of the organization as whole, together with a more frequent contact, an expectation that there will be greater understanding between client or senior management and other functions on how to achieve common goals; and d) The cross-fertilization of good ideas and data across traditional boundaries. For convenience, the benefits that can be derived from the use ofterotechnology are summarized in Annex A.

9.1 For management, terotechnology is one of a number of concepts which can contribute to the overall efficiency of an enterprise. Like others, it can be classed as common sense or `simple when you know how', but requires careful, thought and planning to realize the potential benefits of its application. 4

IS 15363 (Part l):2003
9.2 The principal function of the chief executive in any organization is to examine investment options and to make choices between them. He needs to consider the availability or cost of raising funds and the various opportunity costs and make judgments on the best courses of action that are available. He needs to remember that the best economic solution may need to be used. He maybe faced with conflicting advice from various advisers and a decision has to be made. 9.3 Senior managers have to consider and evaluate all the various available options in acquisition, operation, maintenance and disposal of all assets. All the financial answers need to be converted to a common base and any government or customer incentives or disincentives evaluated. The results of all of the findings of senior managers have to be in a simple and consistent format to enable the options to be evaluated in the light of the organization's overall policy and strategy to come to a decision on the best course of action to follow. More details of this are given in Part 2 of this standard. 9A The role of the senior manager in an organization seeking to apply terotechnology is fivefold as follows: a) To encourage departmental managers to work together, and provide each other with all the information that each requires; b) To foster friendly rivalry between departments and to encourage ideas on economies to come from the shop floor (possibly by incentive schemes); c) To coordinate the departmental managers to arrive at a number of possible options (all prepared using the same ground rules to allow correct comparisons to be made); d) To decide on which option to adopt (see 4.1); and e) To ensure that the departmental managers implement the decision which is made. 10 ORGANIZATIONAL FRAMEWORK need to be some changes in individuals' attitudes to their responsibilities. These changes should be towards a more collective corporate attitude and away from narrow departmental or professional allegiances. 11 INCORPORATION INTO ACTIVITIES OF TEROTECHNOLOGY

11.1 Modification of and Additions Activities in the Organization

to Existing

11.1.1 Terotechnology involves understanding and CO1 Iaboration between functions to be effective. An organization will be said to be practicing terotechnology when it is consciously managing the cost of owning its assets. The concepts of `cost of ownership' involves the appreciation oftrade-offs between acquisition costs and running costs. It is easy to understand, but not necessarily easy to apply.

11.1.2 The application of terotechnology requires senior management to have a thorough understanding of each specialist's role. This also means that specialists need to have a broad recognition of their own contribution plus that of their colleagues in other disciplines. If senior management has to make decisions : f new plant with little or no on the purchase information on past performance and operating costs, this can lead to wasted resources, high costs, higher downtime and lost orders. The till terotechnology cycle begins at the investment appraisal stage and ends with the disposal of the asset, but the circle can be entered at any point. For example, a company may decide to improve maintenance and reduce downtime on existing plant; although the trade-off between initial capital costs and subsequent costs cannot be taken into account, the company's decision will have a very real effect on the cost of ownership. The fact that terotechnology cannot be applied from the beginning of the life cycle of a piece of plant should not deter a company from attempting to improve reliability, or to improve or design out maintenance. 11.1.3 Experience to date has shown that in many organizations there is an advantage in appointing a senior person to oversee adoption of the principles of terotechnology throughout the organization. This person should be appointed by and be responsible to, the Board of Management. Preferably he shou!d be independent of any particular department, thus being capable of cutting across departmental boundaries without `bias. 11.2 Modification Relationship
to Customer/Supplier

10.1 The introduction of terotechnology into an organization does not require any significant changes in the organization's functional and departmental framework. There will still be a need for the individual specialized activities; all that will be changed will be the basis of the primary objectives of the individual departments. 10.2 The principal change content of interdepartmental in the relationship between suppliers of its principal buildings, plant or both. will be in the extent and communications, and also the organization and the assets, whether these be

10.3 With the changes in internal and external communications there will inevitably be some modification to individual responsibilities and there 5

11.2.1 Many of the problems which arise at a late stage in the life of physical assets stem from inadequate specification of requirements and poor communication between customer and supplier. It is important to distinguish between specification for function and

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003
specification of reliability, maintainability and continuity of optimum performance of the assets in question. 11.2.2 Terotechnology is not concerned with the first (for example, the process), but it does include the latter. This is a fundamental distinction which helps to illustrate the relationship between terotechnology and other management techniques. 11.2.3 Only the user is able to specify the overall requirement but the supplier can and should have responsibility for much of the detail. Equipment suppliers make an important contribution to the efficiency of industry because they determine the reliability and fitness for purpose; of the assets they supply and management in this area has a particular responsibility to ensure that the customer takes delivery of plant which meets his requirements, both in terms of technical parameters and predicted life cycle costs. 11.2.4 In certain industries, there has developed an understanding that the customer/supplier relationship has a very real effect on the efficiency and prosperity of all concerned. In such cases there is a deeper appreciation of each other's role and requirements than would be the case with purely formal and procedural relationships. 11.2.5 Not only are the customer and supplier better able to plan their respective operations, but the early and crucial stages in the life of a plant develop more smoothly and logically than would otherwise be the case. Benefits resulting from a closer customer/supplier relationship are as follows: a) Planning made easier and with a better chance of success; b) Easier transition production; c) Production from specification to its own objectives and a plant to meet these, broken down into a series of individual projects. The steps in the process are as follows: a) Identify each project including the total market demand for the product or service and the national target share of this demand to be met by the organization. Both of these aspects need to be determined against a time scale. b) Identify the scenario against which these market predictions are being made. c) Identify and agree the probable ranges of variations in this scenario and both the probabilities of such variations and the consequences on the national output and time sensitivities on the project objectives. d) Identi& any performance requirements such as availability or reliability of output and any product quality targets and the consequences (including penalties) of not meeting these requirements. The second part of this phase involves the identification and selection of a specific asset plant proposal. The steps are as follows: a) Identify the technically feasible way of meeting the project targets, within any restraints, financial or otherwise. b) Estimate outline costs of alternatives costs). c) Estimate cost variations ranges of scenarios. (life time

within the identified

d) Select best option or options for further detailed study after taking into account the assessed probabilities and risks. e) Refine assessments to reduce best options to a single proposal and communicate this in full detail. 11.3.2 Acquisition Phase

schedules more readily met; and

d) Increased company effectiveness and greater chance of meeting market requirements. 11.2.6 This situation may not come about if the customer does not know how to specify exactly what he wants, and the supplier does not feel it is his responsibility to rkk for a precise specification or there may be complete ignorance of the fact that there is a communication gap. Equipment is sometimes bought and modified by the customer who, perhaps because of fear of disclosing commercial secrets, does not inform the supplier, with the result that more plant of the same type will be designed and built with the same shortcomings. 11.3 Example of Application of Terotechnology Different Project Phases in a User Organization 11.3.1 Concept and Investment Appraisal Phase 11.3.1.1 Initially the organization will have to establish 6 in

11.3.2.1 In this phase the first task is to specify the assets needed for the project. The steps include the following:
a) Obtain inputs from all parts of the organization regarding the assets needed and the probable future resource needs during the project lifetime. b) Identify and evaluate potential trade-offs, for example, automation versus manpower, inherent ~eliability versus maintenance. c) Either specify assessed optimum of trade-offs or demand information in tenders on which to determine the optimum. d) Fully specify requirements in all particulars including contract documentation, manuals and support during the life cycle of the asset.

.

IS 15363 (Part l) :2003
e) Finally issue the enquiry viable tenders. specification to all the operation and maintenance of the current assets but also for use by the user's planning and project staff in future projects. To this should be added such data which, when fed back to the manufacturers or suppliers, enables them to improve their performance in serving the terotechnological needs of future users. 11.3.5 Disposal Phase This terminal phase of the life cycle will have to be optimized as part of the life cycle management. Therefore, the data and costs associated with this phase should be considered for use in the studies of future projects.

11.3.2.2 When tenders have been received, these will have to be assessed and compared. The essential elements of the assessment to be included areas follows: a) Ensure all specification data, have been met. requirements, including

b) Identify shortcomings or alternatives and estilmate the consequential penalties to the user organization. c) Identify options offered, then determine select best option for the user. and

d) Identify further pothtial shortcomings (not necessary outside-specification) and evaluate a reasonable notional penalty based upon risk and consequence estimates. e) Identify guarantees being offered.

11.4 Effect on Supplier Organizations
11.4.1 In so far as supplier will normally also be a user of assets acquired from another supplier, he will have an interest in terotechnology applied to his own assets. But his consideration should also extend to the assets he is supplying to his customers. To do this he needs to consider in his own operations the terotechnology needs of his customers, as users, by viewing matters from their points of view. 11.4.2 In particular his designs for assets to be supplied to a customer should make the user's terotechnology needs the priority consideration. Having done so, it will be equally essential that the supplier markets his product with due emphasis on how the customer's terotechnology needs have been considered and catered for. This aspect goes beyond the design of the product and extends to both contractual conditions (guarantees, etc) and support for the service phase. This latter could include both spares and specialist advisory services. 12 MODIFICATIONS TO INDIVIDUAL FUNCTIONAL ACTIVITIES 12.1 Management 12.1.1 The decisions made by management can only be as good as the information which is made available to them. At management level the primary function of terotechnology is as an information and control system and as an aid to communication and appraisal. Information fedback from all functions within the organization will enable better evaluation of the performance of physical assets and so improve corporate planning and forecasting. 12.1.2 Management style is important in the application of terotechnology and a policy which encourages communication and information exchange will facilitate this. The acquisition, processing and transmission of relevant data is a fundamental requisite for the full practice of terotechnology and although this may sometimes call for sophisticated data systems based on computers, this should not automatically be assumed to be the case. The type of information required should be specified first, and then the methods of recording it.
I

11.3.2.3 Competitive tenders should be compared and tenders then selected for all the contracts for the various assets in the total project. Before proceeding it will of course be necessary to check that the tendered data does not invalidate the chosen asset plan or the original Finally contracts are let or market plan proposals. orders placed for the assets needed. 11.3.3 Commissioning Stage

During the commissioning stage of the assets further detailed examination needs to be given to all the options regarding policies, strategies and the support resources needed for operation and maintenance of the assets. The objective is to identify the optimum position viewed overall with respect to the project targets. Further refinement should be made of estimates of resources needed for operation and maintenance during the asset life cycle particularly in the light of any variations within the scenario ranges agreed, from time to time, by senior management. 11.3.4 Useful Life Phase

11.3.4.1 During the useful life phase, in which operation and maintenance are the primary activities, the policies and strategies, initially forecast during the commissioning stage, will be reviewed and modified in the light of experience and circumstances, As time progresses, reviews need to be held inter alia to clearly define the project targets, particularly regarding the duration of the life cycle and the associated costs in respect of disposal of the assets and/or their replacement if this is appropriate. Routinely, the performance of the asset and associated costs should be reviewed and be improved if this is possible. 11.3.4.2 A major feature of this phase will however be the collection and analysis of data not only for use in

IS 15363 (Part l): 2003
Care needs to be taken to ensure that cost of gathering and evaluating the information does not out weigh its usefulness. 12.2 Accountants The accountant should have the responsibility to: 1) Identifying for any new acquisition the full requirements of the user groups in the organization; and Providing to those involved in determining acquisitions the information necessary to assist in making correct purchasing decisions and help to ensure that initial cost is not used as the sole criterion.

2)

a) Develop effective communication with colleagues in design, manufacturing, maintenance and marketing to assist the flow of information on all aspects of cost, particularly to enable a proper examination of the relationship between the initial purchase cost of an asset and the total life cycle cost; b) Insist that departmental managers feed him cost data in a form that can be used in wider decision processes of life cycle costing, including optimization of policies; c) Make available cost and performance information to assist in making investment proposals, which in turn will lead to improved investment appraisals and better investment decisions. 12.3 Designers and Project Engineers The designer and project responsibility to: engineer should have the

b) Externally by: 1) 2) Fully communicating the requirements the user groups to suppliers; and of

Making available to suppliers adequate data on the relevant aspects of the required life cycle performance of physical assets being considered for acquisition, including initial cost, installation and commissioning, performance, life, reliability and maintainability and thereby assisting in preparing an adequate specification of the company's requirements. Managers and Engineers

12.5 Production

12.5.1 The production manager and engineer should have the responsibility to: reliability, a) Provide information on maintainability, safety, costs and failure or malfunction, etc, of plant and equipment in use; b) Provide the relevant information enabling clear and complete specifications of requirements to be prepared when consideration is being given to the purchase of new or replacement assets; c) Make available relevant data when considering production programmed and how they would be affected by maintenance schedules; d) Receive and act on feedback of information from the users of the product on failures, reliability, maintainability and safety; and e) Assist in the preparation of valid estimates of delivery time and price when responding to a prospective purchaser's enquiry. 12.5.2 The better information and cooperation resulting from the use of terotechnology will often result in an overall improvement in costs and efficiency. 12.6 Maintenance Managers and Plant Engineers should

a) Ensure the availability of feedback information from users on such items as: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) Cost of installation and commissioning; Reliability; Maintainability; Functional performance including numbers and types of failure or malfunction; and Consequences of failure and use of failure modes, effects and criticality analysis.

b) Enable the whole life cycle costs including manufacture, installation, commissioning, operation, overhaul, repair and disposal to be considered at the design and development stage; more fully aware of the c) Become implications of their design decisions; cost

d) Facilitate the preparation and presentation of technical manuals and brochures on the product; and e) Show, if required, the need for specialist personnel and their required skills, and identify how these can be employed. Decide on how this need can be satisfied by the time these skills are required and consider recruitment or training. 12.4 Purchasing Executives

The maintenance manager and plant engineer have the responsibility to:

a) Encourage the provision of proper maintenance" schedules; b) Provide a fault recording and analyzing system as part of a maintenance strategy, giving information on spares requirements, reliability, maintainability, maintenance costs, safety, etc; c) Make available information 8 on the total costs of

The purchasing executive should have the responsibility to strengthen communication bridges with the suppliers: a) Internally by:

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003
maintenance including both direct and indirect costs, which would assis~ in assessing the right time for equipment replacement; d) Provide the means of checking reliability and maintainability achieved in practice; that forecast figures are are identified and some solutions in 13.2 to 13.5. 13.1.2 The problems discussed four broad categories: a) Concept; b) Technical and economic; c) Management organization; and to them suggested may be divided into

condition-based maintenance e) Evaluate techniques as part of terotechnology to optimize maintenance costs and improve plant availability; and how poor~r f) Highlight to top management inadequate maintenance can result in poor delivery performance, and consequently dissatisfied customers and lost markets. 12.7 Marketing Executives

d) Personnel management. 13.2 Concept 13.2.1 A reluctance to accept the concept of terotechnology is often a problem within an organization for a variety of reasons. In order to deal with the problem these reasons shobld bd identified. Depending on the cause of the problem consideration should be given to the following suggested solutions: a) Where the problem is due to a lack of understanding of the meaning of the term terotechnology a solution may be found in seeking forms of the term which are familiar and therefot-e meaningful to the person(s) concerned. The list given in 4.3.5 maybe helpful. b) Where there is doubt regarding the benefits to be gained from the adoption of terotechnology, it may be profitable to undertake some back of an envelope sensitivity analysis before embarking on an in-depth "investigation. it is often surprising how valuable such an introductory exercise can be and what it leads to. c) Where there are no specific reasons for the problem other than the natural reluctance to accept change, a trial in one trade-off situation can often be convincing as It will demonstrate how using terotechnology leads to more informed decision making. 13.2.2 Whilst the concept of terotechnology may be acceptable in an organization there may be opposition to the implementation of terotechnology in the organization because the costs are thought to be prohibitively high. However, much of the data required in the application of terotechnology can be derived from data which should already be collected for normal management purposes and the analysis of the data can use the existing facilities. The solution to the problem therefore is to convince the objectors that the additional cost to an efficient organization will be minimal. 13.2.3 The application ofterotechnology calls for multidisciplinary cooperation. However, the sectional interests of the different professions and educational institutions are not conductive to promoting this cooperation. The lack of appreciation of the need for 9

The marketing executive should have the responsibility to: a ) Provide information to enable the competitive features of the product to be presented to the prospective purchaser and particularly the tradeoff between initial cost and total life cycle costs; b) Consider such factors as delivery, performance, price quality, reliability, maintainability, aftersales service, spares availability, the quality of technical manuals, etc, and whether: 1) he is fully equipped to respond customer's requirements; to the

2)

he has information to assist in detailed comparisons with rival products; and

c) Establish feedback from customers on product performance 12.8 Effect on Training To achieve the maximum benefits from terotechnology it will be necessary to introduce the concept into the staff training of the organization. This should lead, in turn, to a level of training sufficient to allow each participant to understand his own contribution and the contribution to be expected or required from all other members of the organization. The greater appreciation by individuals of the work and contributions of others should lead to smoother relationships within the organization, less friction and disturbances and a greater identification of each individual with the corporate entity of the organization. 13 PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED IN INTRODUCING TEROTECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS FOUND EFFECTIVE 13.1 General 13.1.1 Those considering the introduction of terotechnology may find themselves faced with a number of difficulties. Some of the common problems

AND

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003
cooperation amongst me]mbers of the organization will impede the effective application ofterotechnology. This problem is gradually disappearing following: because of the assumptions. In case of doubt it will be wise to apply sensitivity analysis to establish the degree of accuracy required of the data and the extent to which any assumption will affect the solution. 13.3.4 Certain external constraints may affect the solution to a terotechnology problem and a sub-optional solution may have to be adopted in preference to the ideal solution (In this context, external constraints are constraints imposed by the organization's policies and may include the cost of initial financing, the imposition of cost limits or a requirement to accept the lowest tender). The great merit of terotechnology is that it identifies the benefits that may be gained. These may produce powerful arguments for revising the constraints imposed and certainly allow more informed decisions to be taken. 13.3.5 When compared with the life of the production run, the duration of the promotional advertising of a product may be relatively short. If the degree of success is appraised at the end of the advertising period the full benefits ofterotechnology maybe underestimated. Since it obviously takes time for clients and customers to assess the benefits of total life costs, the mll benefits will normally only materialize in the Iongerterm. This aspect should be borne in mind in setting up the promotional programme; in subsequent promotions results can be quoted. 13.4 Management Organization

a) Terotechnology, often under the guise of other names, is accepted by the professions and is now being taught by many technical colleges, polytechnics, etc. [n-house training can also be effective in further eliminating the problem. b) In many organizations today it is recognized that liaison and cooperation between the different professions is @sential for the efficient running of the business and this can easily be extended to the application of terotechnology. 13.3 Technical and Economic Problems

13.3.1 The most common problem in this area is that there is an apparent non-availability of data in a form suitable for use in terotechnology. This problem is less serious today than in earlier times it should gradually disappear for two reasons: a) Recent explosive developments in information technology allow the derivation of data suitable for terotechnological purposes. b) Efficient management now recognizes the need for data to allow the preparation of programmed, control budgets and the monitoring of performance. It is not difficult for such data to be collected in a form which will also allow them to be used for terotechnology. The wider availability of personal computers in offices of all sizes makes this collection of data possible. In some cases the required data can be derived from hypotheses and/or published information. 13.3.2 Another problem which has discouraged the use of terotechnology is the belief that there are no suitable techniques for the processing of data. This is not the case. The normal techniques used for investment appraisal can be used, including statistical analysis and discounted cash flow techniques. The skill lies in applying these techniques to terotechnological problems and interpreting the results. 13.3.3 A problem to be faced in the application of terotechnology is how to deal with uncertainties about the future. In order to deal with uncg-tainties, assumptions about the future have to be made. Every form of investment analysis is based on such assumptions. In terotechnology these may include the likely life of the product, the rate of inflation, the discount rate to be used, and tax incentives. These aspects are dealt with in some detail in Parts 2 and 3 of this standard. There are well-tried techniques available for choosing the best 10

13.4.1 Terolechnology requires inputs from a number of different disciplines which may be located in different functional divisions within an organization. This may create a problem. Normally the problem does not apply to small organizations or to larger organizations which are split up into small groupings by region or type of operation. Nonetheless, in many cases some overall guidance may be essential. The problem has to be solved by identifying eliminating the root cause, such as the following: and

a) In some cases different departments or different disciplines in an organiza~ion find it difficult to cooperate for the common good due to the fact that the departments are considered to be separate accounting units, each of which has to show a profit. In such cases it should be made clear that each department should consider all the options open to it and take into account the effect these will have on other departments. Someone should then be appointed to consider all the options and to recommend to the senior manager the solution most beneficial to the organization as a whole. b) Departments may not recognize that some of their data have the potential of serving the needs

IS 15363 (Part l) :2003
of other departments. Everybody needs to be made aware that information is available in the various departments. In order to make this information useful to other departments it will be necessary to open up and maintain interdepartmental channels of communication. 13.5 Personnel Management may concern possible loss of status if not loss of employment altogether. Management generally must ensure that they recognize when or where such concerns are arising and take such steps as are necessary to counter them. These fears may concern possible misapplication and consequent loss of status. Acknowledgement and due recognition of both specialist skills and cooperative efforts should help in this respect as well as appropriately structured training which explains and promotes the value of interdisciplinary cooperation. The formation of interdisciplinary teams to tackle selected tasks rather than the maintenance of single disciplinary line managements throughout the organization may also assist in allaying fears and demonstrating the value of interdisciplinary contacts to staff at an early stage. Monetary incentives for specialist skills may be appropriate and a sharing in the increased profitability or savings maybe the best method of applying incentive for cooperative efforts. However, a sense of person appreciation may be even more important. 14 APPLICATION TECHNIQUES 14.1 General The application of terotechnology demands that all those involved have a broad recognition of their own contribution together with that of their colleagues in other disciplines and its success is dependent upon effective communications between all parties. It requires an understanding of management and accounting and a knowledge of the engineering associated with the particular industry or asset. The full terotechnology cycle begins. at the investment appraisal stage and ends with the disposal of the asset, but the application of terotechnology can be made at any stage in the life of a physical asset and continue for some or all of the remaining life cycle periods until disposal or replacement. 14.2 Procedures and Techniques OF PROCEDURES AND

13.5.1 The introduction of terotechnology has a signit~cant impact on man management. Senior and middle mangers in particular need to develop to appropriate levels their knowledge of a) Multi-disciplinary b) lntemction skills involved;

between these skills; and

c) Language and jargon used in each interacting discipline in the terotechnology concept. [n addition, departmental isolation and loyalties have to be redirected to secure the wider aims of terotecbnology. However, this objective should not prevail to the extent that specialist skills become too dilute, resulting in a staff knowing a little about everything but nothing in depth. 13.5.2 For most organizations staff represent their most valuable resource and organizations which fail to recognize this, and do not strive constantly to enhance their quality, rarely prosper. The introduction of terotechnology demands reeducation and restraining of personnel throughout the organization and career development along terotechnology lines needs to form an integral part of the personnel management policy. Care needs to be taken to update specialist knowledge and staff need to be encouraged to absorb all the technological changes witbin their own specialism. The career development strategy of the organization should be to overlay management training and multidisciplinary awareness on in-depth specialist knowledge. Senior management needs to be trained in the necessary corporate decision-making skills. Top management will need to delegate specialist tasks and require constituent branches of the organization to present progress r'eports, financial information, etc, using the techniques in Part 3 of this standard, in such a form that corporate decisions can easily be made, justified and explained. The acquisition of staff can be treated to some extent like the acquisition of other assets. A similar life cycle/ cost approach can be taken and career management and progression are in many respects sim ilar to the processes outlined for maintenance and improved of other assets. 13.5.3 in certain circumstances specialists may fear the implications of revealing their special skills to colleagues outside their own discipline. These fears

The procedures and techniques available for the implementation ofterotechnology are many and varied. Some examples of these techniques in relation to life cycle cost functions are given in Table 1. For full details of these techniques and their application see Parts 2 and 3 of this standard. 14.3 Terotechnology Checklists

Terotechnology checklists have been prepared for use by various functions within organizations. As an example, the checklist aimed at managers in user organizations is included as Annex B. The full set of checklists is reproduced in Part 3 of this standard.

II

Table 1 Some Examples

of Relationships

Betw'een Life Cycle Functions (Clause 14.2)

and Relevant

Techniques

sl
;0.

Life Cycle Functions Task

System Specification Define parameters for technical performance Performance evaluation

Plant Design Balance performance against time and cost Environmental planning Carry out value engineering study

O

F
Set quality limits Commission and test to quality limits Quality assurance. value engineering Test reliability Value engineering Forecasting

Plant Operation
Assess

Nlaintcnance

Replacement

performance to specification and reliability

Assess future performance need

Techniques

-- Task Check quality to specification Assess influence of maintenance on quality Corrosion. tirbology. sampling Determine future quality need

ii)

Quality Techniques Marketing factors

Probability theory; sensitivity analysis Assess failure probabilities Value engineering, simulation

Quality assurance, sampling

Task

Speci& realistic limits Marketing forecasts

Set maintenance schedule

Maintain to schedule and assess reliability Preventive maintenance. probability analysis

Determine future reliability

iii)

Reliability

Techniques

iv)

Downtime

Task

Collect data from previous plant records Evaluate project, set control parameters and reporting Project appraisal

Assess maintenance need in Iight of specification Control design. schedule, time and cost Network analysis

Snags carried forward

Snags carried forward

Establish actual downtime

Evaluate progressive future downtime Control maintenance cycle and cost Network analysis Collate life cycle cost for appraisal

Task

Control manufacture schedule. time, cost and quality

Pre-plarming implemented control schedule and cost Network analysis

Control cost and progress

v) Techniques . Linear programming Project evaluation

l'a ble 1 (Cone/zf&C/) --.

SI
No.

~
I

Life Cycle Functions Task

S}stem Specification

Plant Design

Plant }Ianufacture

Commission, InsPall

Plant Operation

llainterran~e

Replaccmcnt

Calculate whole life
cycle cost Life cycle costing. investment appraisal. sensitivity analysis

.Allocate
design costs Finance. cost accounting. management accounting

Allocate
manufacture cost. set price Cost and management accounting

Allocate
installation cost Programme evaluation and review technique (cost)

Assesscost of
operation and downtime Cost and management accounting

Assess
cost of maintenance Marginal costing

Assess
aod etaloate economics cost forecasting. Discounted cash flow. investment appraisal. Cost-Benefit Anal}sis Schedule replacement phase

vi)

cost

Techniques

Task vii) Scheduling

Techniques

Request schedule as part of quotation Planning

Produ'cemanufacture and installation schedules Resource scheduling

Set work flow based on schedule Work study. resource scheduling. materials handling
W'ork study production process

Task

Set design plan

,iii)

Time

utilize feedback to reduce design time Critical path analysis Use feasibility study data Probability theory Determine future records needed System analysis Modi@ design in light of feedback Behaviour science

Install based on schedule Work study, resource scheduling, materials handling Value of long-term commissioning

Set work flow for production Work study. resource materials handling linear programming Investigate economic runs Critical path analysis

Set maintenance schedule Work study. resource scheduling. materials handling Evaluate maintenance load

Determine economic life

Techniques Task

Marketing factors Carry out feasibility study to set specification Probability theory Speci& records to be kept (up to delivery) Information systems, information theory Keep specification up-to-date Information theory

Critical path analysis Test operation feasibility Modelling, synthesis Maintain process and manufacture records Automatic data processing Feedback design Simulation Keep commissioning log Network analysis Feedback to design and sales

-- Assess project feasibility Cost-Benefit Analysis

ix)

Feasibility

Techniques Task

x)

Records

Keep production. downtirne. cost records .4utomatic data processing Feedback to purchasing and design

Keep maintenance records Automatic data processing Feedback to previous stages

ColIage records

Techniques

Tasli

xi)

Feedback Techniques

Feedback to all previous stages

IS 15363 (Part 1) :2003 ANNEX A

(Clause 6)
SUMMARY OF THE BENEFITS FROM USING TEROTECHNOLOGY

A- I The use of terotechnology the following areas:

can provide benefits in

A-2 The use of terotechnology beneficial results:

can have the following

1)

Reduction in total cost of ownership of physical asset and hence increased profitability; Demonstrable balance between short term profit goals; and long and with

a) Improved profitability, with appropriate balance between short and long term goals; b) Improved communications and sense of common purpose between company functions enabling greater delegati& of asset management tasks, encouraging junior management to develop healthy attitudes; c) Reduction in time spent on asset management by senior managers, whilst, demonstrably improving control and asset management activities; and d) Lower development through: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) Limited objectives Elimination and production costs

2) 3)

Identifies future penalties associated expedient short term actions. and Control:

b) Communications 1)

Improved understanding between senior management and other business functions (on topic of asset management) using common language of total cost of ownership; Cross-fertilization of good ideas and data across traditional functional boundaries; Greater scope for delegation of asset management tasks to junior staf~ leaving time for more important decision making. Emphasis on more coherent inputs from below (less risk, time saving); Provides common goals and language all functions within the business; for

performance of non-essential

improvement functions;

2) 3)

Design simplicity; Greater use of design inheritance; Greater use of standard products; and commercial parts; and source

4) 5)

Use of high volume production Designing to facilitate competition.

multiple

Encourages a multi-disciplinary approach to management which develops healthy attitudes in respect ofi i) Inter-functional relationships;

e) Improved reliability through: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) Greater use of proven design; Greater attention to non-random Simplified design; Improved quality control; More efficient procedures; development and and test stringent failures;

ii) Short versus long term effects; 6) Provides a rational approach to asset management which will allow senior managers to make decisions on the basis of a lower volume of more meaningful information. Development:

More representative environmental tests; and Timely elimination

c) Management I)

of software errors. through:

Disciplines junior management to develop appropriate balance between immediate goals and future penalties or benefits; and Encourages a multi-disciplinary helping to reduce the negative inter-fuilctional tension. approach, effects of

f) Improved maintainability 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 14

More design attention to maintainability; Improved test equipment Improved accessibility; Improved reliability of test equipment; Greater support equipment standardization; Use of standard equipment; and components in support and procedures;

2)

d) Profitahilily: I) 2) Reduction of the total costs of physical assets and hence increased profitability; and Achievement of an appropriate balance between long and short term goals.

Built-in self-test capabilities.

IS 15363 (Part l) :2003 g) lmproveds upporto perationsthrough:
1) 2) ~) Reduced proliferation Reduced proliferation Reduced maintenance requirelments; of sub-systems; of parts; skill and manpower 4) 5) 6) 7) Use of common support equipment; Reduced special training; Reduced logistics pipeline time; and Reduced ments. scheduled maintenance require-

ANNEX

B

(Clause 14.3)
EXAMPLE OF A TEROTECHNOLOGY CHECKLIST

B-O GENERAL This checklist is intended to help organizations in the application of terotechnology. Tick those items on the check list for which yes is appropriate or mark those to which, perhaps for organizational reasons, only a negative answer can be given; in this way one should be able to highlight areas where improvements could be made. B-1 TEROTECHNOLOGY CHECKLIST FOR OVERALL MANAGEMENT OF A USER ORGAN1ZATION B-1.l General 3)

or service obtained from the unit in question? and Trends in the costs of use and maintenance? for purchasing to:

e) Encourage those responsible 1) 2) 3)

Maintain interest in the physical the organization; Make a positive contribution affecting the acquisition; and

assets of

to decisions

Take full account of life cycle criteria when recommending or selecting a supplier of bought-in components or assemblies.

f) Check that manuals and other support literature: 1) Are acceptable to those in the organization who install, operate and maintain the units in their care; and Permit the preparation of life cycle plans, including financial provisioning. Decisions on Acquisition of a

a) Ensure that there is effective two-way communication between the organization and suppliers of plant, machinery, equipment, buildings, structures or other physical assets. b) Check that this includes quantitative information on the following: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) Functional utility; Health and safety in all phases, including disposal; Reliability; Maintainability; Types (and man-hour costs) of malfunction or failure; Man-hour costs of maintenance overhaul and repair); and Environmental compatibility. (including

2)

B-1.2 When Making New Physictil Asset

a) Ensure that the investment appraisal: 1) 2) is based on a life cycle plan; has taken account of, and displays, the balance between initial cost and total life cycle costs; compares the estimated life cycle costs and performance of the proposed acquisition with those of refurbishing and recommissioning units already in service; and recognizes assurance. the full implications of quality

3)

c) Ensure that there is an efficient system for monitoring, recording and analyzing the perforlnance aqd life cycle costs of the physical assets used by the organization. d) Are the following being considered: I) 2) Condition monitoring?

4)

b) Before making or confirming acquire a new asset consult persons responsible for: 1) 2) 15 Finance; Marketing;

the decision to the concerned

Trends in quality and quantity of the output

1S 15363 (Part 1) :2003 .J)
4) 5) 6) Production; Maintenance; Quality; and Safety. P) Use the life cycle plan to monitor and record progress and costs starting from the time when acquisition was first considered. that changes in the q) Inform all concerned purchasing specification after the order is placed will be prevented. r) Ensure that there is a formal procedure for dealing with proposals for modifications which may result from: 1) 2) problems in design construction; and unavoidable and manufacture or

c) Ensure that the statement of your requirements: 1) 2) is unambiguous; and aspects of life cycle

covers all relevant performance.

d) Check that it will permit intending suppliers to: 1) 2) prepare without delay a specification comment or agreement; or for

changes in requirements.

submit proposals for modifications which they consider will make the asset feasible or more acceptable on grounds of performance or costs.

B-1.3 After Delivery a) Check that those who will be responsible for operating and maintaining the unit are satisfied with: 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) Its testing; Its installation; Availability of documentsimanuals operation and maintenance; Its performance; Their relationship and with the supplier. for

for modification are e) Ensure that proposals communicated to and acted upon without delay by those who wi II be responsible for installing, operating and maintaining the unit. f) Ensure that the proposals for modifications made by the organization are kept to the necessary minimum and can be justified. @ Check that the effects on cost and delivery of modifications to the asset in question are fully communicated. that decisions on proposals for h) Ensure modifications are communicated without delay to the potential supplier. j) Review terms of warranties offered by intending suppliers when placing the order. Assess their potential value and take this into account in economic assessments. specification has k) Ensure that the purchasing been agreed by al I those who were consulted on acquisition of the unit in question.
Ill )

b) Ensure that all legal, regulatory and commercial formalities are completed correctly (for example, those relating to safety and warranties). c) Review how promises, estimates or forecasts ofi 1) 2) 3) 4) 5) Functional performance; Spares; Reliability; Maintainability; costs; have been substantiated or modified between placing the order and acceptance of the unit. d) Consult with those in the organization who are responsible for Finance, Marketing, Production, Maintenance, Purchasing and Quality on how this review will affect the organizations' future plans. and

Ensure that the purchasing specification includes adequate data on all aspects of life cycle performance. of warranties, price and

n) Ask for confirmation delivery.

16

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BISisastatutory institution established under tile Bureau oJ/ndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed

from Dot: No. MSD 4 (223). Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Amendments Amend No.

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBA1 400093

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHAT1. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

