IS 15052:2002

W(I74Jill%

Indian Standard

SHIPBUILDING -- DIESEL PROPULSION SYSTEM RESPONSIBILITY -- REQUIREMENTS

ICS 47.020.20

0 BIS 2002

BUREAU
MANAK

OF IN DIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

April 2002

Price Group

5

Marine Engineering

and Safety Aids Sectional Committee, TED 19

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adoped by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Marine Engineering and Safety Aids Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. This standard has been prepared to specify requirement for propulsion system responsibility for ships with the object to select correct propulsion machineries, to resolve all interfaces between various equipment and to guarantee propulsion system performance requirements. Whi'le preparing this standard due consideration propeller with diesel engine. has been given to factors currently followed for matching the

Failure to meet the propulsion system performance the roll of the ship originally intended for.

requirement

such as speedhhrust

of the ship would hamper

Attention should therefore, be given at the design and selection of machines. Design propulsion system matching should cater at the design stage certain reserve power in d]esel engine. To accomplish the same knowledge on propulsion machineries and hydrodynamics of ships should be used. Series of discussions with the equipment suppliers and designers may be required prior to placement of order for the right selection of equipment. Annex A forms an integral part of this standard. The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B.

IS 15052:2002

Indian Standard

SHIPBUILDING -- DIESEL PROPULSION SYSTEM RESPONSIBILITY -- REQUIREMENTS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies requirement for system responsibility for propulsion plant comprising diesel engine, gear box, stem gear and its control system. 1.2 This standard holds good for diesel engine driven propulsion plant. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standards contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: IS No. 3979:1998 Title Shipbuilding -- Testing of marine diesel engines for main propulsion -- Code of practice (/lrst revision) 3.1.1.3 Fuel stop power Fuel stop power is the power which an engine is capable of delivering during a stated period corresponding to its application, and at stated speed and under stated ambient conditions, with the fuel limited so that the fuel stop power cannot be exceeded. 3.1.1.4 Intermittent rating engine fuel stop or permit the overload power to be delivered satisfactorily. The overload power shall be expressed as a percentage of continuous power, together with the duration and frequency permitted and the appropriate engine speed. Unless otherwise stated an overload power of 110 percent of the continuous power at a speed corresponding to engine application is permitted for a period of 1 h without interruptions, within a period of 12 h of operations.
NOTES 1 The power of marine propulsion engine is normally limited to the continuous power so that the overload power cannot be given in service. However, for special applications, marine main propulsion engines may develop overload power in service. 2 If the engine application is not determined the engine supplier shatl specify the overload power and corresponding engine speed.

10000 (Part 4) : Methods of tests for internal combus1980 tion engines: Part 4 Declaration of power, efficiency, fuel consumption and lubrication oil consumption 3 TERMINOLOGY 3.1 Main Engine An engine intended for main propulsion. 3.1.1 Rated Power 3.1.1.1 Continuous power

Engine is rated for specified time at increased engine speed than its continuous power speed for specified application. 3.1.1S Sprint rating

Continuous power is the net brake power which the engine is capable of delivering continuously, between the normal maintenance intervals stated by the supplier, at the stated speed and under stated ambient conditions prescribed by the supplier being carried out. 3.1.1.2 Overload power

An engine is rated for a very short duration and rated at slightly higher speed than intermittent speed for specified application. 3.1.1.6 Service rating

Overload power is the net brake power which an engine may be permitted to deliver at standard reference conditions (see IS 3979) immediately after working at the continuous power. The duration and frequency of use of overload power, which is permitted, will depend on service application, but adequate allowance shall be made in setting the 1

The rating at which propeller is matched for propulsion maximum continuous operation. Service rating is less than the maximum continuous rating of an engine. This can vary from 85 percent to 90 percent of continuous power at specified speed and depends upon ship owner' s/ship designer's requirement. 3.2 Kinds of Statements 3.2.1 IS Stanahrd Power This is the continuous net brake power which the engine manufacturer declares that an engine is capable of delivering continuously, between the normal of Power

IS 15052:2002 maintenance intervals stated by the manufacturer, under the following conditions: a) b) and 3.5 Stern Gear Stem gear shall comprise of shafting and propeller. 3.6 Control System Control system is a device to vary the engine speed, to clutch or de-clutch and/or to vary the pitch of the propeller. 4 SYSTEM RESPONSIBILITY of a propulsion plant shall

At a stated speed under the operating conditions of the engine manufacturer's test bed; With the declared power adjusted to the standard reference conditions as per IS 3979 and tested in accordance with IS 10000 (Part 4); and With the maintenance described by the engine manufacturer being carried out.

c)

The system responsibility be: a)

3.2.2 Service Power Service power is the power determined under the ambient and operating condition of an engine application. To establish service power, following conditions shall be taken into account: a) The ambient conditions, or any nominal ambient conditions according to the special requirements of inspecting and/or legislative authorities and/or classification societies, as specified by the purchaser (see Annex A of IS 3979); For example, the following nominal ambient conditions apply to main and auxiliary RIC engines on ships for International Association of Classification Societies (IACS) unrestricted service: Total barometric pressure Px = 100 kPa Air temperature TX= 318 K (45"C) Relative humidity ex=60% Sea water temperature Tcx = 305 K (32�C) (charge air coolant inlet) The nominal duty of the engine; The expected interval tenance periods; The nature and required; and between of the mainsupervision

To select proper. engine, gear box, stem gear and control system for the intended application of the vessel; To design the propeller so that under loaded condition of the ship with clean hull and good weather conditions, it can absorb the specified service rating at speed specified in continuous rating; To ensure all machineries and their control system are correctly interfaced; To ensure that selected machinery and control system are installed on-board without any difficulty; To eliminate harmful cavitation to propellers within the entire speed range of propeller operation; calculations of entire propulsion system. Input data required for vibration calculations shall be described for all rotating masses. Torsional vibration calculations are required only when the power of the system exceeds 200 kW;

b)

c) d)

e)

f) To carry out torsional, axial, lateral vibration

b) c) d) e)

t?) To design a shafting system with suitable number of bearings ensuring that no bearing overloaded in the running condition; h) is

amount

All information relevant to the operation of the engine in service (see Annex-A and B of IS 3979).

To carry out shaft alignment calculations and provide necessary check values to achieve satisfactory alignment on-board; and To guarantee the performance requirement of complete propulsion machinery in terms of their individual equipment operation, and sys' tern as a whole as well as to achieve desired sea trial performance to meet shipbuilder's contractual requirements of ship owners. OF PROPULSION

j)

3.3 Flexible Coupling Flexible coupling is a power transmitting member between the engine and the gearbox. Selection/Design of the coupling shall take into consideration such as permissible misalignment, torsional vibration, etc. 3.4 Gear Box Gear box is a power transmission unit between the engine and the propulsion system. Suitable reverse reduction or reduction gearbox chosen for installation between engine and stem gear to match optimum propeller speed with rated speed of engine.

5 SELECTION MACHINERY

5.1 Typical propulsion arrangement is given in Fig. 1. 5.2 Propeller A device which converts engine torque to thrust. The responsibility of developing the hull lines and the propeller hydrodynamic design fall under ship designer's scope. In the preliminary design stage,

2

IS 15052:2002

REMOTE

CONTROL

SYSTEM

`---1 I

GOVERNOR

.----

.--

.

------.

--.-

--.

FIG.

1 PROPULSION

SYSTEM

most specific information is required in order to make the necessary trade-off studies to support a design selection. Systematic model test report of ship provide the final design of propeller and hull characteristics. 5.3 Engine The first and most important consideration leading to the selection of a diesel engine is the definition of service requirement. As such it entails obtaining the speed power curves for all important modes of operation such as fully and lightly loaded, clean and fouled bottom, towing and running free and with and without power take-off loads. When the speed power curye has been established an engine can be selected which will develop the required horse power at its appropriate rating. 5.4 Gear Box Gears are selected to match best propeller rev/rein against engine selected with suitable reduction ratio having coaxial or vertical/horizontal offset depends upon shafting)engine room arrangement. 6 POWER FLOW
(~E)

6.5 Relationship P~ = Ps=~

of PE, PD and Ps P~

noxnRxnf+

`B = $ where nH no nR ns = = = =

(n~ is 1 when gearbox

is not fitted)

Hull efficiency, Propeller efficiency, Relative rotative efficiency, Shafting efficiency (not less than 97 percent), and Gear box efficiency (not less than 97 percent).

6.1 Power Effective

The power required to tow a ship, at constant speed in unlimited undisturbed water. 6.2 Power Delivered
(PD)

6.6 Generally power demanded by propeller which is considered as delivered horse power (PD) will be given to propulsion system selector. It can be observed from the power flow characteristic that engine to drive the propeller needs to be selected after accounting for power losses through shafting and gear boxes. The continuous power of engine shall have reserve margin to accomplish service requirements and shall normally include the margins given in 6.6.1, 6.6.2 and 6.6.3 depending on ship owners'/ship designers' considerations.
PB thus derived for engine shall be matched with propeller characteristics as given in Fig. 2 at 85 percent to 90 percent continuous power rating for economical fuel consumption.

The power delivered to the propeller. 6.3 Power Shaft (1%) The power delivered to the shafting system by the propelling machinery. 6.4 Power Brake
(~B)

6.6.1 Sea Margin Power reserve to maintain a given ships speed allowing for weather, sea force, aging and fouling of hull as well as roughening of propeller blades. 6.6.2 Operational Margin Mechanical and thermodynamic power reserve for economical operation of engine (for low fuel and maintenance costs). 3

The power measured at the engine coupling by means of mechanical, hydraulic or electric brake.

IS 15052:2002

OVERLOAD

POWER

PROPELLER VE us POWER

@ @ @

RANGE RANGE RANGE SPECIAL

OF CONTINUOUS OF INTERMITTENT

POWER OPERATION OVERLOAD OPERATION FOR

OF SHORT-TIME APPLICATION

FtG.2 6.6.3 RPA4h4argin

EXAMPLEFORAPOWERKPEEDDIAGRAM

Margin in propeller revolutions with new ship (that is under sea trial condition) to attain or mamtam any power up to continuous power in future continuous service.

7 MODEL TEST/DRAWINGS REQUIRED FOR SELECTION AND INSTALLATION OF ~RoPuLS1oN SYSTEM 7.1 The total propulsion plant shall be selected in such a way that the machineries are installed comfortably within the space allocated in machinery room and shall perform to meet contractual requirements. To assess

4

IS 15052:2002 the performance following need to be scrutinised by those who give system responsibility: a) b) c) d) e) Hull lines of the ship; Model test report if any with respect to propulsion test carried out; Ship's bottom structure in way of propulsion machineries; `A' or `P' bracket details; Engine characteristics; 9 MANUFACTURING AND TESTING

Main engine, gear box, stem gear (shafting system), thrust block and remote control system are to be manufactured and tested wherever applicable in accordance with rules, regulations and National/International Standards as specified by the purchaser. 10 ON-BOARD TEST

f-) Propeller characteristics; @ Stern gear arrangement; h) .i) Installation box; and drawing for main engine and gear

During the sea trial, by means of torsion meter check the shaft horse power which is delivered to the propeller and by means of thrust meter (if available) check thrust produced by the propeller. 11 WARRANTY Propulsion system responsibility when assured shall wanrant that delivered horse power (DHP) as sought by the ship designer shall be delivered to the propeller. In the event that requisite DHP is not achieved as noted from torsion meterorthepropeller even after receiving the requisite DHP is unable to produce the requisite thrust to move the ship as per contractual speed requirement, the subject need to be discussed mutually.

Layout of engine room, machinery control room, wheel house and general arrangement of the ship.

8 INTERFACE If propulsion machinery and its control system are required to be interfaced satisfactorily, then there should be a flow information broadly as indicated in Annex A.

5

IS 15052:2002

ANNEX A
(Clause 8) INTERFACE sl
No. 1. Infm-matiun Required
Main engine

DATA
Stem Gem Remote Cuntmrl System
1, Details of contrul gear provided the engine 2. Details of safety arrangement on the engine -- 3. Instrumentation indicating and maximum and operating circuitry 4. 5. Wiring diagram of -- chart -- -- set values range, minimum Drawings three weight Holding down (Iuose, arrangement in views prnvided on 1.

Main Engine
-- 1.

Gear Box

Shiphuihfer

Idle and maximum engine sped

1.

Engine chamcteristics

Installation

drawings

in I :20 or 1:25 scales to make shipbuilder structural drawings, clearly indicating following:

2.

Torque at idle and maximum speed engine

Centre of gravity and

3.

Flexible

coupling

output flange details

fitted fwlts lnformation and their arrangement, approx. design Characteristics following -- -- -- -- 6. Pressure Temperature Fuel rack Power 2. Engine associated drawings Engine characteristics indicating idle and maximum speed 7. Engine startktop sequence logic 8. 9, Engine control safety and monitoring Documentation sensors fitted 10. Details for stwt interluck down condition de-clutching details 4. clutch circuit for 3. -- All louse accessories drawings end connection details. Guidance drawing engine seating Recommended for with -- Bill of materials identifying engine and yard scope gjving for clearly calculation, Engine end connections etc) against speed

pipe line

safeties, shut

diagrams (for fresh water, oil, compressed air, fuel oil, etc)

bluck and safeties condition 5. 11. Engine overload

Recommended

lubricatoil.

ing oil grades, volume of fresh water, lubricating 6. 7. 8. Recommended balance diagram Crankshaft details Guidance drawings for lateral supports. thrust brackets 9. Details of unbalanced forceslmoments engine 10. Maximum values of shear forcehending moments at crankshaft flange for shafi alignment purpuses 11. Recommended capacities for pumpslcoulers/cOmpressurslairreceiversl engine rcom crane, etc on flange heat etc in main engine system

? -.

Gear box

1.

Break away torque

1.

Output coupling flange details

1.

Details of control gear provided the geac box on

1.

Installation

drawing

in 1:20 or 1:25 scale to make shipbuilder structural drawings clearly indicating following: the

2.

Clutch engagement speed

2,

Driven shaft along with its 2. Safety arrangement if any catered bearings details

6

IS 15052:2002 sl
No.

Information Required 3.

Main Engine
Technical torsional vibration analysis. data

Gear Box

Stem Gear

Rerrmte Coertrul System

Shipbuilder

-- 3. `llrermalexpansion value of bearings 4. Maximum permissible 4. 3. Instrumentation indkating maximum bearing load Dceumentationfor sensnrs fitted 2. chart -- and -- minimum

Drawings CGand Holding

inthree weight

views

m Cwl'y out

down arrange-

set values and

ment (loose, fitted, bolts information and their arrangement calculation) Gearbnxasscciated drawings -- -- clearly giving details for Bill of materials identifying Alllomet drawings gear box accessories with end details GAP, SAG

operating rmsge

connection details 3. 4. Thurstbcaring Recomnrend

Value of GB output tlange to shaft flange 5. 6. 7. 8. Linediagram on gear box Cocking gear box Details ofpumpsicnolers provided on gear bnx for heat Sea water quantity requirement exchanger 9, Weight of main gear wheel, moments of inertia of gear wheels for torsional vibration calculations -1 Stern gear I. Propeller chamcteri. sties 2. Technical data required for torsional vibration characteristics 1. Stem gear shaft flange to be coupled to output flange of gearbox 1. Combinator curve FOR CPP PROPELLERS 2. Details of shaft bearings, seals, etc -- For fixed pitch propeller-nil 1. Details of stem gear assembly drawing amangementof forpiping

2.

Shaft lnck, brake disc

3. 2.
Pitch changing time

Propeller characteristics matching with recommended 6 percent service rating of engine after allowing losses on shafting system

3.

Shaft load on GB bearings as the result of shaft alignment calculations 5.

3.

Detailsof interlock, safeties shut down
conditions 4.

KT/KQ diagram
Cavitation Axial, analysis

3.

FOR

CPP PROPELLERS

FOR CPP PROPELLERS 6.
1. CPP OD Box details lateral vibration calculations 7. Shaft alignment calcula-

3. I Pitch changing time

2.

CPP pump if any
to be driven by gear box

t ion and procedure

3.2 Comb[nator
cuwe

8.
8.1

For CPP besides abnve
Pitch-speed curve power

3.3 Numerical
value nf engine BP corresponding to pitch angle 9. Individual following weights: a) b) c) d) e) f) Propeller shaft Intermediate Coupling Bushes Seals Pro@ler(indicating dia/pitch/blade areafmoment inertia) g) h) Propeller cap Recommended lubricating oil diagram of shaft bolts drawings for items to be 8.2 Combinator curve

furnished indicating

7

IS 15052:2002 sl
No.

Information Required

Main Engine

Gear Box

Sfem Gear

Remote Control System j)

Shipbuilder

Shaft besrings (indicating requirement, clearetc) ances, sea water

4.

Remote control system

Control,

safeties, aeheme

Control safety monitoring approwd scheme for GB supplier

FOR

CPP SYSTEM ONLY
safety scheme

--

1.
2.

Control,

safeties scheme

monitoring

monitoring Control, monitoring approval 4.

for engine supplier approval cOncurrence

GA and details of control panel Pneumatic/wiring diagrsm Details of special cables, cable connections, etc.

for stem gesr

3.

5.

Individual for different provided functions --

drawings types

of valves and components in the control their systems indicating 5 Shipbuilder All shipbuilders drawings asscoiated with main engine for engine supplier concurrence All shipbuilders dmwings associated with gear box for gear box supplier concurrence Structural armngement of stem gear Sbipbuilder wiring/

piping scheme

8

IS 15052:2002

ANNEX B (Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION TED 19

Marine Engineering and Safety Aids Sectional Committee,
Organization tXi
Shipping, Mumbtri SHRI B. K. BISWAS

Alcock

Ashdown

& Co Ltd.

Bhavnagar

Bureau Central

Veritas, Institute

Mumbai of Fisheries Technology, Cochin

Cochin

Shipyard

Ltd,

Cochin

Ericson

& Richards,

Mumbai

Representative(s) (Chairman) SHRI A. CHATARJEE (Alternate) SHm P. MITRA SHRI K. J. ROY (Afremate) SHRI P. B. WARRIER DR T. K. SIVASAD SHRI K. RAMAKRISHANAN (Alternate) SHRI MATHEWGEORGE SHRt K. K. S. NAMBIAR (Alternate) CAFT S. B. AGA
SHRt V. SRtNtVASAN

Essar Shipping Ltd, Mumbai Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, Kolkata Goa Shipyard Ltd, Goa Greaves Cotton&Co Ltd, Mumbai

Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai Institute of Marine Engineers, Mumbai

Institute of Marine Technologists, Kirloskar Oil Engines, Purre Kolkata Port Trust, Kolkata

Mumbai

Lluyd's Register of Shipping, Mumbai

Mather & Platt (India) Ltd, Mumbai Mazagon Dock Ltd, Mumbai Ministry of Communication, New Delhi

Ministry of Defence, Directorate of Marine Engineers, New Delhi Ministry of Defence, Directorate of Standardization, Ministry of Shipping (Development New Delhi

Wing), New Delhi

Ministry of Shipping (SBR), New Delhi Mumbai Port Trust, .Mumbai National Ship Design and Research Centre, Visakhapatrmm Nitin Fire Production System Ltd, Mumbai Shaparia Dock & Steel Co Pvt Ltd, Mumbai South India Shipping Corporation Ltd. Chennai The Comp~ny of Master Mariners of India, Mumbai The Indian National Shipowners Association, Mumbai The Shipping Corporation of India. Mumbai Vijay Fire Protection Systems Pvt Ltd, Mumbai BIS Dircctomte General

SHRI S. MAJI SHRI RAGUVEER .!hNGH SHRI V. DAS GUFTA (Afremafe) CApt-S. SOGTA SHRI H. L. SHAH (Alfemate) SHRI A. SESHAGIRI RAO SHRt S. LAKSHMtNARAYANA (Alternate) SHRI L N. BOSE SHRI U. S, KALGHATGI (Alrerrrare) SHRI K. CHIDAMBARAM CMDERAJANMATHEW(Alfemate I) SHRI K. R. SACHAR(Alternate 11) SHRI DON DYER SNRID. B. lRANI(Altemafe) SHRI S. C. SARDESAI SHRI P. S. BHAVE(Alferrrafe) SHRI S. ROY SHRIG. SEN (Alternate) SHRIT. K. MtTRA SHRIS. C. SABHARWAL (Alternate 1) SHRIJ. D. GROVER(Alternate II) SHRID. R. BAPAT SHRI K. BASHWARAN (Alternate) SHRI S. K. MURTHY SHRI A. H. SOLANI(Afterrrate) DR ASHOKCHANDRA SHRI V. V. SINGH(Aftema?e) COMDRA. P. V. THAMPAN ASSISTANT DtRECTOR OF MARINEENGINEERING (Alternate) CAPT P. R. SANGLIKAR SHRI A. R. C. VAR~A (Alternate) SHRIG. P. ROY SHRIT. K. DUITA (Alternate) DEVELOPMENT ADVISOR(SBR) SHRI R. K. SEN (Alternate) SHRI R. K. KHATTAR SHRI S. P. DEOKULIAR (Alternafe) DIRECTOR SHRI B. R. MALLYA SHRI C. N. MISTRY SHRI ASIM DAS SHRt B. N. BHAIT (Alternate) CAFT V. N. AINDLEY SHRI M. M. PIPLANI SHRI S. K. BHALLA SHRI B. N. ADVANI(Alternate) Sm+t JATINDERA R. SALOT SHtU HARISHR. SALOT(Alternate) SHRI A. R. GULATI,Director & Head (TED) [Represerring Dkector General (E.x-oficio)]

Menrber-Secretary SHRIM. M. BANSAL Joint Director (TED), BIS

9

Bureau

of Indian

Standards institution
of

BIS is a statutory
harmonious

established
the activities

under the Bureau
of standardization,

of Irdian marking

development

Standards Act, 1986 to promote and quality certification of goods

and attending Copyright

to connected

matters in the country.

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TED 19 ( 042 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan,

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Telephones Regional Central

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 :3230131, 3233375, 3239402 : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617 3233841

Offices

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002
: 1/14

{

Eastern

C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

{

3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120 603843 602025

Northern

: SCO 335-336,

{
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

CHENNAI

600113 {

2541216,2541442 2542519,2541315

Western

: Manakalaya,

E9

MIDC,

Marol, Andheri

(East)

MUMBAI Branches

400093

8329295,8327858 { 8327891,8327892

: AH MEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FAR ID ABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Detbi-2

