IS : 4758 - 1968 ( Reaffirmed 1989 )

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

METHODS QF MEASUREMENT OF NOISE EMITTED BY MACHINES ( Fourth
Reprint DECEMBER lW5 )

UDC

534,837

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK IIII.\V~\N,

9 Ilr\li.\l)Ui< SIlAl I %t',:l;.\li RI.\l;(; NI:LV blirxr 1iOOl):!

IS : 4758 - 1968 ._

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF NOISE EMITTED BY MACHINES
Acoustics
Chairman DR k. PANCI~OLY MnnbCrS SIIRI A. N. AHUJA SHRI I. S. AHUJA ( Altcrnatc~) SHRI G. S. BOLINA SHRI S. C. I~RANI SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) SHRI H. JO~A RAO Ahuja Radios, New Delhi G. W. Balkar & Co, Jullundur The Radio Electronics & Television Association, Calcutta Manufacturer's of of

Sectional

Committee,

ETDC

27
( CSIR ), New Delhi

Representing National Physical Laboratory

State Broadcasting Department, Government Andhra Pradesh Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) SHRI B. G. KALE Directorate General of Inspection (Ministry LT-COL S. D. MAINI Defence ) SHRI P. XRISHNAMURTHY RAO (Alternate) Posts & Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI G. B. MEEMAMBI All India Radio Merchants' Association, Bombay SHRI .I. S. MON~A S&r V. J. BHATT ( Alternate ) ( Bombay ) SHRI D. N. CHA~JDI~URI( Alternate ) ( Calcutta ) SHRI L. S. V. EA~WAR (Alternate )
SHRI &~~;I?,,,,,

National Test House, CalcutLa

S&I B. P. GHORH ( Alternate ) SHRI M. S. NARAYANAN

Directorate General of Defence Research & Development ( Ministry of Dcfence ) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore DR B. S. RAXAKZISHNA Directorate General of `411 India Radio RESEARCH ENGINEXI~ DR ( SMT ) C. K. KESAVAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Displjsnls SHRI M. SAN~AR~LINGAM ( Inspection Wing ) Central Electronics Enginxring Research Institute Drt D. L. SUBRAHMANYAM ( CSIR /`mm1. Pilani SHIU K. D. PAVATF. ( Alternate) ' _ Director General. IS1 ( Ex-qficio Member ) SHRI Y. S. VENKATRSWARAN. Director ( Elec tech ) ' Secretaries SHKI N. SI~INIVASAN Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1 SHRI S. MIX~IOPADIIYAY Assistant Dirrctor ( Elec tech ), ISI

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDI'AN

STANDARDS
%AY.\lZ MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 1100X?

IS : 4758 - 1968

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF NOISE EMITTED BY MACHINES
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Sta.ndard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 September 1965, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard concerns with the procedures followed in the objective These procedures are not measuremeqts of noise emitted by machines. necessarily applicable to n&se of an impulsive character. 0.3 This standard describes the general principles of methods of measurcments of machinery noise based on lvhich individual standards may be formulated. The specific standard covering methods of measurement of noise of the various types of machines will have to select the most suitable method having regard to the size of the machine and its application. All the necessary particulars to enable a result to hr obtained with the required accuracy will be given in these standards. 0.4 The machines a) b) c: dj measuremerit of has the following To verify standard, that the physical four objects: characteristics machinr of the noise of

the noise of a givrn

conforms

to a c'ertain

To make a comparison betjveen huilt to the same specification, To make a comparison machines, and To determine between

the nnisc> Prnit ted by machines the noise at a distance. emitted by difkent

the noise received

The four aims specified above are achieved by determining the acoIlstic noise power radiated by the machine as well as the directivity, these Determination quantities being measured a s a function of the frequency. of the acoustic po\ver shocld thus be the preferred mc~thod for the measureThe different methods of measuring ment of the noise of machines. acoustic power are given in Appendices A to C. 0.4.1 Determination of` the po\ver and that directivity, however, leads to sufFic,iently removed ti-om the the siting of the points of measurement machine for the conditions of prnpagntion by. progressive knaves to be It ii :~.IM n~essar~~ that at this site, the reflections from the established. This quires premises of walls of the preiui<cs &all have no cf%t:t. relativelv large dnnt~nsions ~r~q~;l~d \vith tlx)se of the machine. with ver) abso:ber;t lvalls.

2

0.4.3 It Inay also IX possilJl(~ to use sc~mi-1.c,vcrf)crarlt spaces lout this limited infi)rmation on the dircc.tivity of 1nethOd call ~iYJVidC Olll;i the, ac.oustic: radiation and very rough cstirnation of the acoustic powcl-. 0.4.4 Whilr the: v \\.iil be 110 diflicult)? to provide nczcssary acoustic cnvi:-onrncnt fi)r small rnac,hincs, it may not always br possible to achicvc the ncc'rssary contlitiolls Li,r larq: machines, special installation condition of` may be rcquirc:d. `I'hc!sc conditions the machine cannot always 1K met particularly fbr lar,qf: rnachitics. It rrlay not also be possil~lc to bring the rnachinc: to :l roo1n snital)lc fbr thr d~tcrrnirlarion of the acousl ic Hcnw. IIW is of`tcbn nladtl of a sirnplific~d mt~thod in which sounc! l'"WW. pressure mt:asIIretnerit5 arc carr kd out at certain rncasurrrnc~nt points suitably spread arorind tile outer casing of the machine, suilicicntly close to the machine t.0 &viatc the effixt of ttrr sound reflections. Such a method enables the objecl Ca 1 to lye achicvcd with thct desired precision, the sufiicifmtly well-dcfincd, but it dimensions of the rnachintr lying goncrally does not enable ol~j~f+; ( c) and cd ) to h obtained. It is, however, possible for the acoustic conditions at a distance to be evaluated approximately on the baG\ oi pressure measur~:rncnts carried out in the vicinity oi` the rnachinr 1)~ takin,g illto ac.cnrlnt the surface on which the measurements have been carried out. clasc~ly 1 SO Recommendation 495 ` C,kr!c~~ al 0.5 `This ?tand<ii d ii)llous rcyuirernents fi)r :irc: prq~aral ion of test codes for measrlring the nois{* einittcd bv mac:h!rii~\ ' issllecl liv the lnterndrionai Organization for StandardizBtiox~.

0.6 In reporting

the resrllt of a test made in accordance with this stz~~ndard, Ii` :he fi;lal value, obscrvcd or calculated, is to be rounded or, it shall be done in accordance \zith IS :Z1960*.

1. SCOPE

1.1`I'his standard

deals with the procedures to be followed in the objective measurement of the noise emitted by. machines. These procedures are not necessarily applicable to noise of an mlpulsive character.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpxe *R&s for
rounding

of this standard,
off numerical

the following
)

definitions

shall

apply.

values ( re&d 3

PS:4758-1968

2.3 Sound Power Level-Ten times the common (Briggsian the ratio of a given sound power to a stated reference power. 2.4 Machine -- rbly are to be meast1rc.d. sound source of which the acoustical

j logarithm
characteristics

2.5 Prescribed Surface ---A hypothetical surface surrounding the machine as given in the individual standard and over which the measurements are assumed to be made. Its area is calculated as laid down in the individual standard. 2.6 Equivalent Hemisphere area as the prescribed surface. Hypothetical hemisphere having the same

2.7 Reference Radius -Radius ( measured from the centre of the ecluivalent hemisphere :: as given in the individual standard, to which all the reslllts of uieasrueirients made on machines of the same category (tested according to the same standard 1, are reduced. 3. GENERAL 3.1 fustallation and Operation of the Machine ---The acoustic radiation of the rilachine can depend on its insta!lation, particularly when the The condition of installation and the machine is one of small climensirn~~. conditions of operation of the machine during the test shall he included in the individual spccificatinn. 3.2 Qyantities to be Measured-Depending on the purpose of the measurement, iiature of the noise source, and the character of the sound field, one or both of the following quantities should he measured: a)
Sound level ( it is recommended he adopted `I, and

that the weighting hands of given

network width.

A will

13) So!ind

pressure

level in frequency

`Specifration

for scwxi

lcvcl meters for ,qeneral purposes 4

\\se.

IS : 4758 -1!%8 3.2.1 Since in all cases a pressure microphone will be used, the result of the measurements will he band sound pressure level or sound level values.
NOTE 1 -When the spectral distribution of the noise is well known, a measuremrnt of wide band sound pressure level or sound level may suffice. 4 NOTE 2 Any determination of the spectral distribution of the noise should be in frequency bands corresponding to those specified in IS : 2264-1963*.

3.3 Measuring Equipment-A sound level meter (see IS : 3932-1966t) or a frequency analyzer or both shall be used as specified in the relevant standard. 3.3.1 The measuring equipment standards at suitable intervals. 3.4 Measuring level measuring 4. METHODS shall be calibrated against acoustic

Positions - In the individual standard, positions are to be clearly laid down. OF MEASUREMENT

the sound pressure

4.1 The accurate determination of the acoustic power of a machine (see 0.4) has to be performed either as a far-field sound pressure level measurement under hemispherical radiation or free-field conditions, or as a sound pressure level measurement in a reverberant room under diffuse field conditions. `In cases where it is difficult to take sound pressure level measurements under these conditions, the measurements may have to be performed under semi-reverberant conditions (see Appendix C), or nearfield measurements (see Appendix D) be made. 4.1.1 The following four methods are available for the determination of acoustic noise power of the machine and/or the sound pressure level of the noise ernitted:

a)

Hemispherical radiation and free-jield methods -The basic principle of this method and evaluation of the radiated acoustic noise power and its directivity are described in Appendix A; D$use-Jield methodThe basic principle of this method and evaluation of acoustic noise power are described in Appendix B. This method does not provide information on the directivity sf the acoustic radiation. Since the degree of diffusion is dependent upon the nature of the noise source, this method is not recommended for machines the noise from which contains prominent components; Semi-reverberant method-The basic principle of this method is described in Appendix C. This method provides only limited information on the directivity of the acoustic radiation and a rough calculation of radiated acoustic noise power; and

b)

c)

*Pdeferred frequencies for acoustical measurcmextts. TSpecification for sound level meters for general purposes use.

5

rs : 4758 - 1968 d) ,Vear-jielti methodIn this method the sound pressure level measureDetails of this ments only are made close to the machines. method along with the required calculations and evaluation of approximate acoustic noise power are given in Appendix D. This method is particularly applicable to large machines (see 0.4 j. 42 Correction for Background Noise-The background noise readings when the machine is not on test should be determined using the same filters and at the same points as for the test. The readings at each point with the machine on test ought to exceed those due to the background noise alone by at least 10 dB. 4.2.1 When the differences below shall be applied : are less than 10 dB, corrections as given

PRoDmEn BY THE MACHINE
(dB) 3 4-5 6-9 When in brackets. corrections are applied

dB XNCREASEIN LEVEL

dB TO BE SUBTRACTED FROMTHE MEASURED VALVE (dB) ; 1 the corrected levels should be reported in general cease

4.2.2 When the increase to have any significance. 5. PRESENTATION 5.1 The test report Reference Description operation; Description OF

is less than 3 dB, measurements

TEST

RESULTS information if any; of installation of the machine; ambient and in all cases:

shall give the following to individual standard,

4 b)

of the machine

and of its conditions and location

9
4

of the test environment

Meteorological conditions, if appropriate, for example, temperature, relative humidity and barometric pressure; of measuring apparatus used;

e) Description

NOTE 1 -When a sound level meter is used, the type employed and the weighting~networlc used should be stated.
NOTE 2 -When a freqllcncy analyzer is used, the band widths and centrr frequencies should k-stated.

f 1 Position

of measuring

points; 6

IS : 4756 - 1968 g) Results j) of sound pressure noise levels; level values corrected octave for background noise, if level measurements;

h) Background

Sound pressure necessary: required,

k) When

the calculated

band sound power levels;

m) When required, the sound pressure level at the reference radius or reference surface corrected as for free-field conditions; and II) In the case of measurements in an ~anechoic required, the directivity index as calculated Appendix A.
NOTEsufficient.

environment, when by the method of
of 30' are generally

Values of the directivity

index at intervals

5.1.1 Additional Information to be Given for i\lea.swements a) b) Description of the prescribed surface

.Near-Field

Sound Pressure Level hemisphere. average or

and equivalent

Results of sound pressure level measurements, either individual, as specified in the individual standard. if any, of environment.

c ) Effect, d)

Extrapolation of the results to the reference radius specified individual standard by the method given in Appendix D.

in the

6. CHOICE

OF METHOD

6.1 `The

objects specified in 0.4 are achieved by determining the acoustic power radiated by the machine as well as the directivity. Hence the method that permits the determination of acoustic power is recommended. However, the choice of method depends on the size of the machine and its application. 6.1.1 acoustic ties of in other The methods specified in 4.1.1 (a) enable the determination of the noise power of the machine and its ~directivity (physical properthe machine noise) and the calculation of the sound pressure level distance or other rooms.

If the directivity is not pronounced or there are no great variations from one machine to another, it may be preferable to determine the acoustic power from measurements in a diffuse field as specified in 4.1.1 (b) . In this case since the characteristics of the reverberant enclosure generally vary with frequency, it is usually necessary to analyze the noise in frequency bands. These two methods are preferred 7 methods.

IS : 4758-1968

6.1.2 In certain cases, the method specified Determination accurate may be acceptable. method is often less precise.

in 4.1.1 (c) which is less of acoustic power by this

6.1.3 When measurements according to 4.1.1 (a) to ( c ) are difficult to perform, measurement of the sound pressure level close to the machine and where appropriate, the determination of sound pressure level at the reference radius, in accordance, with 4.1.1 (d) may have to be made. These may be the only measurements possible when difficulties are encountered Such measurements permit with reflecting surfaces or background noise. correct comparisons to be made between similar machines built to the same specifications but make possible only an approximate determination of the acoustic power or the sound pressure level at a distance.

APPENDIX [C&me 4.1.1 (a)]

A

DETERMINATION OF ACOUSTIC POWER AND DIRECTIVITY INDEX UNDER HEMISPHERICAL RADIATION AND FREE-FIELD CONDITIONS A-I. PRINCIPLE OF MEASUREMENT

A-l.1 The determination of the power and the directivity requires the siting of measurements points sufficiently remote from the machine for the conditions of propagation of progressive sound waves to be estabThere should be no reflected waves at the measurement points lished. and this requires premises with sufficiently absorbent walls and dimensions large compared with those of machine Any effect of the surroundings or near-field effects will be made apparent by measuring over two surfaces and checking if the sound pressure varies inversely as the square A ratio of areas of 2 or 4 is recomroot of the ratio of surface areas. and -6 dB respectively. The results of mended, corresponding to -3 such check measurements should be stated. A-2. DETERMINATION OF ACOUSTIC POWER

A-2.1 i%ny machines are Under these conditions, in of the environment and in the sound power level may out around the machine and

mounted on or near a reflecting floor plane. the absence of reflections from other surfaces the absence of absorption in the surroundings, A hemisphere is marked be determined. the sotmd power Ievel calculated as follows:

IS:4758-1968
In this equation: 10 log,, above, ; is the sound power level of the machine under test,

0

20 log,, -.z

P

is the mean sound pressure

level, above

PO p0 =

2 x 1O-" N/m3 ( 2 x 1O-4 ~dyn/cm" )
relative to &,= 1 mz.

2n

r2

-is the surface of the test hemisphere,

is the mean value in space of the square of the rms The quantity &, sound pressures recorded at a certain number of measuring points, on a test hemisphere of radius Y with the machine as its centre. It is necessary that Y be sufficiently large for the measuring points to come within the field of progressive waves where sound pressure and particle velocity are in phase. In the most usual cases, a value of Y of the order of twice the dimensions of the machine suffices to fulfil this condition. In the above expression the acoustic impedance of the air is assumed to When the machine is not mounted be equal to pC=400 mks (rayls). on a reflecting plane but is in free space, the radiation becomes spherical and not hemispherical and 2rr yZ should be replaced by 4n r2.

A-3. DETERMINATION

OF THE DIRECTIVITY

INDEX

A-3.1 `I`he directivity index can be calculated as fOllows on the~basis of the measllrcmvnts carried out under hemispherical radiation conditions:
1)1=20 In this equation log,, f 0 -2Olog,,,++3 0 dB ...

:
the reflect-

DI is the directivity index in the direction considered, ing plane being regarded as an integral part of the source.
20 log,, P p,, is thr sound pressure level, above

pO= 2 x lo-m5 N/m2 (2 x 1O-4 dyn/ctn*) at the distance 20 log,, from the centre equal to
Y

in the direction

considered

E?J- is the mean sound pressure level, above PO p,=2 :< 1O-5 N!m2 ( 2 x 1O-4 dyn/cm2) of radius r. 9

on the test hemisphere

IS :-4758 - 1968 When the machine is not mounted on a reflecting plane but is in free space, the radiation becomes spherical and not hemispherical and the 3 dB in equation 2 should be omitted.

APPENDIX
[
DETERMINATION DIFFUSE B-l. I'RINGIBLE

B
(h ) ]
UNDER

&?Lse 4.1.1.

OF ACOUSTIC POWER FIELD CONDITIONS

OF MEASUREMENT

B-l.1 As arr alternative to the hemispherical radiation and free-field methods, the use of a highly reverixrant enclosure is recommended. In this case the> ~:+)untlfield tends to become uniform ant1 the relevant theory This method can for sound povver determination is descrilwd in B-Z. provide no inlijr triatiun on the directivity of the acoustic radiation. B-2. DETERMINATION OF ACOUSTIC POWER

itJ

IS :4758-1968
The quantity p",,, is the mean square sound pressure obtained from measurements at a certain number of ppints in the diffuse (reverberant) If it is not possible or convenient to determine the field in the room. reverberation time 7; P can be determined by using a reference sound source of known acoustic power (see Appendix C ).

NOTE1 -- The microphone shall not be placed too near the boundries of the room.
A minimum distance of G shall be maintained, where L is the wavelength of the sound at the lowest frrqurncy of interest.

NOTE 2 - The microphone shall be placed sufficiently away from the source to be in the reverberant field and not in the near field of the source. A minimum distance

,f

2

3

V+ is recommended,

where V is the volume of the room. approximately

NOTE 3 --The microphone positions shall be selected to cover equal surface area over lhr: test hemisphere (sphere).

APPENDIX [CZause 4.1.1(c)]

C

DETERMINATION OF SOUND POWER UNDER .SEMkREVERBERANT CONDITIONS C-l. C-l.1 PRINCIPLE OF MEASUREMENT

In practice, it is often necessary for machines to be tested in room having limited absorption (semi-reverberant rooms), such as factories, offices. Under these conditions, the sound power of the shops, pachine under test can be determined by using a reference sound source `of known acoustic power Pr which is substituted for the machine. If it is not possible for the machine under test YO be moved, and if the test room is large enough, another suitable position for the reference source can usually be found. The reference sound source can be a machine of similar type or a special sound source radiating noise having a sufficiently uniform spectral distribution over the whole frequency range of interest. Determination of the sound power of the reference source is to be carried out by the method described in Appendix A and Appendix B, or the result can also be provided by a testing laboratory. G-2.

DETFJkMlNATION
acoustic power as follows:

OF ACQUSTK
level P of the

POWER
machine under test can he

C-2.1 The
calculated

PC + 20 log,, -&Pm 10 log,, $ 0 = 10 log,, p,

20 log,, F

. ..( 4)

11

x:4758-1968

In this equation: P 10 log,, I-' 0 is the sound power level IJo= lo-*2 w 10 log,, + 0 is the sound power level of the reference source, above p"= 20 log,,, -:E test, ~above _ 0 lo-`* w of the machine under test,

above

is the mean sound pressure level of the machine under p,=2 x 1O-5 N/m2 ( 2 x 1O-4 dyn/cm* )

above

20 log,, p$= is the mean sound pressure level of the reference source, Cl p0=2 x 1O-5 N/m2 (2 x 1O-4 dyn/cm2)

The quantities Pan and p& are the space averages of the mean square sound pressures recorded at a certain number of points on the test hemisphere of radius r in the semi-reverberant room, with the machine as its The radius r is chosen as in the case for hemispherical radiation or centre. The measuring points are chosen in free-field conditions (Appendix A). the same way for the reference source and for the machine under test. C-2.2 In many cases a region of the sound field can be found where the sound pressure level beyond the distance Y does not vary appreciably with position. In that event, the above equation can still be used to calculate P. The quantities p2m and p2,r,r then represent the mean values of the* squares of the rms sound pressures recorded at a certain number of points in the reverberant field of the test room. This procedure can also be followed in a reverberant room (see Appendix B ).

APPENDIX [Clause 4.1.1 (d) ]
NEAR-PIELD
D-l. D-l.1

D
LEVEL MEASUREMENT

SOUND

PRESSURE

MEASUREMENT

Prescribed Surface--A surface as simple as possible and whose area can be calculated easily is to be marked out round the machine conforming approximately to the external casing. This surface and its

12

IS : 4758 - 1968 average distanW from the outer casing arch :o 1~ laid do~v11 in r;lch illdiof the rncasurillg points The number and disposition vidnal standard. required depend on the irregurlarity of thr acorlstic. lic~ltl. When it is nc'ctbssary to carrv out measurements closer to the machine than is specific-d in the individual standard, or to explore only part of' lhc surface, these limitations should be clearly stated in the test report. D-l.2 Evaluation of the Result - In the majority of cases, in particu1a.r when the directivity is not pronounced or when for the type of machine under consideration it varies relatively slightly from one machine to another. the arithmetic mean of the decibel readings over the prescribed surface may he a sufflcicntly accurate measure of the mean square pressure.
NOTE For a snread of 5 dB in thr decibel readinm the error in takiw the mean of the decibels is les's than 0.7 dB and for a spread-of 10 dB it is less `;han 2.5 dB. When thv spread is g-water than 10 dB. this method of averaging is generally not witahle.

D-l.3 Effect of Environment-l'he effect of the surroundings of the machine may he determined by first placing such a machine in a space without reflections and secondly in the test environment so that a direct comparison can be made; every precaution should be taken to ensure constant conditions of machine noise and measuring apparatus. As accurate determination of the influence of the surroundings is not possible it is recommended that this influence he kept to a minimum. D-2. CALCULATION THE REFERENCE OF THE RADIUS SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL AT

D-2.1 The sound pressure level at a reference radius which is laid down in the specifir individual standards is calculated from that measured on the prescribed surface as described in D-2.2. The reference radius is to be laid down in each individual standard. It should be the same of all machines covered by a given standard. One of the values 1, 3 or 10 m should be adopted. It is recommended that the value chosen should be slightly greater than the radius of the equivalent hemisphere corresponding to the largest machine covered by the individual standard. Da.2 The free-field calculated thus: sound pressure level at the reference d r radius is to be

20 `O&o
where

+-

0

=20

log,,

+-

-20

log,,

-

PO = 2 X 10e5 N/m2 ( 2 x lo-'

dyn/cm')

= radius

of equivalent 13

hemisphere,

IS : 4758-1968 S = area
of prescribed

surface,

d = reference f.~,,,= mean

radius, over the prescribed radius. OF THE SOUND POWER surface, and

sound pressure

pd = sound pressure D-3. APPROXIMATE

at the reference

EVALUATION

D-3.1 In certain cases it is possible to arrive at an approximate evaluation of the sound power starting from the sound pressure level at the measuring distance or the reference radius (see D-2 and Appendix A).
NOTE- In the case of hemispherical radiation, the numerical value of sound power level would be 8, 18 or 28 dB greater than the sound pressure level at the reference distances of 1, 3 and 10 m respectively.

14

BUREAU
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 331 Offices:

OF
9 Bahadur 01 31,

INDIAN
Shah Zafar 331 13 75

S TANDARDS
Marg,

Telephones: Regional Central *Eastern Nortnern

NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices)
Telephone 331 01 31 331 1375 I 36 24 99

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 : 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Southern twestern

: C. 1. T. Campus, : Manakalaya,
BOMBAY

MADRAS

600113 Andheri

E9 MIDC. 400093

Marol,

21843 3 16 41 41 24 42 41 25 19 ( 41 2916 ( East ), 6 32 92 95 I

Branch Offkes: `Pushpak', Nlurmohamed Shaikh AHMADABAD 380001 $Peenya Industrial Prea BANGALORE 560058 Marg, Khanpur, Tumkur Road

2 63 48 I 2 63 49
38 49 55 I 38 49 56 ' 6 67 16 5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 6 6 21 { 21 6 16 `l-6 { 34 98 68 82 23 21 21 71 32 76 92 05 04 `97

1st Stage,

Bangalore

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751002 PIot No. 821'83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 53j5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 781003 GUWAHATI 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg Nampally Station Road )e HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister 117/418 Marg. C Scheme, Nagar, JAIPUR 302005 238005

B Gavodaya

KANPUR

Patliputra Industr;al Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/142%. Universitv P.O.. Palayam TRIVAND`RUM 695035 inspection Officzes ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( lndia ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Street. *Sales Calcwa Office 700072 in Calcutta Bombay tSales400007 Office :Sales

2 54 71

5 24 35

is at 5 Chowringhee
is at Novelty

Approach,
Chambers,

P. 0. Grant

Princep Road,

23 66 00 69 65 28

in 8ombay

:

Bangalore

Offire in Bangalore 560002

is atcunity Building, Narasimharaja

Square, 22 36 71

Keprography

Unit,

BIS,

New ~Delhi,

Indz

