xxxxxx ( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 2009

IS : 899 - 1971

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TAPIOCA SAG0 ( .%4BOODANA ( )

First Revision )
AFDC 33

Edible Starches and Glucose Sectional Committee,
Chairman
SHRI P. S. RAMACHANDRAN Members Representing

Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of Health & Family Planning )

Tapioca Market Expansion Board, Government of Kerala SHRI P. N. PURUSHOTHAMAN ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute SHRI G. S. BAINS ( CSIR ), Mysore National Sugar Institute, Kanpur DR S. BOSE Bharat Starch and Chemicals Ltd, Calcutta SHRI V. P. CRADHA SHRI N. D. SINGHAL ( Alternate ) Technical Standardization Committee ( Foodstuffs ) CHAIRMAN ( TSC) ( Ministry of_Agriculture ) SECRETARY ( Alternate ) All India Starch Manufacturers' Association, SHRI CHINUBHAI MANIBRAI Bombay \ SHRI S. B. SETHI ( Alternate ) Indian Confectionery Manqfacturers' Association, SHRI H. S. R; IYENQAR Calcutta SHRI L. N. MATIWR ( Alternate ) Anil Starch Products Ltd, Ahmedabad SHRI R. V. JUNNARKAR SHRI 0. N. PARIKH ( Alternate ) Ravalgaon Sugar Farm Ltd, Ravalgaon SRRI S. K. MU~HERJEE Kamala Sugar Mills Ltd, Udamalpet SHRI V. RADHAKRISHNAN SHRI WILFRED DAVID ( Alternate ) Corn Products Co ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. S. RAJADHYAKSHA SHRI S. R. PALEKAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development SHRI S. RAI+IASWAMY ) ( Ministry of Industrial Devprircyt General's Army Quartermaster COL R. R. RAO 3 Headquarters LT-COL 0. P. KAPUR ( Alternate ) SHRI M. ABDUSSALAM ( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN
MANAK

STA,NDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELYI

1

IS I 899- 1971
( Continued from &ge 1 ) Members Reprcscnting Das #z Company, Bombay SHRI S. N. RAO SHRI M. N. NAIK ( Alternate ) Federation of Biscuit Manufacturers of India, Delhi SHRI M. G. SATHE SHRI R. D. KERAWALLA ( Alternate ) Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi SECRETARY SHXI D. S. CHADHA ( Alternate ) Indian Chemicals Manufacturers' Association. SHRI S. K. SEN GUPTA Calcutta Maize Products, Ahmedabad SERIP. M. SHAH SHRI V. C. PATEL ( Alternate ) Italab Private Limited, Bombay SRRI V. M. SHAH SRRI J. C. DEY ( Alternate ) ( Calcutta ) SHRI S. S. HONAVAR ( Alternate ) DR IIA(R!%?~;~A, Deputy Director (`Agri & Food ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojicio Member

)

Secretary SRRI MANOHAR T. SANTWANI Assistant Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

2

IS:899-1971

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR TAPIOCA SAG0 (SABOODANA)

(First Revision)
0.
0.1This Indian Standard

FOREWORD

( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 September ,l971, after the draft finalized by the Edible Starches and Glucose Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Saga is a processed food starch marketed in the form of small globules In Hindi, it is known as SABOODANA. The name sago is or pearls. derived from the original product which used to be manufactured from the starchy core of the stem of several palms, the principal being the sago palm (Metroxylon sagu and M. rumphii). Sago is manufactured in India from the starch obtained from the tubers of tapioca (Munihot utihima). 0.3 This revision incorporates a number of important modifications, namely: (a) moisture content has been reduced from 12.0 percent to 11 percent; and (b) additional requirements of starch, protein, sulphur dioxide and crude fibre have been included. It is hoped that these modifications would improve the quality of sago and also safeguard consumer health, specially the convalescents. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due consideration has been given to the relevant rules prescribed by the Government of India under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954. This standard is, however, subject to the restrictions imposed under that Act, wherever applicable. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS :2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Rules for roundingoff`numeridalvalues ( revised ). 3

I8 t 899 - 1971 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements ing and test for sago ( SABOOL)AJVA ). 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, sago ( SABOODAJVA ) shall mean small hard globules or pearls made from the starch obtained from the tubers of manihot plants commonly known as cassava or tapioca (Munihot
utilissima ) .

and the methods of sampl-

3. REQUIREMENTS 3.1 Description - The material shall be in the form of small hard globules or pearls and shall be pearl white in colour. It shall be free from fermented or musty or any other objectionable odours, from added sweetening or colouring matters, from adulterants, from fungal contamination and from insect infestation. 3.2 The material shall be made from starch obtained from sound tubers of tapioca, free from any fungal or bacterial contamination. 3.3 The material, when examined by the method prescribed in. 15 of IS : 4706-1968*, shall be free from dirt, or other suspended and extrai* neous matter. - When cooked and tested by the method prescribed 3.4 Gelatinization in Appendix A, the quantity of starch passed into the gruel shall not exceed 30 percent by weight of the material taken for the test, and the individual globules or pearls shall retain the globular shape. 3.5 The material, manufactured from the starch obtained from the tubers of tapioca, shall comply with the requirements given in Table 1. 3.6 Sago shall be processed and packed under hygienic conditions IS : 2491-1963t ). 4. PACKING AND MARKING and new shall hand each 4.1 Packing - Unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser the vendor, the material shall be packed in clean, sound and dry A-Twill jute bags ( see IS : 1943-19641 ). The mouth of each bag be either machine stitched or rolled over and hand stitched; if stitched, the stitches shall be in two rows with at least 14 stitches in row. _~___ _ ._~_ _
*Methods of trst for edible starches. +Code for sanitary conditious for food processing SSpecification for A-twill jute baqs ( revised). units.

( see

4

IS : 899- 1971
TABLE

1 REQUIREMENTS

FOR

SAG0

(.SABOODANA)

( Clause 3.5 ) SL No. CHARACTERISTIC REQUIREMENT METHOD OB TEST -e-,7 ClofIS: Ref to Appendix 4706-1968' (4) (5) 3 4 5 6

(1) i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) Moisture, percent

(2)
by weight, Max Total ash ( dry basis ), percent by weight, Max Acid insoluble ash by weight, Max ( dry basis), percent

(3) 11 0'4 0.10 98 0.30

Starch ( on dry basis ), percent by weight, Min Protein ( N x 6.25 ) ( on dry basis ), percent by weight, Max Sulphur dioxide, ppm, MGX percent by Crude fibre ( on dry basis), weight, Max pH of aqueous extract Colour of gelatinized alkaline paste in the porcelain cuvette on the Lovibond Scale, not deeper than of test for edible starches.

100
0.20 4.5 to 7.0 lR+3Y

-

8 9

B

10 -

*Methods

4.2 Marking - Each pack shall be suitably marked I following information: a) Name of the material; b) Name of the manufacturer; c) Batch or code number; and d), Net weight, when packed.

so as to give the

4.2.1 Each container may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.
NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard made thereunder. conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control This system, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated during production. by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9

w : 899- 1971
5. SAMPLING ._
and

5.1 The method of drawing representative samples of the material the criteria for conformity shall be as given in IS : 4662-1968*. 6. TESTS 6.1 Tests shall be carried out in accordance in 3.3, 3.4 and co1 4 and 5 of Table 1.
with the methods

prescribed

pure chemicals 6.2 Quality of Reagents - Unless specified otherwise, shall be employed in tests and distilled water (`gee IS : 1070-1960t ) shall be used where the use of water as a reagent is intended.
NOTE - ` Pure chemicals `. shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which affect the results of analysis.

6.3 Preparation

of Material

-

in 3.3 and co1 4 and 5 of Table

Prepare the material 1, as given in 6.3.1.

for tests prescribed

6.3.1 Take about 100 g of the material and finely powder in a clean pestle and mortar so that the whole of it passes through 250-micron IS Sieve. Place this prepared material in a clean and dry stoppered glass bottle. NOTE -In case 250-micron IS Sieve ( conforming to IS: 460-19622 ) is not available, BS Test Sieve 60, ASTM Sieve 60, or Tyler Sieve 60, which have their apertures within the limits specified for this IS Sieve, may be used.

APPENDIX A ( Clause 3.4 ) \
TEST FOR GELATINIZATION STARCH IN GRUEL A-l. PRdCEDURE AND DETERMINATION AFTER COOKING OF

A-l.1 Weigh accurately about 10 g of the material in a 200-ml conical flask. Add 80 ml of boiling water into the conical flask, connect it with an upright water-cooled condenser' and heat it on a wire gauze using a Bunsen burner. ( It is essential that the contents of the flask begin to boil within one minute of adding the boiling water. ) Boil the contents of the flask briskly for exactly 15 minutes, after which remove the flame, disconnect the flask from the condenser and filter the contents of the flask . through 850-micron IS Sieve. Collect the gruel in a tared porcelain dish.
*Methods for sample of starch. tSpecification for water, distilled quality ( revised). &Specification for test sieves ( r&d ).

6

IS : 899 -1971
Place the porcelain dish containing the gruel over a boiling water bath and evaporate the water from it until the residue becomes quite dry. Remove the dish from the boiling water bath and place it in an electric air-oven maintained at 110 fZ"C over night. Cool the dish in a desiccator and weigh. Repeat heating in the oven at 110 f 2"C, cooling and weighing at half hour intervals, till the difference between two successive is less than one milligram. Note the lowest weight. weighings

A-1.1.1
globular A-2. A-2.1

Examine shape.

the cooked

globules

or pearls

on the sieve for their

CALCULATION Calculate as follows: the by for =1OOW

Quantity of starch passed into gruel, expressed as percentage weight of the material taken the test where w = weight W = weight

W

in g of the dry residue obtained in g of the material . taken

from the gruel,

and

for the test.

APPENDIX B [TabZe1,1tevz(ik)]
DETERMINATION OF COLOUR OF ALKALINE PASTE GELATINIZED

B-l. B-l.1 B-l.2 -.

APPARATUS Lovibond Porcelain Tintometer Cuvette supplied by the makers with the Lovibond

`l'intometer. B-2. REAGENT
B-2.1 Sodium Hydroxide Solution - approximately 0.5 from sodium hydroxide, analytical reagent ( see IS : 376-1969* `Specification for sodium hydrc)xide, analytical reagent (first revision ). N prepared ).

IS : a99 - 1971 B-3. PROCEDURE

Place about 10 g of the prepared material ( 6.3.1) in a clean and dry Heat the beaker with neutral glass beaker and add to it 95 ml of water. its contents on a boiling water-bath for about 15 minutes with continuous stirring till the material is gelatinized. Add 5 ml of sodium hydroxide solution to the gelatinized paste and stir well. Allow the slurry to cool.
B-3.1

B-3.2 Examination of Gelatinized Paste - Clean the porcelain cuvette with carbon tetrachloride to remove any oily or greasy film on it and allow it to dry. Fill the cuvette with the gelatinized paste ( see B-3.1 ), and place it in position in the tintometer kept in the vertical position, suitable for measuring reflected light. Place along side of it such red and/or yellow Lovibond glasses as are necessary to match the colour shade of the gelatinized paste, observing the colour of the gelatinized paste and of the combination of Lovibond glasses through the eye piece. B-4. REPORT

B-4.1 Report the colour of the gelatinized paste in terms of Lovibond units by summing up individually the values for the red and yellow Lovibond glasses as follows: Colour reading of the gelatinized paste in the porcelain cuvette on the Lovibond Scale where a = the sum total of the various red (R) Lovibond glasses used, and 6 -the sum total of various yellow `( Y ) Lovibond glasses used. =nR+bY

,

8

