( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY
PART LII Section DATA PROCESSING IO Data Communication

Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, LTDC 1
Chairman MAJ-GEN K. K. MEHTA ( RETD ) Members SHRI D. C. BHATTACHAREE DR V. P. KODALI ( Alternate) DR I<. CHANDRA SHRI B. A. CHETTY Institution of Electronics Engineers, New Delhi and Telecommunication Representing Chairman, Electronics Division Council and Telecommunication

National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR), New Delhi Department of Electronics, New Delhi Department of Science &. Technology, New Delhi DIREC~TOR Railway Board, Ministry of Railways DR C. G. KI-IOT SHRI RAWNDRA NATK ( &ernate ) SHRI 0. P. KHUSHU All India Radio, New Delhi Directorate of Technical Development & Production GP-CAPT J. S. LAMP.\ ( Air ), Ministry of Defence, New Delhi SHRI R. SOMASUNDARAM ( Alternate) SHRI M. H. V. MURTHY Ministry of Defence Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI J. V. SASTRY Vice-Chairman, Electronics and Telecommunication SHRI T. V. SRIRANGAN Division Council &RI R. C. JAIN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Mambcr ) Head ( Electronics ) ( Secretqy )

Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee, LTDC 24
Chairman BRIG A. BALASUBRAMANIAN Members SHRI K. S. ANANDARAO SHRI C. K. BAPIRAJU Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore State Bank of India, Bombay ( Continued on page Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), New Delhi

2)

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrfghf Acf (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the raid Act.

IS : 1885 ( Part LIf/Sec 10 ) - 1980
( Continuedfrom page 1 )
Members SHRI A. K. BASAK Re#rexenting Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, New Delhi SHRI P. P. MALHOTRA (Alternate ) SHRI A. K. BINDAL Weston Electroniks Ltd, New Delhi SHRI V. M. GAUTAM Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi SHRI ANUPAMGVPTA ( Alternate) SHRI A. C. JAIN Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ARJUN MALHOTRA Hindustan Computers Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. S. PAWAR ( Alternnte ) SHRI S. C. MODI Tata Electric Companies, Bombay SHRI H. V. JAIN (Alternate) SHRI K. P. N. NAIR Reserve Bank of India, Bombay SHRI S. S. OBERAI Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI ASHISSEN Indian Statistical Institute? Calcutta SHRI S. K. SENGUPTA Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHR~KAPAL Dev ( Alfernate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( InspecSHR~ M. SHANKHALINGAM tion Wing ), New Delhi Kerala State Electronics Development Corporation SHRI M. R. SITHARAMAN Ltd, Trivandrum SHRI S. M. V. BHATT (Alternate) SHRI Cl. G. SUBRAMANYAN Electronics Trade & Technology Development Coruoration Ltd. New Delhi SHRI T. N. SWAMY Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI R. THIAGARAJAN Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi SHRI K. R. VENKATARAMAN Hindustan Teleprinters Ltd, Madras SHRI S. DEVARAJAN ' Alternate) SHRI L. P. VENKATARAMAN Life Insurance Corporation, Bombay SHRI R. C. JAIN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) Head ( Electronics ) Secretary SHRI A. S. RAWAT Assistant Director ( Electronics ), IS1

IS : 1885 ( Part LIX/Sec 10) - 1980

Indian Standard
ELECTROTECHNICAL
PART LII DATA

VOCABULARY

PROCESSING

Section

IO Data Communication

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part LII/Sec 10) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 September 1980, after the draft finalized by the Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee, in consultation with Computers, Business Machines and Calculators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 Electronic data processing is utilized for numerous exchanges and analysis of information of both intellectual and material nature. Application of electronic data processing becomes difficult, either because of the great variety of terms used in various fields to express the same concept, or because of the absence of or the imprecision of useful concepts. To overcome these barriers, this standard has been formulated. 0.3 This standard is one of the series of twenty Indian Standards on data processing vocabulary, constituting Part LII of the electrotechnical vocabulary, which deals with the main areas of data processing classified under the following heads: Section 1 Fundamental terms Section 2 Arithmetic and logic operations Section 3 Equipment technology Section 4 Organization of data Section 5 Representation of data Section 6 Preparation and handling of data Section 7 Digital computer programming Section 8 Control, input-output and arithmetic equipment Section 9 Data media, storage and related equipment Section 10 Data communication Section 11 Operating techniques and facilities Section 12 Information theory Section 13 Analogue and hybrid computing 3

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980 Section 14 Computer graphics and computer micrographics Section 15 Programming Section 16 Data bases Section 17 Data structures Section 18 Information systems characteristics and development Section 19 Reliability, maintenance and availability Section 20 Control and integrity 0.4 Prime importance has been given to simplicity and clarity of the definitions so that they may be understood by all. It may, therefore, be felt that some definitions do not cover all the cases and exceptions. 0.5 Assistance has been derived in formulating this standard irom draft International Standard IS0 2382 `Data processing - Vocabulary - Section 10 Data communication, prepared by the International Organization for Standardization'. languages
.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part LII/Section 10 ) covers terms related to data communication as used in data processing. 2. GENERAL TERMS 2.1 Data .Communication - Data transfer between data source and data sink via one or more data links according to a link protocol. 2.2 Data Transmission - The conveying of data from one place for reception elsewhere by signals transmitted over a channel. 2.3 Teleprocessing - Data processing by means of a combination puters and data communication facilities. 2.4 Telecommunication telephone. Communication of com-

at a distance, as by telegraph or

2.5 Data Transmission Interface - A shared boundary defined by common physical interconnection characteristics, signal characteristics, and functional characteristics of the interchange circuits. a.6 Time Frame - A defined structure, based on recurring events, imposed on time. 4

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980 3. NETWORK TERMS 3.1 Node - In a data network, a point where one or more functional units interconnect data transmission lines. 3.2 Branch -In nodes. a data network, a route between two directly connected

3.3 Path - In a data network, a route between any two nodes. 3.4 Terminal Port - A functional unit of a node through which data can enter or leave a data network. 4. TRANSMISSION METHODS

4.1 Synchronous Transmission - A mode of data transmission such that the time of occurrence of each signal representing a bit is related to a fixed time frame. 4.2 Asynchronous Transmission - A mode of data transmission such that the time of occurrence of the start of each character, or block of characters, is arbitrary; once started, the time of occurrence of each signal representing a bit within the character, or block, has the same relationship to significant instants of a fixed time frame. 4.3 Start-Stop Transmission - Asynchronous transmission such that a group of signals representing a character is preceded by a start element and is followed by a stop element. 4.4 Start Element/Start Signal - In a start-stop transmission, a signal, indicating the beginning of a character, and which is transmitted for the nominal duration of one signal element. 4.5 Stop Element/Stop Signal - In a start-stop transmission, a signal transmitted immediately after a character; for the nominal duration of one- or two-signal element. 4.6 Parallel Transmission - The simultaneous transmission bits constituting a character or other entity of data. 4.7 Serial Transmission - The sequential transmission constituting a character or other entity of data. of a group of

of a group of bits

4.8 Burst Transmission - A method of operating a data network by interrupting, at intervals, the transmission of data.
NOTEThe method enables communication between data terminal equipments.

4.9 One-Way Communication - A mode of data communication information is transferred in one pre-assigned direction.
NOTE See Table 1.

such that

5

IS : 1885 ( Part EII/Sec 10 ) - 1980
TABLE 1 USE OF DEFINED ( Clause 4.9 ) CONTEXT DATA DATA COMMUNICATION TRANSMISSION F---h-~ r_-*--~ Data Link Data Channel Circuit NA NA NA P P P in given context ) P P P NA NA NA NP NP P NA NA NA TERMINOLOGY

Transmission capability

Duplex Half Duplex Simplex

User mode

Both-way Either-way One-way

NA = not applicable ( use deprecated NP = not possible P = possible

4.10 Simplex Transmission
NOTE -See

-

Data transmission over a data circuit in one

pre-assigned direction only.
Table 1.

4.11 Either-Way

Communication/Two-Way

Alternate

Communication

-

A

mode of data communication such that information directions, one direction at a time. NOTE - See Table 1.

is transferred

in both

4.12 Half-Duplex Transmission - Data transmission over a data circuit in either direction, one direction at a time; the choice of direction is controlled by the data terminal equipment.
NOTE -SW Table 1.

4.13 Both-Way Communication/Two-Way Simultaneous Communication A mode of data communication such that information is transferred

simultaneously
NOTE -See

in both directions.
Table 1.

4.14 Duplex Transmission - Data transmission

over a data circuit in both

directions at the same time.
NOTE SeeTable 1.

6

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec

10 ) - 1980

4.15 Modulation Rate - The reciprocal of the measure of the shortest nominal time interval between successive significant instants of the modulated signal. NOTE -If this measure is expressed in seconds, the modulation rate is given in
bauds.

4.16 Data

Signalling Rate - The rate at which data are transmitted received by a data terminal equipment.
NOTE -The data signalling rate is expressed as a number of bits per second.

or

4.17 Effective

Data Transfer Rate - In data communication, the average number of bits, characters, or blocks per unit time transferred from a data source and accepted as valid by a data sink.
NOTE- The data transfer rate minute, or hour. is usually in bits, characters or blocks per second,

4.18 Actual

Data Transfer Rate-In data communication, the average number of bits, characters, or blocks per unit time transferred from a data source and received by a data sink.

(In Data Communication) - A group of characters and control bit sequences transferred as an entity, from a data source to a data sink, whose arrangement of characters is determined by the data source.

4.19 Message

4.20 Packet - Data and a sequence of control bits arranged in a specified format and transferred as an entity that is determined by the process of transmission. 4.21 Message Switching - The process of routing messages by receiving, storing, and forwarding complete messages within a data network. 4.22 Circuit Switching - A process that, on demand, connects two or more data terminal equipments and permits the exclusive use of a data circuit between them until the connection is released. 4.23 Packet Switching - The process of routing and transferring data by means of addressed packets so that a channel is occupied during the transmission of the packet only, and upon completion of the transmission the channel is made available for the transfer of other packets. 4.24 Virtual Circuit ( Connection) - In a data network operating in packet mode, those facilities provided by the network for transferring data between data stations that emulate facilities provided by a physical connection. 5. LINES AND DATA LINKS
5.1 Data Transmission Line -

A medium for transferring 7

signals over a

distance.

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980 5.2 Data Network - The assembly of functional units that establishes data circuits between data terminal equipments. 5.3 Data Link - The assembly of parts of two data terminal equipments that are controlled by a link protocol, and that, together with tbe interconnecting data circuit, enables data to be transferred from a data source to a data sink. 5.4 Data Circuit - A means of data transmission between two data terminal equipments.
NOTE-See Fig. 1.

/
DATA SOURCE OR DATA SINK

DTE
DATA COMMUNlCATiON CONTROL (LINK PROTOCOL)

INTERFACE ' I 8
I 1
I

DCE
CONNECTION AND CONVERSION

LINE

I
OATA M 1 DATA STATION DATA LINK _) CIRCUIT

FIG. 1

DATA TRANSMISSION

SET-UP in a

5.5 Channel - In data transmission, a means of simplex transmission pre-assigned direction.

5.6 Forwaid Channel - That channel of a data circuit on which data may be transferred from the data source to the data sink. 5.7 Backward Channel - That channel of a data circuit on which acknowledgements or other control data may be transferred in a direction opposite to that of its associated forward channel. 5.8 Circuit Switched Connection -A connection that is established on demand between two or more data stations in order to allow the exclusive use of a data circuit until the connection is released. 5.9 Multipoint Connection - A connection more data stations.
NOTE-The

established between three or

connection may include switching facilities.

5.10

Point-to-Point Connection - A connection two data stations.
NOTE -The

established between

only

connection may include switching facilities. 8

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980 5.11 Leased Circuit ( Connection ) - A connection established without the use of switching facilities, for the exclusive use of two or more data stations. 6. PROCEDURES AND OPERATIONS 6.1 Link Protocol - A set of rules for data communication over a data link specified in terms of a transmission code, a transmission mode and control and recovery procedures.
NOTE See Fig. 1.

6.2 Code-Independent Data Communication - A mode of data communication that uses a character-oriented link protocol that does not depend on the character set or code used by the data source. 6.3 Code-Transparent Data Communication- A mode of data communication that uses a bit-oriented link protocol that does not depend on the bit sequence structure used by the data source. 6.4 Packet Mode -A packet switching. 6.5 Message Mode message switching. manner of operating a data network by means of

A manner of operating a data network by means of

6.6 Store-and-Forward Mode - A manner of operating a data network in which packets or messages are stored before transmission to the ultimate destination. 6.7 Recovery Procedure - In data communication, a process whereby a specified data station attempts to resolve conflicting or erroneous conditions arising during the transfer of data.. 6.8 Error Control ( Procedure ) - In data communication, that part of the link protocol controlling the detection, and possibly the correction, of transmission errors. 6.9 Block Check ( Procedure ) - That part of the error control procedure used for determining that a data block is structured according to given rules. 6.10 Contention-A condition arising when two or more data stations attempt to transmit at the same time over a shared channel, or when two data stations attempt to transmit at the same time in either-way communication.
NOTE - By extension, contention data source at a time. can arise in a computer that can deal with only one

6.11 Calling-The process of transmitting establish a connection between data stations.
9

address

signals in order to

IS : 1885( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980 6.12 Answering - The process of responding to a calling station to complete

the establishment of a connection between data stations. 6.13 Interrogation - The process whereby a master station requests a slave station to identify itself or give its status. 6.14 Polling - The process whereby data stations are invited at a time to transmit. 6.15 Selecting - The process of inviting receive. one or more data stations to

6.16 Packet Sequencing - A process of ensuring that packets are delivered to the receiving data station in the same sequence as they were received by the data network from the sending data station. 7. TERMINAL EQUIPMENT part of data terminal equipment that enters data

7.1 Data Source -That into a data link.
NOTE See Fig, 1.

7.2 Data Sink - That part of data terminal equipment that receives data from a data link.
NOTE-See Fig. 1.

7.3 Data Terminal Equipment ( DTE) - The functional unit of a data station that serves as a data source or a data sink and provides for the data communication control function to be performed in accordance with link protocol.
NOTE See Fig. 1.

7.4 Data Circuit-Terminating Equipment ( DCE ) - The functional unit of a data station that establishes, maintains and releases a connection and provides those functions necessary for any code or signal conversion between the data terminal equipment and the data transmission line.
NOTE See Fig. 1.

7.5 Modem -

A functional unit that modulates and demodulates signals.

NOTE -One of the functions of a modem is to enable digital data to be transmitted over analog transmission facilities.

7.6 Data Multiplexer - In data transmission, a functional unit that permits two or more data sources to share a common transmission medium such that each data source has its own independent channel. 7.7 Data Concentrator - In data transmission, a functional unit that permits a common transmission medium to serve more data sources that there are channels currently available within the transmission medium. 10

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10 ) - 1980 7.8 Data Station-The set of functional units that consists of the data terminal equipment, the data circuit-terminating equipment and their common interference.
NOTE--See Fig. 1.

7.9 Control Station - In a multipoint or a point-to-point connection, that data station which nominates the master station and supervises polling, selecting, interrogating and recovery procedures. 7.10 Tributary Station -`(In a multipoint connection, any data station other than the control station. 7.11 Master Station - That data station which has accepted an invitation to ensure data transfer to one or more slave stations.
NOTEAt a given instant there can be only one master station on a data link.

7.12 Slave Station - A data station that is selected by a master station to received data. 7.13 Passive Station - In a multipoint waiting to be polled or selected. connection, any tributary station

7.14 Primary Function - The function that allows a data station to exert overall control of the data link according to the link protocol. 7.15 Secondary Function -The function that allows a data station to respond to commands according to the link protocol. 7.16 Primary Station - A, data station function but not the secondary function. that can perform the primary

7.17 Secondary Station - A data St&ion that can perform the secondary function, but not the primary function. 7.18 Combined Station/Balanced Station - A data station that can perform the primary function and the secondary function.

11

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10) - 1980 INDEX
NOTE - This index has been prepared numbers are clause numbers. A And-forward mode, Store- 6.6 Answering 6.12 Asynchronous transmission 4.2 B Backward channel 5.7 Balanced station 7.18 Block check 6.9 Branch 3.2 Burst transmission 4.8 C Calling 6.11 Channel 5.5 Backward 5.7 Forward 5.6 Check, Block 6.9 Circuit Data 5.4 Leased 5.11 switched connection 5.8 -terminating equipment, Data 7.4 Cocleindependent data communication 6.2 transparent data communication 6.3 Combined station 7.18 Communication Code-independent data 6.2 transparent data 6.3 One-way 4.9 Concentrator, data 7.7 Connection Circuit switched 5.8 Multipoint 5.9 Point-to-point 5.10 Contention 6.10 Control Error 6.8 station 7.9 D Data circuit 5.4 -terminating in accordance with IS

: 1275-1958*.

Index

communication 2.1 Codeindependent 6.2 transparent 6.3 concentrator 7.7 link 5.3 multiplexer 7.6 network 5.2 sink 7.2 source 7.1 station 7.8 terminal equipment ( DTE ) 7.3 transmission 2.2 interface 2.5 line 5.1 E Element Start 4.4 stop 4.5 Equipment Data circuit-terminating terminal 7.3 Error-control 6.8 F Forward channel 5.6 mode, Store-andFrame, Time 2.6 Function Primary 7.14 Secondary 7.15

7.4

6.6

I Interface, Data transmission Interrogation 6.13 L Leased circuit 5.11 Line, Data transmission 5.1 2.5

equipment

( DCE ) 7.4 indexes.

Link Data 5.3 protocol 6.1

*Rules for making alphabetical

12

IS : 1885 ( Part LII/Sec 10) - 1980
M Master station 7.11 Message mode 6.5 Mode Message 6.5 Packet 6.4 Store-and-forward 6.6 Modem 7.5 Multiplexer, Data 7.6 Multipoint connection 5.9 N Network, Data 5.2 Node 3.1 0 One-way communication 4.9 Serial transmission 4.7 Signal Start 4.4 stop 4.5 Sink, Data 7.2 Slave station 7.12 Source, Data 7.1 Start element 4.4 signal 4.4 -stop transmission 4.3 Station Balanced 7.18 Combined 7.18 Control 7.9 Data 7.8 Master 7.11 Passive 7.13 Primarv 7.16 Secondary 7.17 Slave 7.12 Tributary 7.10 element 4.5 signal 4.5 -stop transmission Start- 4.3 Store-and-forward mode 6.6 Switched connection, Circuit 5.8 Synchronous transmission 4.1 T Telecommunication 2.4 Teleprocessing 2.3 Terminal equipment (DTE), Data 7.3 part 3.4 Terminating equipment, Data circuit 7.4 Time frame 2.6 Transmission Asynchronous 4.2 interface, Data 2.5 line, Data 5.1 Parallel 4.6 Serial 4.7 Start-stop 4.3 Synchronous 4.1 Tributary station 7.10

P
Packet mode 6.4 sequencing 6.16 Parallel transmission 4.6 Passive station 7.13 Path 3.3 Point-to-point connection Polling 6.14 Port, Terminal 3.4 Primary function 7.14 station 7.16 Procedure, Recovery 6.7 Protocol, Link 6.1' R Recovery procedure 6.7 S Secondary function 7.15 station 7.17 Selecting 6.15 Sequencing, Packet 6.16

stop

.

5.10

13

iNTERNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS (SI

UNITS)

Quantity Length &lass Time Electric current

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin

Symbol m kg
S

A K

Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance

candela mole

cd mob

Supplementary Quantity Plane angle

Units Unit radian steradian Symbol rad sr

Sofid angle

Derived

Units Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal Symbol N J W Wb T Hz s V Pa
1

Quantity Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force

Definition

N==

1 kg. m/s9

1 1

J = 1 N.m W = 1 J/s 1 v.s

1 Wb 1 1 1 1 1

T = 1 Wb/ma Hz = 1 c/s (s-l S = 1 A/V v = 1 W/A Pa = 1 N/ma )

Electromotive Pressure,

stress

14

