**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1399 (1959) : Glossary of terms used in optical 
technology [PGD 22: Educational Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 : 1399 - 1959 

Indian Standard reaffirmed' 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN. mm 
OPTICAL TECHNOLOGY 



Third Reprint FBBRUARY 1990 

( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 681-4: 001-4 



© Copyright 1970 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 March I960 



18:1399-1919 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
OPTICAL TECHNOLOGY 

mmmmm^mmm^mmmmmmmmammmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm^mmm mmmmmmm 

Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee. EDC 36 



Db.CS. Rao Defence Research ft Development Off anisatioa ( M iofetry of 

Defence) 

Assistant Dibectoe Stawdabdctatiow Research, Design ft Standardization Organisation ( Ministry of 

(Civil) kail wars} 

Suet K. L. Bajaj Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Calcutta 
Sam Balvw Sinci Grab Udyog Sabakari Saniti LtdV Roorkee 

Snai I. S. Gbvlayi Oftce of the Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries 

( Ministry of Commotce ft Industry ) 
Snm K. X. S. Iyencae Enf^noer-m-CnieTs Branca. Army Headquarters 

Coi R. & Kalba Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Lt Col S. K. S. Modauae ( AUmmU) 
Smei K. M. Maleahi Central Public Works Department, New Dalai 

Snai Peem Peaeasb National physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Snai P. Habibabab (AUtnmU) 
Snei S. Raobavacbabi Central Water ft Power Commission, New Delhi 

Snai D. P. JrrawAEi (AHmmts) 
Sbei B. B. Rajbebeab Raj-Der-Kar ft Co, Bombay 

Snai K. Rajacoealae (vflfcrante) 
Comm amoks S. Rajsbdua Indian Navy 

Dn I. Ramaeeissjea Rao Madras Institute of Technology, Madras 

Sbei A. N. See National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta 

Sbei R, R. Cbabeavaety ( >f tomato ) 
pEor S. R. SiEcn Roorkee University, Roorkee 

Sbei P. V. Sueea Rao The Andara Scientific Co Ltd; Masuttpatam 

Saat M. M. Van* Development Wing, Ministry of Commerce ft Industry 

Dn. S. P. Vbeha (itftmsftl ' 

Sbei K. SamtvASA Rao ( A U t m t t* ) 
Sbei H. C. Veeba Associated Instruments Manufacturer* ( India ) Ud. Maw 

Delhi 
Da Lal C Veemam ( £*-eJb»e ) Director, ISI 

Snwnlary 
Sbei M. V. Patabbab Assistant Director ( Rngg ), ISI 

Optical Instruments Subcommittee, £1X3 36:2 



Sbei A. N. Bbattacbabyya Defence^ Reseat ch ft Development Oiganlssthiii ( Ministry of 

Mtmker* 

Sbei S. S. Dbaemavva ( AHmmMs to Shri A. S. Bhattacharyya ) 
Sbei P. Habibaeab National Physical Laboratory (CSIR). New Delhi 

Snai Pbssi Peaeasb ( A Ui rm it ) 
Sbei S. Haeibaeae Madras Institute of Technology, Madras 

Snai D. C. Rov National InstrumenU Ltd, Calcutta 

Sbei S. K. Roy Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry of 

Defence ), Calcutta 
Sbei P. V. Sveea Rao The Anders Scientific Co Ltd, Masulinatam 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI U0002 



18:1399-1959 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
OPTICAL TECHNOLOGY 

0. FOREWORD 



0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Insti- 
tution on 10 October 1959, after the draft finalized by the Optical 
and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 With a view to assisting the optical instruments industry, a series of 
Indian Standards is under prepaiation. Other standards in the series 
on which work has been initiated are for General Requirements for Optical 
Components, General Requirements for Optical Instruments and Optical 
Glass. This standard is intended to establish a glossary of terms used in 
optical technology. Reference to this standard will be made, in due course, 
in other Indian Standards of the series. This standard at present does 
not include mechanical engineering terms commonly applied to optical 
instruments, as it has been decided to prepare a separate standard for the 
use of different industries. 

0.3 In preparing this standard, due consideration has been given by the 
Sectional Committee concerned to the terms used by producers, con- 
sumers and technologists in the country in this field. Terms used in 
other countries have also been studied. 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard gives the definitions of terms used in optical technology, 
but does not include the more commonly used mechanical engineering 
terms. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 Fundamentals 

2.1.1 A bsorpti on — The reduction in intensity of incident radiation 
during transmission through a medium and/or reflection at an interface. 



18:1399-1959 

2.1.2 Achromatism — The condition in which rays of two different colours 
are brought to a common focus/path. 

2.1.3 Airy Disc — The diffraction pattern, consisting of a central bright 
disc surrounded by alternate dark and bright rings, which constitutes the 
image of a point object as formed by an optical instrument. 

2.1.4 Apochrotnatism — The condition in which rays of three different 
colours are brought to a common focus. 

2.1.5 Caiadioptric Systems — Optical systems incorporating both reflecting 
and refracting elements as parts thereof. 

2.1.6 Catoptric System — An optical system consisting of reflecting 
surfaces. 

2.1.7 Deviation — The extent to which, in angular measure, a ray of 
light is deflected from its original path due to refraction and/or reflection. 

2.1.8 Diffraction — The phenomenon showing the apparent bending 
of light rays around the edge of an object and the consequent spreading 
of light int" the region of the geometrical shadow. 

2.1.9 Dioptric System — An optical system consisting of refracting ele- 
ments. 

2.1.10 Dispersion — The separation of monochromatic components of 
complex radiation. 

2.1.11 Dispersive Poivet of a Refracting Medium — It is measured by the 

expression —— ^, where n d , nF and nc are respectively the refractive 
n<| — 1 

indices of the medium for yellow helium light and the blue and red lines of 

the hydrogen spectrum. Its reciprocal V is often referred to as the Abbe 

number. 

2.1.12 Double Refraction — A phenomenon in which crystalline substances 
or transparent materials under mechanical, electrical or magnetic strain 
exhibit the property of dividing an incident ray of light into two rays, 
which pursue different paths in the crystal. Only one ray, called the 
ordinary ray, obeys Snell's law. The other is called the extraordinary ray. 

2.1.13 Electromagnetic Waves -— A travelling disturbance in space pro- 
duced by the acceleration of an electric charge and comprising an electric 
field at right angles to a magnetic field, both moving at the same velocity 
in a direction normal to the plane containing the two fields. Radio waves, 
heat rays, light rays, X-rays, etc, are all electromagnetic waves, but dif- 
fering in frequency. 

2.1.14 Fraunhofer Lines — Dark lines in the sun's continuous spectrum 
caused by absorption of certain wave-lengths in the Solar Chromosphere. 



18:1399*1919 

2.1.1$ Frequency — The number of waves passing per second through a 
point in the direction of propagation and is defined by the ratio of the 
velocity of light to the wave length of radiation. 

2.1-1* Halation and Spreading — Halation, an effect commonly noticed 
with spectrum lines' that have been greatly overexposed. Spreading is 
another photographic phenomenon in which the image on a photographic 
plate will not be confined only to the area on which the light is incident. 

2.1.17 Interference — The phenomenon by which two or more super- 
posed trains of waves of equal wave-length cause either an increase or 
decrease in intensity at a point in a medium due to the phase relationship 
between the wave trains at that point. 

24.18 Light — Electromagnetic radiation capable of inducing visual 
perception. 

2X19 Opaque — Impervious to light or radiation of particular wave- 
lengths. 

2.1.29 Optical System — An orderly arrangement of optical components, 
the constructional parameters of which are so adjusted as to give optimum 
performance of the instrument in which it is used. 

2.1.21 Optics — The branch of Physics dealing with the study of light 
including instruments used to aid vision. 

2.1.22 Polarization — The phenomenon by which a radiation having 
vibrations in a selective plane and prientation can be obtained. Polariza- 
tion may be of three types, namely plane, circular or elliptical according 
to the type of vibrations. 

2.1.23 Radiation — Emission of energy in the form of electromagnetic 
waves ( or quanta ). The term is also used for energy in this form. 

2.1.24 Rayleigh Criterion for Resolution — Two infinitely narrow light 
sources or point sources are to be considered resolvable when they are 
separated by such an amount that the central diffraction maximum of 
one falls on the first diffraction minimum of the other. 

2.1.25 Reflection — The phenomenon by which light rays are returned 
back in the same medium from which they are incident. 

2.1*26 Refraction — The phenomenon by which a transmitted ray of 
light changes its direction at the interface of two media of differing refractive 
indices or in traversing an optically non-homogeneous medium. 

2.1*27 Retractive Index of a Transparent Materia}— The ratio of the 
velocity of light in vacuum to its velocity in the material. 

2.1.28 Secondary Spectrum — The residual dispersion between two wave- 
lengths after achromatisation. 



IS:139*-1*S9 ' 

2.1*29 Source off Light — A self-luminous (or reflecting) body from 
which light is emitted (or reflected). 

2.1*3i Spectral Analysis — Analysis of the structural or chemical nature 
of a substance by the characteristic emission or absorption lines or bands 
produced by it in a spectrum. 

2.131 Spectroscopy — Study of the radiations in a spectrum. 

2.132 Spectrum — A dispersed image of a line or point source of radiation 
presenting an orderly arrangement of the radiation according to wave- 
length. It may appear continuous or present discrete lines or bands 
against a dark or bright background. 

Note — The visible portion of the spectrum and the infra-red and ultra-violet 
regions on either side of it cover the following ranges of wave-length: 

Infra-red region: a few millimetres to 7-5 xlO -4 mm 

Visible region: 7-5 X 10* to 4xMH mm 

Ultra-violet region: 4x10-* to 1x10-* mm 

2.133 Total Internal Reflection — When a ray of l^ght traverses from a 
denser medium to a rater medium, the ray of light is totally reflected at 
the boundary of separation between the two media when the angle of inci- 
dence is greater than a certain critical value ( critical angle ). This pheno- 
menon is called total internal reflection. 

2.1.34 Translucent — Transmitting light mainly by diffuse transmission. 

2.1.39 Transparent — Allowing light rays to be transmitted without 
noticeable absorption so as to be distinctly seen through. 

2.1.36 Velocity off Light — The rate at which electromagnetic radiation 
is propagated in a medium. 

2*137 Wave-Front — The envelope or leading portion of an Advancing 
wave in which all points are in the same phase. 

2*1.38 Wave-Length — The separation between corresponding points of 
successive wave fronts, in the same phase. 

Note — The units off wave-length in and near the visible region of the spectrum 
in common use are: 

1 jk ( micron ) *» 10* 4 cm 

1 mp. ( millimicron ) »• 1<H cm 

1 A ( Angstrom ) - KHcm 

2 J The Eye and Vision 

2JL1 Accommodation — The change of power of the crystalline lens 
accompanying the action of the ciliary muscle due to which objects at 
various distances are brought into focus involuntarily by the eye. 



18:13*9-1959 

3*2*2 Adaptation — The power of the eye to adapt itself to different 
lighting conditions. 

2*2*3 Aqueous Humour — The watery fluid filling the space between 
the cornea and the lens of the eye. 

2*2.4 Astigmatism of the Eye — A defect of the eye caused by its having 
different optical powers in different meridians resulting in the" image of a 
point source being drawn out into a short line. 

2*2.5 Binocular Vision — The view obtained by observation of an 
object through two oculars. 

2.2.6 Blind Spot — The spot insensitive to light on the retina where 
the sensitive layer is absent due to the optic nerve penetrating through it. 

Note — Rods are responsible for night vision and predominate in the peri- 
pheral positions of the retina. Cones are associated with acute vision and exist 
exclusively in the fovea centralis. 

2.2.7 Colour Blindness — The defect of vision in some individuals who 
cannot perceive or distinguish certain portions of the visible spectrum. 

2.2.8 Colour Sensitivity — The degree of visual sensation or the sensi- 
tivity of the eye to radiant energy which depends upon the wave-length. 

2.2.9 Cornea — A glassy transparent membrane that forms the front 
covering of the eye. 

2*2.19 Crystalline Lens — A double convex lens formed of a highly clastic 
thick jelly-like substance of varying refractive index and located just 
behind the iris and is the chief image producing element of the eye. 

2*2.11 Fovea Centralis — Ihe central spot of the macula lutea (yellow 
spot) of about 0-5 mm 1 in area, where the visual acuity is greatest. 

2*2.12 Glare — The various effects produced on the eye due to the 
presence in the filed of view of an object much brighter than the general 
level of brightness of the field or of the object under observation. 

2*2.13 Hypermetropia — A condition of the eye in which, with the eye 
at rest, parallel rays of light converge towards a focus behind the retina. 
This is popularly known as long- or far-sightedness. 

2*2*14 Iris — A diaphragm in front of the eye consisting of a pigmented 
membrane and acting as self-adjusting aperture according to the brightness 
of the field of view. 

2 .2.15 Luminous Efficiency of Radiation — The quotient of luminous 
flux by the corresponding radiant flux. 

2-2.14 Luxon — The retinal illumination produced by a surface having 
a luminance of one candela per square metre when the pupil area is one 
square millimetre. 



IS: 1399- 1959 

2 J.17 Macula Lutea or Ycttow Spot — A slightly elliptical yellow region 
on the retina of about 2-5 mm diameter where 'vision is most clear. 

2.2.18 Mesopic Vision — The vision in conditions intermediate between 
those of photopic and scotopic vision. 

2.2.19 Myopia — A condition of the eye in which, with the eye at rest, 
parallel rays of light come to a focus in front of the retina. This is 
popularly known as short-sightedness. 

2.2.20 Optic Nerve — The nerves conveying the retinal sensations to the 
brain. 

2.2.21 Perception of Contrast: Fechner Fraction — When a photometric 
field of two equal portions is seen by the eye, the least perceptible dif- 
ference (dB ) in brightness ( B), often expressed as dB/B ( Fechner Fraction ), 
measures the ability of the eye to perceive brightness contrast and achieve 
photometric match between the two parts of the field. 

2.2.22 Persistence of Vision — A phenomenon in which the impression 
of the image on the retina remains for a small fraction of a second ( nor- 
mally one-sixteenth of a second ) even after the object has been removed 
from sight. 

2.2.23 Photopic Vision — The vision depending essentially on the cones. 
It is generally associated with adaptation to a luminance level of several 
candelas per square metre. 

2.2.24 Pupil — The effective aperture in the iris through which light 
enters the eye. 

2.2.25 Purkinje Effect — The displacement of the wave-lenjgth of 
maximum luminous efficiency to shorter wave-lengths, in passing from 
photopic to scotopic vision. 

2.2.26 Retina — The innermost coating of the eye consisting of a delicate ' 
film of reticulated structure of light sensitive nerve fibres and cells directly 
connected with the optic nerve. 

2.2.27 Rods and Cones — Minute light sensitive bodies in the shape of 
rods and cones attached to the nerve-fibres of the optic nerve, which are 
mainly instrumental in seeing objects. 

2.2.28 Scotopic Vision — The vision depending essentially on the rods. 
It is generally associated with adaptation to a luminance level below some 
hundredths of a candela per square metre. 

2.2.29 Stereoscopic Acuity — The ability of the eyes to resolve and see 
as such objects which are at varying distances from the observer. 



18:1399*1959 

2<23# Stereoscopic- or Stereo-Vision— The observation of ah object ot 
objects under conditions -which present a different image to each eye to 
produce a solid or three dimensional effect. 

2.231 the Eye — The organ of sight in man or animal by which the 
physical perception of the external objects is accomplished. 

2.2.32 Threshold of Vision -— The minimum perceptible luminance for 
the fully dark adapted eye. This threshold usually lies between 10-* and 
10* lux for an extended field. 

2.2.33 Veiling Glare — The effect on vision due to the inter-position 
between the eye and the object looked at of a luminous veil or an illumi- 
nated haze, tliereby resulting in a reduction of contrast. 

2.234 Vernier or Contour Acuity — The ability of the eye to perceive 
relative position or detect the absence of coincidence or alignment between 
two objects. It is measured in terms of the minimum angular separation 
below which failure of coincidence cannot be appreciated. 

2.2.35 Visibility Curve — The curve showing the graphical relation 
between the relative luminous efficiency or visibility of radiation for dif- 
ferent wave-lengths in the visible part of the spectrum. 

2.236 Visual Acuity ( Resolving Poiver ) — Acuity or sharpness of vision 
is the ability of the eye to distinguish fineness of details and is measured 
by the minimum angular separation which permits resolution for two 
point objects. 

2.2.37 Vitreous Humour — The jelly like transparent substance filling 
the space between the lens and the retina of the eye. 

23 Photometry and Illumination 

23.1 Brightness or Luminosity - - The attribute of visual sensation 
according to which an area appears to emit more or less light. 

Note — Thii attribute is the psychosensorial correlate (or nearly so) of the 
photometric quantity luminance. 

23.2 Candela (cd) — The unit of luminous intensity. It is of such a 
magnitude that the luminance of a full radiator ( black body ) at the tem- 
perature of solidification of platinum is 60 units of luminous intensity per 
square centimetre. 

233 Colorimetry — The science of the precise measurement of the hue, 
purity and brightness of a colour. 

33.4 Densitometry — The subject dealing with the measuremfcht of 
photographic densities on an exposed plate. 



IS: 1399 -1959 

2.3.5 Efficiency of a Luminous Source — The ratio of the total luminous 
flux emitted to the total power consumed. It is usually expressed in 
lumens per watt or in lumens per thermal unit per unit of time. 

23.6 Foot-Candle — A unit of illumination. An illumination of one 
lumen per square foot. 

23.7 Foot-Lambert — A unit of luminance. It is equal to the luminance 
of a uniform diffuser emitting or reflecting one lumen per square foot. 

2.3.8 Full Radiator — A light source emitting radiation, the spectral 
distribution of which is dependent on the temperature only and not on the 
material and nature of the source. 

2.3.9 Illumination at Any Point of a Surface — The surface density of 
luminous flux at a point. 

23.10 International Candle — The former unit of luminous intensity 
derived from the Carcel and pentane lamps and maintained by means of 
carbon filament electric lamps by the national standardizing laboratories 
of UK, USA and France. It has been replaced since 1948 by Candela b\ r 
international agreement, the two being related by the equation 60 cd = 
58'9±0-2 international candles. 

23.11 Lambert — A unit of luminance. It is equal to the luminance 
of a perfectly uniform diffusing surface emitting or reflecting one lumen 
per square centimetre. 

23.12 Lumen (Im) — The unit of luminous flux. It is the flux emitted 
in a unit solid angle of one steradian by a point source having a uniform 
intensity of one candela. 

23.13 Luminance (I) at a Point of a Surface in a Given Direction — The 
quotient of the luminous intensity in a direction of an element of the 
surface containing the point, by the area of the orthogonal projection of 
this element on a plane perpendicular to the direction; and expressed in 
candela per unit area. It is a measure of the physical stimulus of the 
radiation as contrasted with the term brightness or luminosity which refers 
to the visual sensation. 

23.14 Luminosity — The attribute of visual perception in accordance 
with which an area appears to emit more or less light. 

23.15 Luminous Energy — The time integral of luminous flux. 

23.16 Luminous Flux — The quantity, characteristic of radiant flux, 
which expresses its capacity to produce visual sensation, evaluated accord- 
ing to the values of relative luminous efficiency for the light adapted eye. 

23*17 Luminous Intensity of a Point Source in Any Direction — The 
quotient of the luminous flux emitted by a source, or by an element of a 



18:1399-1959 

source, in an infinitesimal cone containing the given direction, by the solid 
angle of that cone. 

2.3.18 Lux or Metre-Candle — The practical unit of illumination. It 
is one lumen per. square metre. 

2.3.19 Mean Horizontal Candle Power ( mhcp ) — The average value 
of the luminous intensity in all directions in a horizontal plane passing 
through the luminous centre of the source. 

2.3.20 Mean Spherical Candle Power ( tnscp ) — The average value of the 
luminous intensity of a source in all directions. It is equal to the total 
luminous flux emitted by the source divided by the solid angle ( 4rc). 

23.21 Microphotometry or Microdensitometry — The subject dealing with 
the measurement of the transmission factor of an exceedingly smalt area 
of an exposed photographic plate, for example, intensities of spectral lines 
or the density of the sound track on a kinematograph film. 

23.22 Photometry — The branch of Applied Physics dealing with the 
measurement of the luminous intensities of light sources and illumination 
of surfaces. 

2.3.23 Primary Standard — A standard light source reproducible from a 
specification. The present international standard is a full radiator at the 
temperature of solidification of platinum. 

2.3.24 Radiant Flux — Power emitted, transferred or received in the 
form of radiation. 

2.3.25 Spectrophotometry — The branch of photometry which deals 
with the quantitative measurement of the relative intensity of radiation 
in different parts of its spectrum. 

2.3.26 Sub-Standard — A suitable lamp which has been measured by 
comparison with the primary standard (or with other sub-standards) so 
that its luminous intensity in a defined direction is known to the highest 
accuracy in photometric measurement. 

2.3.27 Working Standard — A lamp which has been measured by com- 
parison from time to time by reference to a sub-standard to an accuracy 
sufficient for ordinary photometric work. 

3. MATERIALS USED IN OPTICAL INDUSTRY 

3.1 Abrasive — A substance like emery, carborundum, diamond powder 
or dust, etc, used in a powdered state for grinding down surfaces of glass 
or crystals. 

3^ Anti-Reflection Coating Materials — Materials used for coating the 
surfaces of optical elements to minimize the loss of light by reflection and 

10 



IS: 1399-1959 

thereby increasing transmission through optical systems. (The material 
should normally have a refractive index equal to the square root of the 
refractive index of the glass.) 

3.3 Calcite — Natural crystalline calcium carbonate (CaC0 3 ), also called 
Iceland Spar. 

3.4 Canada Balsam — A straw coloured natural resin in an organic 
solvent used as an adhesive for lenses and optical elements. 

3.5 Cement — A transparent adhesive substance applied when soft as a 
bonding medium between optical components. 

3.6 Grown Glass — A type of optical gla^s not containing lead among 
its constituents and having low dispersion and usually low in refractive 
index. 

3.7 Desiccant — A substance capable of absorbing/adsorbing water 
vapour from its surrounding atmosphere. 

3.8 Developer — A chemical solution used to bring out the latent image 
in the exposed areas of the light sensitive layer of a plate, film or paper. 

3«9 Fixer — An agent for the conversion of unreduced silver salts in 
the sensit^ed layer after development into soluble salts which can be eli- 
minated by washing and thus fix the image on the base. 

3.1(1 Flint Glass — A type of optical glass containing lead oxide and 
usi&lly having high dispersion and high refractive index. 

3.11 Fluorspar ( Fluorlte ) — Natural crystalline calcium fluoride (CaF t ), 
normally colourless and having ultra-violet transmission up to 125 milli- 
microns. 

3.12 Fuller's Earth — A fine-grained earthy substance, similar to clay, 
used with rouge in polishing on cloth polisher. 

3.13 Fungicide — A chemical which is lethal to fungi and is ofterj used in 
some form in optical instruments to eliminate mould growth. 

3.14 HT Cement — A synthetic plastic ( butyl methacrylate ) used as an 
optical cement by a process of curing to achieve polymerization, thereby 
resulting in a bonded film of high mechanical stability. 

3.15 Iceland Spar ( Calcite ) — A very pure transparent and crvstalline 
form of calcium carbonate, noted for its double refraction or birefringence 
and used in the construction of Nicol prism. 

3.16 Immersion Oil — A liquid like cedar wood oil used to fill the gap 
between the specimen under examination and a high power microscope 
objective, to obtain a higher numerical aperture. 

11 



18:1399-1959 

3.17 Impregnating Materials— Materials used for filling, by impregna- 
tion under pressure, the pores of porous castings employed in the construc- 
tion of optical instruments. 

3.18 Intensifies — Materials used for intensification of the optica! density 
of an image in the photographic negative prints. 

3.19 Luting Optical — A tacky plastic composition, usually incorporating 
a fungicide and employed for sealing the joints of instruments as a means 
of tropic-proofing them. 

3.20 Mica — A natural mineral ( silicate of aluminium with magnesium, 
iron or,aikali metals), generally transparent vith perfect basal cleavage, 
the laminae being flexible. 

3.21 Opal Glass — Glass which is opalescent or white and made by the 
addition of fluorides ( for example, fluorspar and cryolite } to the glass 
mixture; sometimes used to diffuse light. 

3.22 Optical Glass — A glass of special quality expressly made for its 
optical qualities from pure selected materials under controlled conditions 
and so treated that the finished product is homogeneous and as transparent 
as possible for the whole visible spectrum and its contiguous spectral regions. 

3 J3 Optical Plastic — A transparent synthetic solid material either ther- 
mosetting or thermoplastic, often used for cementing optical elements or 
as colour filters or for mass production of not too precise optical parts. 
Methyl methacrylate, polysterene, cellulose caprate, cellulose acetate and 
cellulose nitrate are some such materials. 

3.24 Orthochromatic Emulsion — Emulsion which registers visual 
radiations correctly apart from colour, such emulsions being sensitive to all 
colours except red. 

3.25 Panchromatic Emulsion — Emulsions which are reasonably sensi- 
tive photographically to all visible radiations particularly towards the 
red end of the spectrum. 

3.24 Photographic Developer — Reducing agent for silver salts, usually 
polyhydric phenol or their derivatives, which act on the light sensitized 
silver halide grains and reduce them to metallic silver. 

3.27 Photographic Emulsion — The light sensitive coating on a suitable 



3.28 Pitch — A fusible, more or less solid, matwial containing bituminous 
or resinous substances, used in preparing polishers making blocks of optical 
components and for holding them otherwise for processing. 

3 M Polisher — A felt, cloth, taffeta, pitch or paper, as a soft and supple 
support for the polishing material for final processing of glass surfaces. 

12 



IS : 1399 - 1959 

3.30 Polishing Rouge— Red oxide of iron (FejOj) in powdered form, 
used for polishing optical surfaces. Cerium oxide and alumina are other 
materials used for the same purpose. 

3.31 Quartz — Natural crystalline silica ( SiO, ) occuiring as a white 
opaque mass, but occasionally as colourless transparent crystals having , 
ultra-violet transmission down to 200 millimicrons. 

3.32 Reducing Agents — Chemical substances which remove silver pro- 
portionately from all parts of the image, thus reducing the effects of over- 
exposure. 

3.33 Sapphire — A fine blue transparent variety of crystalline corundum. 
Both natural and artificial sapphires are used for instrument jewels. 

3.34 Sealing Materials — Materials used for effecting air-tight joints in 
instrument assembly. 

3.35 Selinite — A naturally occurring colourless and transparent variety 
of gypsum. 

3.36 Spectacle Crown — A type of crown glass used specially for making 
spectacle lenses and usually of refractive index 1*52. 

3.37 Tourmaline — Natural crystalline silicates of various metals con- 
taining boron. These crystals are birefringent and have the additional 
peculiar property of absorbing the ordinary ray when more than 2 mm 
thick. 

4. PROCESSING METHODS 

4.1 Adhesing — Joining two polished pieces of optical glass by heat 
treatment without distortion. 

4.2 Aluminizing — Deposition of a layer of aluminium on a polished 
surface by evaporation or sputtering to give a highly reflecting surface. 

4.3 Annealing — A process of slow heating of glass to a proper tetnpera- 
ture and subsequent conditioned cooling with a view to relieve stresses 
and strains in slabs or moulded glass. 

4.4 Anodizing — Oxidation of exposed aluminium surfaces for protection 
and sometimes for dyeing. 

4.5 Aspherize — To depart deliberately from sphericity of surface. 

4.6 Balsamming — Cementing two or more optical components into a 
single unit using Canada Balsam or similar optical cement. 

4.7 Blocking — Sticking components with pitch composition resin, wax 
or plaster of paris on to a properly shaped metal surface before jK>lishing 
or grinding. 

13 



18:1399-1959 

4.8 Block Setting — Correcting the final setting in a block before polish- 
ing or grinding by means of a template. 

4.9 Blooming — Deposition of thin films of fluorides of certain alkali 
earth metals to a thickness of quarter wave-length for reducing surface 
reflection losses. 

4.10 Centring — The process of mounting a lens for edging so that the 
mechanical axis of rotation is coincident with the optical axis. 

4.11 Chamfering — Removal of sharp edges and corners of optical com- 
ponents by grinding. 

4.12 Collimation — The process of aligning the various parts of an optical 
system. 

4.13 Curving — Grinding a flat surface to the required curvature. 

4.14 Desiccation — Drying up the interior of an assembled instrument 
to eliminate water vapour as an aid to tropic-proofing or tropicalization. 

4.1 5 Edging — The process of giving a smooth contour to the periphery 
of a lens by grinding. 

4.14 Elutriation/Levigation — The process of selection used for fine 
emery. 

4.17 Etching — Forming a pattern on a glass plate by the chemical action 
of hydrofluoric acid, the required pattern being formed on the ' resist ' 
coated glass, with the pattern only being exposed. 

4.18 Figuring — Correcting local faults on optical surfaces. 

4.19 Fumigation — Exposure of interior surfaces of an assembled instru- 
ment to the vapours of antiseptic materials like formaldehyde and methanol, 
as an aid to tropic-proofing or tropicalization. 

AM Granularity — A .measure of the size and distribution of the 'grains 
of photographically sensitive material embedded in the emulsion. 

None — The sensation of the graininess resulting from an excessive enlargement 
of a negative is a result of the granularity of the emulsion. 

4.21 Grinding — The process of reducing the surface to its required shape 
or angle by using abrasives. 

4.22 Hardening — The process of hardening the gelatin emulsion in a 
photographic plate or film by a suitable agent ( formalin ) to make it in* 
soluble and more permanent. 

4J3 Intensification — Increase of contrast in a photographic negative 
or print by chemical means by further deposition, usually of mercury, on 
exposed parts. 

14 



18:1399-1959 

4.14 Marking — The initial layout on a block of optical glass with a grease 
pencil for economical utilization of material before sawing or cutting as 
well as for rejecting defective portions. 

4.25 Photo- Etching — Etching the required pattern on glass or metal 
whete the pattern on the ' resist ' is formed by a photographic process, 
instead of by mechanical means. 

AM Photoprinting — A process of printing a pattern by photographic 
means. 

4.27 Polishing — A process in which the smooth surface is rendered 
transparent by rubbing the surface against the polishing tool with rouge 
or other similar material. 

AM Roughing — Grinding the component, using hard abrasives, roughly 
to the required size and shape. 

4.29 Ruling — Drawing lines ( or patterns ) using a diamond point. 

4.3ft Shanking Off/Nibbling Off — The operation of cutting off the 
corners of square plates with a view to bringing them approximately to the 
right size close to the final form. 

431 Silvering — Deposition of a coat of silver on a polished glass or metal 
surface, either by chemical, electrochemical or evaporation method to 
give a highly reflecting surface. 

432 Slitting — The process of cutting through glass and even harder 
substances by the edge of a soft .sheet-iron disc or wire saw charged with 
diamond dust or by a disc of abrasive material. 

4L33 Smoothing — Continuation of trueing with still finer abrasives prior 
to polishing. 

AM Sputtering — Formation of very fine grained coatings of metal upon 
surfaces of glass, quartz, etc, by the disintegration of the metal cathode 
in a vacuum tube due to bombardment by positive ions. 

4-35 Trepaning — Drilling cylindrical sections of required diameter 
out of a slab of optical glass. 

4JM Tropicalization — A technique forming part of the original design 
with a view to achieving lasting protection against tropical deterioration. 

4.37 Tropic-Proofing — It is an ad hoc technique of providing tem- 
porary protection against tropical deterioration. 

4.38 Trueing — Grinding of a rough curved surface of an optical com- 
ponent against a master tool to impart the desired radius of curvature to 
the working surface. 

15 



IS: 1399 -1959 

5. OPTICAL COMPONENTS 

5.1 Achromatic Lens — A combination of lenses having such powers and 
different dispersions as to bring rays of two colours of the spectrum to a 
single focus. 

5.2 Amici Prism — A prism used to produce 90° deviation with simul- 
taneous inversion of the image. 

5.3 Analyser — A polarizer used to detect polarized light. 

5.4 Anastigmat Lens — A photographic lens corrected for astigmatism 
for one obliquity and providing a reasonably flat field of good definition. 

5.5 Aplanatic Lens — A lens free from spherical aberration and coma. 

5.6 Apochromatic Lens — A combination of lenses having such powers 
and different refractive indices as to bring rays of three colours to a single 
focus. 

5.7 Aspheric Lens — A lens whose surfaces ( either one or both ) are given 
different curvatures at different zones to eliminate spherical aberration 
and to obtain better correction of the optical system in which it is used. 

5.8 Biprism — A prism of large apex angle forming two images of a point 
source of light, which act as coherent sources for interference fringes. 

5*9 Compensating Filters — Filters used to adjust the light entering a 
photographic system in order to fulfil some particular conditions required 
in colour photography. 

5.10 Condenser — An optical device used to converge the incident light 
on to an object. 

5.11 Contrast Filters — Filters used selectively to modify the brightness 
of some special colour or group of colours. 

5.12 Cover Glass — A thin transparent glass disc used to protect micro- 
scope specimens. 

5.13 Cylindrical Lens — A lens at least one of whose surfaces is cylindrical 
resulting in magnifying the image of an object in the direction perpendicular 
to the axis only. 

5.14 Dark Field Condenser — Condenser used in microscopy for oblique 
illumination of specimens. The objects are observed by the scattered light 
against a dark backgrounnd. 

5.15 Dove Prism — A prism used to revert the image without deviation 
of the beam or displacing the axis of the beam. This js used only in 
collimated light. 

16 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 MARCH 1984 

TC 

IS: 1399-1959 GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
OPTICAL TECHNOLOGY 

Alteration 

( Page 4 9 clause 2.1.25) - Substitute the 
following for the existing clause: 

•2.1.25 Reflection - The phenomenon by which ligfrt 
rays are returned in the same medium from which they 
are incident. 1 



(EDO 36 > 

Printed «t Stmeo Printing PfiSl D«lhl, India 



IS : 1399 - 1959 

5.16 Dry Objective — A microscope objective whose object space is air. 

5.17 Eye Lens — The lens or system of lenses closest to the eye in an 
eyepiece. 

5.18 Eyepiece — A lens system used in an optical instrument nearest 
to the eye for observing the image formed by the objective. 

549 Field Lens — A lens in an eyepiece system farthest from the eye 
and used to collect the rays of the image field at large angles. 

5.29 Filter — A transparent material containing a dye or other light 
absorbing medium with a view to modifying the intensity or colour of light 
being admitted to or transmitted through an optical instrument. 

5.21 Focal Plane Shutter — A shutter with a slit of fixed or variable width 
which is made to pass rapidly just in front of the film which is in the focal 
plane of the objective. 

5.22 Graticule ( Reticule ) — Optically polished glass marked with 
reference lines or evaluated patterns, suitably positioned in the focal plane 
of optical systems for precise estimation measurement. 

5.23 Grating — A plane or spherical surface having a periodic variation of 
amplitude or phase transmission or reflection. This is commonly produced 
by ruling uniformly spaced grooves on the surface. 

5.24 Inter Lens Shutter — A shutter situated at or near the iris dia- 
phragm of the lens. 

5.25 Inversion Objective — A microscope objective whose object space 
between the cover glass and the lens surface is filled with a special oil to 
increase the numerical aperture beyond unity. 

5.26 Iris-Diaphragm ~ A variable diaphragm whose aperture can be 
controlled to allow the passage of light. 

5 .27 Leman Prism — A prism used for lateral displacement of the image 
with its simultaneous inversion by means of a roof. 

5.28 Lens — A refracting medium bounded by two surfaces of which one 
or both may be spherical aspheric or cylindrical. Each of these surfaces 
may be convex, doncave or plane. 

5.29 Mirror — A highly polished plane or curved surface which reflects 
the major portion of the incident light. 

5.30 Negative Lens — A lens which increases the divergence or decreases 
the convergence of the incident light. 

5.31 Nicol Prism — A cemented prism combination made of Iceland Spar 
used for obtaining plane-polarised light. 

17 



18 : 1399 - 1959 

5.32 Objective — The lens or system of lenses in an optical instrument 
which forms a real image of the object under observation. 

5.33 Orthochromatic Filters — Filters used to correct the selective sensi- 
tiveness of photographic materials in order to give a reproduction of the 
brightness of coloured objects more closely approximating that perceived 
by eye. 

5.34 Pentagonal Prism — A five-sided prism used to deviate a beam of 
light through 90° in the same plane even when the beam is not exactly 
normal to the incident face. 

5.35 Phase Plate — A plate partially covered by a thin layer of material 
that is used in phase contrast systems to introduce a phase difference ( and 
sometimes absorption ) between the direct and the diffracted beams. 

5.36 Polarizer — A device which causes the polarization of unpolarized 
light. 

537 Polaroid ( a Trade Name ) -- A transparent thin film of oriented 
complex molecules, suitably treated, for producing plane-polarized light. 

5.38 Porro Prism — A reflecting prism used to reverse the image in the 
plane in which reflection takes place. 

5.39 Positive Lens — A lens which increases the convergence or decreases 
the divergence of the incident light. 

5.4© Prism — A transparent hollow or solid body of refracting material 
bounded by four or more plane faces. 

5.41 Rhomboidal Prism — A prism used only to displace the axis of 
beam without introducing deviation, inversion or reversion. 

5.42 Roof Prism — Any type of reflecting prism in which reversion is 
performed with a roof. 

5.43 Selective Filters — Filters used for two- or three-colour photography 
with their corresponding synthetic projection filters. 

5.44 Shutter — A device usually automatic to admit and cut off light for 
a predetermined interval of time to enable photographic exposures to be 
made. 

5.45 Telephoto Lens — A camera objective with an equivalent focal length 
considerably greater than its back focal length. 

5.46 Test Plates — Optically polished plates, either flat or spherical, 
worked to a high standard of optical precision and used for examining 
surface errors. 

5.47 Tetrahedron Prism/Corner ( Cube ) Prism — A prism bounded 
by four triangular faces, three of which are mutually perpendicular to one 
another. 

18 



IS : 1399 - 19S9 

5.48 Travias Expanding Stop — It is a variable sized opaque stop used 
with dark ground illumination system, operated on similar lines to an iris 
diaphragm. 

5.49 Wave Plate — Thin sections of birefringent material of suitable 
thickness used to introduce phase differences in incident radiation. 

5.50 Wirth Priam — A dove prism equipped with a roof at the reflecting 
surface to cause inversion. 



6- OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 
6.1 Microscopes 

6.1.1 Binocular Microscope — A compound microscope with one objec- 
tive and two eyepieces for simultaneous observation of the image with both 
eyes for comfort of vision. 

6.1.2 Comparison Microscope ( Micro Ccnnparator ) — A special micro- 
scope with two objectives and one eyepiece intended for simultaneous 
observation of two objects for comparison purposes. 

6.1*3 Compound Microscope — An instrument in which the primary 
magnification of the objective and the secondary magnification of the 
eyepiece are compounded suitably to give the necessary magnification and 
resolution. 

6.1.4 Dissecting Microscope — A simple microscope mounted on strong 
base for hand rest and a transparent stage for holding and dissecting speci- 
mens. 

6.1.5 Electron Microscope — A microscope of very high magnification 
and resolution which makes use of a beam of electrons for the formation 
of an image to the required magnification. 

6.1.6 Interference Microscope — A microscope by which objects are made 
visible by interference between two parts of the incident beam of light; 
one of them modified in phase by passage through the specimen, the other 
remaining unmodified. 

6.1.7 Metallurgical Microscope — A compound microscope with vertical 
illumination for examination of metallurgical specimens. 

6.1.8 Microscope — An instrument used for the observation of minute 
objects under magnification. 

6.1.9 Pathological Microscope — A research type of microscope used by 
pathologists for examination of blood, sputum, etc. 

19 



IS: 1399 -1959 

6.1.10 Penological Microscope — A polarizing type of microscope used for 
examining mineral specimens. 

6.1.11 Phase Contrast Microscope — It is a compound microscope to 
observe detail in specimens of inherently low contrast by the introduction 
of a phase plate which delineates changes of phase introduced by the struc- 
ture of the specimens as changes in brightness or colour. 

6.1.12 Polarizing Microscope — A compound microscope where the 
object is illuminated by means of plane-polarized light and the eyepiece 
fitted with an analyser and a graduated circle. 

6.1.13 Projection Microscope — A microscope for projecting the magnified 
image of an object on to a screen. 

6.1. 14 Reflecting Microscope — A special type of compound microscope, 
using a reflecting type of objective. 

6.1.15 Simple Microscope — A simple positive lens or a combination of 
lenses mounted in cell and used as a magnifier. 

6.1.16 Stereoscopic Microscope — Two compound microscopes in a simple 
body so arranged as to give a stereoscopic presentation of the image of the 
object. ( A large working distance and relatively low magnification are the 
characteristics of this microscope.) 

6.1.17 Tool Maker's Microscope — Microscope for the study of profile of 
opaque objects with or without projection and fitted with micrometers and 
angle measuring devices for carrying out measurements. 

i.l. 18 Travelling Microscope — A low magnification compound micro- 
scope sliding over a graduated scale used for linear measurements. 

6.1.19 Ultra Microscope — A compound micr scope with special type of 
illumination for the examination of very minute- particles held in liquid or 
gaseous suspension. 

6.1.20 Ultra-Violet Microscope — A microscope using ultra-violet radia- 
tions for illuminating the object to obtain more resolution and better 
contrast facilities. 

6.1.21 Universal Microscope — A microscope combining the various 
features of research metallurgical and penological microscope and used 
either for visual observation or for taking photographs of the image. This 
is usually characterized by very rigid construction and built in illumination. 

6.2 Telescopic Instruments 

6.2.1 Astronomical Telescope — A high magnification telescope which 
forms an inverted image of a celestial object in astronomical observations. 

20 



IS : 1399 - 1999 

6J.2 Binoculars — Two telescopes of identical optical characteristics 
joined together to form a single instrument which presents to both eyes a 
magnified stereoscopic view of the objects. 

6*2.3 Finder I Locating Telescope — An auxiliary telescope, usually of large 
field of view and low magnification, used in conjunction with a telescope 
of high magnification and small field of view for easy location of the objects 
to be viewed. 

6.2.4 Galilean Telescope — A telescope with a converging objective and a 
diverging eye lens, giving an erect image. 

6.2.5 Level — A survey instrument used for determining the difference 
in heights between two points, using a telescope for sighting and a spirit 
bubble for levelling. 

6.2.6 Panoramic Telescope — A periscopic telescope where the object 
glass assembly can be rotated through 360° to give a panoramic view but 
the eyepiece remaining stationary. It gives an erect image of the object 
in all positions of the object glass assembly. 

6.2.7 Prismatic Telescope — A terrestrial telescope in which the erect 
image is obtained by using prisms. 

6.2.8 Rangefinder — An instrument for determining the distance of a 
distant object, the distance being termed ' range ' ( a term from ' gunnery ' ). 

6.2.9 Reflecting Telescope — A telescope in which the objective is of a 
reflecting type. 

6.2.10 Refracting Telescope — A telescope in which the objective consists 
of a system of lenses^ 

6.2.11 Sighting Telescope — A terrestrial telescope, usually of large field 
of view and low magnification, used in conjunction with a main equipment 
for easy location of the object to be viewed. 

6.2.12 Telescope — An optical instrument for the observation of distant 
objects under magnification. 

6.2.13 Terrestrial Telescope — A telescope which gives an erect image of 
an object and used for observing terrestrial objects. 

6.2.14 Theodolite — A survey instrument used for the precise measure- 
ment of angles with a telescope as the means of sighting. 

6.2.15 Transit — An astronomical telescope suitably mounted on bear- 
ings for its rotation through 360° on vertical and horizontal planes. 

6.3 Cameras and Projectors 

6.3.1 Camera — An instrument used for photographing the images of 
objects. 

21 



18 : WW - 1959 

6.3.2 Cine Projector — A projector with provision for successive inter- 
mittent projection of a series of pictures of a cine film. 

6.3.3 Diascope — A projector which produces an image of a transparency. 

6.3.4 Efdarger — An optical arrangement which produces an enlarged 
image of an object by projection normally used in photography. 

6*3.5 Epidiascope — A projector which combines the features of an 
episcope and a diascope and can, therefore, be used for the projection of 
the image of an opaque or transparent object. 

6-3.6 Episcope — A projector which produces an image by reflection 
from the surface of an opaque object. 

6.3.7 Folding Camera — A camera where the distance between the lens 
and the photographic plate is adjustable and which can be folded for port- 
ability. 

63.8 High Speed Camera — A camera for taking a very large number of 
pictures of a fast moving object within a very short time interval, for 
example, of projectiles from guns. 

6.3.9 Movie Camera ( Motion Picture Camera ) — A camera for taking 
continuous sequence of photographs of an object. 

6*3.10 Panoramic Camera — A camera intended for taking pictures 
subtending very wide angles, generally obtained by rotation of the camera 
on a fixed axis. 

6.3.11 Photostat Camera — A camera intended for rapid* duplication of 
documents. 

6.3.12 Process Camera — .* camera equipment intended for production of 
line and half tone negatives and positives for photo-mechanical purposes. 

6.3.13 Projector — An optical instrument in which the magnified image 
of an object is thrown on to a screen for ease of observation. 

6*3.14 Reflex Camera — A camera in which focussing can be performed 
by observing the image of an object on a ground glass plate, mounted in a 
plane at right angles to the recording ( photographic ) plate, even while the 
sensitized plate is in its position. 

6*3.15 Stereo Camera — A camera designed to record two images of an 
object simultaneously from two different angles. 

6*3*16 SHU Camera — A camera used for taking single photographs of an 
object. 

6JJ7 Bthind-the-Uns Shutter— A shutter positioned as closely as possible 
Co the back element of a photographic lens. 

Note — In certain cameras with meniscus lenses, the shutter may be placed in front 
of the lens. 

22 



IS: 1399-19*9 

6*3.18 Effective Aperture of a Well-Defined Photographic Objective for a Given 
&tH*t $ M* Diaphragm — An opening, equivalent to a right section or the 
largest beam of parallel light from an axial object point that is transmitted 
by the letis. It is specified by its diameter. 

6*3.19 Effective Exposure Time (/,) — The product of the total open time 
({») and the efficiency («?), that is, t . n for a particular exposure setting of 
shutter. 

%SM Hyper-Focal Distance — When a lens is focussed on an object 
situated at hyper-focal distance, all objects situated between oc and half this 
distance will be in acceptably good focus. 

6JL21 Inter-Lens Shutter — A shutter positioned between the front and 
back elements of a photographic lens. 

6.3.22 Maximum Aperture — Usually referred by the /-number obtained 
with the effective aperture as large as possible, in the case of a photographic 
lens. 

6.3.23 Shutter Efficiency (v) — The ratio of the quantity of light actually 
transmitted by the shutter at any particular shutter setting to the quantity 
of light that would have been transmitted had the shutter been fully open 
to that diaphragm opening for the total open time. 

6.3.24 Total Open Time (t ) — The time interval for a particular exposure 
setting of shutter from the beginning of the opening period to the end of 
the closing period. 

&3.25 View-Finder — A visual aid provided in a camera to ensure that 
the subject is included in the useful field of the taking lens at the time 
of exposure. 

6.4 Other Instrument* 

6.4.1 Autocollimator — An instrument which combines the functions of a 
collimator and telescope. 

6.4J Codoslat — An instrument consisting of a clock driven mirror 
rotating about an axis in its own plane and used to reflect continuously 
the same region of the sky into the field of view of a fixed telescope. 

4.4 A Collimator — An optical device consisting of an objective and a 
graticule in its focal plane to simulate the conditions of an object at infinity 
and used for the alignment of optical systems. 

4*4.4 Calorimeter — An instrument used for the measurement/com- 
parison of the hue, purity and brightness of a colour. 

6*4.5 Comparator — An instrument for the precise measurement of small 
variations in linear dimensions. 

23 



IS : 1399 - 19S9 

6.4.6 Endoscope — A tubular optical instrument of small aperture used 
for the examination of inaccessible interior parts of the human body. 

6.4.7 Exposure Meter — A photo-electric device used to determine the 
optimum exposure conditions m terms of the brightness of the chosen area 
in the field. 

6.4.8 Heliograph — An instrument similar to the heliostat but fitted 
with a spring device to signal long and short flashes. 

6.4.9 Heliostat — An instrument similar to coelostat specially used for 
photographic and spectroscopic study of the sun. 

6.4.10 Interferometer — A research and a workshop instrument designed 
for measurement of observation of optical path difference and the effects 
thereof using the principle of interference. 

6.4.11 Inter feroscope — An optical instrument used to examine surfaces 
for flatness without bringing the two surfaces into actual contact. 

6.4.12 Micro photometer or Microdensitometer — An instrument used for 
the measurement/recording of the photographic densities over minute 
areas of an exposed plate. 

6.4.13 Opthalmometer — An instrument for measuring the radius of cur- 
vature of the cornea of the human eye. 

6.4.14 Optical Micrometer — An optical device used for measuring small 
linear displacements utilizing the principle of deviation of a beam of light 
when passed through a plane parallel plate of glass. 

6.4.15 Periscope — An optical instrument designed for looking over the 
top of obstacles. 

6.4.16 Photometer — An instrument used for measuring photometric 
quantities. 

6.4.17 Polarimeier — An instrument for measuring the amount of rotation 
of the plane of polarization in an optically active substance. 

6.4.18 Ref Tactometer — An optical instrument for determination of the 
refractive index of a material. 

6.4.19 Saccharimeter — A special type of polarimeter used for the esti- 
mation of sugar concentration by the measurement of the rotation of the 
plane of polarization by the specimen. 

6.4.20 Spectrograph — A spectrograph is a modified spectroscope for 
photographic recording of spectra. 

6.4.21 Spectrometer — An instrument with a collimator, telescope and a 
prism table, used for the evaluation of refractive indices by reading the 
positions of the telescope and prism table on an angular scale provided for 
the purpose. 

24 



IS : 1399 * 19S9 

6.4.22 Spectroplwtometcr - An instrument for the quantitative measure- 
ment of the relative intensity of radiation in different parts of its spec- 
trum. 

6.4.23 Spectroscope — An instalment designed for visual observation of 
spectra. 

6.4.24 Stereoscope — An instrument that reveals the contours in relief 
and presents a solid/three dimensional view of the object. 

7. DEFECTS AND ABERRATIONS 

7.1 Aberration — Departure of an image formed by an optical system in 
point to point resemblance in colour, dimensional proportionality and 
form from the ideal image of the object. 

7.2 Air Bubble — A defect in glass developed during glass manufacture 
due to small bubbles of gas getting entrapped in the melt. 

7.3 Astigmatism — The defect in an optical system by which the image 
of an off-axis pout object is drawn out into two mutually perpendicular 
lines at different distances along the central ray of the image forming 
bundle. 

7.4 Balsam Colouration — Preponderance of the colour of the cementing 
material manifested in balsamed components. 

7.5 Balsam Cracking (Starring Starting ) — The presence of a dis- 
continuity of the cemented film between optical components in the form 
of an irregular star or other shape. 

7.6 Chromatic Aberration — Defect due to lack of coincidence of the 
component colour images of an object formed by a lens owing to dispersion. 

7.7 Cloudiness — Turbidity of glass developed during its manufacture 
resulting in diminished transparency. 

7.8 Coma — An extra axial aberration of optical systems where thfe image 
of a point object off the axis is drawn out into a comet like flare due to 
varying magnifications of the aperture zones of the system. 

7.9 Cords — Heavy stria?; a defect in glass manufacture. 

7.10 Curvature of the Image Field — A defect due to curvature of lens 
surfaces where a plane object perpendicular to the optical axis is brought 
to a focus on a curved surface. 

7.11 Dead Metal/Stone Small fragments of undissolved material, nor- 
mally opaque, embedded in optical glass during its manufacture. 

7.12 Defective Centring — Non-alignment of the geometric and optic 
axis of a lens or a system of lenses. 

25 



IS:lttt~19S9 

7.13 Dig — A shallow pit on a polished glass surface. 

7.14 Dimming — Reduction of light transmission as a result ot formation 
of an extraneous film on polished glass surfaces. 

7.15 Distortion — A defect due to lateral magnification varying across 
the field resulting in dissimilarity in shape. This is of the following two 
types: 

a) -Pm Cushion Type — It is a distortion where the magnification 
increases with the increase of axial distance. 

b) Barrel Type — It is a distortion where the magnification decreases 
with the increase of axial distance. 

7.14 Filming — Formation of a greyish film on the surfaces of optical 
components due to deposition of volatiles or due to chemical action. 

7.17 Fogging — Formation of a greyish film of moisture on glass surface 
due to condensation from humid atmosphere in contact. 

7.18 Fttngal/Mould Growth — Growth of fungi or moulds in the shape 
of tree-like structures on glass surfaces interfering with clear vision through 
the instrument. 

7.19 Fungal Marks — Characteristic etch marks or patterns on polished 
glass surfaces due to growth of certain types of fungi. 

7 M Ghost Image — Spurious image of the object coming into the field 
of view due to undesirable reflections within the instrument. 

7.11 Parallax — Apparent relative movement between two objects, two 
images or an object and an image when the observer's eye is shifted. 

tJB Pita — Innate defects in glass brought out as dents/pits on surface 
during processing ( for example, breaking of air bubbles, re movalof atones, 
etc). 

131& Pyramidal Error ^- The departure from exact pandkKsm of the 
edges of a prism. It is measured as an angle between one of the 
and the opposite edge. 



TJt Roams — Final bands occurring in plate glass parallel to the direction 
of rolling and arising from the breaking up of the strife during r-"* — 



7.35 Scratches — Small furrows caused by particles of sbrasives on 
pawled glass. 

7Ji Seeds — Minute air bubbles. 

7.17 Sleeks — Very fine scratches left by a polishing tool 

7Jt Spherical Aherratlon — A defect due to a bundle ot rays of 
chromatic light not being brought to the same focus by diffident : 
the 



IS : 1399 - 1919 

7J9 Strata — A state caused by tendon or stress induced in glass due io 
annealing during manufacture or due to faulty mounting during 
of a component. 

7 Jft Striae Veins — Defects in glass due to nonhomogeneity of the melt 
resulting in slight differences in optical properties having the appearance of 
transparent threads in the material 

7.31 Water Marks — Light etching appearing as patches caused by pro- 
longed contact of polished glass surface with moisture. 

ft. PARAMETERS AND TESTS 

8.1 Absorption Coefficient — The ratio of the quantity of light absorbed 
to the total amount of light incident on the specimen/ 

8.2 Angular Magnification — Ratio of the angle subtended at the eye 
by the virtual image formed by an instrument to that subtended by the 
object itself. 

83 Angular Subtence — The angle subtended at the eye or at the centre 
point of the first surface of an optical instrument by an extended object. 

M Aperture — An opening that allows passage of light through an optical 
instrument. 

8J Aperture Stop — A diaphragm that limits the passage of a bundle of 
light rays through the instrument. 

84 Artificial Star — A point source of light virtually located at infinity 
simulating a star under laboratory conditions. 

Note — The use of the ' Star * should be smaller than the resolving power of 
the — * — 



8.7 Back Focal Length of a Positive Lena — The distance between the 
second focal point and the vertex of the lens nearest to it. 

8.8 Binocular Parallax Difference Parallactic Angle — The difference 
in the angles subtended at the two eyes of a person4>y two different objects 
situated in space. This enables perception in depth. 

8.9 Centre of Perspective — For a photographic lens, it is that point 
through which all straight lines connecting corresponding points of the 
object and image pass. 

Nan — When viewing a reproduction, the entrance pupil of the eye should 
be located at the centre of perspective at which the perspective was made. 

8.1ft Circle of Leaat Confusion — The smallest circle enveloping, all the 
transmitted rays of a bundle in the vicinity of the focal plane. 

8.11 Collimatiott — see 4.12. 

27 



IS : 1399 - 1959 

8.12 Conjugate Points — Points so located with respect to an optical 
system that an object placed at the one will produce an image at the other. 

8.13 Contrast — The relative variation in photographic density in a print 
or negative delineating light and shade. 

8.14 Critical Angle - In case of refraction from a denser medium to a 
rarer medium, the angle of incidence for which the refracted ray just grazes 
over the surfaces of separation. 

8.15 Definition — The clarity with which an object can be seen through 
an optical system and is dependent on the freedom from various aberrations. 

8.16 Depth of Focus ( Image Space ) — The range in image space 
throughout which the image formed by an optical system remains in sharp 
focus without noticeable deterioration. 

8.17 Depth of Focus (Object Space) — The range in object space 
throughout which any positional changes of the object do not noticeably 
affect the position of focus of the corresponding image. 

8.18 Dioptre ( Lensatic ) — The unit of power of a lens. It is equal 
to the reciprocal of the focal length expressed in metres. 

8.19 Dioptre ( Prismatic ) — The unit of power of a prism. It is equal 
to a deviation of one centimetre at a distance of one metre. 

8.20 Entrance Pupil — The image of the aperture stop of an optical 
instrument formed by the optical elements on the object side. 

8.21 Equivalent Air Path of the Medium — The path of travel of a ray 
in any medium other than air equated in terms of travel in air for the same 
time. It is expressed by the product of the refractive index of the medium 
and the distance travelled by the ray in the meolum. 

8.22 Equivalent Focal Length of a Lens or C< mbination of Lenses — 

The focal length of an equivalent thin lens wh ii gives the same sized 
image of an object at infinity. It is measured by the distance between the 
second principal plane and second focal point of the system. 

8.23 Equivalent Optical Path of the Medium — The path of travel of a 
ray in air equated in terms of its travel in the particular medium without 
altering the layout of the optical system. It is expressed by the quotient 
of the distance travelled and the refractive index of the medium. 

8.24 Exit Pupil — The image of the entrance pupil by the optical system. 

8.25 Field of View — The extent of the object space, in angular measure, 
that can be viewed through the instrument in any one setting. 

8.26 F-Number — The ratio of the focal length to the aperture of the 
lens. 

8.27 Focal Plane — The plane containing th^ focal point and perpendi- 
cular to the optical axis. 

28 



IS : 1399 - 1959 

8.28 Hyperfocal Distance --The nearest objt :t distance for which the 
image is sharp, when the lens is focusscd for infinity. 

8.29 Interocular Distance - The distance between the centres of 
exit pupils of a binocular instrument. 

8.30 Least Distance of Distinct Vision — The minimum distance at 
which the eye can distinctly see an object with comfort. 

8.31 Linear Magnification — The ratio of the linear size of the image to 
that of the object. 

8.32 Magnifying Power of a Lens — The ratio of the angle subtended 
at the eye by the virtual image to the angle subtended by the object when 
placed at the least distance of distinct vision. 

8.33 Mechanical Tube Length - The distance between the shoulder 
of the object glass and the upper end of the body tube against which the 
eyepiece flange rests in a microscope. 

8.34 Nodal Plane — A pair of conjugate planes of unit angular magni- 
fication in a lens or lens combination. When a ray strikes the first nodal 
plane on the object side at a certain angle, it leaves from the second nodal 
plane at the same angle. 

8.35 Numerical Aperture — An optical constant defined as being equal 
to the product of the refractive index of the object space and the sine of half 
the apical angle of the cone of light covered by the objective. 

8.36 Optical Axis — An imaginary line passing through the centres of 
curvature of the various surfaces of the system. 

8.37 Optical Centre-— The point on the optical axis of a lens through 
which a ray of light passes undeviated. 

8.38 Optical Path — A term used in wave optics for the product of the 
metric distance travelled by the wave and the refractive index of the 
medium. 

8.39 Optical Tube Length — The distance between the adjacent focal 
planes of the objective and the eyepiece in a microscope. 

8.40 Parallactic Angle — see 8.8. 

8.41 Primary Magnification — A term used in microscopy to denote the 
magnification effected by the objective. 

8.42 Principal Plane — A pair of conjugate planes of unit linear fnagni- 
fication. When a ray strikes the first principal plane on the object side 
at a certain height, it leaves the second principal plane at the same height. 
These are also called Unit Planes. 

8.43 Radius of Curvature — Radius of a sphere or cylinder of which the 
surface of the lens/mirror is a part. 

29 



H:U»-lt» 



•.44 fteflectlar C**Adc*t/Rd|*ett«<a~The ratio of the quantity of 
light reflected to the total quantity incident on any reflecting surface. 

t.45 Refractive lade* of a Medina*— The ratio of the velocity of light 
in vacuum to that in the medium. 

M£ Reaolvtag Power — The minimum angular linear separation between 
two object points at which they can be observed as distinct and separate. 



8.47 S ter eo sc o pi c Power of a Binocular Instrument — The product 
of the magnifying power of the instrument and the ratio of the distance 
between the centres of the two entrance pupils to the interocular distance. 

8.41 T-Number — The photometric rating of the speed of a lens. It is 
defined as the 'F* Number of a fictitious lens of circular aperture having 
100 percent transmit tance which will give the same central illumination 
as the actual lens at the specified stop opening. 

S»4§ TrunamJasion CoeflBcient/Transmittance ~ The ratio of the 
quantity of light passing through the specimen to the total quantity incident 
on it. 



30 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters; 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all offices ) 
Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, [331 01 31 

NEW DELHI-1 10002 L331 1375 

♦Eastern : 1/14 C.IX Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road. 36 2499 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. 

CHANDIGARH 160036 



Southern 
tWestern 



C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 



[218 43 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East), 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 

AHMEDABAD 380001 
tPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 

GUWAHATI 781003 
5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATN A 80001 3 
T C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., f"alayam 
TR IVAN DRUM 695035 

Inspection Office (With Sale Point) : 

Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAG PUR 440010 
institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 

PUNE 411005 



•Sale* Office In Calcutta Is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Prlncep 
Street, Calcutta 700072 

tSales Office In* Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 
Bombay 400007 

tSales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimhara)a Square, 
Bangalore 560002 



L316 41 
2442 
2519 
2916 
6 32 9295 



f 41 

i 41 
Ui 



T2 63 48 

12 63 49 

T3849 55 

L38 49 56 

6 6716 

5 36 27 
3 3177 

231083 

T6 3471 
L6 98 32 
68 76 
82 92 

6 23 05 
T6 21 04 
16 2117 

26171 
5 2435 

27 68 00 
82 66 28 
22 36 71 



[21 

121 



Printed at Slmco Printing Preee, Delhi, Indie 



