ттт Wah IS 16421 : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


этчїч ae Weert ent RaT 


Glossary of Terms in Supply Chain 
Management 


ICS 03.100.40 


O BIS 2016 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 ag AHL AM, as feeei-110002 
vez чоша кын, МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2016 Price Group 7 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Management 
and Productivity Sectional Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division Council. 


The standard has been prepared for the guidance of all organizations to assist them in the correct interpretation of 
terms used in supply chain management. It is hoped that this glossary of terms will help in establishing a generally 
recognized usage and eliminate ambiguity and confusion that might arise from individual interpretation of terms. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard gives definitions of terms relating to 
Supply Chain Management. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


2.1 ABC Analysis — An inventory classification that 
ranks items based on annual usage value. 
Approximately 10 — 15 percent of the top ranked items 
accounting for 70 percent of total annual usage value 
are termed as “A” class items. Next about 15-20 percent 
of the items accounts for 20 percent of total annual 
usage value are termed as “B”. The remaining 70 
percent of the items accounting for 10% of the total 
annual usage value are termed as “С” class items. 


2.2 Acceptance of Tender — It is a document 
confirming the acceptance of the tender for concluding 
the contract. 


2.3 Accounts Payable — A financial obligation 
created by the receipt of goods and/or services, not 
yet paid for. 


2.4 Accounts Receivable — A financial asset created 
by the supply of goods and/or services, not yet paid 
for. 


2.5 Acknowledgement — A document from a vendor 
to a customer verifying receipt of an order. It may also 
contain description of item, quantity, rate, scheduled 
date and terms and conditions. 


2.6 Actual Loss — Loss on account of higher prices 
paid, additional taxes paid and additional freight 
charges paid by the purchaser on account of delay in 
deliveries from the contracted delivery period. 


2.7 Advanced Shipping Notification (ASN) — An 
intimation by a supplier to a customer, at the time of 
shipment, notifying the details of consignment. 


2.8 All Time Order — Last order for spares of a 
particular product which is in the last phases of its life 
cycle. 


NOTE — Also referred to as life time buy. It is of such a size 
that the total expected future demand can be satisfied. 


2.9 Annual Contract — Contract between a supplier 
and a customer for an year that sets pricing and other 
terms and conditions to help in continuous supply of 
goods and services. 


2.10 Agreement — A promise and every set of 
promises forming the consideration for each other, is 
an agreement. 


NOTE —The proposal or offer when accepted is a promise. 


2.11 Automated Storage and Retrieval System (AS/ 
RS) — A high density automatic mechanized storage 
racking system which locates, retrieves/stores the 
material as per the requirement enhancing the pick rate 
and better space utilization. 


2.12 Actual Loss — Loss on account of higher prices 
paid, additional taxes paid and/or additional freight 
charges paid by the purchaser on account of delay in 
deliveries from the contracted delivery period. 


2.13 Backlog/Order Balance — Orders for goods and/ 
or services received but not yet supplied. 


2.14 Bank Guarantee — Undertaking by a bank on 
behalf of a supplier to a buyer that it will be responsible 
for the debt of the supplier in consideration of the buyer 
forgoing payment of the deposit or security. 


2.15 Bar Code — A computer recognizable code that 

stores information in the form of a series of black thick 

and thin parallel lines that represent binary digits. 
NOTE — It is normally a 13-digit code: the first digit represents 
the general product category, the next six digits the 


manufacturer's identification number and the last six the product 
identification number. The code does not include price. 


2.16 Barge — A large boat with a flat platform used 
for carrying bulk cargo. 


2.17 Basic Price — A price excluding various taxes, 
duties, cess, surcharge and freight. 


2.18 Batch (Production) — A lot or a given quantity 
processed/manufactured at the same time with the same 
process parameters. 


2.19 Benchmarking — The process of comparing the 
performance levels of an organization with the 
established best performance levels of another 
organization. 


2.20 Best Before Date — Time by which a product is 
recommended to be used to ensure the planned Quality 
level. 


NOTE — Also known as use by date. 


2.21 Beyond Economic Repair (BER) — Where the 
projected cost of repair, normally for a repairable or 


IS 16421 : 2016 


rotable item, exceeds a management set percentage of 
the replacement value of the item concerned. 


2.22 Bid — A legally binding offer to sell or to buy. 
In public procurement, a bid is confidential/sealed and 
is opened at a pre-scheduled time, date and place. 


2.23 Bid Deposit — An amount required to be 
submitted in the form of Banker’s Cheque/Bank 
Guarantee or any other approved government 
instrument, by a supplier to a buyer along with the bid 
which guarantees that the bidder will accept the 
contract if awarded or else get the deposit forfeited. 


2.24 Bid Security — A security provided to the 
procuring entity by bidders for securing the fulfilment 
of any obligation in terms of the provisions of the 
bidding document. 


NOTE — It is also known as earnest money. 


2.25 Bidder — One who submits a response to an 
invitation for bid (IFB) or request for quotations (RFQ). 


2.26 Bill of Exchange — Unconditional signed order 
in writing by one to another, requiring the person to 
whom it is addressed to pay on demand or at a fixed or 
determinable future time a certain sum in money to 
order or to bearer (Uniform Negotiable Instruments 
Law). 


2.27 Bill of Lading (B/L) — A Sea carrier's contract 
and receipt for goods agreeing to transport these goods 
from one place to another and to deliver to a designated 
recipient (consignee). 


NOTE — Such a document issued by Air Carrier is called 
Airway Bill. 


2.28 Bill of Material — A list of quantities and 
description of all materials required to produce a unit 
of the finish goods. 


2.29 Bin Card — Stock card detailing the receipts, 
issues and closing stock of the item stored in a 
particular bin. 


NOTE — It may also contain details of next higher assembly 
(NHA), alternate part numbers/issue in lieu, unit rate and 
supplier. 


2.30 Bin — An inventory shelf or rack location with a 
specific identifier. 


2.31 Blanket Order — A commitment to a supplier 
for supplying certain goods or services over a 
predetermined period of time at predetermined prices, 
or at prices to be determined based on market or other 
conditions. 


2.32 Bonded Warehouse — A warehouse in which 
goods are stored until duties are paid or goods are 
otherwise properly released. 


NOTE — Such warehouse are used for the storage and custody 
of imported or taxed merchandise which is subject to duty or 
goods to be reshipped without entry. 


2.33 Book Inventory — The quantity or value of 
inventory obtained from inventory records rather than 
by actual count. 


2.34 Breach of Contract — A failure to perform any 
promise(s), which forms a part of a contract. 


2.35 Breach of Warranty — Failure of good and/or 
services to meet the quality or other specifications 
warranted by the supplier. 


2.36 Break Bulk — Disaggregation of a big lot into 
smaller lots. 


2.37 Break Even Point — Level of production or the 
volume of sales at which revenue equals cost. 


2.38 Buffer Stock — Quantity of goods or articles 
kept in storage to safeguard against unforeseen 
short-ages due to variation in lead time and/or demands. 


2.39 Bulk Material — Material in loose form, not 
having a definitive shape, without specific packaging. 


NOTES 


1 It is generally handled by conveyor or pumps and is measured 
by weight or volume. 


2 Examples of bulk materials include coal, oil, sand, pig iron, 
limestone, liquids and gases. 


2.40 Bundle Pricing — Selling of two or more 
products as a bundle for a price lower than the sum of 
the individual product prices. 


2.41 Business Process Re-engineering (BPR) — 
Systematic reviewing of the activities carried out by 
an enterprise to substantially improve performance by 
focusing on the steps in each business process, which 
add value to the final customer. 


NOTE — BPR aims to eliminate non-value —adding activities 
and reduce process costs and cycle times. 


2.42 Business-to-Business (B2B) — A type of 
commerce transaction that exists between businesses 


such as those involving a manufacturer and whole seller 
or a whole seller and retailer. 


NOTE — This is in contrast to Business-to- Consumer (B2C). 


2.43 Business-to- Consumer (B2C) — A type of 
commerce transaction that exists between a business 
and end customer/consumer/user. 


NOTE — See also 2.42. 


2.44 By-product — Goods obtained or produced as a 
residual part during the production process of other 
goods. 


NOTE — For example, Coaltar is the by product or process of 
obtaining gas from coal. 


2.45 Cannibalize — To retrieve usable parts from an 
equipment, for its alternate use. 


NOTE — It is normally resorted to when the equipment is 
Beyond Economic Repairs. 


2.46 Cash Discount — A discount offered to 
encourage prompt payment. 


2.47 Cash in Advance (CIA) — A payment method 
in which full payment is made prior to the providing 
of the goods and/or services. 


2.48 Cash on Delivery (COD) — A payment method 
in which full payment is made upon delivery of goods 
and/or services. 


2.49 Capacity Report — A document to assess the 
technical and financial capacity of the supplier to 
execute the contract for the purpose of registration of 
the supplier. 


2.50 Carrying Cost — A measure, usually expressed 
as a percentage, of the costs incurred to hold inventory 
including insurance, obsolescence, theft/pilferage, 
damage, deterioration, warehousing charges, etc. 


2.51 Cartage — A charge made for hauling and 
transferring goods, usually on a local basis. Also called 
drayage. 


2.52 Cartel —A group of suppliers of a commodity who 
join together and agree to limit the supply of the 
commodity and charge an agreed-upon price by the group. 


2.53 Catalogue — Information system about supply 
items which tailors and distills information to the 
various catalogue users needs. 


NOTE — It may be presented in hard copy reports, microfiche 
or online about supply items with catalogue number, item name, 
description, application and part number to facilitate access to 
the various catalogue users. 


2.54 Certificate of Compliance — A document 
executed by a competent person verifying to the effect 
that the goods or services in question meet the specified 
requirements. 


NOTE — Also known as certificate of conformance and 
certificate of conformity. 


2.55 Certificate of Conformance — Signed document 
provided by a supplier to a customer which verifies 
that the goods supplied conform to the customer's 
specified requirements. 


NOTE — This is usually on a standard form that accompanies 
a delivery of goods. 


2.56 Certificate of Damage — A certificate issued 
by the carrier when goods delivered to the consignee 
by them are in damaged condition. 


NOTE — The document is needed by the consignee/consignor 
to initiate claims. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


2.57 Certificate of Inspection — A document 
certifying that merchandise was in good condition 
immediately prior to shipment. 


2.58 Change Order — A purchaser's authorization to 
the supplier to modify or change an existing purchase 
order. 


2.59 Closing Stock — An amount of on-hand stock at 
the end of a period, often determined by a physical 
stock check. 


2.60 Codification — A System of providing a unique 
identification number. 


NOTE — It could contain classification, category, size, type, 
manufacture's source, etc, to provide a tool for supply 
management. 


2.61 Competitive Bidding — A process asking bidders 
to submit their technical and commercial offers 
indicating prices and other specified details. 


2.62 Confirmed Letter of Credit — A letter of credit, 
issued by the buyer's bank, whose validity has been 
confirmed by the seller's bank. 


NOTE — A supplier is assured of payment on completion of 
specified conditions given in the confirmed letter of credit. 
Generally, it is known as irrevocable letter of credit without 
recourse. 


2.63 Consignee — The person or organization to 
whom the goods are shipped. 


2.64 Consignment — A lot of goods shipped at one 
time. 


2.65 Consignment Note — A document used to 
confirm receipt of goods by a carrier to forward these 
to the consignee given thereon. It also shows 
description of goods, weight/volume, freight rate and 
name of carrier. 


NOTE — For inland transportation by road, it is normally 
termed as Lorry Receipt (L/R). 


2.66 Consignment Stocks — An inventory of goods 
held by either with the supplier or with the customer 
but remaining the property of the supplier until issued 
for use to the customer at which point payment 
becomes due. 


2.67 Consignor — The person or organization who 
ships a consignment. 


2.68 Consolidation — Combining a number of smaller 
shipments to form an economic shipment lot. 


NOTE — It is done to achieve economies of scale in 
transportation through lower freight rates. 


2.69 Container — A large pre-fabricated metal box, 
with fixed dimensions designed for the purpose of safe 
handling, transportation and storage of goods. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


NOTE — Generally, for international and domestic trade, 20 
feet and 40 feet long standard containers are used. For shipment 
by air, standard LD 3 containers are used. 


2.70 Contract Price Adjustment — A clause in 
contract allowing the price to be varied according to a 
formula during the life of the contract based on the 
rates of labour, material and energy indices at a 
particular point of time. 


2.71 Contract — An agreement with free consent 
between two or more individuals or organizations for 
a set of promises giving rise to obligations which can 
be enforced or recognized by law. 


2.72 Cost Plus — Pricing method whereby the 
purchaser agrees to pay the supplier for goods/services 
an amount incurred by the supplier plus a percentage 
of cost incurred or fixed sum. 


2.73 Cost of Quality — A measure that sums all costs 
associated with poor quality or product failure, 
including rework, scrap, warranty costs and other costs 
incurred in preventing or resolving quality problems. 


2.74 Counter Offer — Alternate offer made in 
response to an offer from another party. 


2.75 Countervailing Duty (CVD) — An additional 
custom tariff applied to import of goods to maintain 
parity in lieu of the excise duty being charged on 
indigenous production of similar goods. 


2.76 Country of Origin — The country where goods 
are wholly grown or manufactured or produced or the 
last country in which the goods undergo substantial 
value addition. 


NOTE — Many countries levy varying import duties rates 
according to the country of origin. 


2.77 Credit Note — A document for agreeing to pay 
a specified amount on account of any difference in the 
obligation as per the contract. 


NOTE — Such instances may include short supply, quality 
defect, error in invoice, special rebate or returned goods, etc. 


2.78 Customs Duty — Tariff levied on imports or 
exports of goods. 


2.79 Cycle Time — The total time required to 
complete a transformation from one status to another. 


NOTE — Total cycle time is composed of many elements. Often 
broken into active (running or operating) time and idle (queue 
or wait) time. 


2.80 Damages — Compensation payable for loss or 
injury suffered by one party as a result of the breach 
of contract by the other party. 


2.81 Dangerous Goods — Goods which have been 
determining for a particular note to be a risk to the 
safety. 


NOTE — For example, a sharp long knife is determining to be 
a dangerous goods if carried on person during a travel whereas 
it is allowed to be carried in a registered package in an aircraft. 
Synonymous with hazardous materials. 


2.82 Debit Note — A document for creating a charge 
on the other party for difference in obligations as per 
the contract. 


NOTE — Such instances may include excess supply, error in 
invoice, special charges, etc. 


2.83 Deemed Exports — Shipments in which the 
goods are supplied within the country against orders, 
which would otherwise need to be imported from other 
countries or shipments for designated projects, which 
have been given deemed export status by the 
Government. 


2.84 Deferred Payment Letter of Credit — A letter 
of credit that specifies payment after a fixed number 
of days after the shipment. 


2.85 Delivery Order — A document issued by the 
owner of goods instructing the warehouse/dock/wharf 
etc to issue specific items to the specified entity. 


2.86 Deliverable State — A state within the meaning 
of the Sale of Goods Act when they are in such a state 
that the buyer would, under the contract, be bound to 
take delivery of them. 


2.87 Delivery Lead Time — Time elapsed for delivery 
of goods from the time an order is received by the 
supplier upto the time goods are delivered to the 
customer/carrier. 


2.88 Delivery Note — A document listing the details 
of the shipment sent alongwith the consignment to the 
consignee. 


2.89 Delivery Schedule — The required time(s) of 
delivery of goods or services as per the contract/ 
purchase order. 


2.90 Demand Forecast — The prediction, projection 
or estimation of expected demand over a specified time 
period in future. 


2.91 Demand Pull System — A customer-initiated 
material movement technique which permits a 
downstream function to pull material from the 
preceding function or external supplier only when it is 
needed and not when it is scheduled to be moved. 


2.92 Demurrage — An amount charged by a party to 
compensate for the detention of its equipment, 
facilities, wagon or container or truck or warehouse in 
excess of allowable time. 


2.93 Despatch Note — A document handed over to 
the forwarder while dispatching the goods, by the 
sender giving details of the addressee and of the 
addressor. 


2.94 Direct Material — Material used in production 
which becomes part of the end product itself. 


2.95 Dimensional Weight — The weight calculated 
based on total area/volume divided by a certain number 
for the purpose of calculation of freight. 

NOTE — Also called volumetric/measurement weight. The 


carrier charge for freight based on the dimensional weight or 
actual gross weight whichever is higher. 


2.96 Documentary Bill — The term used to indicate 
a set of bills of exchange, given to a merchant for goods 
sent abroad including bill of lading, invoices for goods 
and for policy of marine insurance. 


2.97 Documents Against Acceptance (D/A) — A 
document containing instructions given by a shipper 
to a bank indicating the documents required for 
transferring title of goods should be delivered to the 
buyer (or drawer) only upon the buyer's acceptance. 


2.98 Documents Against Payment (D/P) — A 
document containing instructions given by a shipper 
to a bank indicating the documents required for 
transferring title of goods should be delivered to the 
buyer (or drawer) only upon receiving the payment. 


2.99 Drayage — see 2.51 


2.100 Duties — Taxes levied based on tariffs for 
imported/manufactured goods. 


2.101 Duty Drawback — A refund of part or full of 
custom duty paid at the time of importing goods when 
it is exported at a later time, in the same or a different 
form. 


2.101.1 Duty Free Zone — A designated physical 
location in which a firm does not have to pay custom 
duty on import of goods or equipment. 


NOTE — As per EPZ policy, these firms are required to fulfil an 
export obligation. Also known as Export Processing Zone (EPZ). 


2.102 E-Business — A means of doing business that 
uses electronic technologies, such as EDI, the Internet 
and Web —based supply chain integration. 


2.103 E-Commerce — A way to execute Business 
transactions including consumer marketing, ordering 
and payment functions and share information with 
other businesses, consumers or with government by 
using computer and telecommunication networks, 
including the Internet Intranets, and/or Extranets. 


2.104 Earnest Money — Money paid as a pledge 
along with the bid to bind itself to the agreement if 
placed on them in response to the bid. 


2.105 Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) — A deposit 
along with a bid as per terms of the tender document. 


NOTE — In case, the bidder does not honour the offer, if the 
contract is awarded, EMD is forfeited. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


2.106 Economic Batch Quantity (EBQ) — Quantity 
that is calculated to minimize the combined costs of 
purchasing, manufacturing and holding stock. Also 
known as Optimum Batch Quantity/Economic lot-size. 


2.107 Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) — Order 
quantity which minimizes the total costs (ordering cost, 
inventory carrying cost and product cost). 


2.108 Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) — A mode 
in which the interaction is between a machine of one 
business entity to the machine of other business entity. 


2.109 Embargo — An order issued by a government 
or other agency, prohibiting the dispatch/receipt of 
specified goods to a particular country or entity or 
freighting from one place to another through specified 
mode. 


2.110 Export Oriented Units (EOU) — An 
establishment enjoying the same benefit as the units in 
export processing zones. These units can be located 
anywhere in the country. 


2.111 Export Processing Zones (EPZ) — Special 
custom bound areas, to provide an internationally 
competitive custom duty-free environment for export 
of production. 


2.112 Evaluation of Bids — The examination of bids 
after opening to determine the bidder's responsibility 
and responsiveness to requirements, and other 
characteristics of the bids relating to the award of 
contract. 


2.113 Export Licence — A document issued by the 
Government that permits the export of specified goods 
to specified countries as per the prevailing policy. 


2.114 Warranty — A specific assurance made by the 
seller concerning the performance, quality, or nature 
of the goods or services sold. An expressed warranty 
often delineates the rights and obligations of the parties 
in the event of defective items or services. 


2.115 Ex-stock — Goods available on demand from 
inventory. 


2.116 FIFO (First-In First-Out) — Inventory and 
costing policy in which the goods are used/costed in 
the order in which received. 


NOTE — See also 2.176. 


2.117 Finished Goods Stock — An inventory of 
completed products available for supply to customers. 


2.118 Finished Product — Final end product 
produced by an enterprise for supply to a customer. 


2.119 Fixed Interval Reorder System — A reordering 
system where the time interval between each two orders 


IS 16421 : 2016 


is fixed, but the size of the order is not fixed. Order 
quantity varies according to usage. 


2.120 Fixed Order Quantity System — Inventory 
control method where the size of the order is fixed, 
but the time interval between orders depends on actual 
demand. 


2.121 Force Majeure Clause — If at any times during 
the continuance of the contract, the performance of 
whole or in part by either party of any obligation under 
the contract shall be prevented or delayed by reason of 
any war, hostility, acts of public enemy, civil 
commotion, sabotage, fire, floods, explosions, 
epidemics, quarantine, restrictions, strikes, lockouts or 
act of God. 


2.122 Foreign Trade Zones — Locations determined 
by the government that do not need to pay tariffs or 
duties on imports, particularly goods that are assembled 
and re-exported. 


2.123 Fourth Party Logistics (4pl) — A firm that 
assembles and manages the resources, capabilities, and 
technology of its own organization with those of 
complementary service providers to deliver a 
comprehensive supply chain solution. 


2.124 Forward Buying — The process of placing an 
order for a supply of goods in a specified time in future 
at a specified rate. 


2.125 Foul Bill of Lading — A receipt issued by a 
shipping company indicating that the goods received 
were damaged 


2.126 Free Trade Zone — Government established 
zones that permit free entry and storage of goods. 
Duties do not need to be paid until the goods leave the 
zone. 


2.127 Freight Bill — The carrier’s invoice for 
transportation charges for a shipment. 


2.128 Freight Forwarder — An entity that facilitates 
the shipment of goods. 


NOTE — Also known as Freight and Forwarding Agents. 


2.129 Full Truckload (FTL) — Transportation based 
on the use of full capacity (by weight/volume) of a 
container/wagon/truck by a consigner. 


2.130 Fully Allocated Cost — The variable cost 
associated with a particular output unit plus a common 
cost allocation. 


2.131 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) — International trade agreement specifying 
conditions, duties and acceptable commerce practices. 


2.132 Globalization — The process of making 
something worldwide in scope or application. Also 


known as adaptation of a global strategy to local 
conditions. 


2.133 Goods — Product, commodity, equipment, item 
in part or complete, services. 


2.134 Goods Inward Inspection — The activity 
conducted for quality, quantity and product 
verification/measurements on incoming material. 


NOTE — Incoming material may be from a vendor or other 
internal manufacturing sites. 


2.135 Goods in Transit — Goods which have left the 
consignor but have not reached the consignee. 


2.136 Goods Receipt and Acceptance Note (GRN/ 
GRAN) — A document prepared by the buying 
organization indicating the quantity and quality of the 
goods namely, specified in the order. 


NOTE — Also known as Goods Received Note (GRN). 


2.137 Goods Receiving Stock Stock comprising of 
goods that have arrived at the receiving point and that 
are not yet available for the use of that organization. 


2.138 Government Procuring Entity — Purchases 
made by Central Government Ministry, Central Public 
sector enterprises, any company in which 50 percent 
or more paid up share capital is held by the Central 
Government, anybody established or constituted whose 
expenditure is met from the Consolidated Fund of 
India, any society, trust or autonomous body 
constituted by an Act of Parliament, any other entity 
which receives substantial financial assistance from 
Central Government. 


2.139 Group Purchasing — Procurement process by 
consolidating requirement of materials/items for a 
group of organizations owned by same or different 
entities. 


2.140 Guarantee — A commitment by a manufacturer 
or supplier to the effect that goods supplied are free 
from defective workmanship or materials together with 
an undertaking to remedy goods found to have such 
defects (see also 2.306). 


NOTE — In the context of financial matters, guarantee means 
a promise by an entity (the guarantor) to make good the debts 
of another (the principal) in the event of the principal failing to 
meet his or her other financial responsibilities to a third party. 


2.141 Handling Costs — Charges involved in moving, 
transferring, preparing, and handling a consignment. 


2.142 Hard Currency — Currency that can be 
exchanged for money of other countries quickly. 


2.143 Hazardous Materials — Materials or 
substances that have been determined by the designated 
authorities to be a risk to health, safety and property 
which must be packaged, labelled, handled, and 


transported according to stringent regulations from 
concerned agencies. 


NOTE — Such materials include explosives, flammables, 
poisons, corrosives, and radioactive materials, etc. 


2.144 Hire Purchase — A system in which a party 
buys the goods and gives it on lease to a user for a 
specified period on payment of a lease rent. The title 
of the goods will pass on to the user on completion of 
the lease period as per the terms agreed. 


2.145 Order on Hold — Direction by a buyer to 
interrupt certain operations/work pending till further 
instructions. 


2.146 Identical Bid — A bid that agrees in most of 
the areas with another bid. 


2.147 Idle Capacity — Unused production, storage 
or logistics resources. 


NOTE — This could be due to lack of demand or a strategic 
policy by the company to meet sudden increase in demand. 


2.148 Igloos — Containers used in air trans-portation 
and its shape fits the internal wall con-tours of a cargo 
hold of an airplane. 


2.149 Implosion — It is a process of finding out as to 
how many products can be made from a given set of 
components, sub-assemblies and material using a bill 
of materials. 


2.150 Import Licence — A document issued by the 
Government that permits the import of specified goods 
from specified countries as per the prevailing policy. 


2.151 Import Substitution — A process of producing 
indigenously those goods that were earlier being 
imported, by developing necessary competencies/ 
processes. 


2.152 In Transit — See also 2.135. 


2.153 Inbound Logistics — Flow of goods from 
suppliers to manufacturing/producing/distributing 
organization and associated flow of information and 
supporting activities. 


2.154 Incident Tracking — A system to report 
problems or incidents, locate and provide solution/ 
advice, provide escalation when necessary and track 
the successful resolution or current status of each 
assigned incident. 


2.155 INCO Term — A set of three-letter standard 
trade terms most commonly used in international 
contracts for the sale of goods. 


2.156 Incoming Inspection — See also 2.134. 


2.157 Independent Demand — Demand of goods, 
solely based on buying decision of the customer. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


NOTE — This does not depend on any factor in the control of 
the supplier or the manufacturer. 


2.158 Intermittent Demand — Sporadic demand for 
end items that may also involve low volumes and are 
more typical of to-order than to-stock environments. 


2.159 Intermodal Transportation — The use of two 
or more transportation modes to move the consignment. 


2.160 International Import Certificate — A 
document required by the importing country indicating 
that the importing country recognizes that controlled 
shipment is entering their country. The importing 
country pledges to monitor the shipment and pre-vent 
its re-export, except in accordance with its own export 
control regulations. 


2.161 Inventory Management — A set of approaches 
to integrate suppliers, manufacturers, warehouses, 
distributors and retailers such that goods are produced 
and delivered in the right quantities, at the right 
locations, at the right time in order to minimize system 
wide cost while maintaining customer service level. 


2.162 Inventory Policy — Strategic decisions on 
inventory management by an organization to meet its 
stated goals of customer service level. 


2.163 Inventory Shrinkage — Losses of inventory due 
to obsolescence, deterioration, pilferage, damage, 
evaporation, sublimation, etc. 


2.164 Inventory Turns — The ratio of cost of goods 
sold divided by the cost of average inventory during a 
year. 


2.165 Inventory Valuation — The process of 
computing a monetary value of inventory on a 
particular date, based on either of the standard cost, 
first-in first-out (FIFO), last-in first-out (LIFO), average 
price or other methods. 


2.166 Inventory Velocity — The speed with which 
inventory moves through a defined cycle that is, from 
receiving to shipping. 


2.167 Inventory Write-Off — The deletion of the 
value (from the current inventory value) of the 
inventory items, found of no use due to obsolescence/ 
surplus, defective or market changes. 


2.168 Invitation to Bid — A tender document of the 
buyer detailing the requirements including 
specifications and other terms and conditions referred 
to the probable bidders for obtaining their bids. 


2.169 Item Master — A document having description, 
unit of measure, dimensions, family and group 
classification, production or purchasing ordering data, 
next higher assembly, alternate items and other 


IS 16421 : 2016 


pertinent information of an item. 
NOTE — It may include the current approved suppliers. 


2.170 Just-In-Time (JIT) — Manufacturing 
philosophy in which each part/component of a product 
arrives at a time when it is required to be assembled. 


NOTE — It cuts non-value added tasks, reduces waste , cuts 
inventory, eliminates delay. 


2.171 Landed Costs — The total cost of a shipment 
at customer’s premises which includes purchase price, 
freight, insurance, duties, taxes and other costs. 


2.172 Last Purchase Price (LLP) — The price paid 
in the latest contract of a similar magnitude which has 
been successfully completed. 


NOTE — It should normally be not earlier than 3 years old. 


2.173 Lead Time — The total time required from the 
time the demand is raised and it is met. 


2.174 Lean Manufacturing — A methodology aimed 
at minimizing the resources required for production 
of goods by eliminating waste and non-value adding 
activities. 


2.175 Less Than Truckload (LTL) — Transportation 
based on the use of part capacity (by weight/volume) 
of a container/wagon/truck by a consigner. 


NOTE — Transportation rates per unit for LTL shipments are 
higher than those for FTL. 


2.176 LIFO (Last-in First-Out) — The method of 
valuing stocks which assumes that all issues or sales 
are charged at the most current cost but stocks are 
valued at the oldest cost available. 


NOTE — See also 2.116. 


2.177 Life Cycle Cost — The analysis of costs 
(acquiring, using, carrying, and disposal, etc) over the 
entire life cycle of a given product, rather than a specific 
fiscal period. It includes factors based on stage 
(introduction, growth, maturity, decline) and all 
research and development, design, marketing, 
production and logistics costs. 


2.178 Liquidated Damages — Damages to be claimed 
by purchaser for delay in supplies from the agreed date 
of delivery at the agreed rates as per the contract. 


2.179 Lot Number — The allocation of a unique 
number, to one or more of a product during 
manufacture or assembly, to provide traceability. 


2.180 Lot — A production run or batch that can be 
isolated from other runs and identified with a specific 
set of material, production facility and process 
characteristics and manufactured under identical 
conditions of production. 


2.181 Machine Hours — The actual time recorded by 
a machine when used for production, and used in 
efficiency and utilization calculations. 


2.182 Maintenance Costs — The costs incurred to 
support and ensure continued availability of an asset. 


NOTE — It includes cost incurred on scheduled, unscheduled 
repairs and support staff. 


2.183 Make or Buy Decision — An analysis of the 
cost of producing a particular item in-house; namely 
outsourcing it, with a view to assess as to which of 
these two options is economically beneficial. 


2.184 Make to Order (MTO) — A manufacturing 
method in which commonly-used raw materials and 
components may be stocked based on previous demand 
history, but further processing into higher-level items 
is not done until receipt of a customer order. 


2.185 Make to Stock (MTS) — A manufacturing 
method in which finished goods are produced and 
stocked even prior to receipt of an order from the 
customer. 


NOTE — It uses a forecasting technique to initiate production 
of end items. 


2.186 Manufacturing Lead Time — The total of all 
individual elements of lead time such as order 
preparation, queue, setup, processing, inspection, etc 
associated for a particular product. 


NOTE — It indicates a projected availability date for an end 
item if the required raw material is on-hand. 


2.187 Marine Insurance — An agreement by an 
organization with a customer to cover loss or damage 
of ships, cargo, terminals, and any transport or cargo 
by which property is transferred, acquired, or held 
between the points of origin and final destination. 


2.188 Maximum Order Quantity — An order 
quantity which will not be exceeded based on the 
maximum level fixed. 


2.189 Maximum Stock — The upper limit, expressed 
in quantitative, financial or time-based terms, to which 
the stock of an item should not exceed. 


2.190 Minimum Order Quantity — The order 
quantity modified/increased, subsequent to the lot size 
requirement, based on the standard packing available/ 
offered by a supplier. 


2.191 Minimum Stock — A control limit in an 
inventory system which indicates the point at which a 
reordering is to be processed. 


2.192 Material Requirements Planning (MRP) — 
A production planning and inventory control system 
used to manage manufacturing processes. 


NOTES 


1 Most MRP systems are software-based, while it is possible 
to conduct MRP by hand as well. 


2 An MRP system is intended to 


— ensure materials are available for production and 
products are available for delivery to customers. 


— plan maintain the lowest possible material and product 
levels in store. 


— manufacturing activities, delivery schedules and 
purchasing activities. 


2.193 Manufacturing Resource Planning (MRP ID 
— A management concept for using human resources 
more productively for the effective planning of all 
resources of a manufacturing company. 


NOTE — Ideally, it addresses operational planning in units, 
financial planning, and has a simulation capability to answer 
“what-if” questions and extension of MRP. 


2.194 MODVAT (Modified Value Added Tax) — 
Excise duty on final product less the excise duty paid 
on the raw material/components. 


2.195 Negotiations — Discussions between two or 
more entities to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement 
on the essentials of a contract. 


2.196 Net Requirements — The need for an item 
based on its gross requirements (from forecasts, 
customer orders, etc), reduced by stock already on- 
hand and scheduled receipts. 


2.197 Obsolescence — The degradation in the value 
and usefulness of a resource based on its age, 
technological advancement, change in style/model or 
other factors that may require a partial or total write 
off of its currently-stated value. 


2.198 Obsolete — Status of an item or equipment 
indicating that due to obsolescence it is no longer 
required and/or not to be used. 


2.199 Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) — 
Prime manufacturer of an item/equipment used by 
specific buyer(s). 


NOTE — One manufacturer can be an OEM for many buyers. 
There can be many OEM for a particular item/equipment. 


2.200 Offload — To shift a production or logistics 
requirements from the original to an alternate resource 
due to capacity and/or timing constraints. 


2.201 Offset — Any condition imposed on a foreign 
bidder in relation to a particular procurement so as to 
encourage local development by means of domestic 
content/licensing of technology/investment 
requirements/counter-trade or other similar 
requirements. 


2.202 Offshore — Production and operating or 
technical support facilities located in a foreign country. 


2.203 On Order — The goods that have yet to arrive 


IS 16421 : 2016 


at a location including all orders which are open/in 
transit/being picked up. 


2.204 On-hand Balance — The quantity of an item 
which is held physically in stock. 


2.205 Online Bidding — A process where 
organizations require supplier to submit their bids 
electronically. 


2.206 On-Time Delivery — The receipt of scheduled 
shipments on the expected date, or within an allowable 
tolerance time limit. 


2.207 Opening Stock — The stock of an item at the 
beginning of an inventory accounting period. 


2.208 Order Lead Time — The total internal 
processing time necessary to transform a demand from 
the time it is felt and till the order is transmitted to the 
supplier. 


2.209 Order — A request by the buyer to the supplier 
for supply of goods or services specifying description 
of item, quantity, rate, delivery schedule , terms and 
conditions etc. 


2.210 Ordering Cost — The total of all costs 
associated with the processing, release of a purchase 
order, receipt of goods, inspection, etc. 


2.211 Outbound Logistics — The processes and 
network used to pick, ship, track and store items 
ordered by customers, distribution centers and other 
supply chain partners. 


2.212 Outsourcing — An external resource, instead 
of an internal, used for production of a single operation, 
from an item to complete assembly, shipping, order 
fulfillment, product design, network infrastructure 
support or other functions. 


2.213 Overhead — Business operating costs that 
cannot be meaningfully or economically allocated to 
specific products or services. 


NOTE — Examples of these could be manufacturing, marketing, 
general and administrative overheads etc. 


2.214 Overrun — An excess of quantity produced/ 
costs incurred/time used compared to the standard/ 
budgeted/estimated parameters. 


2.215 Packing Slip — A document of the supplier/ 
manufacturer that accompanies a shipment/ 
consignment describing its contents and quantities. 


NOTE — It may also refer the order number. 


2.216 Pallet — Portable platform of standard sizes 
made of wood/metal on which goods are stacked in 
unit loads and can be picked up by forklift/other 
machines to be transferred to a truck/storage place/ 
conveyer. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


2.217 Past Supplier — A supplier who has been 
awarded contract(s) by the same organization for the 
same item prior to the date of opening of tenders and 
has successfully executed the contract(s) so awarded. 


2.218 Periodic Order Review System — Inventory 
control method where the time interval between two 
orders is fixed, but the quantity on order depends on 
actual demand during the period. 


2.219 Periodic Replenishment — An inventory 
control method in which the required quantity is 
ordered at a fixed interval of time. 


NOTE — The quantity ordered each time will be dependent on 
various factors and may be different. 


2.220 Perpetual Inventory System — An inventory 
control method in which the same quantity is ordered 
at a fixed reorder level of quantity. 


2.221 Pre-qualification Document — The document 
issued by a procuring entity, including any amendments 
thereto, that set out the terms and conditions of the 
pre-qualification proceedings and includes the 
invitation to pre-qualify. 


2.222 Procurement Contract — A contract entered 
into between the procuring entity and a successful 
bidder concerning the subject matter of procurement. 


2.223 Productivity — A measure of resource 
utilization efficiency defined as the sum of the outputs 
divided by the sum of the inputs. 


2.224 Progressive Payment — The system of making 
payments in phases based on the accomplishment of 
milestones, cost recovery agreement, or other 
contractual obligations. 


2.225 Proof of Delivery (POD) — A document 
confirming the date of delivery/handing over of the 
goods by a supplier/carrier or their agents to buyer or 
his agent. 


2.226 Proposal or Offer — An entity signifying to 
another entity its willingness to do or to abstain from 
doing anything with a view to obtain the assent of the 
other to such act or abstinence. 


2.227 Public Private Partnership — An arrangement 
between the Government owned entity on one side and 
a private sector entity on the other, for the provision 
of public assets or public services or both through 
investments being made or management being 
undertaken by the private sector entity for a specified 
period of time where there is well defined allocation 
of risk between the private sector and the public entity 
and the private entity receives performance linked 
payment that conform (or are benchmarked) to 
specified and pre-determined performance standards, 
measurable by public entity or its representatives. 


10 


2.228 Public Procurement — An acquisition by 
purchase, lease, licence or otherwise of works, goods 
or services including award of public private 
partnership projects, by a procuring entity whether 
directly or through an agency with which a contract 
for procurement services is entered into but does not 
include any acquisition without consideration. 


2.229 Public Warehousing — The storage of goods 
by an entity that offers storage facilities to the public 
for a fee. 


2.230 Purchasing — The functions associated with 
buy-ing the goods and services. 


2.231 Purchasing Lead Time (PLT) — The time lag 
between the decision to purchase an item and its actual 
addition to stock. 


2.232 Quantitative Restrictions (QRs) — Specific 
limits imposed by the Government authorities on the 
quantity or value of goods that can be imported or 
exported. 


2.233 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) — A 
tag for identification of objects through radio frequency 
technology. 


NOTE — RFID tags can be active or passive. Active tags 
contain a power source and emit a signal constantly. Passive 
tags receive power from the radio waves sent by the scanner/ 
reader. The inherent advantages of RFID over bar code 
technology are: 


a) the ability to be read over longer distances, 

b) the elimination of requirement for “line of sight” reads, 
c) added capacity to contain information, and 

d) RFID tag data can be updated/changed. 


2.234 Rationing — A technique of allocating available 
stocks of product among requesting customers 
typically used when demand exceeds anticipated 
availability. 


NOTE — Various formulas or strategies may be employed based 
on customer relationships, urgency and price. 


2.235 Rate Contract — An agreement between a 
procuring entity and one or more bidders which 
specifies the terms and conditions including the price, 
for the supply of a subject matter of procurement 
required on a recurring basis. 


2.236 Redistribution — A trend in the distribution 
business where a large "redistributor" will purchase 
in huge quantities from the various manufacturers and 
warehouse the products. Individual smaller distributors 
can then purchase multiple manufacturers' products 
from the redistributor to save on shipping costs. 


2.237 Redundant Stock —— An item/part/component 
which is no longer used/stocked by the organization 
because of technical change/modification/discontinuation 
of a production of a product requiring their use. 


NOTE — Redundant parts may have a useful life elsewhere. 


2.238 Re-engineering — A fundamental re-thinking 
and radical design of business processes to achieve 
substantial improvements in performance. 


2.239 Refrigerated Carriers — Container/vehicles 
having a temperature controlled space to store/ 
transport perishable goods and items requiring 
temperature controlled conditions for retaining their 
shelf life. 


2.240 Registered Supplier — Any supplier who is on 
the list of registered supplier’s of the procuring entity. 


2.241 Release Note — Document in a specified format 
issued by an approved manufacturer certifying that the 
goods have been produced as per the required 
specifications. 


NOTE — This is a typical document relating to aviation 
industry. 


2.242 Release-to-Start Manufacturing — Average 
lead time from order release to start of the manufacture 
process. 
NOTE — This lead time may typically be required to support 
activities such as material movement and line changeovers. 
2.243 Re-Order Level (ROL) — A predetermined 


stock level in a inventory control system that triggers 
the need to place an order. 


2.244 Re-Order Quantity — The quantity necessary 
to be ordered to replenish the stock at a given time. 


NOTE — Also known as Replenishment Order Quantity. 


2.245 Replenishment Order Quantity — See 
also 2.244. 


2.246 Request for Proposal (RFP) — See also 2.168. 
NOTE — Also known as Request for Quotation (RFQ). 


2.247 Request for Quotation (RFQ) — See 
also 2.168. 


NOTE — Also known as Request for Proposal (RFP). 


2.248 Return Material Authorization or Return 
Merchandise Authorization (RMA) — A reference 
number provided by a supplier to a buyer authorizing 
him to return a product. 


2.249 Return to Vendor (RTV) — Material that has 
been rejected by the buyer and is awaiting shipment 
back to the supplier. 


2.250 Return Processing Cost — The total cost to 
process recall, repairs, refurbished, excess, obsolete, 
and End-of-Life products. 


NOTE — This could include the costs of logistics support, 
materials, centralized functions, troubleshooting service 
requests, on-site diagnosis and repair, external repair, and 
miscellaneous. These costs are broken into Returns Order 


11 


IS 16421 : 2016 


Management, Returns Inventory Carrying, Returns Material 
Acquisition, Finance, Planning, IT, Disposal and Warranty 
Costs. 


2.251 Rules-Based Picking Logic — A picking 
methodology which is based on preset rules governing 
the various pick strategies as per instructions given in 
the orders. 


2.252 Reverse Auction — An online real-time 
purchasing technique utilized by the procuring entity 
to select the successful submission, which involves 
presentation by bidder of successively lowered bids 
during a scheduled period of time and the automatic 
evaluation of bid. 


2.253 Reverse Logistics — The system of collecting, 
mov-ing and performing other allied activities of the 
previously shipped goods, from a customer back to a 
manufacturer or distribution centre for repair/service/ 
credit or due to error in order execution. 


2.254 Running Contract — It is a contract for the 
supply of an approximate quantity of stores at a 
specified price during a certain period. 


NOTE — In other words the purchaser guarantees to take 
quantity before expiry of contract. 


2.255 Safety Stock — The additional inventory held 
as a buffer against uncertainties in demand or in the 
supply system. 


2.256 Salvage Material — An item that has value in 
addition to its worth as scrap. 


NOTE — The item is, however, no longer useful as a unit in its 
present condition and whose restoration to usefulness as a unit 
is not economically feasible. 


2.257 Scenario Building — A methodology used to 
anticipate a possible large scale changes that could 
affect an organization and develop scenarios to respond 
to different future situations. 


2.258 Sensitivity Analysis (SA) — The study of effect 
of variation (uncertainty) in the input variables on the 
output values. 


2.259 Service Level — It is a measure in terms of the 
percentages of actual performance vis-à-vis the 
predetermined desired levels of service. In the context 
of material, itis the ratio of number of times the demand 
is met. 


2.260 Shelf Life — The maximum time an item can 
remain in store without deterioration. 


2.261 Shipping Lane — A predetermined, mapped 
route on the ocean that commercial vessels tend to 
follow between ports. This helps ships avoid hazardous 
areas. 


NOTE — In general transportation, the logical route between 


IS 16421 : 2016 


the point of shipment and the point of delivery used to analyze 
the volume of shipment between two points. 


2.262 Shipping Manifest — A list prepared by the 
shipper giving details of the reference number of each 
shipping order in the load, the weight, and count of 
boxes or containers, and the destination. 


2.263 Simplification — The methodology that seek 
to reduce variation in product and process. 


2.264 Slow Moving Inventory — Goods in stock that 
have had no usage activity for a specified number of 
days, or whose usage rate is significantly below the 
historical or expected average. 


2.265 Slurry — Dry commodities that are made into 
a liq-uid form by the addition of water or other fluids 
to permit movement by pipeline. 


2.266 Sourcing — The process of identifying suppliers 
and carrying out procurement process to conclude 
contracts for supply of goods and services. 


2.267 Special Economic Zone (SEZ) — A designated 
physical location in which a firm enjoys moratorium 
for a specific period from certain levies. 


2.268 Spot Demand — Unusual high demand for a 
product with a corresponding shorter lead time. 


2.269 Standard Container See also 2.69. 


2.270 Standardization — The methodology to reduce 
the variability of item or processes through elimination 
of lesser used or slow/non-moving items by specifying 
an in-lieu of item, in-stock to be used. 


2.271 Stock in Transit — All goods in transit from 
one point in a supply chain to another supply chain 
destination, expressed in quantitative or financial 
terms. 


2.272 Stock Order — A production order used to 
replenish inventory to the desired level, irrespective 
of the requirement from a customer. 


2.273 Stock Taking — A physical count of products, 
actually held in stock on a particular date, for 
verification of the stock records and accounts. 


2.274 Stockless Purchasing — A practice whereby 
the buyer negotiates a price for the purchases of annual 
requirements and the supplier owns and holds 
inventory until the buyer places an order for individual 
items. 


2.275 Stockout Cost — The opportunity cost 
associated with not having sufficient supply to meet 
the actual demand. 


2.276 Subcontracting — Giving work to a third party. 


2.277 Supplier — Any person or organization that 


12 


provides inputs of goods and/or services to a 
purchasing entity. 


NOTE — Earlier known as vendor. 


2.278 Supplier Capacity Analysis — An assessment 
of a supplier’s capacity viz-a-viz the buyer’s 
requirements. 


2.279 Supply Chain — The physical, financial, and 
infor-mation networks that involve the movement of 
goods, funds, and related information through the full 
logistics process, from the acquisition of raw materials 
to delivery of finished goods to the end user. The 
supply chain includes all vendors, service providers, 
customers, and intermediaries. 


2.280 Supply Chain Management (SCM) — The 
coordinated set of techniques to plan, execute and 
manage to and fro flow of material, information and 
finance in the global network right from conceiving 
the demand of material and services to delivery to end 
customers. 


2.281 Supply Chain Optimization — The method to 
determining the level of resources across all or part of 
a supply chain to achieve supply chain objectives such 
as minimizing total cost or maintaining a desired 
service level or both. 


2.282 Supplier-Owned Inventory — A variant of 
vendor-managed inventory and consignment 
inventory. In this case, the supplier not only manages 
the inventory, but also owns the stock close to or at 
the customer location until the point of consumption 
or usage by the customer. 


2.283 Supplier Rating — An evaluation of a supplier 
based on his performance on quality, delivery, price, 
involvement in process improvement programs and 
other parameters. 
NOTE — This results in rating the supplier in categories such 
as preferred, approved (qualified) or unsatisfactory 
(disqualified). 
2.284 Third Party Inspection Agency — An 
outsourced agency engaged by customer to get the pre- 
dispatch inspection carried out of the goods to be 
supplied by the supplier. 


2.285 Third Party Logistics Provider (3PL) — An 
outsourced entity that manages all or a significant part 
of an organization's logistics requirements. 


2.286 Throughput — The volume of output generated 
by a resource in a specific period of time. 


2.287 Tier 1 Supplier — A immediate or primary set 
of supplier directly used by a company. 


NOTE — Tier 2 is a supplier to tier 1. 


2.288 Tier 2 Supplier — A supplier to a tier 1 supplier. 


2.289 Tolerance Clause — A clause in the contract 
where purchaser has an option to buy certain quantity 
of its original order quantity at the same terms and 
conditions, as applicable for the original order, within 
the specified period as per the contract. 


2.290 Total Cost Analysis — A method used for 
analysing the total cost between different options based 
on various costs such as transportation, warehousing, 
inventory, taxes, duties, warranties, etc. 


2.291 Total Cost Curve — The curve depicting fixed 
cost and variable cost for the various levels of 
production. 


2.292 Total Cost of Ownership — Total cost of an 
asset throughout its lifecycle. 


2.293 Total Supply-Chain Management Cost — 
Total cost to manage order processing, acquire 
materials, manage inventory, and manage supply-chain 
finance, planning, and IT costs, expressed as a percent 
of revenue. 


2.294 Total Supply Chain Response Time — The 
lead time to rebalance the supply chain to meet a 
change in market demand. 


2.295 Trade Barriers — Government imposed 
restriction on the free international exchange of goods 
or services. 


NOTE — Trade barriers are generally classified as 


a) 


import policies reflected in tariffs and other import 
charges, quotas, import licensing, customs practices, 

b) standards, testing, labelling, and various types of 
certification, 

direct procurement by Government, 

subsidies for local exporters, 

lack of copyright protection, 


restrictions on franchising, licensing, technology transfer, 
and 


g) restriction on foreign direct investment, etc. 


2.296 Two Bin Inventory System — An inventory 
system that uses two physical bins, one of which holds 
the stock equivalent to the consumption during the lead 
time. 


NOTE — Issues are made from other bin. When this bin is 

empty, a reorder is placed. 
2.297 Unit Load Device (ULD) — It refers to cargo 
containers, pallets of standard size for easy 
transportation and to avoid transit damage. 

NOTE — This is typical to airfreight industry. The outer shape 

fits the internal wall con-tours of a cargo hold of the aircraft. 
2.298 Unitization — The process of bundling of items/ 
boxes together on a pallet or a container for easier and 
economical transportation. 


2.299 Validity of Offer — A date fixed in tender forms/ 


13 


IS 16421 : 2016 


offer up to which the bids are open for acceptance. 


2.300 Value Analysis — The organized use of 
methodologies that focus on the function of a goods, 
processes or services in providing value to the 
customer. It attempts to define cost, quality and 
customer acceptance parameters in determining the 
value and possible redesign or reengineering of a given 
function. 


2.301 Value Engineering — The systematic 
application of recognized techniques which identify 
the functions of the product or service, establish the 
work of those functions, and provide the necessary 
functions to meet the required performance at the 
lowest overall cost. 


NOTE — Value engineering can also achieve enhanced value 
by improving the functions that are desired by the customer 
even at an increased cost. 


2.302 Variable Cost — A cost that is proportionate 
to the vol-ume of production of goods/services. 


NOTE — The cost is primarily towards direct material cost/ 
labour cost. 


2.303 Variety Rationalization — The selection of the 
optimum number of sizes and other characteristics or 
types of a product required to meet prevailing needs. 


2.304 Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI) — An 
inventory management system in which a supplier 
maintains and manages the inventory of items at the 
customer’s premises, including timely replenishments. 


NOTE — Payment of the goods are made based on the actual 
issues made from this inventory. 


2.305 Warehouse Management System (WMS) — 
An integrated set of system designed to locate, put 
away, move, pick and cycle count/inventory 
verification activities of a warehouse or distribution 
center. 


2.306 Warranty — Undertaking, either expressed or 
implied that a certain fact regarding the subject matter 
of contract is presently true or will be true. 


2.307 Waybill — Document containing description of 
goods that are a part of common carrier freight 
shipment. Show origin, destination, consignee/ 
consignor, and amount charged. Copies of this 
document accompany the goods and are retained by 
originating/delivering agents. 


2.308 Work in Process (WIP) — Material that has 
been partially processed but not yet transformed into 
end product. 


2.309 International Commercial Terms (INCO 
Terms) 


2.309.1 EXW — EX WORKS (... named place of 


IS 16421 : 2016 


delivery) — The Seller’s only responsibility is to make 
the goods available at the Seller’s premises. The Buyer 
bears full costs and risks of moving the goods from 
there to destination. 


2.309.2 FCA — FREE CARRIER (... named place of 
delivery) — The Seller delivers the goods, cleared for 
export, to the carrier selected by the Buyer. The Seller 
loads the goods if the carrier pickup is at the Seller’s 
premises. From that point, the Buyer bears the costs 
and risks of moving the goods to destination. 


2.309.3 CPT — CARRIAGE PAID TO (... named place 
of destination) — The Seller pays for moving the goods 
to destination. From the time the goods are transferred 
to the first carrier, the Buyer bears the risks of loss or 
damage. 


2.309.4 CIP — CARRIAGE AND INSURANCE PAID 
TO (... named place of destination) — The Seller pays 
for moving the goods to destination. From the time 
the goods are transferred to the first carrier, the Buyer 
bears the risks of loss or damage. The Seller, however, 
purchases the cargo insurance. 


2.309.5 DAT- DELIVERED AT TERMINAL (... named 
terminal at port or place of destination) — The Seller 
delivers when the goods, once unloaded from the 
arriving means of transport, are placed at the Buyer’s 
disposal at a named terminal at the named port or place 
of destination. “Terminal” includes any place, whether 
covered or not, such as a quay, warehouse, container 
yard or road, rail or air cargo terminal. The Seller bears 
all risks involved in bringing the goods to and 
unloading them at the terminal at the named port or 
place of destination. 


14 


2.309.6 DAP — DELIVERED AT PLACE (... named 
place of destination) — The Seller delivers when the 
goods are placed at the Buyer’s disposal on the arriving 
means of transport ready for unloading at the names 
place of destination. The Seller bears all risks involved 
in bringing the goods to the named place. 


2.309.7 DDP — DELIVERED DUTY PAID (... named 
place) — The Seller delivers the goods -cleared for 
import – to the Buyer at destination. The Seller bears 
all costs and risks of moving the goods to destination, 
including the payment of Customs duties and taxes. 


2.310 Maritime-only Terms 


2.310.1 FAS — FREE ALONGSIDE SHIP (... named 
port of shipment) — The Seller delivers the goods to 
the origin port. From that point, the Buyer bears all 
costs and risks of loss or damage. 


2.310.2 FOB — FREE ON BOARD (... named port of 
shipment) — The Seller delivers the goods on board 
the ship and clears the goods for export. From that 
point, the Buyer bears all costs and risks of loss or 
damage. 


2.310.3 CFR — COST AND FREIGHT (... named port 
of destination) — The Seller clears the goods for export 
and pays the costs of moving the goods to destination. 
The Buyer bears all risks of loss or damage. 


2.310.4 CIF – COST INSURANCE AND FREIGHT (... 
named port of destination) — The Seller clears the 
goods for export and pays the costs of moving the 
goods to the port of destination. The Buyer bears all 
risks of loss or damage. The Seller, however, purchases 
the cargo insurance. 


IS 16421 : 2016 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 
Additional Directorate General of Financial Planning, New Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Ltd, New Delhi 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, Bangalore 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Kanpur 


DRDO, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FICCI, New Delhi 

HCL Technologies, NCR 

Indian Institute of Management, Indore 

Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Finance, Delhi and Noida 


Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi 


Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi 
International Management Institute, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Baroda 


Management Development Institute (MDI), Gurgaon 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


National Informatic Centre, New Delhi 


Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 


Northern Railway, New Delhi 
NITIE, Mumbai 
Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 


Project Management Institute, New Delhi 


Punj Lloyds Pvt. Ltd, Gurgaon 


Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) 


Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh 
Steel Authority of India. Ltd., New Delhi 


The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi 


15 


Representative 
Suri V.K. Jain (Chairman) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


PROF AMAN AGARWAL 


SHRI BALRAJ SETH 


Suri K. K. SETH 
Suri JacpisH Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr SARITA NAGPAL 
Suri С.У. Rao (Alternate) 


Suri I DEvKi NANDAN (Principal) 
Suri M.V. KUMBHALKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A.K. SINGH 
Suri S.S. Kinan (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH MurGAI 
Suri M.K. Ja (Alternate) 


Dn S. Bazas 
REPRESENTATIVE 

ProF V.K. GUPTA 
Suri M.K. BHARDWAJ 


PROF SAURABH AGARWAL 
ProF Mansu AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Ms УрАҮА KATTI 
Dr Biswasit Nac (Alternate) 


Ms RINA CHAKRAVORTY 
Dr B. METRI 


Suri К. RAVINDRANATH 
SHRI MOHAMMED HABIBULLA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI A.K. TOMER 
Suri S. Bose (Alternate) 


Dr V. SIVARAMAKRISHNAIAH 


Capt D.K. SINGH 
Іт CDR S. SREEKANTH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri S. K. Yapav 
SHRI SANJAY SRIVASTAV (Alternate) 


SHRI DHIRAJ GYANI 
Ms Leena Gupte (Alternate) 


SHRI ADARSH SONI 
SHRI МокЕ$н Arora (Alternate) 


Dr MariA CHRISTINE NIRMALA 
Ms Dyna СаАмАРАТНҮ (Alternate) 


ProF P. RAJASEKHARA REDDY 
Suri R. K. ANAND 


SHRI J. P. SINGH 


IS 16421 : 2016 


Organization Representative(s) 
WIPRO Technologies, NCR REPRESENTATIVE 
In personal capacity (804, Chelsea Tower, Omaxe Heights, Pror S. CHAKRABORTY 


Vibhuti Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow-226010) 


In personal capacity (D-27, Panchsheel Enclave, New Delhi) Pnor R.K. SACHDEVA 
In personal capacity (H 67C, DDA Flats, Saket, New Delhi) SHRI MAHESH CHAUDHARY 
BIS Directorate General Suri K.N. Rao, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MSD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI PRAVEEN KHANNA 
Scientist ‘E’ (Management and Systems), BIS 


Composition of the Panel on ‘Glossary of Terms in Supply Chain Management’, MSD 4/P-24 


Organization Representative(s) 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi Suri M.K. Bnanpwa) (Convener) 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi Suri V.K. JAIN 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Haridwar SHRI MALVINDER SINGH 
IMT, Ghaziabad ProF У.К. GUPTA 
DGS&D, New Delhi Suri A.N. JHA 
MOIL, Nagpur Suri А.К. MEHRA 
In personal capacity (F/12-F, DDA Flats, Munirka, Suri TEK CHAND 


New Delhi - 110067) 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 04 (0456). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


