NAT 1% IS 2167 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


егет Her chi Fass 


(ана JETT ) 


Specification for Bottle Coolers 


(Second Revision) 


ICS 97.130.20 


© BIS 2019 


mAT нтяев эд 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 SERE TH AMT, ay (ത്തീ — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR МАКС 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2019 Price Group 6 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1983. 


It has now been revised to bring it in line with the current technical practice and to establish uniform test conditions 
and method to be used for determining the laboratory performance for bottle coolers. The test conditions included 
in the standard are intended to provide the basis for comparison of performance. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2167 : 2019 


Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR BOTTLE COOLERS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the general constructional 
requirements and methods of testing and rating of dry 
type self-contained close type bottle coolers operated 
by electrically driven vapour compression type 
refrigerating machine with air-cooled condenser. This 
standard is limited to bottle cooler only. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


Title 


Safety of household and similar 
electrical appliances: Part 1 
General requirements (sixth 
revision) 


IS No. 


302 (Part 1) 
: 2008 


694 : 2010 Polyvinyl chloride insulated 
unsheathed and sheathed cables/ 
cords with rigid and flexible 
conductor for rated voltages up 


to and including 450/750 V 


Code of practice for electrical 
wiring installations (fourth 
revision) 


732 : 2019 


induction 
purpose 


996 : 2009 Single-phase а.с. 
motors for general 


( third revision) 


9968 (Part 1) 
: 1988 


Specification for elastomer 
insulated cables: Part 1 for 
working voltages up to and 
including 1100 volts (first 
revision ) 


IS/IEC 60730-2-9 
: 2011 


Automatic electrical controls 
for household and similar use: 
Part 2 Particular requirements, 
Section 9 Temperature sensing 
controls 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Bottle Cooler — A machine to cool and dispense 
bottled drinks. 


3.2 Bottle Opener — A device fixed at a convenient 
place to the bottle cooler for purposes of removing the 
caps of bottles. 


3.3 Dispenser — A suitable arrangement to hold fresh 
or empty bottles for the ready use of the vendor or 
customer. It is optional and availability should be based 
on manufacturer discretion and applicable for vertical 
type bottle cooler only. 


3.4 Dry Type Self-Contained Bottle Cooler — 
Medium in the refrigerated storage space. One which 
uses air, rather than water, as the cooling. 


3.5 Vapour Compression Cycle — А refrigeration 
cycle in which a volatile liquid absorbs heat, evaporates 
and is compressed to a higher pressure and temperature 
to return to its liquid state again, by surrendering heat 
at a higher temperature and pressure. 


3.6 The Average Cabinet Air Temperatures — 
The average air temperature taken by means of the 
thermocouples or thermometers located at places in the 
cabinet as shown in Annex A . 


3.7 Cycles Per 24 Hours — A Cycle in the operation of 
a bottle cooler is the period during which a compressor 
goes through the steps of starting, running, stopping 
and starting again. Cycles per day can be determined by 
dividing the number of complete cycles by the elapsed 
time in hours and multiplying the result by 24. 


3.8 Percentage Running Time — The percentage 
running time, under given conditions of ambient 
temperatures and of mean internal temperature, is the 
ratio: 


к= 45 100 
гр 
Where, 


d = duration of compressor operation during a full 
number of cycles, and 


D = total duration of the cycles. 


IS 2167 : 2019 


3.9 Overall Dimensions — Measurement ofthe outside 
rectangular dimensions over the horizontal base within 
which the bottle cooler including the accessories other 
than bottle opener and handle are inscribed. 


3.10 Gross Volume — Total volume contained within 
interior walls of the cabinet with the door closed and 
determined by the method given in 5.3. 


3.11 Storage Volume — The total volume contained 
inside the cabinet for storage of bottles. This will be 
equal to the gross volume minus volume of internal 
fittings as described in 5.4. 


3.12 Bottle Storage Capacity — The total number of 
standard 300 ml and 600 ml beverage bottles that can 
be loaded inside the cabinet. 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


4.1 General Design 


The cabinet and their parts shall be constructed with 
strength and rigidity adequate to withstand normal 
conditions of handling, transport and usage. Where 
an internal light is fitted, the lamp shall be effectively 
protected from mechanical damage but shall be 
accessible without excessive dismantling. There 
shall be no sharp edges or corners liable to cause 
injury to the user in the normal conditions of use. 
The door of the cooler should be constructed based 
on the temperatures required for the specific market 
in which the cooler will be placed. For example, two 
panes of glass may be necessary for use in normal 
and high ambient environmental conditions and three 
panes of glass may be necessary in very high ambient 
and extra high ambient environmental conditions. 
Tempered glass should be used when required by 
local safety regulations. To prevent condensation and 
minimize heat gain, consideration should be given to 
energy saving features such as glass panes with low E 
coatings, gaps between panes filled with argon gas, or 
panes hermetically sealed and thermally insulated from 
metal frame surfaces. High altitude should not affect 
the hermetic seal. If an anti-sweat device is being used, 
consideration should be given to use of hot air instead 
of an electric heating element. Considerations should 
be given for making the weight of doors as light as 
possible to allow easy opening and to including self- 
closing features for closing after use. Built-in door 
blocks should be incorporated especially on double- 
door and triple-door units with sliding doors to prevent 
the door closing during cooler loading. Hinges and 
breaker plates on all coolers must be designed to 
handle rough treatment without becoming damaged. 
The door material should also be able to withstand 
temperatures up to 65.60 (150°F). Swing doors should 
be fitted with safe and sturdy door handles preferably 
installed by the manufacturer; recessed door handles 
are recommended. In some markets, integrated door 


locks and interchangeable right and left hinges may 
be requested as standard items. Coolers should not be 
unstable due to top heaviness and must remain stable 
when placed on uneven surfaces. Leveling legs should 
be included to ensure stability. 


4.2 Materials 


Materials used in the construction of the cabinet shall 
comply with Indian Standards wherever applicable, 
except where such requirements are modified by this 
standard. They shall be free from defects which are 
liable to cause undue deterioration or failure. Under 
normal conditions of use, the materials used shall not 
shrink, warp or cause odour and shall be resistant to 
attack by local vermins and destructive pests. Sealing 
materials used shall not become lose in service any 
of their essential properties, such as adhesiveness, 
plasticity and moisture resistance, due to ageing, 
temperature and humidity variations. 


4.3 Finish 


The interior and exterior finish shall be durable and 
capable of being cleared effectively and hygienically 
without undue deterioration. All metal parts used inside 
or outside the cooler which are exposed to moisture 
or ambient conditions shall be corrosion resistant or 
adequately protected against corrosion under normal 
condition and usage. 


4.4 Thermal Insulation 


The quality, thickness and application of the insulating 
material shall be such as to maintain the required 
temperature inside the cabinet. There shall be proper 
seals against moisture penetration by diffusion or 
condensation. Detachable plates and covers in the 
cabinet shall be provided with suitable seals to prevent 
ingress of moisture into the insulation. External surfaces 
of the cabinet shall be free from moisture condensation 
under normal conditions of service. 


4.5 Fittings 


Linings and facing shall have sufficient mechanical 
strength to resist distortion and give reasonable 
protection to the insulation. When the lids of the 
refrigerated space are closed, there shall be no leakage 
of external air into the cabinet either past the lid gaskets 
or by any other means. 


4.6 Power Characteristics 


Coolers shall be designed with power characteristics 
suitable for the country in which they will be used. 
Because of wide voltage fluctuations in some 
international markets, it that electrical equipment be 
able to operate within +10 percent of the minimum 
rated voltage without component failure or producing 
a hazardous situation. Coolers must have overload 
protection to avoid damage caused by voltage 
fluctuations. 


4.7 Hardware 


Lid fasteners and hinges shall be smooth and positive 
in action and designed to maintain their proper function 
without undue wear under normal conditions of service. 
Screws and all other hardware shall be of corrosion 
resisting material. 


4.8 Refrigeration System 


4.8.1 Construction 


The pipes and connections to moving or resiliently 
mounted parts shall be arranged so as not to foul with 
or transmit vibration to other parts. The pipes and 
connections shall be securely fixed and should be of 
sufficient length to minimize the risk of failure due 
to vibration. The refrigerating system shall not have 
distinct nuisance noise in the normal running operation 
and should not transmit vibration to adjoining portions 
of the surroundings. Where necessary pipes and valves 
shall be properly insulated. 


4.8.2 Safety Features in Design 


The refrigerating system shall be assembled in 
accordance with good engineering practice. The 
refrigerating system shall be so designed that it 
will suffer no damage if the lid of the cabinet is left 
open accidently for a short duration in ambient air of 
the specified temperature. During this period motor 
overload protective device may come into operation. 


4.8.3 Control of Operations 


Refrigerant flow and compressor motors shall 
be automatically controlled to reduce the cabinet 
temperature to the temperature specified and to 
maintain it within the limits of applications. Suitable 
strainer shall always be provided in the liquid line. 


4.8.4 Location of Components 


The evaporator, screen and shelves shall not obstruct 
access to the stored bottles. All control devices and 
service valves shall be readily accessible. 


4.8.5 Strength of Pressure Parts 


The parts of the refrigerating circuit subjected to 
internal pressure shall be designed to withstand without 
permanent deformation and leakage pressure given in 
Table 1. 


4.8.6 Cabinet Insulation 


The insulating materials and refrigerant must be free 
of CFC. All foams and refrigerants must be safe, 
technically and economically viable, and in compliance 
with all local guidelines and regulations governing the 
use of refrigerants and insulation. 


4.9 Electrical Components 


4.9.1 All ratings shall be based on either 230 V in the 
case of single phase supply and 415 V in the case of 


IS 2167 : 2019 


three phase supply. The unit, however, shall be capable 
of working at any voltage within +10 percent of the 
rated voltage. 


Table 1 Test Pressure 


( Clause 4.8.5 ) 

SI Refrigerant Composition Pressure 
No. (Gauge) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) R-134a CH,FCF, 20 bar 

ii) R-404a CHF,CF,, 30 bar 


CH,CF,, СН,ЕСЕ, 


For companies using natural refrigerants like hydrocarbons 
adequate care should be taken to confine the charge quantity 
below lower flammability limit. 


NOTE — When a system is such that its low side pressure cannot 
by reasons of its design, go beyond a maximum pressure of P 


ш? 


the test pressure shall be Р, x 13 provided such pressure does not 
exceed that shown in table. 


4.9.2 Electric Motors 


Electric motors for hermetically sealed compressors 
shall be so constructed that the constant pressure of oil 
and refrigerant under working pressure and temperature 
has no adverse effect on the insulation material and 
windings. 


4.9.3 Compressor Motor Overload Protector 


The compressor motor shall be connected through a 
current and temperature sensitive protecting device 
which is capable of automatically disconnecting the 
motor from the line in case the motor is electrically or 
thermally overloaded either during starting or running. 


4.9.4 Electrical Contacts 


Electrical contacts in relays and thermostats should 
be of snap action type and shall he of ample capacity 
to easily handle the locked rotor current, that is, the 
continuous current taken by the motor when its rotor is 
mechanically locked so as to prevent its rotation. 


4.9.5 Flexible Cord 

Three-core cable conforming to IS 9968 (Part 1) or 
IS 694 of at least 1.5 m length shall be provided with 
each unit. A three-pin plug and starter, if required, shall 
be provided at the time of installation. 


4.9.6 Wiring 


Electrical wiring and connections shall conform to the 
requirement of IS 732 and also to the Indian Electricity 
Act, 1910 and /ndian Electricity Rules, 1956. АП 
electrical joints shall be electrically and mechanically 
secure. 


4.9.7 Accidental Contact 


Live parts shall be protected by suitable guards, shields 
or screens of adequate strength and durability to avoid 


IS 2167 : 2019 


the possibility of making inadvertent contact therewith 
during normal service conditions. 


4.9.8 Electrical Accessories 


АП internal electrical fittings, such as lamps, and 
switches, shall be provided with guards for protection 
against mechanical damage and shall be suitable 
for operation at the lowest air temperature likely to 
occur. Electrical accessories should be able to operate 
safely with in operating power and environment class 
mentioned on product. Care should be taken such that 
product should not have to be removed from the cooler 
to change lights 


4.9.9 Terminals 


The materials, design and proportions of all terminals 
shall be such that connections made shall not slacken or 
overheat under the normal conditions of use. Terminals 
shall be such that conductors connected thereto are 
rigidly and effectively clamped between metal surfaces. 
Terminal screws and nuts shall engage for at least two 
full turns. 


4.9.10 Temperature Sensing Controls 


The temperature sensing controls shall conform to 
IS/IEC 60730-2-9. 


4.9.11 Provision for Earthing 


The cabinet shall be provided with a suitable terminal 
for attaching the earth conductor and this terminal 
shall be in effective electrical contact with accessible 
metal parts during normal use or when any cover or 
casing, removable without the use of tools, has been 
removed and which is liable to become live in the case 
of breakdown of electrical insulation. 


The earth terminal shall be so designed that the 
pressure necessary to clamp the conductor shall not 
serve to secure any other component. The terminal 
shall be clearly and indelibly indicated by the symbol 
of protective earth as depicted in IS 302 (Part 1). 


4.9.12 Fan and Motor 


Condenser and evaporator fans and motor should be quiet 
when running and designed for long life, high efficiency, 
and low power consumption. Materials of construction 
should be durable and resistant to rust and moisture. 
Some markets may request a fan switch operated by the 
opening of the cooler door as a standard item 


5 MEASUREMENT OF BOTTLE COOLER 
STORAGE CAPACITY 


5.1 Accuracy of Measurement and Units 


Linear dimensions shall be measured to the nearest 
millimeter. Areas estimated shall be expressed in square 
decimeters. Volumes estimated shall be expressed in 
cubic decimeters or litres. 


5.2 Inside Dimensions of the Cabinet 
5.2.1 Front Access Type 
5.2.1.1 Inside depth 


This shall be the mean horizontal distance between the 
front door in close condition and the rear inside surface 
of the enclosed space of the cabinet. 


5.2.1.2 Inside width 


This shall be the mean horizontal distance between the 
inner surfaces of the side walls of the enclosed space. 


5.2.1.3 Inside height 


This shall be mean vertical distance between the inner 
surfaces of the floor and the ceiling of the enclosed 
space. 


5.2.2 Top Access Type 
5.22.1 Inside depth 


This shall be the mean horizontal distance between 
the inner wall of the front door in close condition and 
the rear inside surface of the enclosed space of the 
cabinet. 


5.2.2.2 Inside width 


This shall be the mean horizontal distance between the 
inner surface of the side walls of the enclosed space. 


5.2.2.3 Inside height 


This shall be the mean vertical distance between the 
inner surface of the floor and the lids. 


5.3 Gross Volume 


The gross volume of the bottle cooler shall be the 
product of inside depth, inside width and inside height 
as defined in 5.2.1 and 5.2.2. 


5.4 Storage Volume (Net Volume) 


The storage volume shall be the gross volume or sum 
of the gross volumes of individual compartments less 
the volumes of internal fittings fixed in the cabinet and 
the volumes of the shelves and partitions essential for 
the proper operation of the cabinet, provided each part 
is more than 0.25 litre. 


5.5 Volume of Shelves, Partitions and Internal 
Fittings 

The volume of a shelf, partition or internal fitting shall 
be the product of its area and thickness. The area of a 
shelf shall be the product of its width and depth. Where 
part of the shelf is cut away, the area of the cut-out 
shelf shall be deducted. Where the edge of the shelf 
is not more than 25 mm from the cabinet lining, the 
shell shall be considered as extending to the lining for 
the purpose of calculating shelf area. Where there is an 
access door in a wall of the cabinet the inner surface of 


the door shall be considered as being the inner surface 
of the lining. 


5.5.1 The thickness of the shelves and partitions shall 
be the distance between the outer surface excluding the 
edges, where those are reinforced (see Fig. 1). Where 
surfaces are corrugated or fitted with pipe grids, the 
plane through the apices of the corrugations or pipes 
shall be used for calculating volumes except that 
where the door distance between adjacent corrugations 
or pipes is greater than 100 mm the surface itself 
shall be used and a volume shall be deducted for each 
corrugation or pipe equal to the product of the width, 
the distance from the surface to the outside of the 
corrugation or pipe and the length of the corrugation 
of pipe. 


THICKNESS 


Fic. 1 THICKNESS OF SHELVES 


5.6 Full Partitions 


The volume of a full partition is the product of its 
thickness, depth and width or height. This depth, 
width and height are those dimensions of the cabinet 
applicable in the place of partition. 


5.7 Fractional Partitions 


The volume of a permanently fixed fractional partition 
is the product of its thickness, depth and width or height 
whichever of these two is applicable. The depth, width 
or height are the distances normal to the lining from 
adjacent surfaces to the further edges of, the partitions 
or to the evaporator in case the fractional partition 
touches it. A horizontal partition the edges of which 
are more than 70 mm from the lining of the cabinet is 
regarded as fractional partition. A vertical partition, the 
edges of which are more than 100 mm from the lining 
of the cabinet, is regarded as a fractional partition. 


5.8 Rated Gross Volume 


This shall be the gross volume as declared by the 
manufacturer in cubic decimeters or litres. The 
measured gross volume as described in 5.3 shall not be 
less than the rated gross volume by more than 5 percent. 


5.9 Rated Storage Volume 


This shall be the storage volume as declared by the 
manufacturer in cubic decimeters or litres. The measure 
storage (net) volume as described in 5.4 shall not be less 
than the rated storage volume by more than 5 percent. 


5.10 Rated Bottle Storage Capacity 


This shall be the storage capacity as declared by the 
manufacturer in terms of number of standard 650 ml 


IS 2167 : 2019 


beverage bottles. The actual bottle storage capacity 
shall not be less than rated bottle storage capacity by 
more than 5 percent. 


6 TESTS 


6.1 Type Tests 
The following shall constitute the type test: 
a) Thermal insulation test; 
b) Insulation resistance test; 
c) High voltage test; 
d) No load performance test; 
e) Percentage running time test; 
f) Capacity rating test; and 
g) Maximum operating condition test. 


6.2 Production Routine Tests 


Every bottle coolers, after completion shall be subjected 
to the following routine tests: 


a) Insulation resistance test, 
b) Performance test, and 
c) High voltage test. 


6.3 Preparation and Test Conditions for Type Tests 


6.3.1 Each specimen tested shall be selected from 
stock or routine factory production, and shall be 
representative of construction and adjustments. 


6.3.2 The bottle cooler with all panels and lids in place, 
shall be tested in a room in which the temperature can 
be controlled. Panels and lids should remain in place 
throughout the entire test. 


6.3.3 Bottle coolers shall be operated until stable 
operating conditions are reached. The stable conditions 
are deemed to have reached when during a time of 2 h 
the average cabinet air temperature does not vary by 
more than 0.5?C. 


6.3.4 The bottle cooler being tested shall be located 
in a room so that its temperature is not affected by 
direct radiation to or from external cooling or heating 
equipment. The air circulation in the room shall be such 
that the specified uniformity of ambient temperature is 
obtained without direct draft upon the bottle cooler 
under test. 


6.3.5 The fan motor and compressor shall be so 
connected as to facilitate measurement of the power 
input. When tested under actual working conditions the 
fan motor should conform to the requirements specified 
in IS 996. 


6.3.6 For the test during which the bottle cooler will 
be in operation, electric power supply shall not vary by 
more than 2 percent of the rated voltage. 


IS 2167 : 2019 


6.3.7 Bottles shall be filled with either beverage liquid 
or water. Alternatively suitable brine solution may be 
used if there is any likelihood of temperature falling to 
0?C or less. 


6.3.8 Bottle temperature shall be measured by 
thermocouple located approximately at the centre of 
the mass of the liquid in the bottle. Bottles shall be 
corked with provision for bringing the thermocouple 
leads out through the cork. 


6.3.9 For determination of average bottle temperature, 
liquid temperature should be measured in bottles 
located at uniformly distributed points inside the 
cabinet, including measurement in top layers and one 
measurement in the bottom layer of bottles. Apart from 
these two locations, additional bottles should be based 
on approximately one bottle per 100 to 150 litres of 
storage volume. 


6.4 Instruments 
6.4.1 Temperature measurements shall be made with 
one or more of the following instruments: 

a) Mercury-in-glass thermometer; 

b) Alcohol-in-glass thermometer; 

c) Thermocouples; 

d) Electric resistance thermometers; or 

e) Electric resistance measurements instruments 


having accuracy 0.2 percent of the scale. 


6.4.1.1 Accuracy of measurement shall be within 
x0.5?C. 


6.4.2 Electrical measurements shall be made with 
indicating instruments. 


6.4.2.1 The accuracy of indicating instruments shall be 
within 1.5 percent of the full scale reading. 


6.4.3 The smallest division on the scale of any 
instrument shall not exceed twice the specified 
accuracy for it. 


6.5 Procedure for Type Tests 


6.5.1 Thermal Insulation Test (External Condensation 
Test) 


The bottle cooler cabinet shall be held with an average 
internal temperature between 4°C to 8°C under 
ambient temperature of 32 + 1°C. it Shall be considered 
satisfactory if when the relative humidity of the 
ambient air is held between 60 to 75 percent condensed 
moisture is not visible on the Outer surface of the bottle 
cooler to the unaided eye of a trained observer during a 
period of time lasting for 12 h after the test conditions 
have become stable. 


6.5.2 Insulation Resistance Test 


The insulation resistance between all electric circuits 
included in the bottle coolers, and earthed metal parts, 
when measured at normal room temperatures with a 
voltage of 500 V d.c., shall not be less than 1 MQ at the 
end of the maximum operating condition test. This test 
should be repeated after high voltage test. 


6.5.3 High Voltage Test 


The electrical insulation of all electric circuits included 
in the bottle cooler shall be such as to withstand 
a high voltage test of 1 000 V rms applied for 2 s 
between alt electric circuits and all accessible metal 
parts (electrically connected together for this test) at 
normal room temperature. The test voltage shall be 
alternating, of approximately sine-wave form, and 
of any convenient frequency between 25 to 100 Hz. 
This test should be in accordance with IS 302 (Part 1) 
clause 13.3. 


6.5.4 No-load Performance Test 


With the bottle cooler working under no-load and with 
the thermostat terminals short-circuited, at ambient 
temperature of 35 + 2°C, the time required to pull down 
the average cabinet air temperature from 35 + 2°C to 
4°C shall not exceed 3 h. 


6.5.5 Power Consumption Test and Percentage Running 
Test 


For this test, the cabinet shall be tested on no-load, 
with lids closed and the thermostat set for maximum 
cooling. The duration of the test will be 12 h at an 
ambient temperature of 35 + 2 °C. Power consumption 
and percentage running time will be taken as average of 
three successive runs in the later half of this period. It 
should not exceed the value stated by the manufacturer 
by more than 5 percent. 


6.5.6 Capacity Rating Test 


This test should immediately follow percentage 
running time without switching off the unit. In case, 
this is not possible then the unit should run on no- 
load for a minimum period of 3 h under prevailing 
ambient conditions before the start of this test. During 
the entire test period, the ambient temperature should 
be maintained at 35 + 2°C and thermostat should be 
set for maximum cooling. Unit should be loaded with 
specified number of standard 650 ml bottles at an initial 
temperature of 35 + 2°C. Rate of loading of bottles 
should not be less than 10 bottles per minute. Once 
the loading is over, lids should be properly closed. 
The test duration starts from the moment the lids are 
closed. Bottle temperatures should be recorded every 
30 min for specified pull down period which shall not 
exceed 12 h. Average temperature of bottles at the 
end of specified pull down period shall not be greater 


than 5?C, and the maximum bottle temperature shall 
not exceed 8?C. 


6.5.7 Maximum Operating Conditions Test 


This test should immediately follow capacity rating 
test without switching off the unit. In case this is not 
possible the unit should run on no-load for a minimum 
of 3 h under prevailing ambient conditions before 
the start of this test. During the entire test period the 
ambient temperature should be maintained at 43 + 2°C 
and the thermostat should be set for maximum cooling. 
Unit should be loaded with specified number of 
standard 650 ml bottles at an initial temperature of 35 + 
2°C. Rate of loading of bottles should not be less than 
10 bottles per minute. Once the loading is over, lids 
should be properly closed. The test duration starts from 
the moment the lids are closed. Bottle temperatures 
should be recorded every 30 min for specified pull 
down period which shall not exceed 18 h. Average 
temperature of bottles at the end of specified pull down 
period shall not be greater than 5?C, and the maximum 
bottle temperature shall not exceed 8?C. 


NOTE — Unit may trip on overload protector during initial 
stage of the test. This should be considered as permissible. 


6.5.8 The type test report shall also contain the 
following identification data: 

a) Name-plate data of bottle cooler; 

b) Name-plate data of compressor; and 

c) Name-plate data of fan motor. 


6.6 Procedure for Production Routine Tests 


6.6.1 Insulation Resistance Test 


Electrical insulation test shall be carried out at 500 V 
dc, given in 6.5.2 at the end of performance test. 


6.6.2 Performance Test 


This test should be carried out with thermostat short- 
circuited externally (or thermostat bulb pulled out 
from its housing) under prevailing ambient condition 
provided ambient temperature is not less than 25?C. 
In case ambient is less than 25?C the provision of 
suitable heating arrangement should be incorporated 
in the test area to create higher ambient temperature. 
Measurement shall be made of the following and the 
performance figure shall be compared with the unit 
which has already passed the type test: 


a) Ambient temperature; 

b) Initial average cabinet temperature on no-load; 

с) Average cabinet temperature at the end of specified 
pull-down period; 

d) Current; and 

е) Voltage. 


Duration of the test should not exceed 3 h. During 
this test a single thermometer may be used to measure 


IS 2167 : 2019 


cabinet temperature, with its bulb at least 150 mm from 
any walls or bottom. 


After pull down, the machine should be continued to 
run with thermostat adjusted for minimum specified 
temperature for a period of at least 3 h. During this 
period operation of the unit should be satisfactory and 
thermostat should operate correctly. 

NOTE — Minimum specified cabinet temperature should not 


be greater than 4°C when operating at an ambient temperature 
of 35 + 2?C. 


6.6.3 High VoltageTtest 


The electrical insulation of all electric circuits included 
in the bottle cooler shall be such as to withstand 
a high voltage test of 1 000 V rms applied for 2 s 
between the electric circuits and all accessible metal 
parts (electrically connected together for this test) at 
normal room temperature. The test voltage shall be 
alternating of approximately sine-wave form, and of 
any convenient frequency between 25 and 100 Hz. 


6.6.4 Earthing Test 


A current of 1.5 times the rated current, but not less 
than 25 amperes derived from ac source with a no- 
load voltage not exceeding 12 V is passed between 
the earthing terminal or earthing contact and each of 
the accessible metal parts in turn. The voltage drop 
between the earthing teminal or earthing contact of the 
cabinet and the accessible metal parts is measured and 
the resistance calculated from the current and voltage 
drop. The resistance of the flexible cord is not included 
in the resistance measurement. In no case shall the 
resistance exceed 0.1 ohm when tested as per IS 302 
(Part 1). 


7 MARKING AND INFORMATION 


7.1 Each bottle cooler shall have the following 
information marked in a permanent and legible manner 
in a location where it is easily accessible and easily 
visible after installation: 


a) Name-plate data of bottle cooler including make, 
model and serial number of the unit and the name 
and quantity of refrigerant; 


b) Supply characteristics (230 V, 50 Hz); 

с) Capacity in terms of liters of storage volume; 
d) Wiring diagram; 

€) Full load current; 


f) Input Power supply 
frequency/ phase); and 


requirement — (voltage/ 


ഇ Operating environment RH 


percent and temperature). 


7.2 BIS Certification Marking 


(ambient class, 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 


IS 2167 : 2019 


assessment schemes under the provisions ofthe Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the standard mark 


8 USER MANUAL 


Each cooler should have an operation manual 
that clearly list operating instructions, directions 
for installation, the recommended maintenance 


schedule, cleaning instructions, a troubleshooting 
guide, a wiring diagram, and a complete parts list 
with an exploded view or assembly drawings of all 
major subassemblies. The manual and especially 
the installation and repair instructions should be 
written as simply and clearly as possible; inclusion 
of pictures and diagrams is highly encouraged. The 
manual should be provided in electronic format when 
possible. 


IS 2167 : 2019 


ANNEX A 


THER MOMETER LOCATIONS FOR TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS 


[ә] 


о 
NID 


ES 


| 5 к 
W(900 OR LESS) 


Fic. 2 REFRIGERATED WALL, ТОР ACCESS 


M 
H M 
Қ 
и 


NIE 


FiG. 3 REFRIGERATED WALLs, ToP AccEss Fic. 4 REFRIGERATED PLATES, ТОР ACCESS 


IS 2167 : 2019 


Fic. 5 REFRIGERATED SHELVES, FRONT ACCESS Fic. 6 REFRIGERATED WALLS, FRONT ACCESS 


10 


IS 2167 : 2019 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 
Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Blue Star Ltd., Mumbai 

Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurgaon 

Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 

Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 

Danfoss Industries Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon 

Electrical Research and Development Association, 


Vadodara 
Emerson Climate Technologies (India) Pvt. Ltd, 


Karad 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Co. Ltd., Mumbai 
Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
Indian Institute of Chemical Engg , Kolkata 
Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 
Ingersoll Rand, Bangalore 
International Copper Association India, Mumbai 
Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 
Refrigeration & Airconditioning Mfr Association, 


New Delhi 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Pnor (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


Suri G. К. PRASAD 
Suri J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMAL SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
Suri D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI А. R. Ravi KUMAR 
SHRI GUJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


Ms SwETA MAHAJAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
Suri K. L. МАСАНАКІ (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
Suri RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. Р. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


ӛнкі Burzin J. WADIA 
Suri Авнит A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dr Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr бию К. Das (Alternate) 


Dr JYOTIRMAY MATHUR 
Suri AsHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRI JEYAPRAKASH GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
Suri С. M. РАтнАК (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV KOCHHAR 
Suri S. T. HAQUE FARIDI (Alternate) 


Suri D. К. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. К. Jua (Alternate) 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri К. K. МЕНТА (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


11 


IS 2167 : 2019 


Organization 


Spirotech Heat Exchanger Pvt Ltd., Bhiwadi 


SRF Ltd 
The Chemours India Pvt Ltd., Gurgaon 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 
Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer 
Voice, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (H. No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase -1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SUNIL BHARDWAJ 
ӛнкі DwiesH GAUTAM (Alternate) 
SHRI RABINDEER N. KAUL 


SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
ӛнкі Мізніт SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. CHIDAMBARAM 
SHRI GIRISH SETHI (Alternate) 


Suri V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI RITESH SINGH 
Suri А. D. Комвнак (Alternate) 


ӛнкі Н. WADHWA 
Suri В. К. MuknorApHva (Alternate) 


SHRI J. К. AGRAWAL 


Suni P. К. MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “Е” AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Ms Кнознво JYOTSNA KINDO 
бсікмтізт “В” (MED), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (1423). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern  : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


