TRATI HAF IS 16241 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


degHe e facesn iege 
UNE 


Realtime Radioscopic 
Examination of Weldments 


ICS 19.100 


O BIS 2018 


ARA AMA equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM YA, 9 ERRE SL Art, ae feeet-110002 
Ay MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 4 


Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive 
Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard covers the practices and the measuring systems for the display under recording of radioscopic 
images on a television monitor. 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from BS EN 13068-3 : 2001 “Non-destructive 
testing—Radioscopic testing — Part 3 General principles of radioscopic testing of metallic materials by X-and 
gamma rays’ and also from AERB Guide No SG/IN-1 ‘Radiological safety in enclosed radiography installations’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16241 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


REALTIME RADIOSCOPIC EXAMINATION OF 
WELDMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers a uniform procedure for real 
time radioscopic examination of weldments. This 
procedure describes practices and image quality 
measuring system for real-time, non-film detection, 
display and recording of radioscopic images. These 
images used in weld inspection are generated by 
ionizing radiation passing through the subject weld and 
producing an image on the imaging device, the image 
intensifier. This method applies only to the use of 
equipment for radioscopic examination in which the 
image is finally presented on a television monitor for, 
operator evaluation. 


1.2 The techniques described in this test method provide 
adequate assurance for defect detectability, however for 
special applications, specific techniques using more 
stringent requirements may be needed to provide 
additional detection capability. This procedure does not 
(suggest or) specify the radioscopic extent, the quality 
level and the acceptance criteria, which can be decided 
by the contracting parties by mutual agreement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
are indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


2953 : 1985 Glossary of terms used for 
interpretation of welds and casting 
radiographs (first revision) 

13805 : 2004 General standard for qualification 


and certification of non-destructive 
testing personal (first revision) 


3 EQUIPMENT 


3.1 System Configuration 


Many different radioscopic configurations are possible 
and it is important to understand the advantages and 
limitations of each. The minimum examination system 
configuration shall include an appropriate source of 
penetrating radiation, a means for positioning the test 
object within the radiation beam and a detection 


system. An electronic imaging system to display a 
bright, two-dimensional gray scale image of the test 
part at the operators control console. A digital image 
processing system to perform image enhancement and 
image evaluation functions. An archival quality image 
recording system. A radiation protective enclosure with 
appropriate safety interlocks and radiation warning 
system. 


3.2 Radiation Source 


Selection of the radiation source for a specific real- 
time inspection system depends upon the variables 
regarding the weld being examined, such as material 
composition and thickness and also the required rate 
of inspection. The suitability of the source shall be 
demonstrated by attainment of the required image 
quality. The radiation flux is a major consideration in 
the selection of the radiation source. For stationary or 
slow moving objects radiation sources with high 
outputs at continuous duty cycle are desired. Radiation 
sources can be X-rays or gamma rays. In general due 
to consideration for image quality with good contrast 
X-ray sources are widely used. X-ray sources are of 
following three different types. Conventional X-ray 
sources of focal spots size of above 1.0 mm, mini- focal 
sources of size 0.1-1 mm and micro-focus sources of 
size less than 0.1 mm: 


a) Detector unsharpness; 
b) Overall sensitivity required; and 
c) Geometric magnifications desired (see 4.2). 


3.2.1 Therefore the effect of raster orientation upon 
the radioscopic examination system’s ability to detect 
fine detail, regardless of orientation, must be taken in 
to account. 


3.2.2 Source Geometry 


The physical size of the source of radiation is a 
parameter that may vary considerably. One reason is 
the dominating unsharpness in the radiation detector. 
Conventional X-ray source with focal spots of 1.0 mm 
and larger are useful at low geometric magnification 
values close to 1X. Minifocal source focal spots from 
0.1—1.0 mm are useful for a geometrical magnification 
of 1.5 - 2X. Micro-focus X-ray sources of focal spot 
size less than 0.1 mm are useful for geometric 
magnification of above X2 with high sensitivity. Using 
micro-focus sources, the reduced focus to object 


IS 16241 : 2018 


distance (FOD), the geometrical unsharpness will 
increase. This effect shall be compensated with 
increased object to detector (ODD) distance so as to 
achieve higher geometric magnification and 
radiographic sensitivity. 


3.2.3 Diaphragms and Masks 


These are used to avoid brightness in areas outside the 
object, which improves contrast and avoids blooming 
of the camera. 


3.3 Imaging System 


An imaging system can be described as a device or 
sub-system that transforms an X-ray field into a prompt 
response optical or electronic signal. When X-ray 
photons pass through the weld, they are attenuated and 
as a result the character of the flux field in a cross- 
section of the X-ray beam is changed. Variations in 
photon flux density and energy are most commonly 
encountered. The analysis of this flux is used for 
detection of discontinuities in the weld and castings. 
The field of view of the imaging system, its resolution 
and the dynamic inspection speed are inter-related. The 
resolution of the detector is fixed by its physical 
characteristics, so if the X-ray image is projected upon 
its full size (the weld and its image planes in contact), 
the resultant resolution shall be approximately equal 
to that of the detector. When the detector resolution 
becomes the limiting factor, the weld may be moved 
away from the detector and towards the source to 
enlarge the projected image and thus allow details to 
be resolved by the same detector. As the image is 
magnified, however, the detail contrast is reduced and 
its outlines are less distinct. As a general rule, X-ray 
magnification should not exceed 2 X except when using 
micro-focus X-ray source. 


3.3.1 The inherent sensitivity of the imaging system 
may be defined as its ability to respond to small, local 
variations in the radiant flux to display the features of 
interest in the weld being examined. It would seem 
that a detector that can display density changes of the 
order of 1 to 2 percent at resolutions approaching that 
of radiography would satisfy all of the requirements 
for successful real-time radioscopic imaging. 


3.3.2 The selection of the appropriate imaging system 
is dependent upon variables such as the size of the weld 
being examined and the energy and intensity of the 
radiation used for the examination. The suitability of 
the imaging system shall be demonstrated by 
attainment of the required image quality. 


3.3.3 Image Intensifier 


This is the most commonly used imaging device for 
real-time radioscopy of weld and castings. An image 
intensifier is a vacuum tube device, suitably packed in 


a metal housing. The intensifier comprises a photo- 
cathode input, which is a coating of multi-alkali or 
semiconductor layers on the inside of the input window, 
and a phosphor screen, which is a fluorescing phosphor 
coating on the inside of the output window. A portion 
of the incident photons striking the photo-cathode 
causes the release of electrons via the photoelectric 
effect. In a small electric field between the photo 
cathode and the small output screen the emitted 
electrons are accelerated and focused through 
concentrically arranged electron lenses. These 
electrons strike the coating and cause it to release light. 
This released light consists of many photons for every 
incident electron striking the photo-cathode surface. 
As aresult of this acceleration and electro optical linear 
image reduction, the electrons produce diminished 
image with enhanced brightness on the fluorescent 
output screen, typically 10 000 or more times brighter 
than that found on the input phosphor. The basic lens 
converts the divergent light of the output screen into 
parallel light. The output end of the tube is normally 
designed to be optically coupled to a CCTV for readout. 


3.3.4 Apart from image intensifiers, X-ray sensitive 
vidicons shall be used for real time radioscopy 
applications. These vidicons have higher spatial 
resolution. In addition to this, flat panel digital array 
detectors can also be used when better defect sensitivity 
and resolution is required. 


4 IMAGE DISPLAY AND PROCESSING 


4.1 The X-ray image converted to light image by the 
image intensifier is picked up by a CCTV camera, is 
amplified and displayed on a TV monitor. This is a 
raw image in analog form and is of poor quality since 
it contains noise. In order to eliminate the noise and to 
enhance the contrast and definition, it is essential to 
convert the image to digital format so that the data can 
be displayed, processed, quantified, stored, retrieved 
and converted back to the original analog format for 
video presentation. The digital image examination data 
shall be recorded and stored in videotape, magnetic 
disc or optical disc. 


4.2 When employing a television image presentation, 
vertical and horizontal resolution are often not the 
same. Therefore the effect of raster orientation upon 
the radioscopic examination system’s ability to detect 
fine detail, regardless of orientation, must be taken into 
account. 


4.3 The system shall, as a minimum include the 
following: 

a) Digitizing system, 

b) Display system, 

c) Image processing system, and 


d) Image storage system. 


5 PROCEDURE OF TESTING 


5.1 Time of Examination 


Unless otherwise specified by the applicable contract, 
the real time radioscopic examination of the weld 
should be performed after heat treatment. 


5.2 Surface Preparation 


Unless otherwise agreed upon, remove the weld bead 
ripple or weld surface irregularities on both the inside 
and outside by any suitable process so that the image 
of the irregularities cannot mask the image of any 
discontinuity. 


5.3 Radioscopic Techniques 
5.3.1 Single Wall Technique 


As far as possible perform radioscopy of the weld using 
a technique in which the radiation passes through only 
one wall. 


5.3.2 Double Wall Technique 


For circumferential welds 90 mm outside diameter or 
less, use a technique in which the radiation passes 
through both walls and both walls are viewed for 
acceptance on the same image. Unless otherwise 
specified, either elliptical or superimposed projections 
may be used. A sufficient number of views should be 
taken to examine the entire weld where design or access 
restricts a practical technique from examining the entire 
weld, the agreement between contracting parties must 
specify necessary weld coverage. 


5.3.3 For circumferential welds greater than 90 mm 
outside diameter use a technique in which only single 
wall viewing is performed. A sufficient number of 
views should be taken to examine the entire weld where 
design or access restricts a practical technique from 
examining the entire weld, agreement between 
contracting parties must specify necessary weld 
coverage. 


5.4 Geometric Unsharpness 


When performing real time radioscopic systems (RTR), 
the geometric unsharpness (see Fig. 1) of the inspection 
setup needs to be taken into consideration, especially 
when using geometric magnification. The size of the 
X-ray tube focal-spot and the magnification factors, 
namely the source-to-specimen and specimen-to- 
detector distances, are used to calculate the geometric 
unsharpness of the inspection setup. In general, the 
allowable geometric unsharpness limit is 1/100 of the 
material thickness up to a maximum of 1 mm (0.040 
inch) (see Annex A). 


5.5 Radioscopic Coverage 


Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser and 


IS 16241 : 2018 


supplier agreement, the extent of radioscopic coverage 
shall include 100 percent of the volume of the weld 
and adjacent base metal. 


5.6 Examination Speed 


For dynamic examination, the speed of the object 
motion relative to the radiation source and detector 
shall be controlled to ensure that the required 
radioscopic quality level is achieved. 


5.7 Image Identification 


A system shall be provided for positive identification 
of the image. As a minimum, the following shall appear 
on the image: 


The name or symbol of the company performing 
radioscopy, the date and the weld identification number 
traceable to part and contract. Identify subsequent 
images made of a repaired area with the letter ‘R’. 


5.8 Location Markers 


The location marker should be placed on the source 
side until and unless specified. Place location markers 
outside the weld area. The radioscopic image of the 
location markers for identification of part location with 
the images shall appear on the image without 
interfering with the interpretation and with such an 
arrangement that the complete coverage is obtained. 
For welds that require a series of images, to cover the 
full length or circumference of the weld, apply the 
complete set of location markers at one time, wherever 
possible. A reference or zero position for each series 
must be identified on the component. When using a 
double wall technique only one location marker is 
required in the image. 


6 RADIOSCOPIC IMAGE QUALITY 


The same principles apply for real time systems as for 
film radiography. Image quality is governed by two 
factors, image contrast and resolution. Since most real 
time systems are resolution limited a great emphasis is 
placed on devices that measure resolution. Therefore, 
many systems require several devices such as (Image 
Quality Indicator), IQIs and wire mesh to assure the 
proper image quality. 


6.1 Image Quality level 


Radioscopic quality level shall be determined upon 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier and 
shall be specified in the contract. Radioscopic quality 
shall be specified in terms of equivalent penetrameter 
(IQI) sensitivity and shall be measured using IQI. The 
images of conventional IQI are largely dependent on 
contrast and are not much affected by change in 
unsharpness, so that it is still possible with an RTR 


IS 16241 : 2018 


system to obtain a very good IQI sensitivity value. 
However, the ability to show small planar flaws such 
as cracks depends on having a small unsharpness as 
well as a good contrast. Hence for applications such 
as weld inspection, it is recommended to assess the 
effective unsharpness with duplex wire indicator in 
addition to IQI sensitivity. IQI selection table may be 
incorporated as annexure. 


6.2 Image Quality Indicator (IQI) Selection 


Performance measurement using IQI shall be in 
accordance with the accepted industry standards 
describing the use of IQIs. For selection of the image 
quality indicator, the thickness on which the image 
quality indicator is based on the single wall thickness 
plus the lesser of the actual or allowable reinforcement. 
For any thickness an image quality indicator acceptable 
for thinner materials may be used, provided all other 
requirements for radioscopy are met. 


6.3 Placement of IQI 


Place the IQI on the source side adjacent to the weld 
being examined; where the weld metal is not 
radioscopically similar to the base material or where 
geometry precludes placement adjacent to the weld, 
place the IQI over the weld. In those cases where the 
physical placement of the image quality indicators on 
the source side is not possible, place the IQI on detector 
side. In case of small radioscopic field of view or other 
situations where it is not practical to place the IQI in 
the field of view with the test object and maintain it 
normal to the X-ray beam, the IQI may be imaged 
immediately before and after the test object 
examination. 


6.4 Number of IQIs 


Place at least one IQI in the area of interest representing 
an area in which the brightness is relatively uniform. 
If the image brightness in an area of interest differs by 
more than the agreed amount between the purchaser 
and the supplier, use two IQIs. One of the IQI, to 
demonstrate acceptable image quality in the darkest 
portion of the image and the other one to demonstrate 
acceptable image quality in the lightest portion of the 
image. When a series of images are made under 
identical conditions, it is permissible for the image 
quality indicators to be used only on the first and last 
images in the series, provided this is agreed upon 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


6.5 Duplex Wire Image Quality Indicator 


For measuring image unsharpness, it is a particularly 
useful tool for establishing and monitoring the 
performance of real time radioscopic systems. This 
IQI consists of 13 wire pairs embedded in rigid plastic. 


The wires are of platinum and tungsten, and are 
exactly spaced to correspond to the diameter of each 
pair. The degree of unsharpness is indicated by the 
number of wire pairs that can be seen. As unsharpness 
increases, the wires merge to form a single image. 
Each IQI is engraved with a unique serial number 
and is supplied with a declaration of conformity 
together with instructions in a storage box. Annex B 
shows the picture of duplex wire type image quality 
indicator containing  unsharpness values 
corresponding to various wire diameters in the duplex 
wire. 


7 SYSTEM PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT 


7.1 Real time radioscopic system performance 
parameters shall be determined initially and monitored 
regularly with the system in operation to assure 
consistent results. The system performance shall be 
monitored at sufficiently scheduled intervals to 
minimize the probability of time-dependent 
performance variations. System performance tests 
require the use of the calibration block, line pair test 
pattern and step wedge. 


Also, for real time radioscopy of weldments with digital 
array type detectors, image unsharpness or also called 
as projected unsharpness (Um) (that is similar to total 
unsharpness (U,) in X-ray film radiography) shall be 
calculated from the following equation: 


= B (ug) +(1.65R, ' 
m 
where 
m = magnification, 
ug = geometric unsharpness, and 


SR, = basic spatial resolution. 


In the above equation, to determine the basic spatial 
resolution (SR,) of the X-ray detector, duplex wire 
without any absorbing material shall be used. SR, shall 
be calculated in a real time digital detector where the 
wire pair that can be seen in the image with minimum 
contrast modulation of 20 percent. 


7.2 Measurement With a Calibration Block 


The calibration block may be an actual test object with 
known features that are representative of the range of 
features to be detected, or may be fabricated to simulate 
the test object with a suitable range of test features. 
The calibration blocks containing known natural 
defects are useful in a single task basis. The calibration 
block should be made of the same material with the 
similar dimensions. It is permissible to produce 
calibration block in sections. Real time radioscopic 
technique utilised for the calibration block shall be 


identical to those used for the actual examination of 
the test object. 


7.3 Calibrated Line Pair Test Pattern and Step Wedge 


A calibrated line pair test pattern and step wedge shall 
be used to determine and track radioscopic system 
performance in terms of spatial resolution and contrast 
sensitivity. The line pair test pattern shall be used without 
an additional absorber to evaluate the system resolution. 
The step wedge shall be used to evaluate system contrast 
sensitivity. The step wedge must be made of the same 
material as the test object with steps representing 
100 percent, 99 percent, 98 percent, and 97 percent of 
both the thickest and thinnest material section to be 
inspected. Additional step thicknesses are permissible. 


7.4 The line pair test pattern and the step wedge tests 
shall be conducted in a manner similar to performance 
measurements for the IQI or the calibration block. It is 
permissible to adjust the X-ray energy and intensity to 
obtain a usable line pair test pattern image brightness. 
Contrast sensitivity shall be evaluated at the same 
energy and the intensity levels as are used for the 
radioscopic technique. 


7.5 A system that exhibits a spatial resolution of three 
line pairs/mm (lp/mm) a thin section contrast 
sensitivity of 3 percent, and a thick section contrast 
sensitivity of 2 percent may be said to have an 
equivalent performance level of 3 percent -2 percent 
- 3 Ip/mm. 


7.6 A written procedure is required and shall contain, 
as a minimum, the following system performance 
parameters: 


a) Image digitising parameters-modular transfer 
function (MTF), line pair resolution, contrast 
sensitivity and dynamic range; 

b) Image display parameters-format, contrast 
and magnification; 

c) Image processing parameters that are used; 


d) Storage-Identification, Data compression and 
media (including precautions to be taken to 
avoid data loss); and 


e) Analog output formats. 


8 EVALUATION 


The digital image shall be evaluated using appropriate 
monitor luminosity display techniques, room lighting 
to ensure proper visualisation of details. The quality 
of system performance is determined by the component 
specified in 6. The digital images shall be free of 
system induced artefacts in the area of interest that 
could mask or be confused with the image of any 
discontinuity. To assist in proper interpretation of the 
digital examination data, details of the technique used 
shall accompany the data. All mandatory radioscopic 
examination accept/reject decisions shall be based upon 


IS 16241 : 2018 


the assessment of static images. Dynamic or in-motion 
imaging may be used to gain useful information about 
the test object. However, the final assessment of image 
information shall be made in the static mode. 


9 STORAGE OF RADIOSCOPIC IMAGES 


The radioscopic images can be recorded and stored on 
videotape, magnetic disc, optical disc, Electronic 
Digital Memory such as ROM (Read Only Memory) 
or EPROM (Erasable Programmable Read Only 
Memory). The digital recording on magnetic disc to 
store the image of the test object are characterised by 
limited storage capacity at video frame rates, therefore 
limiting the ability to capture the test part motion in 
dynamic radioscopic systems. Digital recording on 
optical disc used to store the image of the test object 
digitally; offers larger storage capacity than magnetic 
disc or tape. 


When storage is required by the contract, the images 
should be stored in a format stipulated by the applicable 
contract or the agreement between the purchaser and 
the supplier. The image storage duration and location 
shall be agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 


10 PERSONNEL QUALIFICATION 


NDT personnel performing the test shall be qualified 
to Level I / Level II in accordance with IS 13805. 


11 RADIATION SAFETY 


Radiation safety of the personnel working with the 
radioscopy system as well for other non-occupational 
workers shall be ensured as per the guidelines given 
in the AERB guide SG/IN-1. 


12 RECORDS 


The following radiographic records shall be maintained 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier: 


a) Radioscopic standard shooting sketch, 
including examination geometry, source 
to-object distance, object-to-detector distance 
and orientation; 

b) Material and thickness range examined; 

c) Equipment used, including specification of 
source parameters (such as voltage, current, 
focal spot size) and imaging equipment 
parameters (such as detector size, field of 
view, electronic magnification, camera black 
level, gain, etc) and display parameters; 

d) Image quality indicator placement; 

e) Image processing parameters; 

f) Image storage data; 

g) Weld repair documentation; and 


h) Performa for reporting ‘Welding radiographic 
examination instruction sheet' (see Annex C). 


IS 16241 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.4) 
GEOMETRIC UNSHARPNESS 


(FDD- FOD) 


Geometric Sharpness = d. 
pness (p) TOD 


or 


with d being focal spot. 


FDO 


FDD 


PENUMARA 


SOURCE FOCAL SPOT 


DETECTOR 


where 


ug = geometrical unsharpness, 
FDD = focal spot to detector distance, 
FOD = focal spot to object distance, and 
M = them magnification factor = FDD / FOD. 
(For FDD = FOD, M becomes 1) 
Fic. 1 CONCEPT OF GEOMETRIC UNSHARPNESS 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.5) 
DUPLEX WIRE UNSHARPNESS INDICATOR 


IS 16241 : 2018 


B-1 Figure 2 shows the duplex wire type along with element No. wire diameter and spacing unsharpness. 


6mm 


2mm | 


TMM 


SPACING OF 5mm | SPACING OF 4 mm SPACING OF 3-5 mm 


LOAD IDENTIFICATIO|N WIRE DIAMETER(d)EQUAL 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


TUNGS TAN WIRE A TIN WIRE ooo o o ATINUM WIRE 


70 mm 


1mm 
RIGID PLASTIC MOUNTING 


( INTERNAL ) SPACING BETWEEN WIRE Lam 

(D = Duplex) Unsharpness Wire Diameter and Spacing 
13d 0.10 0.050 
12d 0.13 0.063 
lld 0.16 0.080 
10d 0.20 0.100 
9d 0.26 0.130 
8d 0.32 0.160 
7d 0.40 0.200 
6d 0.50 0.250 
Sd 0.64 0.320 
4d 0.80 0.400 
3d 1.00 0.500 
2d 1.26 0.630 
1d 1.60 0.800 


Fic. 2 DuPLeEx WIRE TYPE IMAGE QUALITY INDICATOR 


IS 16241 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
[Clause 12(h)] 
WELDING RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION INSTRUCTION SHEET 
Dale 4 x E ete Revision level ........................ esee 


Purchaser oPradioscople:ServiGes.. i m etre rettet ren SE e NEAR a o e APA TER ERE GUAE naa E YE ene a 
Supplier of radioscOpi€ Services... tege et a te dore re d e e d Pop eh ot da Hd 
Radioscopic shooting sketch provided by .........cecesesseeseesseeseeeseeeseeseeesecscecseeesecscceseeeaecceeaeeesecseeesecaeceesseeeaecaeeaseaerses 
Date of shooting Sketch preparan... tete Steg esie a vases e FARE AAA Ape EX Ve ERN Ee SERV R E xr eeu edes 
Entity performing: radioscopy «te eh eee A de ee ei t e ee 
Welding information: om ede o ERU RA PER toa insano 
Drawing number EP id idiota ias 
Identification number AAA do e e ret e He a EAE eN lee pde eee ib dat 
Desctriptive;name:s. uii err e AERE ERE ERE Fu EE er PRAES: 
Material type-and SpeCifICatOn;..: uice racc be led 
lei D ————— 
Pattern number... ger p I RR I IO RE RR RR OH B Lie ent 
Welding condition when radioscopy is performed .....................sesssessssesessseeeeseeeeee eene enne enne enne nennen tenni 
Method for determining image quality ...................... esee iaer iee eiia e tns enn streets tenens enne 
Radioscopic location 1 2 3 4 
Single-Wallthickness /— inanssueese5eees Crit C aaen Ru ers tad 
finished thickness. ——— sede T esp eee en duse A Y RENE. aa 
Doüble-Wallthickness:. miis. dp A HEIC URGES PEN 
finisheditlicknesS- | amena. das ss liada, c dU RARUS 

IOL. ar  Chesdesessu id duet en 
Required SENSITIVITY ——— ati. ai a iia 
Calibration block. ^ assssnesseseses eun auae c c uen b UI RR. | oderint teda 
Required.fealuié-- —— — rra a eie e e nume, ded ener ee EEP 
Actualtestpart wives a A ONE RENE asian TERES ERN 
Required feature.- ——— - noce eveee cc E EEEa T Cervera. CRISE titel 
Required features Catia ew qu eee Re ia dt 
X-ray KV'rangeQr- mitin ao a, Wie b dediti 

radioisotope Energy 
X-Ray mA ange Ob. — ii cuu IRURE a ia 
radioisotope energy 

Bocalspots1286- smart Catas C DARREN RE. tl 
Maenificationsmode:, inn Dres Ge A SEARE EIES DAREA SEa PIER 
sSource-detectordist. iria ei ia. abi 
Objectedetectordist: seminario  cteasesc idees llei in 
Accept Rejectstd.. sumado: biota. Cip aiina napaasa — due dap 


Sëverity level č 1 xXasogheereue Cia pus) paa. ad 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (5036). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Published by BIS, New Delhi 


