NAT AWA IS 1904 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


War À lai & fëstrg+ atk 
Frater & feu 
amma agar — ofa afeat 
( RA Te ) 


General Requirements for Design 
and Construction of Foundations 
in Soils — Code of Practice 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2021 Price Group 7 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Series of Indian Standards on design and construction of various types of foundations (shallow, deep and special 
types) have been formulated covering their specific requirements. Many of the requirements for designing of such 
foundations are common for all types of foundations. In order that these general requirements are not repeated in 
each of such Indian Standards, this basic standard covering such general requirements has been formulated. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1961 and subsequently revised in 1966, 1978 and 1986. The standard 
till its third version covered requirements for shallow foundations. Considering that subsequent to its second 
revision, various new Indian Standards covering design and construction of various types of foundations had been 
formulated, the standard was again revised so as to cover the general requirements for design and construction 
not only for shallow foundation but also for all other types of foundations. Opportunity was utilized to transfer to 
this standard, the general requirements covered in IS 1080 : 1985 ‘Code of practice for design and construction 
of shallow foundations in soils (other than raft, ring and shell) (second revision)’, which was also revised 
simultaneously, so that it covers only the specific requirements applicable to design and construction of shallow 
foundations. This revision of the standard has been taken up to take into account changes that were required in 
view of recent advancements in the field. In this revision, following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Combined foundation, referred as a type of deep foundation, has been deleted. 


b) Suitable precautions to be taken in case of foundations in localities where considerable amount 
of soluble salts are contained in ground water and soil have been deleted and a reference to 
IS 456 : 2000 ‘Plain and reinforced concrete — Code of practice (fourth revision)’ has been included 
for such provisions. 


c) Minimum distance to be ensured between large size trees and foundation of buildings in case of 
clayey soil has been changed from 8 m to 6 m. 


d) Common methods of site exploration suggested in the standard have been deleted, as it has to be 
suitably decided in accordance with IS 1892 : 2021 ‘Subsurface investigation for foundations — 
Code of practice (second revision)’. 


e) Provisions for footings at different levels, loads on foundations and settlement of foundations have 
been modified for clarity. Reference to relevant Indian Standards for determination of various loads 
acting on the foundation has been made. 


f) Need for liquefaction analysis in case of non-cohesive soils as per IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 ‘Criteria 
for earthquake resistant design of structures: Part 1 General provisions and buildings (sixth revision)’ 
has been added. 


g) Provisions on backfilling of the excavation have been modified. 


The design of the foundation, superstructure and the characteristics of the ground are inter-related. In order to 
obtain maximum economy, the supporting ground, foundation and superstructure should be studied as a whole. 
The design of a foundation involves both geotechnical aspects of supporting ground and the structural aspects of 
the foundation materials. The aim is to proportion the foundation (plan dimensions) in such a way that net loading 
intensity of pressure, called the net foundation pressure on the soil does not exceed the safe bearing capacity and 
that structural design which involves the determination of the thickness of elements so that maximum stress in 
concrete (plain or reinforced) and masonry is within permissible limits. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1904 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN AND 
CONSTRUCTION OF FOUNDATIONS 
IN SOILS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the general requirements for 
design and construction of all types of foundations 
(shallow, deep and special types). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication 
the editions indicated are valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definition of terms 
given in IS 2809 shall apply. 


4 TYPES OF FOUNDATIONS 


4.1 Shallow Foundations 


These cover such types of foundations in which load 
transference is primarily through shear resistance of the 
bearing strata. 


4.1.1 The various types of shallow foundations are as 
under: 


a) Spread or pad foundation — See IS 1080. 
b) Strip foundation — See IS 1080. 
c) Raft foundation — See IS 2950 (Part 1). 


d) Ring and shell foundation — See IS 11089 and 
IS 9456. 


4.2 Deep Foundations 


These are foundations generally in the form of piles, 
caissons, diaphragm walls, well foundations used 
separately or in combination, to transmit the loads to 
deeper load bearing strata, when, no adequate bearing 
strata exists at shallow depths. The transfer of load to 
deeper strata may be through friction, end-bearing or a 
combination of both. 


4.2.1 The various types of deep foundations are as 
under: 


a) Pile Foundations 


1) Driven cast in-situ — See IS 2911 
(Part 1/Sec 1). 
2) Bored cast in-situ — See IS 2911 


(Part 1/Sec 2). 

3) Driven precast — See IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 3). 
4) Bored precast — See IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 4). 
5) Timber — See IS 2911 (Part 2). 
6) Under-reamed pile — See IS 2911 (Part 3). 

b) Caissons — See IS 9527 (Part 1). 

c) Diaphragm walls — See IS 9556. 

d) Well foundations (a detail code on this subject is 
formulated by IRC). 

4.3 Foundations for Special Structure 


Foundations for certain structures and/or machineries 
require special design and detailing procedure 
taking into consideration the impact and vibration 
characteristics of the load and the soil properties under 
dynamic conditions. 


4.3.1 The various types of such foundations are as 
under: 
a) Machine foundations 
1) Reciprocating type — See IS 2974 (Part 1). 
2) Impact type — See IS 2974 (Part 2). 
3) Rotary type (medium and high frequency) — 
See IS 2974 (Part 3). 


4) Rotary type low frequency — See IS 2974 
(Part 4). 

5) Impact type (other than hammer) — See 
IS 2974 (Part 5). 


Tower foundations 


b 


wm 


1) Transmission line towers and poles — See 
IS 4091. 


2) Radar antenna, microwave and TV tower — 
See IS 11233. 


IS 1904 : 2021 


5 GROUND 


The natural geological deposits over base rock 
extending to the surface level of the earth should be 
examined. 


6 SITE INVESTIGATION 


6.1 The investigation of the site is an essential 
prerequisite to the construction of all civil engineering 
works with a view to assess the general suitability of 
the site for the proposed new works and to enable in 
preparing an adequate and economic design. 


In particular, it is necessary to assess the impact during 
or after the construction of the structure due to the type 
of materials, methods of construction, etc which may 
adversely affect the safety of the structure or alter its 
performance or utility. 


6.2 The subsurface investigation of the site shall be 
carried out in accordance with the principles set in 
IS 1892. As a preliminary, it is usually judicious 
to collect information relating to the site prior to 
commencing its exploration. The exploration of the site 
for a structure requires the exploration and sampling 
of all strata likely to be significantly affected by the 
structural load. The extent of this exploration will 
depend on the site and structure. Particular attention 
shall be paid to the ground water level, underground 
water courses, old drains, pits, wells, old foundation, 
etc, and presence of excessive sulphates, chlorides 
and/or other injurious compounds in the ground water 
and soil. The site should also be explored in detail, 
where necessary, to ascertain the type, consistency, 
thickness, sequence and dip of the strata. 


6.3 Mass movements of the ground are liable to occur 
from causes independent of the loads imposed by the 
structure. These include mining subsidence, land slips, 
unstable slopes and creep on clay slopes. These factors 
shall be taken into account in the layout and design 
of the proposed works. However, if necessary, expert 
advice regarding the geological and hydrological 
characteristics of the site shall be sought. 


6.3.1 Mining subsidence is liable to occur in mining 
areas. The magnitude of the movement and its 
distribution over the area and their vicinity can be 
roughly estimated. Where future subsidence is likely, 
care should be taken to design the superstructure and 
foundation sufficiently strong to cater for probable 
ground movements. Long continuous buildings should 
be avoided and large building should be divided into 
independent sections of suitable size, each with its own 
foundations. Expert advice from appropriate mining 
authority may be sought. 


6.3.2 Cuttings, excavations or sloping ground near 
foundations may increase the possibility of shear 
failure in the ground supporting the foundations. 


On sloping ground, there may be a tendency for the 
upper layers of soil to move downhill. The extent of 
such movement, however, depends on the type of soil, 
the angle of slope, ground water regime and climatic 
conditions. Instability may develop even after a long 
period of apparent stability, particularly in stiff, fissured 
and over consolidated clayey soil. 


Uneven surface of a slope on natural ground, curved 
tree trunks, tilted fence posts, tilted boundary walls, 
etc, indicate the creep of the surface layers. Areas 
subject to land slip and unstable slopes shall therefore, 
be avoided. 


6.3.3 Some clayey soils are susceptible to shrinkage 
and cracking in dry and hot weather, and swelling in 
wet weather. These conditions may also occur due to 
extraneous agencies like trees, boiler installations, 
furnaces, kilns, underground cables, services and 
refrigeration installations. These factors shall be 
considered carefully before designing any foundations. 
Shrinkage of clayey soils may be increased by the 
drying effect produced by nearby trees and shrubs. 
Swelling may occur, if they are cut down. No trees 
which may grow to a large size shall be planted within 
6 m of foundations of buildings. 


6.3.4 New constructions may interfere with drainage 
regime of the ground and affect the stability of existing 
structure. Adequate precautions should be taken to 
protect these. On the uphill side of a building on a 
sloping site, land drainage requires special consideration 
for diverting the natural flow of water away from the 
foundations. If excavation involves cutting through 
existing land drains, consideration should be given for 
diverting into the ground-drainage system. 


6.3.5 Increase in moisture content results in substantial 
loss of bearing capacity in case of certain types of 
soils which may lead to differential settlement of 
foundations. On sites liable to be water logged in wet 
weather, it is desirable to determine the contour of the 
water-table surface in order to indicate the directions 
of the natural drainage and to obtain the basis of the 
design of intercepting drains to prevent the influx of 
ground water into the site from higher ground. The 
seasonal variation of the water table is of importance 
in some cases. In case of soils with low permeability, 
the water levels in boreholes or observation wells may 
take a considerable time to reach equilibrium with 
ground water. Spot readings of water level in boreholes 
may, therefore, give an erroneous impression of the 
true ground water level. It is generally determined 
by measuring the water level in the borehole after a 
suitable time lapse of 14 h or more, as the case may 
be. In soils with high permeability, such as sand and 
gravels, lesser time will usually be sufficient, unless 
the hole has been sealed with drilling mud. In such 
cases, it may be necessary to resort to indirect means 
to determine the water table. Where deep excavation is 


required, the location of water bearing strata should be 
determined so that necessary precautions may be taken 
during excavation. 


6.3.6 In certain localities where considerable amount 
of soluble salts are contained in ground water and soil, 
cement concrete, especially thin members or buried 
metals are subjected to deterioration and corrosion. 
Certain soils have corrosive action on metals, 
particularly on cast iron, due to either chemical or 
bacteriological agency. In industrial areas, corrosive 
action may arise from industrial wastes that have been 
dumped on the site. Chemical analysis of samples of 
ground water or soil (or sometimes both) should be 
done to assess the necessity of special precautions 
(see also IS 456) and precautions as given in IS 456 
shall be adopted. 


7 DEPTH OF FOUNDATION 


7.1 The depth of foundation depends upon the 
following principal factors: 


a) Getting adequate allowable bearing capacity. 


b) In the case of clayey soils, penetration below the 
zone where shrinkage and swelling due to seasonal 
weather changes, and due to trees and shrubs are 
likely to cause appreciable movements. 


c) In fine sands and silts, penetration below the depth 
of frost penetration. 


d) Maximum depth of scour, wherever relevant, 
should also be considered and the foundation 
should be located sufficiently below this depth. 


e) Other factors, such as ground movements and heat 
transmitted from the building to the supporting 
ground may be important. 


7.2 All foundations shall extend to a depth of at least 
500 mm below natural ground level. On rock or such 
other weather resisting natural ground, removal of 
the top soil may be all that is required. In such cases, 
the surface shall be cleaned and, if necessary, stepped 
or otherwise prepared so as to provide a suitable 
bearing and thus prevent slipping or other unwanted 
movements. 


7.3 Where there is excavation, ditch, pond, water course, 
filled-up ground or similar condition of the subsoil on 
which the structure is to be erected, the foundation of 
such structure shall either be carried down to a depth 
beyond the detrimental influence of such conditions, 
or retaining walls shall be provided for the purpose of 
shielding from the effects of such conditions. 


IS 1904 : 2021 


7.4 A foundation in any type of soil shall be below the 
zone significantly weakened by root holes or cavities 
produced by burrowing animals or works. The depth 
shall also be enough to prevent the rainwater scouring 
below the footings. 


7.5 Clayey soils, like black cotton soils, are seasonally 
affected by drying, shrinkage and cracking in dry and 
hot weather, and by swelling in the following wet 
weather to a depth which will vary according to the 
nature of the clay and the climatic condition of the 
region. It may be necessary in such soils, either to place 
the foundation on the strata where the effects of seasonal 
changes are not significant or to make the foundation 
capable of eliminating the undesirable effects of 
relative movement. Adequate load counteraction 
against swelling pressures also provides satisfactory 
foundations. 


8 FOUNDATIONS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS 


8.1 Where footings are adjacent to sloping ground or 
where the bottoms of the footings of a structure are 
at different levels or at levels different from those of 
the footings of adjoining structures, the depth of the 
footings shall be such that the difference in footing 
elevations shall be subject to the following limitations: 


a) When the ground surface slopes downward 
adjacent to a footing, the sloping surface shall not 
intersect a frustum of bearing material under the 
footing having sides which make an angle of 30° 
with the horizontal for soil and horizontal distance 
from the lower edge of the footing to the sloping 
surface shall be at least 600 mm for rock and 
900 mm for soil (see Fig. 1). 


b 


wm 


In the case of footings in granular soil, a line drawn 
between the lower adjacent edges of adjacent 
footings shall not have a slope steeper than one 
vertical to two horizontal (see Fig. 2). 


c 


— 


In case of footing in clayey soils, a line drawn 
between the lower adjacent edge of the upper 
footing and the upper adjacent edge of lower 
footing shall not have a steeper slope than one 
vertical to two horizontal (see Fig. 3). 


8.2 The requirement given in 8.1 shall not apply where 
adequate provision is made for the lateral support 
(such as with retaining walls) of the material supporting 
the higher footing. 


IS 1904 : 2021 


THESE SURFACES 
SHOULD NOT INTERSECT 


Fic. 1 FOOTING IN SLOPING GROUND 


FOOTING 


\ LOWER 


SLOPE OF JOINING LINE FOOTING 
NOT STEEPER THAN ONE 
VERTICAL TO TWO HORIZONTAL 


Fic. 2 FOOTING IN GRANULAR SOIL 


UPPER 
FOOTING 


SLOPE OF JOINING LINE 
NOT STEEPER THAN ONE 


IS 1904 : 2021 


LOWER 
FOOTING 


VERTICAL TO TWO HORIZONTAL 


Fic. 3 FOOTING IN CLAYEY SOIL 


9 EFFECT OF SEASONAL 
CHANGES 


WEATHER 


During periods of hot, dry weather, a deficiency of 
water develops near the ground surface. In clayey soils, 
this may be associated with a decrease of volume or 
ground shrinkage and the development of cracks. The 
shrinkage of clay will be increased by drying effect 
produced by fast growing and water seeking trees. 
The range of influence depends on size and number of 
trees and it increases during dry periods. In general, it 
is desirable that there shall be a distance of at least 6 m 
between foundations of buildings and such trees. Boiler 
installations, furnaces, kilns, underground cables and 
refrigeration installations and other artificial sources of 
heat may also cause increased volume changes of clay 
by drying out the ground beneath them, the drying out 
can be to a substantial depth. Special precautions either 
in the form of insulation or otherwise should be taken. 
In periods of wet weather, clayey soils swell and the 
cracks tend to close, the water deficiency developed in 
the previous dry periods may be partially replenished 
and a subsurface zone or zones deficient in water may 
persist for many years. Leakage from water mains and 
underground sewers may also result in large volume 
changes. Therefore, special care shall be taken to 
prevent such leakages. 


10 EFFECT OF MASS MOVEMENTS OF 
GROUND IN UNSTABLE AREAS 


In certain areas, mass movements of the ground are 
liable to occur from causes independent of the loads 
applied by the foundations of structures. These include 


mining subsidence, landslips on unstable slopes and 
creep on clay slopes. 


10.1 Mining Subsidence 


In mining areas, subsidence of the ground beneath a 
building or any other structure is liable to occur. The 
magnitude of the movement and its distribution over 
the area are likely to be uncertain and attention shall, 
therefore, be directed to make the foundations and 
structures sufficiently rigid and strong to withstand the 
probable worst loading condition and probable ground 
movement. In this connection, reference should also be 
made to 6.3.1. 


10.2 Landslide Prone Areas 


10.2.1 The construction of structures on slopes which 
are suspected of being unstable and are subject to 
landslip shall be avoided. 


10.2.2 On sloping ground on clayey soils, there is 
always a tendency for the upper layers of soil to move 
downhill, depending on type of soil, the angle of slope, 
climatic conditions, etc. In some cases, the uneven 
surface of the ground will indicate that the area is 
subject to small land slips and, therefore, if used for 
foundation, will obviously necessitate special design 
consideration as specified in IS 14243 (Parts 1 and 2). 


10.2.3 On sloping sites, spread foundations shall be 
on a horizontal bearing and stepped. At all changes of 
levels, they shall be lapped at the steps for a distance at 
least equal to the thickness of the foundation or twice 
the height of the step, whichever is greater. The steps 


IS 1904 : 2021 


shall not be of greater height than the thickness of the 
foundation, unless special precautions are taken. 


10.2.4 Cuttings, excavations or sloping ground near and 
below foundation level may increase the possibility of 
shear failure of the soil. The foundation shall be placed 
beyond the zone of such shear failure. 


10.2.5 If the probable failure surface intersects a 
retaining wall or other revetment, the later shall be 
made strong enough to resist any unbalanced thrust. In 
case of doubt, as to the suitability of the natural slopes 
or cuttings, the structure shall be kept well away from 
the top of the slopes, or the slopes shall be stabilized. 


10.2.6 Cuttings and excavations adjoining foundations 
reduce stability and increase the likelihood of differential 
settlement. Such an effect should be investigated when 
they exist or when made subsequently. 


10.2.7 Where a structure is to be placed on sloping 
ground, additional complications are introduced. The 
ground itself may be subject to creep or other forms of 
instability, which may be enhanced if the strata dip in 
the same direction as the ground surface. If the slope of 
the ground is large, the overall stability of the slope and 
substructure may be affected. These aspects should be 
carefully investigated. 


11 PRECAUTIONS FOR FOUNDATIONS ON 
INCLINED STRATA 


In the case of inclined strata, if they dip towards a cutting 
or basement, it may be necessary to carry foundation 
below the possible slip planes. Land drainage also 
requires special consideration, particularly on the 
uphill side of a structure to divert the natural flow of 
water away from the foundations. 


12 STRATA OF VARYING THICKNESS 


Strata of varying thickness, even at appreciable depth, 
may increase differential settlement. Where necessary, 
calculations should be made of the estimated settlement 
from different thicknesses of strata and the structure 
should be designed accordingly. When there is large 
change of thickness of soft strata, the stability of 
foundation may be affected. Subsurface investigation 
of the site should, therefore, ensure detection of 
significant variations in strata thickness. 


13 LAYERS OF SOFTER MATERIAL 


Some soils and rocks have thin layers of softer material 
between layers of harder material, which may not 
be detected unless thorough investigation is carried 
out. The softer layers may undergo marked changes 
in properties if the loading on them is increased or 
decreased by the proposed construction or affected 
by related changes in ground water conditions. These 
should be taken into account. 


14 SPACING BETWEEN EXISTING AND NEW 
FOUNDATION 


The minimum horizontal clear spacing between the 
edges of the existing and new footings shall be equal 
to the width of the wider footing. While the adoption 
of such provision shall help minimizing damage to 
adjacent foundation, an analysis of bearing capacity and 
settlement shall be carried out to have an appreciation 
of the effect on the adjacent foundation. Suitable 
site-specific protection measures shall be adopted for 
the existing foundation, as required. 


15 LOADS ON FOUNDATIONS 


15.1 Loads on a foundation are those forces imparted 
by the structure, it is supporting, in any of the form, 
(a) vertical either upwards or downwards, (b) horizontal 
or lateral, and (c) moment or couple. 


15.2 Foundation shall be analyzed and designed for all 
the load combinations used for super-structure analysis 
and design. In the load combinations for analysis of 
foundations (for calculating bearing pressure or pile 
reaction), minimum load factor considered in design 
shall be unity. 


15.3 The loads as in 15.3.1 to 15.3.7 shall be considered 
for design of foundations. 


15.3.1 Permanent Load 


This is the actual service load/sustained load consisting 
of dead loads and imposed loads of a structure which 
give rise to stresses and deformations in the soil below 
foundation causing its settlement. 


15.3.2 Transient Load 


This is a momentary or sudden load imparted to a 
structure due to wind or seismic vibrations. Due to 
its transitory nature, the stresses in the soil below the 
foundation carried by such loads are allowed certain 
percentage increase over the allowable safe values. 


15.3.3 Foundations shall be proportioned for the 
following combination of loads: 


a) Dead load + imposed load, and 


b) Dead load + imposed load + wind load or seismic 
force. 


Loads and forces shall be calculated in accordance with 
IS 875 (Parts 1, 2 and 3) and IS 1893 (Part 1). 


15.3.4 Dead load also includes the weight of 
column/wall, footings, foundations and the overlying 
fill but excludes the weight of the displaced soil. 


15.3.5 Imposed loads from the floors above as specified 
in IS 875 (Part 2) shall be taken in proportioning and 
designing the foundations. 


15.3.6 Where wind or seismic load is less than 
25 percent of that due to dead and imposed loads, it 
may be neglected in design. 


15.3.7 Where wind or seismic load is more than 
25 percent of that due to dead and imposed loads, 
foundations may be so proportioned that the pressure 
due to combination of load, that is, dead + imposed 
+ wind load, does not exceed the safe bearing capacity 
by more than 25 percent. When seismic forces are 
considered, the safe bearing capacity shall be increased 
as specified in IS 1893 (Part 1) or IS 1893 (Part 4), as 
applicable. Analysis for liquefaction and the influence 
of earthquake shall also be made in accordance with 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


16 SETTLEMENT OF FOUNDATION 


16.1 Uniform Settlement 


The magnitude of the settlement that should occur, when 
foundation loads are applied to the ground, depends 
on the rigidity of substructure and compressibility of 
the underlying strata. In silts and clays, the settlement 
may continue for a long period after the construction 
of structure. Due allowance shall, therefore, need to 
be made for this consolidation settlement. In sand and 
gravels, the settlement is likely to be over by the end of 
the construction. In strata of organic soils, settlement 
may continue for a long time after construction. For 
the safety of foundations, the Engineer-in-Charge 
should be well familiar with all causes of settlement. 
Foundations may settle due to some combination of the 
following reasons: 


a) Elastic compression of the foundation material 
and the underlying soil; 


b) Consolidation including secondary compression; 


c) Ground water lowering — Specially repeated 
lowering and raising of water level in cohesionless 
soils tend to compact the soil and cause settlement 
of the footings. Prolonged lowering of the 
water table in fine grained soils may introduce 
settlements because of the extrusion of water 
from the voids. Pumping water or draining water 
by wells or pipes from granular soils without 
adequate filter material as protection may, in a 
period of time, carry a sufficient amount of fine 
particles away from the soil and cause settlement; 


d 


wa 


Seasonal swelling and shrinkage of expansive 

clays; 

e) Ground movement on earth slopes, for example, 
surface erosion, slow creep or landslides; and 

f) Other causes, such as nearby excavation, mining 


subsidence and underground erosion by streams or 
floods. 


IS 1904 : 2021 


16.2 Differential Settlements 


The foundations of different elements of a structure may 
have unequal settlements and the difference between 
such settlements will cause differential settlement in the 
structure. Some of the causes of differential settlements 
are as follows: 


a) Geological and physical non-uniformity or 
anomalies in type, structure, thickness, and density 
of the soil medium, an admixture of organic 
matter, peat, mud, etc; 


b) Non-uniform pressure distribution from 
foundation to the soil due to non-uniform loading 
of the foundations; 


c) Variation of ground water table; 


d) Overstressing of soil at adjacent site by heavy 
structures built next to light ones; 


e) Overlap of stress distribution in soil from adjoining 
structures; 


f) Unequal expansion of the soil due to excavation 
for footing; 


g) Non-uniform development of extrusion causing 
settlements; and 


h) Non-uniform structural disruptions or disturbance 
of soil due to freezing and thawing, swelling, 
softening and drying of soils. 


16.3 Criteria for Settlement Analysis for Shallow 
Foundation 


16.3.1 For foundations resting on coarse grained soils, 
the settlements shall be estimated by considering the 
load mentioned in 15.3.3 (b). In such type of soils, 
settlements occur within a very short period of loading. 


16.3.2 For fine grained soils, the settlements shall 
be estimated corresponding to the load mentioned in 
15.3.3 (a). 


16.3.3 It is possible to minimize differential settlement 
under an imposed load by providing appropriate 
foundations to keep the differential settlement of 
adjacent foundations within permissible limits. This 
may be done by the following procedure: 


a) Determine the required bearing area for a column 
having the largest imposed load to dead load ratio. 
In the conventional method of design, the area (A) 
is given by: 


_ Dead load + Imposed load 


Allowable bearing pressure 


b) Compute for the same column, the design bearing 


aus ." 


7 A 


d 


IS 1904 : 2021 


c) Determine the area for all other columns by the 
use of q , that is: 


Service load 
qa 


Bearing area = 


d) For calculation of settlement of foundations, 
IS 8009 (Part 1) may be referred. 


16.3.3 The total settlement of the foundations caused 
by elastic and consolidation settlement of the soil shall 
be not more than permissible. 


16.3.4 The permissible value of settlement for different 
types of structures are given in Table 1. 


16.3.5 Differential settlement and/or tilt (angular 
distortion) of the structures shall not be more than the 
permissible values. The differential settlement shall be 
obtained by taking the difference between maximum 
and minimum settlement. Tilt shall be calculated by 
dividing the differential settlement by the distance 
between points of related maximum and minimum 
settlement. 


16.4 Settlement Analysis for Deep Foundation 


The permissible value of total settlement, differential 
settlement, and tilt (angular distortion) of the foundation 
shall be judiciously adopted by the designer considering 
the type of structure and functional requirements. 
The settlement shall be calculated according to 
IS 8009 (Part 2). 


17 STABILITY AGAINST SLIDING AND 
OVERTURNING 


17.1 The stability of the foundation against sliding and 
overturning shall be checked, and the factors of safety 
shall conform to the requirements specified in 17.1.1 
and 17.1.2. 


17.1.1 Sliding 


The factor of safety against sliding of structures which 
resist lateral forces (such as retaining walls) shall be 
not less than 1.5 when dead load, imposed load and 
earth pressures are considered together with wind load 
or seismic forces. When dead load, imposed load and 
earth pressure only are considered, the factor of safety 
shall be not less than 1.75. 


NOTE — For structures founded on soils with low frictional 
coefficient (that is, slippery material), safety against sliding 
may be improved by providing anchor type cut-off walls or 
piles to take the excess load over that resisted by friction or an 
inclined underside of the base. 


17.1.2 Overturning 


The factor of safety for shallow foundation against 
overturning shall be not less than 1.5 when dead 
load, imposed load and earth pressures are considered 
together with wind load or seismic forces. When 


dead load, imposed load and earth pressures only 
are considered, the factor of safety shall be not less 
than 2. The factor of safety of other types of foundation 
is covered in relevant Indian Standards (see 4). 


18 BEARING CAPACITY 


The net safe bearing capacity for shallow foundation 
shall be calculated in accordance with IS 6403. The 
method of computation of safe bearing capacity for 
other types of foundations has been specified in the 
relevant Indian Standards. 


19 PRELIMINARY 
CONSTRUCTION 


WORK FOR 


19.1 The construction of access roads, main sewers 
and drains should preferably be completed before 
commencing the work of foundations; alternatively, 
sufficient precautions shall be taken to protect the 
already constructed foundations during subsequent 
work. 


19.2 Clearance of Site 


Any obstacles, including the stump of trees, likely 
to interfere with the work shall be removed. Holes 
left by digging, such as those due to removal of old 
foundation, uprooted trees, burrowing by animals, etc, 
shall be back-filled with soil and well compacted. 


19.3 Drainage 


If the construction site is such that surface water drain 
towards the structure, the land may be dressed or drains 
laid to divert the water away from the structure. 


19.4 Setting Out 


Generally the site shall be levelled before the layout of 
foundations are set out. In case of sloping terrain, care 
shall be taken to ensure that the dimensions on plans 
are set out correctly in one or more horizontal planes. 


19.5 The layout of foundations shall be set out in 
accordance with IS 11134. The setting out of walls 
shall be facilitated by permanent row of pillars, parallel 
to and at a suitable distance beyond the periphery of the 
building. The pillars shall be located at junctions of cross 
walls with the peripheral line of pillars. The centreline 
of the cross walls shall be extended to and permanently 
erected on the plastered tops of the corresponding sets 
of pillars. The datum lines parallel to and at the known 
fixed distance from the centreline of the external walls 
also be permanently worked on the corresponding rows 
of pillars to pillars to serve as checks on the accuracy 
of the work as it proceeds. The top of these pillars shall 
be at the same level and preferably at the plinth or floor 
level. The pillars shall be of sizes not less than 250 mm 
wide and shall be bedded sufficiently deep into ground 
so that they are not disturbed. 


2021 


IS 1904 


`šunooj uongpunoj WO [JEM JO 443104 ət] səlouəp H “SULNJOD UIIMJAq BOURISIP 91]U9I-0}-9.HUI9 10 eRI/[]BM Jo Ped poyooyop JO yySus] ƏY} So}OUap 7 “JOUSISOp oy} 
Jo siuəuuəarnbəi əy} 19d se paploap oq p[nous osed YoRs ut (UOTIOJSIP Je[NSue) 1[n pue JUDUIDTNOS Juə:zogipAuouro[119s 240} ə|qtsstuuəd əy} pue spins z se ATUO uəyg) əq ABUT 91 QR} OU} UL UDAIS SONA ML — SALON 


`šunooj uonppunoj WO prem Jo 1u81əu oY} səlouop H 


`suumjoə uəəwqəq DOULISIP Ənnruoo-o1-ƏTnuəo JO YRI/[]BM Jo Jed pP Jo u18uə| IY} səljouəop 7 


`pəle[odiəlur oq ULI SINJLA OY} ‘H/F JO SOLI NIPSULIDIUT 1O4 (qı 


(`C 91 əsnpjO ) 


SOS ur uopepunoy Moes 103 (uonioJsiq 1e[nSu v) 
YELL PUE JUIUIIPIIE EYUA PUWIS ASUA J AQEL 


00¢/T TS c00°0 STI 00¢/T TS 700° 001 999/l TS 100° SL 999/1 TS 100° Os SO[IS PUL SIOMO] JOFVM IOJ (AI 
00S C/I Tr 000° 09 00S C/T Tr 000° 09 al =H/T(Z 
< posayunosus oq 0} AJOJ ION ——nr 
000 S/T TC 000° 09 000 S/T TT 000° 09 at =H/T( 
sjem Suureəq peo] 104 (q 
sjjem{m 
poued ym sšurpimq 
00€/T Te €00°0 STI 00¢/T TS c00'0 SL 00S/T TZ00° SL 00S/T ‘TCOO" 09 pəureg [9ə]s 10 DY (e 
:s3urppmq pə/Xərols-nrnurrol (IH 
səmjonns 
00S/T TCOO" Scl 00S/T TI c00" SL 999/1 TS 100 SL 999/1 TS 100° os ajoIOUOD padsojuler og (H 
00ç/1 TE £00° 001 00€/T Te £00° SL 00€/T Te €00 Os 00¢/1 Te £00° os aINJON.YS [99}S 1OJ (1 
D (€1) (¿D aD OD (6) (8) (O) (9) (s) (p) (£) © 0) 
wu wu wu luu wu wu wu wu 
UOTIOISIQ uawas uowəpəs uowmogsıq JWOWAEG yuəwəpəs uonio]siq JuƏur9[ƏS jJUOWOTJOS uowmosıq Jməwəməş yuowəoyəs 
Iepnsuy Tenuoiogiq umunxej sJeNsuy  (enuə:jiq umunxej sIensuy jenuooyiq wnwxey sensuy = [enuoyiq  wnurnxepy 
—_~— 
Keo onselg Ae] prey pue pues Keo onselg Kejo prey pue pues 
s  —  — — — n M —  — —:.  —- V  vV s oÑ — 
“ON 
suonepunog yey suonepunoy pa}e[osy IMPINS Jo addy, IS 


IS 1904 : 2021 


20 PROTECTION OF EXCAVATION 


20.1 The protection of excavation during construction 
and dewatering operations, where necessary, shall be 
done in accordance with IS 3764. 


20.2 After excavation, the bottom of the excavation 
shall be cleared of all loose soil and rubbish and shall 
be levelled, where necessary. The bed shall be wetted 
and compacted by heavy rammerts to an even surface. 


20.3 Excavation in clayey or other soils that are 
liable to be effected by exposure to atmosphere shall 
be concreted as soon as they are dug. The bottom of 


10 


excavation shall be protected immediately by laying at 
least 80 mm thick layer of cement concrete not leaner 
than mix 1 : 5: 10 over which shall come the foundation 
concrete, or in order to obtain a dry hard bottom, the 
last excavation of about 100 mm shall be removed only 
before concreting. 


20.4 The backfilling of the excavation shall he done 
with care so as not to disturb the constructed foundation, 
and shall be compacted in layers not exceeding 
150 mm compacted thickness, with sprinkling of 
minimum quantity of water necessary for proper 
compaction. 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 


875 


(Part 1) : 1987 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
1080 : 1985 


1892 : 2021 


1893 


(Part 1) : 2016 


(Part 4) : 2015 


2809 : 1972 


2911 


(Part 1/Sec 1) 
: 2010 


(Part 1/Sec 2) 
: 2010 


(Part 1/Sec 3) 
: 2010 


(Part 1/Sec 4) 
: 2010 


(Part 2) : 2021 
(Part 3) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures 


Dead loads — Unit weights of 
building materials and stored 
materials (second revision) 


Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of shallow foundations 
in soils (other than raft, ring and 
shell) (second revision) 

Subsurface investigation for 
foundations — Code of practice 
(second revision) 


Criteria for earthquake 
design of structures 


resistant 


General provisions and buildings 
(sixth revision) 


Industrial structures including stack- 
like structures (first revision) 


Glossary of terms and symbols 
relating to sol engineering 
(first revision) 


Design and construction of pile 
foundations — Code of practice 


Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 1 
Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 2 
Bored cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 3 
Driven precast concrete piles 
(second revision) 


Part 1 Concrete piles, Section 4 
Precast concrete piles in prebored 
holes (first revision) 


Timber piles (second revision) 


Under-reamed piles (second revision) 


11 


IS No. 


2950 (Part 1): 


1981 


2974 


(Part 1): 


(Part 2) : 


(Part 3): 


(Part 4) : 


(Part 5): 


1982 


1980 


1992 


1979 


1987 


3764 : 1992 


4091 : 1979 


6403 : 1981 


8009 


(Part 1): 


(Part 2) : 


1976 


1980 


9456 : 1980 


9527 (Part 1) : 


1981 


9556 : 1980 


IS 1904 : 2021 


Title 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of raft foundations: 
Part 1 Design (second revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of machine foundations 


Foundation for reciprocating type 
machines (second revision) 


Foundations for 
machines (hammer 
(first revision) 


impact type 
foundations) 


Foundations for rotary type machines 


(medium and high frequency) 
(second revision) 

Foundations for rotary type 
machines of low frequency 


(first revision) 


Foundations for impact machines 
other than hammer (forging and 
stamping press, pig breaker, drop 
crusher and jolter) (first revision) 


Excavation work — Code of safety 
(first revision) 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations for 
transmission line towers and poles 
(first revision) 

Code of practice for determination 
of breaking capacity of shallow 
foundations (first revision) 


Code of practice for calculation of 
settlements of foundations 


Shallow foundations subjected to 
symmetrical static vertical loads 


Deep foundations subjected to 
symmetrical static vertical loading 


Code of practice for design 
and construction of conical and 
hyperbolic paraboloidal types of 
shell foundations 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of port and harbour 
structures: Part I Concrete monoliths 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of diaphragm walls 


IS 1904 : 2021 


IS No. 


11089 : 1984 


11134 : 1984 


11233 : 1985 


Title 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of ring foundation 


Code of practice for setting out of 
buildings 
Code of practice for design and 


construction of radar antenna, 
microwave and TV tower foundations 


12 


IS No. 
14243 


(Part 1) : 1995 
(Part 2) : 1995 


Title 


Selection and development of site for 
building in hill areas — Guidelines 


Microzonation of urban centres 


Selection and development 


IS 1904 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 202/395, Jodhpur 
Park, Kolkata 700068) 


In Personal Capacity (D-1903, PWS, 7 Hills, 
Narsingi(v), Kokapet Road, Ranga Reddy 
500089) 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 

AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 

Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Association of Piling Specialists (India), Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Noida 


CEM Engineers & Consultants Pvt Ltd, Bhubaneswar 


Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Designs Organization, Water Resources 
Deptt, Govt of Maharashtra, Nashik 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New 
Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr N. Som (Chairman) 


Dr D. N. NARESH (Vice Chairman) 


SHRI P. S. BANSOD 
SHRI V. RAMAMURTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI LALIT MOHAN PATHAK (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHANWA AMOL SHINGAREY 
SHRI CHANDRAMOULEESWAR S. (Alternate) 


SHRI V. T. GANPULE 
SHRI MADHUKAR J. LODHAVIA (Alternate) 


SHRI C. PUSHPAKARAN 
SHRI HEMANT MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK BASA 


SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 

SHRI Ravi SUNDARAM (Alternate I) 

SHRI SORABH GUPTA (Alternate II) 
DIRECTOR 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 

EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR 

SHRI SIDHARTHA MITRA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJESH KHARE 

SHRI SAUROBH Kumar (Alternate) 
Dr R. CHITRA 

SHRI MAHABIR Dixit (Alternate) 
SHRI DIPANKAR PAUL 

Suri T. K. Roy CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 
SHRI MANOJIT SAMANTA 

DR S. GANESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI KANWAR SINGH 

Dr P. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 
Dr P. KAMATCHI 

SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA (Alternate) 
Dr K. G. BHATIA 
SHRI GOVIND RAM SHIROMANI 

SHRI K. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


PROF ASHOK KUMAR GUPTA 


13 


IS 1904 : 2021 


Organization 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


F S Engineers Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Geodynamics Ltd, Vadodara 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Ground Engineering Limited, New Delhi 

Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 

Hydraulic and Engineering Instruments (HEICO), 
New Delhi 


Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 
ITD Cementation India Ltd, Kolkata 

Jadhavpur University, Kolkata 

Keller Ground Engineering Pvt Ltd, Chennai 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New 
Delhi 


M N Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. K. PANWAR 
SHRI SANJOY BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


DR A. VERGHESE CHUMMAR 


SHRI VENKATARAMANA. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI SANDEEP M. GHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI KIRAN RAMESH VAIDYA 
SHRI SUJAN KULKARNI (Alternate) 


DR TIMIR BARAN GHOSAL 
SHRI PRASHANT TUKARAM ILAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI K. A. KESHVANI 
SHRI R. S. Vasava (Alternate) 


SHRI JATTINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAUNAQ SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 


Pror T. G. SITHARAM 
ProF G. L. SIVAKUMARA BABU (Alternate) 


Dr G. V. RAMANA 
Dr J. T. SHAHU (Alternate I) 
DR PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate II YP) 


PROF PRIYANKA GHOSH 


PROF SUBHADEEP BANERJEE 
PROF RAMESH K. KANDASAMI (Alternate) 


PROF DEEPANKAR CHOUDHURY 
PRoF Dasaka Murty (Alternate) 


PROF MAHENDRA SINGH 
PROF VisHwas A. SAWANT (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
DIRECTOR (T) (Alternate) 


Pror T. G. SITHARAM 
Dr B. K. MAHESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH KUMAR 
SHRI SACHIN Kamat (Alternate) 


PROF SIBAPRIYA MUKHERJEE 
PROF RAMENDU BIKAS SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI V. V. S. RAMADAS 
SHRI MADAN KUMAR ANNAM (Alternate) 


Dr K. S. RAMAKRISHNA 
SHRI JESUDOSS ASIRVATHAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJAN KUMAR PANDEY 
SHRI AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr ABHIJIT DASGUPTA 


SHRI SUVENDU Dey (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR RAY 


14 


Organization 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 

Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 

Nagadi Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 
National Institute of Disaster Management, New 


Delhi 
NTPC Limited, Noida 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 
Safe Enterprises, Mumbai 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Simplex Infrastructures Limited, Chennai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Telangana State Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 


The Pressure Piling Co (I) Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity, New Delhi (Flat No. 220, Ankur 


Apartments Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, 
Delhi 110092) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1904 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


Suri H. N. ASWATH 
SHRI ANIL PRUTHI (Alternate) 


Dy CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) (A/ternate) 


Dr V. V. S. Rao 
DR N. SANTOSH RAO (Alternate) 


DR CHANDAN GHOSH 
SHRI AMIR ALI (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDER KUMAR 
SHRI MOHIT JHALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER SINGH 
Suri S. K. OJHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK GARG 
Suri S. K. Kapoor (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANDIPAN HORE (Alternate I) 


SHRI VIKRAM SINGH RAO 
SHRI SURYAVEER SINGH RAO (Alternate) 


ProF Y. K. JAIN 


SHRI SHANKAR GUHA 
Dr V. BALAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
SHRI B. N. NAGARAJ (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI J. SRIDEVI 
SHRI P. JOHN VICTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. C. DESHPANDE 
SHRI PUSHKAR V. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 43 (14122). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


