( Reaffirmed 1999 )

ISr9581-1980

Indian Standard
SAFETY AND OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PEDESTRIAN-CONTROLLED CYLINDER ( REEL ) POWER LAWN MOWERS
Horticultural
Chairman
SHRI P. N. PAN~OTRA

Equipment Sectional Committee,
Rspescnting Ministry of ture ) Agriculture

AFDC

44
of Agricul-

( Department

Membrrs SERI V. A. PATIL ( Alternate to Shri P. N. Pangotra ) Department of Agriculture, Government of AGRICULTURALENQINEER Himachal Pradrsh, Simla Directorate of Extension, Minintry of Agriculture, DR G. S. BAWEJA New Del hi National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing SHRI BHUPENDRA Federation of India Ltd, Delhi Pocha Seeds Pvt Ltd, Pune SARI V. G. BBOKER SHRI UDAY TIWARI ( Altcrnatr ) DIRECTOR OF FORESTRY RESE- Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun ASSISTANT SILVIOULTURIST ( Afternnte ) Department of Agriculture. Government of Uttar SHRI R. C. GOEL Pradesh, Lu&now . Premier Corporation, New Drlhi SH~I G. B. GOSWAMI Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), SARI K. K. KAUL New Delhi SRRI S. K. ADLAKEA ( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of Jammu SHRI MOHD. SAYEED & Kashmir. Srinagar Mudhar Allied Traders, Delhi SHRI PARAMJIT SIN~H MUDEAR SHRI G. S. MUDHAR ( Altematc) Directorate of Horticulture, Bangalore SHRI P. P. NANJAPPA Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi Paor A. C. PANDYA SERI K. C. BHARADWAJ ( Ahnate ) Passi Mechanical Works, Ludhiana S~rrr SARBAQ SINQH PASBI Indian Institute of Horticultural Research ( ICAR ), DR T. RAJA RAO Bangalore ( Continued on pagr 2 ) @ Copyright 1980 STANDARDS INSTITUTION
ARCH

INDIAN

Thir publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.
I
I

IS : 9581 - 1980
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Mm bcrs
SHRI K. SADDY Central Repwscnting

SHBI V. K. SHARMA DR G. S. NIJJAR ( Ahrnatc ) Kay Bee Industries ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SECRI S. C. VIRMANI SERI INDER ~JOHAN SHARMA ( Altrrnate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-r$%io Member ) SERI T. PIJRNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRI R. N. SIIARMA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Public Works Department, New Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana

2

IS t 9581- 1980

Indian Standard
SAFETY AND OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PEDESTRIAN-CONTROLLED CYLINDER ( REEL ) POWER LAWN MOWERS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 August 1980, after the draft finalized by the Horticultural Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.
0.2

While preparing IS : 9575-1980 * it was felt that the general safety and operational characteristics of the lawn mowers should be covered in a separate standard. This standard is, therefore, being published to fulfil this need.

0.2.1 The detailed electrical safety requirements for electricallyoperated lawn mowers are expected to be covered in a different standard. 0.3 In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived, view to ensure international co-ordination, from the following: with a

ISO/DlS 5395/D Power lawn mowers, lawn tractors, lawn and garden tractors with mowing attachments-safety requirements Internaand test procedures - Part II : Basic requirements. tional Organization for Standardization. ISO/TC 23/SC 13 N 103 Part III Requirements for rotary mowers. International Organization for Standardization. B'S 5107 : 1974 Specification Standards Institution. for powered lawn mowers. British

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Specification for power lawn mower, pedestrian-controlled tRuler for rounding off numerical values ( m&cd ). cylinder ( reel ) type.

3

IS : 9581 - 1980 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard pedestrian-controlled 2. GUARDING 2.1 Power-Driven Components - Power-driven gears, chains, sproackets, belts, f&Son drives and pulleys which are capable of causing injury during normal starting, mounting and operation of the machine, shall be so positioned or guarded by shields or similar attachments to prevent the operator's accidental contact with these components. Power-driven components within reach of the operator from the operator's position shall be guarded to prevent contact with a finger probe ( see Fig. 1 ). covers the safety and cylinder ( reel) power operational requirements lawn mowers. of

4
-.e12.5 f

All dimensions in millimetrcs. FIG. 1 FINGER PROBE

2.1.1 Driving belts and chains having fastenings shall be guarded Drive shafts shall be fully guarded. their whole length.

along

2.1.2 Rotating covers or discs shall have a continuous unbroken or Mowers shall not be equipped with a starter operated smooth surface. by means of a loose rope, with the exception of auxiliary starting devices designated for emergency starts. 2.1.3 Access doors, shields or guards shall be provided inadvertent contact by the operator with hazardous servicing to prevent points.

NOTE - The requirements given above do not apply to any component functioning in contact with the soil and any axle of a ground wheel.

2.2 Heat Protection - A guard or shield shall be provided to prevent inadvertent contact with any exposed components which are hot and may cause burns during normal starting, mounting and operation of the machine. 4

IS : 9581 e 1980. 2.3 Guard Attachment - All guards or shields ( other than grass box ) required under 2.1 and 2.2 shall be either permanently attached or secured to prevent removal without the use of tools. 2.4 Protection from Exhaust Fumes - Engine exhaust, where provided, shall be directed to the side below the horizontal plane or away from the operator's zone. On machines equipped with an enclosure for the operator, the engine exhaust shall be directed away from the enclosure. 2.5 Protection from Vibration - The mounting of the engine on the frame shall be done through rubber-bonded bolts and pads or at least belt cushion of minimum 6 mm thick shall be provided to eliminate vibration. 2.6 Protection from Fire - The fuel tank in engines shall be so located that in case of a chance leakage from the supply line it does not drip on the heated engine parts and cause accidental fire during operation. 3. CONTROLS 3.1 The controls used for operating the machine, that is, stopping, starting, speed control, and attachment for power engagement, shall be clearly identified on a durable lable. 3.2 Controls, the direction other than those whose operation is self evident, and method of operation clearly identified. shall have

3.3 When handle-mounted controls are provided, they shall be accessible to the operator in the normal operating position. The direction of movement of the control to increase engine speed shall be away from the operator. 4. LABEL ( NAME-PLATES ) attachment unit shall be fitted with the manufacturer or supplier, model or cautionary material

4.1 Every basic machine and major a permanent name-plate identifying number and serial number. 4.2 Labels information

provided fqr mower name-plate, directional shall satisfy the following requirements: shall have a durable bond with

a) The label surface;

the base

b) The label shall be weather resistant procedures shall not fade, discolour, shall remain legible; and 5

and under normal cleaning crack, craze, or blister and

IS :9581.1980
c) The label shall not curl at the edges and shall not be effected spilled gasoline or oil. by

plate ( for example, embossed, cast, mouldcd, stamped metal, NOTE-A etched plate, or plastic plate mechanically secured ) fastened with rivets or equivalent means shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this clause.

5. STOPPING

AND

STARTING

5.1 A shut-off control device shall be provided on all battery-powered units and engine-powered units with battery starters to stop the operation of the engine or motor. This device shall require manual and intentional activation in order to restart the engine or motor, and shall be accessible from starting and operating positions. A component which is not removable without the use of tools shall be provided to prevent unauthorized starting or use of the motor. 5.2 On engine-driven mowers with manual starting, a means shall be The stopping device shall not depend on provided to stop the engine. sustained pressure for its continued operation. The device shall require manual and intentional activation to start the engine. 6. BLADE ROTATION

- Jf blades give no visual indication of 6.1 Blade Rotation Warning rotation, a warning notice shall be included in the user instructions, and shall also bP placed in a prcminent position on the machine with a The warning shall consist of the minimum height of lettering of 3 mm. following words: `WARNING: BLADES CONTINUE TO MACHINE IS SWITCHED
* or other appropriate

ROTATE OFF'.
expression

AFTER
may be used in

NOTE - The word ` declutched place of ` switched off `.

6.2 Blade Stopping Time -Blade shall stop rotating from the maximum speed specified by the manufacturer within 15 seconds after the prime mover is switched off unless a visible indication of blade rotation is provided. 7. ELECTRICAL 7.1 A trip switch REQUIREMENTS

should be provided on the mains so that current shall The detailed electrical requirements for circuit. lawn mowers are under preelectrically-driven mains - connected paration. Till this standard is published reference should be made to IS: 302-1973*.
trip in case of short
*General and safety ( four rh revision ) . requirements for household and similar electrical appliances

6

IS : 9581- 1980
7.2 The electrical requirements for battery-powered extra low voltage are given below for guidance. 7.2.1 Low Voltage Battery-Powered Circuits ) Circuits circuits of safety-

( not Including Magneto Grounding

7.2.1.1 Electrical cables - Electrical cables should withstand abrasion, unless otherwise protected or not in potentially abrasive contact with The wiring assembly should, where possible, be grouped metal surfaces. together, be properly supported, and be located so that no portion is in contact with the carburettor, metallic fuel lines, the exhaust system, moving parts or sharp edges. Any edges of metal members likely to be in contact with the cables shall be rounded or protected to prevent possible damage to the cables by cutting or abrasion. for a vented storage 7.2.1.2 Battery installation - The compartment battery should have opening to provide ventilation and drainage. When the battery is in the operating position, acid shall not leak on to parts that would be critically affected to the extent that a hazard would be created from corrosion. 7.2.1.3 Overload protection - All ignition circuits, should be provided the battery terminals except that for overload protection shall be located circuits, except starter with overload protection two-wire, non-grounded in either wire. motor and devices on systems, the
machines

NOTE - This requirement shall not, however, apply to battery-powered capable of passing the following tests:

With the motor stopped, connect it to its fully chargrd integral battery, and leave it in that condition until the battery is discharged or failutre of any component taken place. The machine shall. not emit flames or molten metal. Any internal explosion shall be contained so as not to cause any material to be ejected from the machine.

7.2.1.4 Terminals and uninsulated electrical parts - Terminals and uninsulated electrical parts, and two-wire non-grounded systems shall be protected against short circuiting by the fuelcan, or tools, during normal re-fuelling and lubrication servicing. 7.2.2 Ignition Circuits - Ignition interruption provided and shall be fitted on the low-voltage or short-circuiting side. shall bc

7.2.3 All high voltage parts of the circuit including spark plug and terminals shall be electrically protected in such a manner that the operator cannot make accidental contact with them. 7.2.4 Spark plug wires shall be removable requiring the use of tools. 7 from the spark plug without

IS : 9581-

1980 AND OPERATIONAL
provided with instructions.

8. MAINTENANCE

REQUIREMENTS
a manual giving operating, This shall also include the of controls;

8.1 Each mower shall be servicing and maintenance followings:
a) Easily b) understood

instructions

on the operations

Instructions for the proper assembly of the mower for use, if the mower is not supplied in a completely assembled form; of the mower, including blades; for example, ROTATING BLADE"; a and

c) Instructions for proper adjustment warning of the danger of rotating "CAUTION
IVOTE -

-

DO NOT

TOUCH

depiction of caution should also be given.

d) Instructions 8.2 Certain guidance. safe

for the operation operation practices

of the mower. are given in Appendix A for

APPENDIX ( Clause 8.2 )
SAFE OPERATION PRACTICES

A

FOR POWER LAWN MOWER

A-I. TRAINING A-l.1 Read the instructions
the proper

carefully. use of the equipment. or people

Be familiar unfamiliar

with the controls with these

and

A-l.2 Never allow children to use the mower.

instructions

A-l.3
A-2.

Avoid mowing PREPARATION

while people,

especially

children,

or pets are nearby.

A-2.1 While mowing, always wear equipment when barefoot or wearing

closed boots. open sandals.

Do

not

operate

the

A-2.2 Tho&ugbly inspect the area where the equipment is to be used and remove all stones, sticks, wires, bones, and other foreign objects. A-2.3 Gasoline precautions: a) Store is highly inflammable. specifically Observe designed the following

fuel in containers

for this purpose. areas. Do

b) Refuel outdoors preferably, or only in well-ventilated not smoke while fueling engine. 8

IS :.9581

- 1980

cl 4
A-2.4

Add fuel before starting the engine. the fuel tank or add gasoline while engine is hot.

Never romove the cap of engine is running or when the area of spill gasoline vapours high noise levels. that mower

If gasoline is spilled, move machine away from and avoid creating any source of ignition until have dissipated. Replace faulty mufflers which create often; unnecessary always

A-2.5 Check all nuts, bolts and screws is in safe operating condition. A-3. OPERATION

be sure

A-3.1 Do not operate the monoxide fumes can collect. garage. A-3.2 Mow only in daylight

engine in a confined space where carbon Open doors if the engine is to be run in the or in good artificial light. Always Excercise not mow and

A-3.3 Avoid operating the equipment in wet grass, where feasible. Walk, never run. be sure of your footing on slopes. A-3.4 Mow across the face of slopes, never extreme caution when changing direction excessively steep slopes.
up

on

and down. slopes. Do

A-3.5 Stop the blade(s) if mower has to be lifted when crossing gravel drive ways, walks, or roads. A-3.6 Never operate the mower with defective safety protective devices in place.

for transportation shields,

guards,

or without

A-3.7 Do not change the engine governor settings or overspeed the engine. Operating an engine at excessive speed increases the hazard of personal injury. A-3.8 A-3.9 A-3.10 chute. Disengage Start Do all blade and drive clutches carefully engine before starting.

the engine not start

with feet well away from the blade(s). when standing in front of the discharge Keep clear

A-3.11 Do not put hands or feet near or under rotating of the discharge opening at all times. A-3.12 A-3.13 Never pick up or carry Stop the engine: you leave the mower, 9 a mower while the engine

parts.

is running.

a) whenever

even for a moment.

b) hafore cIearing
c) before d) before A-3.14 refueling. making

or removing a height

grass box or unclogging

chute.

adjustment. the spark plug wire:

Stop the engine checking

and cl&connect or working

a) before

on the mower.

b) after striking a foreign and make repairs before c) if mower A-3.15 starts to vibrate Avoid cutting

object. ( Inspect the mower for damage restarting and operating the mower. ) abnormally. the mower ( Check towards immediately. you. )

grass by pulling

A-3.16 Never use a mains-electric power mower in the rain or when grass is wet and always use an isolating transformer if the mower is not Use of an isolating transformer with double insulated double insulated. mower is recommended. Never use a mains-electric mower which has a If lead is cut by mower disconnect damaged or worn flexible lead. Do not handle mower or severed ends immediately from power supply. of lead until this is done regardless of whether or not an isolating transformer is used. A-3.17 Never leave wind-up type starters suitable in a wound eye protection up condition. when operating

A-3.18 It is advisable mower. A-4. STORAGE

to wear

A-4.1 Keep all nuts, bolts, and screws tight is in safe working condition.

to be sure that the equipment in the tank inside a or spark. Allow the free of grass,

A-4.2 Never store the equipment with gasoline building where fumes may reach an open flame engine to cool before storing in any enclosure. A-4.3 To reduce fire hazard, leaves, or excessive grease. keep the engine

and muffler for wear

A-4.4 Check the grass catcher bags frequently Replace with new bags for safety.

or deterioration.

10

