( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Indian Standard
CENTRIFUGAL, MIXED FLOW AND AXIAL PUMPS - CODE FOR HYDRAULIC PERFORMANCE TESTS - PRECISION CLASS
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical to IS0 5198 : 1987 `Centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps - Code for hydraulic performance tests - Precision class', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Pumps Sectional Committee ( HMD 20 ) and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:
International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IS0 31

: 1983 Quantities IS 1890 (PartO) symbols - General principles IS 1890 (Partl): 1982 Quantities, symbols : Part 1 Space and time

units units

and and

Identical Identical Identical Identical Identical Identical Identical

IS 1890 (Part2) : 1982 Quantities units and symbols : Part 2 Periodic and related phenomena : 1982 Quantities IS 1890 ( Part3) symbols : Part 3 Mechanics IS 1890 ( Part 4 ) : 1982 symbols : Part 4 Heat IS 1890 ( Part 5 ) : 1983 symbols : Part 5 Electricity IS 1890 ( Part 6 ) : 1983 symbols : Part 6 Light and tic radiations IS 1890 ( Part 7') : 1983 symbols : Part 7 Acoustics Quantities units units and and

Quantities units and and magnetism Quantities units and related electromagneQuantities units and

Identical Identical

: 1983 Quantities units and IS 1890( Part8) chemistry and smybols. : Part 8 Physical molecular physics IS 1890 ( Part 9 ) : 1983 Quantities units and symbols : Part 9 Atomic and nuclear physics

Identical

(i)

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 6198 : 1987 international Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 1890 ( Part 10 ) : 1983 Quantities symbols : Part 10 Nuclear reactions zing radiations ISs18~%31s( Part 11 : Part symbols for use technology ( first units and and ioniDegree of Equrvalence Identical

) : 1982 Quantities units and 11 Mathematical signs and in the physical science and revision )

Identical

IS 1890 ( Part 12 ) : 1983 Quantities units and symbols : Part 12 Dimensionless parameters IS 1890( Part131 : 1983 Quantities symbols : Part 13 Solid state physics IS0 555 ( Part 1 ) units and

Identical Identical Technically equivalent

IS 9163 ( Part 1 ) : 1979 Dilution methods of measurement of steady flow : Part 1 Constant rate injection method

IS0 1438 ( Since withdrawn in favour of IS0 1438/l and IS0 4359 ) IS0 1438/l IS0 IS0 IS0 IS0 2548 3534 3555 3846 IS 9108 : 1979 Liquid flow measurement in open channels using thin plate weirs IS 9137 : 1978 Code for acceptance test for centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps - Class C 7920 : 1985 Statistical vocabulary ( first revision ) IS 10981 : 1983 Code of acceptance test for centrifugal mixed flow and axial pumps - Class B IS 6059 : 1971 Recommendations for liquid flow measurement in open channels by weirs and flumes - Weirs of finite crest width for free discharge IS 6062 : 1971 Method of measurement of flow of water in open channels using standing wave flume-fall IS 4080 : 1967 Specification for vertical staff gauges IS 4477 ( Part 1 ) : 1957 Methods of measurement of fluid flow by means of venturi meters : Part 1 Liquids
IS 4889 : 1968 Method of determination ency of rotating electrical machines of effici-

IS

Technically equivalent Nbt equivalent Not equivalent Not equivalent Technically equivalent

IS0 4359

Not equivalent Technically equivalent Technically equivalent Not
equivalent

IS0 4373 IS0 5167

IEC 34-2

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of IS0 555 ( Part 2 ) and ( Part 3 ), IS0 2186, IS0 2975 ( Part 1 ), ( Part 2), ( Part 3 ), ( Part 6 ) and ( Part 7 ), IS0 3354, IS0 3966, IS0 4185, IS0 4360, IS0 5168, IS0 7194, IS0 8316, IEC Pub 41, IEC Pub 193, IEC Pub 198 and IEC Pub 497 and decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. ( ii )

1S 13638:1393 IS0 6188:1887 CONTENTS 0 1 2 3 Introduction scope Field of application References
... ... . .. ... ... . .. . .. . ..

. .. ... . . .

Page 1 1

a.
2 3 10 10 17 21 38 38 41 51 57 61 65 78 80

...
. .. . .. ... . . . . . . .*. . . . . . . . . . . . . ..* . . . . . . . . .

Sect ion one : General recommendations 4 Definitions and symbols 5 Specified duty 6 General requirements for tests Section two : Measurement methods 7 Measurement of rate of flow 8 Measurement of head 9 Measurement of speed of rotation 10 Measurement of power input 11 Measurement of pump efficiency by the thermodynamic method 12 Cavitation tests

... . .. . ..

. .. . .. ...

. .. ... . .. ... . .. ...

l ..

...

...

...

..*

.I.

Annexes . .. A Estimation and analysis of uncertainties . . . ... B Comparison of test results with specified duty C Thermodynamic properties of water and assessment of the accuracy of efficiency measurements by the thermodynamic method . .. ... D Other cavitation tests . .. . .. E Friction losses

( iii )

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

0

Introductim

This International

Standard

does not recommend

any construc-

This International Standard is the first of a set of International Standards dealing with performance tests of centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps (in the rest of the text referred to as "pumps"). It specifies precision class tests (former class A). Engineering class I and class II tests (former classes B and C) will be the subject of a further International Standard."

tional tolerance nor any global tolerance for acceptance purposes; it is devoted to specifying and describing procedure and methods for accurately ascertaining the performance of a pump under the conditions in which it is tested. Contractual interpretation of the test results must be the subject of a special agreement between the parties concerned (see annex B). Pump performance may be greatly affected by the installation

conditions, and this must be especially considered when drawing up the contract if a precision class test is to be carried out. develop-

The aims of these classes are quite different. The precision class is mainly used for research,

ment and scientific purposes in laboratories, where an extremely high accuracy of measurement is important. The engineering tests. classes are generally applied for acceptance

1

scope

This International Standard specifies precision class performance tests for centrifugal, mixed flow and axial pumps. It defines the terms and quantities that are used and specifies general requirements for tests. It specifies ways of measuring the characteristic quantities of the precision class so as to ascertain the performance of the pump and thus provide a basis for comparison with the performance specified in the contract. The structural details of pumps and the mechanical properties of their components lie outside the scope of this International Standard. This International Standard does not specify tolerances, which are purely contractual. constructional

In most cases, engineering

class II is adequate

for acceptance

tests. The use of engineering class I is restricted to special cases when there is a need to have the pump performance more precisely defined. However, there may be cases of high importance, in which even an engineering class I acceptance test will be judged inadequate for the precision required for defining pump performance. In these cases the use of the precision class may exceptionally be necessary for an acceptance test. Attention must be paid to the fact that the accuracy required for a precision class test significantly increases the test costs by comparison with the costs for an engineering class test.

Precision class tests may not always be practicable, even when great effort and expense are devoted to measurements. Performance tests to precision class specifications will be required, and are possible, only in suitable circumstances. Therefore both the purchaser amine whether and the manufacturershall carefully exthe accuracy required for a precision class test

2
This

Field of application
International performance Standard gives recommendations mixed-flow for and

hydraulic

testing of centrifugal,

might be achieved either on site, on the manufacturer's test bed or in a mutually agreed laboratory. It should be noted that it may not be possible to guarantee advance of the tests. precision class accuracy in

axial pumps when these tests have to meet very special requirements for research, development or acceptance of industrial high-tech. pumps, or when very accurate knowledge mance characteristics is of prime importance. of perfor-

The purpose of this International Standard is to specify how to carry out a test with extremely high precision.

This International Standard also applies to models and prototypes whether the pumps are tested on a test bench or on site if installation conditions 50 permit.

1)

At present, they are dealt with in IS0 2545 and IS0 3555.

1,s13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

.

it applies either to the pump itself without fittings, quires that the pump ends are accessible; or which re-

IS0 3534, Statistics

-

Vocabulary

and symbols.

IS0 3555, Centrifugal, mixed flow and acceptance tests - Class B.

axial pumps - Code for

to the whole assembly of pump and of ail or part of its upstream and downstream fittings, which is the case for pumps with inaccessible ends (submerged NOTES
1 ,Attention is drawn to the fact that nearly all industrial needs are covered by the codes of acceptance testing of industrial classes I and II. 2 Accepiance tests for site and model storage pumps are dealt with in

pumps, etc.).

IS0 3646, Liquid flow measurement in open channels by weirs and flumes - Free overfall weirs of finite crest width (rectangular broad-crested IS0 3966, Measurement weirs). of fluid flow in closed conduits -

Velocity area method

using Pitot static tubes. of liquid flow in closed conduits -

IEC Publications 198 and 497.

IS0 4185, Measurement Weighing method.

3

References
units and symbols. Dilu-

IS0 4359, Liquid flow measurement in open channels tangular, trapezoidal and U-shaped flumes. IS0 4360, Liquid flow measurement and flumes -

Rec-

IS0 31, Quantities,

in open channels by weirs

Triangular profile weirs. in open channels -

IS0 555, Liquid flow measurement in open channels tion methods for measurement of steady flow Part 1: Constant-rate Part 2: Integration Part 3: method IS0 injection method. method. and

150'4373, Measurement of liquid flow Water level measuring de vices.

(sudden injection)

Constant-rate injection method using radioactive tracers. flow measurement

integration

IS0 5167, Measuremenr of fluid flow by means of orifice plates, nozzles and venturi tubes inserted in circular crosssection conduits running full.

1438, Liquid

in open channels

using

IS0 5166, Measurement tainty of a flow-rate

of fluid fldw

-

Estimation

of uncar-

thin-plate

weirs and venturi flumes.

measurement. or

IS0 1436/l, Water flow measurement in open channels using weirs and venturi flumes - Part 1: Thin-plate weirs. IS0 2183, Fluid flow in closed conduits - Connections for pressure signal transmissions between primary and secondary elements. IS0 2540, Centrifugal, acceptance IS0 2975, tests mixed flow and Class C. of water flow in closed conduits -

IS0 7154, Measurement of fluid flow in closed conduits Velocity-area methods of flow measurement in swirling asymmetric flaw conditions in circular ducts by means current-meters or Pitot static tubes.

of

axial pumps - Code for

IS0 6316, Measurement of liquid flow in closed conduits Method by collection of the liquid in a volumetric tank. `)

-

Measurement -

IEC Publication 34-2, Rotating electrical machines - Part 2: Methods for determining losses and efficiency of rotating electrical machinery vehicles). from tests lexc1udin.g machines for traction

Tracer methods

Part 7: General.

Part 2:
Part3: tracers.

Constant
tracers. Constant

rate

injection

method

using

non-

IEC Publication

41, International turbines.

code for the field acceptance

radioactive

tests of hydraulic

rate injection

method

using radioactive

IEC Publication 193, International tests of hydraulic turbines. IEC Publication 196, International

code for model acceptance

Part 6: Transit time method Part 7: Transit time method IS0 3354, duits Measurement

using non-radioactive using radioactive flow

tracers.

code for the fieldacceptance

tracers. con-

tests of storage pumps. IEC Publication 493, InternatIonal code for model acceptance

of clean water

in closed

Velocity-area

method

using current-meters.

tests of storage pumps.

1)

At present at the stage of draft.

2

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

Section
4
4.1

one

:

General

recommendations
or the autocorrelation function, R,, given by the equation

Definitions
Definitions

and symbols

R,(t,
Standard, the following 4.1.5

T)

=

$

s
I

r+ 7

X(I) [xlt

+ T)] dr

For the purposes of this International definitions apply.

steady

and unsteady

process:

Random

process x(f)

4.1.1 measuring system : System composed of a measuring instrument, including a transducer which picks up physical information, and one or sevc,al elements in series transmitting the resulting signal. or transforming

is said to be slightly steady or steady in a general sense when its first order statistical moment (mean pX) and its second order statistical moment [variance r$, or autocorrelation function R., (1, T)l are not dependent on time 1, at which the observation begins nor on the period of time T during which the observation is made. on I or

Such a system has a response function which can be illustrated by a gain response or a phase response curve over a frequency range. In particular, a filtering effect appears between the picked up physical quantity and the observed signal. This filtering effect is essentially characterized by a cut frequency. In most measuring systems which are used, the continuous component of the signal can pass and the cut frequency is then strongly related to the response time of the system.

Inversely, when the statistical moments are dependent T, the physical phenomenon is said to be unsteady.

When all statistical moments of the process x(f) (beyond the second order), which completely describe the statistical property of x(f), are not dependent on t and 7, the process is then said to be strongly or strictly steady.

4.12

measuring

instrument:

Instrument,

forming part of a

measuring system, which transforms any physical quantity (pressure, speed, current, etc.) into a signal which can be directly observed (a mercury level, a point on a dial scale, a digital reading, etc. t.

NOTE - From a practical point of view and in this lnternanonal Srandard, only slightly steady processes are considered (first and second order statistical moments). It should be noted that when the considered process follows a normal or Gaussian distribution law, the first and second order statistical moments are sufficient to describe the statrstrcal properties of the process completely and both concepts of strong or slight steadiness are then equivalent.

4.1.3

first

order

statistical

moment:

mean

value

of a

4.1.6 steady operating conditions: The operating conditions are said to be steady when the different signals delivered by the measuring systems and the physical quantities calculated from these signals have first order (mean p,I and order [variance oX2, or autocorrelation function R, (1, T)l statistical moments which do not depend on the time t at which the observation begins nor on the duration T during second which the observation is made.

signal: Characterization of a random process x(t) order statistical moment which generally is the calculated

by a first mean pX

over a period of time T given by the equation

I
responding

,+

I

x(t) dt

I

NOTE - To calculate the mean value of a signal or physical quantity, an integration period Tmuch longer than the response time of the cormeasuring system is usually chosen.

NOTE - The random signal delivered by a measuring system can be found to be steady only if the integration period T'is sufficiently long. This point is difficult to check for one is never calculated for a sufficrent
duration; this is why, from a practical point of view, only a steadiness with a certain confidence level IS defined.

To determine simultaneously the mean value of several signals of several physical quantities corresponding to the same operating point, the integration period TIS chosen by considering the longest response

4.1.7
tions

unsteady are said

operating to be

conditions: when

The operating condithe different signals quantities

time among ail the measuring

systems which are used.

unsteady

According to the value of the integration period 7 chosen to calculate the mean value of the signals, the operating condrtrons will be determined to be either steady or unsteady.

delivered by the measuring systems and the physical

calculated from these signals have a first order imean II,) or second order [variance CJ~,or autocorrelatlon functron H, (I, T)] statistrcal moment which depends on the trme I at which the observation begins or on the penod I durinq which the observation is made.
NOTE - The dynamic component (see figurlc li ot the prcked up phystcal quantrtres has different origins a) a random etc., origin. turbulence, white WJIW tit the electronic

4.1.4 second order statistical moment: variance or autocorrelation function: Charactenzatron of a random processx(r) by a second order statistical moment calculated over a time period T and for which can be chosen erther the variance uz expressed as 1 s /+

:
T [x(r) ~~ p,.)2

system,

of=

-

d[

T

I

bl a determrnrst ongrn blade passing frequency, speed of rotation in connection with the electric network frequency, flow singularities, vrbration modes, etc.

3

IS 13538: 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

T,

is an insufficiently is a sufficiently

long integration

period. The mean value, X, of x as estimated

from TI will vary.

T2

long period.

Figure

1 -

Graph

of the evolution

of a phenomenon

(supposed

to be known)

It is supposed that the possible unsteadiness of the operating conditions has a frequency lower than that corresponding to these phenomena (less than half the lowest encountered frequency); as a consequence, the integration period Twill not be leas than twice the
period T corresponding to the lowest frequency mentioned above.

Then the variations of the mean value can be considered being "slow" compared to fluctuations (see 4.1.8).

as

4.1.8

fluctuations:

Periodic

or

random

evolutions

of

a

4.1.10 readings: Visual observations allowing the recording of the value of the signal delivered by a measuring system.

phenomenon x(t) as a function of time, varying around a mean value and describing a physical quantity or a signal delivered by a measuring system.

Two types of readings should be considered

:

a) the "quasi-instantaneous"
All evolutions having a period or a pseudo-period less than twice the integration period chosen to calculate the mean values are considered as fluctuations. Then the fluctuations can be considered as being "rapid" compared to the variations of the mean value (see 4.1.9).
NOTE - Only fluctuations having a period or a pseudo-period higher than twice the response time of the corresponding measuring system can be detected. b) the

reading of the signal, which

is made during as short a time as possible (but not shorter than the response time of the measuring system considered)

;

NOTE The group of "quasi instantaneous" readings made during the integration period Tallows the calculation of statlstlcal moments (set' 4 1 3 and 4 1 4).

"averaging

reading"

of rhe signal which

is made

4.1.9 variations of operating conditions):
physical between quantity one reading

the

mean
of delivered

value
the

(in
mean

unsteady
value of a system,

Evolution

over or at rhe end of the integration period 7'depending on the measuring system, thts "averagtng reading" leads directly to the mean value of the slgnal.

or of signal

by a measurtng

and the next, in unsteady

operating

con4.1.11 set of readings: Group of "quasi-instantaneous"

ditions. The variations pseudo-period of the mean values should show a period or a higher than twice the integration period T the mean value. readings leading to the determination of the values of the different signal or physical quantities characterizing an operating point

chosen to calculate

IS 13538 : 1993 Is0 5198 : 1987

4.1.12 response time of a measuring instrument: Time interval between the instant when a stimulus is subjected to a specified abrupt change and the instant when the response reaches and remains within specified value. 4.1.13 Prandtl
PC,

4.2

Quantities,

symbols and units

limits of its final steady

Table 1 gives concepts and some of their uses in this International Standard, together with any associated symbols which have been allocated: it is based on IS0 31.

number,

fr:
The definitions, particularly those given for kinetic energy coef-

pr =T
where p 1 (Definition

ficient, specific energy and NPSH may not be appropriate for completely general use in hydrodynamics, and are for the purposes of this International Standard only. viscosity of the fluid; conductivity. Table 2 gives an alphabetical gives a list of subscripts. list of symbols used, and table 3

is the dynamic is its thermal

taken from IS0 31/12.)

Table Quantity Mass Length Time Temperature Area Volume Angular velocity Velocity Acceleration due to gravity41 Speed of rotation Density Pressure

1 -

List of quantities Definition2)

(based on IS0 31)`) Symbol m DimensiorG) M L T 0 LZ
L3

Unit kg
m S

OC m3 m3 rad/s m/s m/s3 s-. I kg/m3 Pa :l bar = 1Oa Pa

T-1

LT-' LT-* Number or rotations per unit time Mass per unit volume Force per unit area. Unless otherwise specified all pressures are gauge pressures, i.e. measured with respect to atmospheric pressure.
"

T-1
ML-3 ML `T-3

Kinematic viscosity Specific energy Power (general term) Reynolds number Diameter Flow rates Mass rate of flow
The mass rate of flow designates the external mass rate of flow of the pump, i.e. the rate of flow discharged into the pipe from the outlet branch of the pump.

L2Tm ' L7-T-3 MLzT-3 dimensionless L

m2/s J/kg W

Energy per unit mass

E P Re D
9,l9)

m

MT-'

kg/s

NOTE -- Losses or abstracrions inherent to the pump, i.e. ; al discharge necessary for hydraulic balancing of axial thrust;
b) cooling of bearings of the pump itself; c) water seal to the packing; dl leakage from the fittings, internal leakage, etc., sre not to be reckoned in the quantity delivered, On the contrary, if they are taken at a point before the How measuring section, all derived quantities used for other purposes, such as : et cooling of the motor bearings; oil cooler), f) cooling of a gear box (bearings, etc., ;hould be added to the measured

rate of flow.

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

Table 1 Quantity Volume rate of flow

List of quantities
Definition*' volume rate of flow

(based on IS0 3111) konfinuedl
Symbol is given by the ov Dimension31 L3T-1 Unit m3/s

F

The outlet equation

(Q)

For the purposes of this International Standard, this symbol may also designate the volume rate of flow in a given Section5 of the pump outlet; it is the quotient of the ma55 rate of flow in this section by the density. (The section may be designated by subscripts. 1 Mean velocity The mean velocity of flow equal to the volume rate of flow divided by the pipe cross~sectior?

u

LT-'

m/s

A
Local velocity Gauge pressure Velocity of flow at any point
Y

LT-' ML-

m/s Pa

Any pressure used in this International Standard except atmospheric and vapour pressure; the effective pressure, relative to the atmospheric pressure. Its value is positive if this pressure is greater atmospheric pressure; is less than the negative if this pressure atmospheric pressure. than the

Pe

1T-3

Atmospheric (absolute) Vapour Head

pressure
pb

ML-' ML

T-3 `T-2 L

Pa Pa m

pressure (absolute) The energy per unit mas5 of fluid divided by gravitational acceleration. Elevation of a point above a reference If the point is below the reference negative. plane plane. plane,

P"

Height

I

m

z is

Reference

Any horizontal plane to be used as a datum for height measurement. A materialized reference plane may be more practical than an imaginary one for measurement purposes. The height of the centre of the circle described by the external point of the entrance edges of the first impeller blades. in case of double inlet pumps, z, is the The this the higher impeller height. manufacturer should indrcate the position of point with respect to precise reference points on pump.

__

Inlet impeller height (or eye height)

m

Velocity

head

Height of flu'd corresponding to the kinetic energy per unit mass of fluid divided by gravitational acceleration. Its value is given by the formula

L

m

a WI2 g
Velocrty head coefficient A coefficrent relating velocity head in the section It is defined a dimensionless with the mean velocrty in that section bv the equation n--Q_ If v ~vadable velocity head The
is

1.

v3dA

C/3 ..4
constant, a = 1 head contributing to the L m

part

of the velocity

total head. Its value is given by the formula cr, LJ21% q See 8.1.1.3 Available clerlt velocity head coefflA coefficient relating available veloc'ty head section to the mean velocity in that section. See 8.1 1.3 in a na dimensionles: where

1 < a,

< a

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

Table Quentity
Total head lin section il as:

1 -

List of quantities DefinitioJ)

(based on IS0 31111 (continued) Svmbol Dimensions)
L Unit m

Total head in a given section, i, is usually calculated

H,

This equation assumes that pressure varies hydrostatically in the section and that compressibility of the liquid pumped See 8.1.1.2 assumption. inlet total head Outlet total head Pump total head Total head at inlet section 1 Total head at outlet section 2 Algebraic difference between outlet total head H2 and inlet total head H, : may be neglected. the correctness of this last concerning

H,
H2

m m m

H

H = H, - H,
Separate evaluation of H, and H2 is not always necessary. Other methods may even be recommended if compressibility is to be accounted for. See 8.1.1.2. Loss of head at inlet The difference between the total head of the liquid at the measuring point, or possibly of the liquid without velocity in the suction chamber, and the total head of the liquid in the inlet section of the pump. Loss of head at outlet The difference between the total head of the liquid in the outlet section of the pump, and the total head of the liquid at the measuring Net positive suction head point. (NPSH) m

HJI

L

m

H J2

m

; NPSH

Inlet total head increasad by the head (in flowing liquid) corresponding to the atmospheric pressure at the test location and decreased by the sum of the head corresponding to the vapour pressure of the pump liquid at the inlet temperature and of the inlet tmpeller height. (NPSH) NOTES 1 To maintain consistency between precision class = H, + z!L

elg

- .38

- z,

and engineering

classes I and II, the arbitrary definivalues, the value

tion of INPSHI is the same. Therefore, in calculating (NPSH)

of ag, is taken to be equal to unity (see velocity head coefficient). 2 Local velocity distribution may influence of the pump. is given in clause 12. to make a distinction between lNPSHt

performance IQJ variation 3

Limitation of local veloc-

It is necessary ~the (NPSHJ

required at given flow and speed ~~ this is specified

of rotation

for a given pump

by the manufacturer: . the (NPSH) available for the same whrch is inferred from the installation: the cavitation test (NPSHI. these quan flow,

Subscripts may be used to differentiate

tities Ifor example (NPSH), when the value required my the pump IS concerned, (NPSH), when the available value is concerned end (NPSH), when ;avitation test (NPSHi is concerned]. INPSH), L m

Miwl

net positive suction head

head associated with Vet positrve suction 2 + W/2j! % either of head drop in the first stage )r of the efficiency drop.

IS 13538

: 1993

IS0 5198 : 1987

Table
Quantity

1 -

List of quantities
DefinitiorG)

(based on

IS0 31)" (concluded)
Symbol Dimensiona' Unit

Type number

A number defined by the equation
K=

K

dimensionless

2n n (q;)l'z
07.`)3/4 =

w q'k1/2
~ E'3l4

where c$~ is the volume rate of flow per eye and H' is the head of the first stage. This quanrity shall be calculated at the best efficiency point. Pump pdwer Input Driver power input Pump power output Mechanical power transmitted to the pump shaft. Power input to driving unit. The power transferred to the liquid at its passage through the pump p, = !?7yR H = @?"E Pump efficiency o=pY P Overall efficiency P _.k! `I,, = p CJr I dimensionless P %' P, ML'T-3 MLZT-3 MLZT-3 W W W

VW

dimensionless

1)

Further symbols used in the thermodynamic method are given in table 9.

2) In order to avoid any error of interpretation, it is deemed desirable to reproduce the definitions of quantities and units as given in IS0 31 and to supplement these definitions by some specific information on their use in this International Standard. 3) M = mass, L = length, T = time, 0 = temperature.
cases, a value of 9,81 m/s2 would not involve significant

41 For precision class tests, the local values of g should be used. Nevertheless. in m-t error. The local value should be calculated by the equation R = 8,780 3 (1 + 0,005 3 sir&) - 3 x 10-Q where q and z are respectively the latitude, in degrees, and the altitude. in metres. 5:

Attention is drawn to the fact that in this case 4" may vary for different reasons across the circuit.

8

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table 2 Symbol
A D r E

Alphabetical

list of symbols Units m2 m

Quantity Area Diameter Relative value of uncertainty Specific energy Frequency Acceleration due to gravity Pump total head Losses in terms of head of liquid Equivalent uniform roughness Type number Length Mass Speed of rotation Net positive suction head Pressure Power Mass rate of flow Volume rate of flow Reynolds number Time Mean velocity Local velocity Volume Height above reference plane Velocity head coefficient Efficiency Temperature Universal coefficient for head loss Kinematic viscosity Density Angular velocitv

J/kg HZ m/s2 m m m dimensionless m kg s-1 m Pa W kg/s ms/s dimensionless s m/s m(s ma m dimensionless dimensionless OC dimensionless n-9/s kg/m3 rad/s

f g
H HJ k K I m n

(NPSH)
P P 4m 4v Rt? I u
V

V
Z a rt 8 A " P w

NOTE -

See also clause 11.

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table

3 -

List of letters and figures as subscripts Designation
inlet outlet available acoustic atmospheric critical drop effective (gauge)

used

a) unless the chemical and physical properties of the liquid are stated, it shall be ?aken that the points specified apply to clean cold water (see table 4);

Subscript 1 2 a ac
b
C

Table

4 -

Specification

of "clean Unit "C
m2/s

cold water"

Characteristic Temperature Kinemarlc viscosity Density Non-absorbent free solid content Dissolved solid content

-I

1

max. 40
1.5 x 10 h 1050

d e
f 9'

kg/m3

fully developed unit (overall) pump total head intermediate manometric mass motor pump power input pump required eve specified total translated useful volume vapour visible efficiency (pressure)

kg/r+ Kg/m3

2.5 50

H
int

M m mot P P r s W t T
U v V

b) the relation between the specified values under clean cold water conditions and the likely performance under other liquid conditions shall be agreed in the contract;

c) specified values shall apply only to the pump as tested by the methods and in the test arrangements specified in this International Standard.

6
6.1
6.1.1

General

requirements
of tests

for tests

Organization
Place

vis `t

of testing tests shall be carried and the purchaser. and manufacturer shall be entltled to have out at the manufacturer's

Performance

5
5.1

Specified
Main

duty

works, or alternatively the manufacturer Both purchaser

at a place to be mutually agreed between

specification

representatives

present at all tests and calibrations in accordance and any prior written agreements.

in order to

One or more of the following quantities may be specified under
the conditions and speed or rotation stated in the contract:

verify that they are performed national Standard

with this Inter-

a) pump total head, Hsp, at the agreed flow rate, qysp, or flow rate of the pump, qysp, at the agreed total head, Hsp. b) power input or efficiency of the pump or combined

6.1.2

Time

of testing agreed by the manufac-

The time of testing shall be mutually turer and the purchaser.

pump-motor c)

unit at the specified qVsp, H,, suction head, (NPSH),

point. required by the

net positive

pump at the agreed flow rate effect as defined, rate. d) other points of the for example,

qvsp for a specified cavitation
in 12.1.3.2 at the agreed flow

6.1.3

Staff
measurements instruments tests. operating The depend used, not only on the quality of the the measuring with just as carefully devices effecting as the

Accurate measuring

but also on the ability and skill entrusted

H(q& curve may be indicated by

of the persons during the

and reading staff

specifying either the total head at a reduced or increased flow rate, or the flow rate at a reduced or incrsased total head.

the measurements instruments

shall be selected

to be used in the test. adequate experience in measuring

A chief of tests possessing 5.2

Other

specifications
agreed othsrwise in the contract, the

operations shall be appointed. Normally, when the test is carried out at the manufacturer's works, the chief of tests is a staff member of the manufacturing firm. conditions

Unless specified

specifically

values are valid in the following

:

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

All persons charged with effecting the measurements are subordinated during the tests to the chief of tests, who conducts and supervises the measurements, reports on test conditions and the results of the tests and then drafts the test report. All questions arising in connection with the measurements and their execution are subject to his decision. The parties concerned shall provide all assistance that the chief

d)

specification

of the pump's drive;

e) description of the test procedure and the measuring apparatus used including calibration data; f) g) of obsarved readings; evaluation measuring and analysis of test results with calculation uncertainties according to 6.4, 6.5 and

of tests considers necessary.

annex A: 6.1.4

State

of pump

h)

conclusion

: comparison

of the test results with

the

specifies When tests are not carried out at the manufacturer's works, opportunity shall be allowed for preliminary adjustments by both the manufacturer and the installer.

duties (see annex B).

All test records and record charts shall be initialled by the chief of tests and by the representatives of both the purchaser and the manufacturer, each of whom shall be provided with a copy of all records and charts. The evaluation of the test results shall be made as far as pass ible while the tests are in progress and, in any case, before the installation and instrumentation are dismantled, in order that measurements regarded as suspect can be repeated without delay.

6.1.6 Only test; shall shall

Test programme
the specified operational data shall form the basis of the other data determined by measurement during the tests have merely an indicative (informative) function and this be stated if they are inclllded in the programme.

6.1.6

Test equipment

6.2

Test arrangements

When deciding on the measuring procedure, the measuring and recording apparatus required shall be specified at the same time. The chief of tests shall be responsible for checking the correct installation of the apparatus and its perfect functioning. All measuring apparatus shall be covered by reports showing, StanThese

The performance of a pump in a given test arrangement, however accurately measured, cannot be assumed to be a correspondingly accurate indication of its performance in another arrangement. Moreover, the conditions which permit the most accurate measurements to be taken are not necessarily those under which the pump may perform most satisfactorily nor those under which the user may ultimately reauire it to perform. This International Standard therefore defines the conditions necessary to measure performance most accurately and discusses the errors which may be caused by failing to meet those conditions, in order that the interested parties may define the test arrangement most suited to the circumstances. Recommendations and general guidance about suitable pipe arrangements upstream of a measuring device are given in clauses 7 and 8; if necessary, they can be used in conjunction with International Standards on flow measurement in closed conduits concerning the different flow measurement methods.

by calibration or by comparison with other International dards, that it complies with the requirements of 6.4. reports shall be presented The measuring devices if required. used shall have valid

calibration.

Periodic calibration shall be performed by an entitled body. During the pump tests, the indications of the various instruments shall be cross-compared to check that their calibration is maintained. Generally after site testing or in case of dispute, new calibration shall be performed as soon as possible.

6.1.7

Test

report the test results shall be summarized in a

Afrer actual scrutiny,

report signed either by the chief of tests alone, or by him and representatives of the manufacturer and of the purchaser. All parties to the contract shall receive a copy of the report as an essential condition for the completion of the contract. The test report shall contain the following a) place and date of the performance information test; serial number,

6.2.1

Standard

test arrangements measurement of head is possible when the

The most accurate

flow at the measuring

section has: velocity distrrbution;

:

a)
b) c)

an axial+

symmetrical

a uniform static pressure distribution, free& w, i:ot7 ..wirl induced by the installatron

b) manufacturer's name, type of pump, and if possible year of construction; c) specified characteristics, test; operational

conditions

during

the performance

IS 13538

: 1993

IS0 5198 : 1987

It is recommended that for standard test circuits leading from reservoirs with a free surface, or from large stilling vessels in a closed circuit, the inlet straight length, L, be determined by the equation : L > (1,5 K + 5,5) D where L D is the inlet straight length; is the pipe inside diameter; is the type number.

c) fittings introduced for testing forming part of the pump itself.

purposes

and taken as

Connection on the inlet and outlet sides of the whole combination shall be made in accordance with 6.2.

8.3 63.1

Test conditions Performance of tests

K

In a standard works or laboratory test rig, satisfactory conditions established by previous tests should be considered as sufficient proof for subsequent tests. this may be remedied

In order to obtain consistent results having regard to the degree of accuracy to be achieved, the duration of the test shall be sufficient to take more particularly into account the response time (see 4.1.12) of measuring instruments and the relative steadiness .of each operating point, within the llmits defined in table 5. The measurements shall be made under either steady operating conditions Ls~4.1.6) or unsteady conditions (see 4.1.7) within the limits defined in table 5. The decision to make measurements when such conditions cannot be obtained shall be a matter of agreement between the parties concerned. When only one duty point is indicated for checking, at least five measurement points closely and evenly grouped around the duty point shall be recorded, for instance between 0,9 qV, c and 1.1 4K G. When performance over a range of operating conditions is to be determined, a sufficient number of measurement points duly distributed shall be recorded, in order to establish the performance within the uncertainty stated in 6.4. If the test has to be carried out at a speed of rotation different from that specified, the limits stated in 6.3.3 shall be respected and the characteristics obtained at the actual speed of rotation can be translated to the specified speed of rotation; see 6.5.2.1.

If the inlet conditions are not satisfactory, in one or more of the following ways:

a) increasing the straight length following disturbance causing the flow maldistribution

the source of

;

bl fitting an appropriate straightener or swirl remover (IS0 7194 gives a detailed description of the functional and geometrical characteristics of these devices. 1 cl changing disturbance. the nature of, or removing, the source of

If none of these devices is practicable measurements cannot be made.

on site, precision class

NOTE - Attention is drawn to the fact that in some particular case8 where this International Standard applies to partial flow rate operation, for which pre-swirl occurs, the arrangements agreed upon for that pen

of the test installation at the suction side may modify the pump performance.

6.2.2

Simulated

test arrangements

6.3.2 6.3.2.1

Steadiness Definitions

of operating

conditions

When pumps are tested under simulated site conditions, flow straighteners shall not be installed immediately before the pump, It is important that the characteristics of flow to the simulated circuit should be controlled, and that the flow should, as far as possible, be free from significant swirl induced bv the installation and have a symmetrical velocity distribution. If' necessary, the velocity distribution of the flow into the simulated traverses, characteristics circuit shall be determined by careful Pitot in order to establish that the required exist. If not, the required characteristics tube flow

For the purposes of this International concepts (see 4.1) are used : measuring

Standard

the following

system and instrument; moment, mean value of a signal; variance and autocor-

first order statistical

can be

second order statistical moment, relation; steady and unsteady steady operating unsteady phenomena:

obtained by the installation of an-adequate straightener (see IS0 7194); however, care shall be taken to ensure that the test conditions will not be affected by the high, irrecoverable pressure losses associated with efficient straightening devices.

conditions; conditions;

operating

62.3

Pumps

tested

with

fittings standard tests can be carried out on

-

fluctuations: of the mean value (in unsteady operating

If specified in the contract, a combination a) b)

of a pump and fittings at the final site installation; thereof; or or

variations conditions); readings;

associated

an exact reproduction

set of readings.

Is 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

6.3.2.2 Fluctuations of the signals delivered by the measuring
systems and of the physical quantities the signals The physical quantities considered in a test and especially those relating to the turbulent flow in the pipes or in the pump are naturally fluctuating ones. Nevertheless, the fluctuations which appear on the signals delivered by the measuring systems are only seen through the response function of these systems which leads to a partial or total filtering effect, and more particul*.rly to a damping Therefore measuring effect over a given frequency instruments range. determined from

6.3.2.2.2

Automatic

recording systems

or integration

of signals

delivered by measuring

When the signals delivered by the measuring systems are automatically recorded or integrated by the measuring device, the maximum permissible fluctuation amplitude of these signals may be higher than the value given in table 5, if a) the measuring system used includes an integrating device carrying out automatically, with the required accuracy, the integration necessary value as defined in 4.1.3; or to calculate the mean

with low inertia and a very

short response time may give a fluctuating signal with large fluctuations at every operating point. Conversely, measuring instruments with high inertia and a long response time may give only small fluctuations and sometimes only in the abnormal operating range of the pump.

b) the integration necessary to calculate the mean value may be carried out later on, from the continuous or sampled record of the analogue signal x(t). (The sampling conditions should be specified in the test report.)

6.3.2.2.1 Direct visual observation of the signals delivered by
measuring systems

6.3.2.3 Number readings The number

of sets of readings or number of averaging

of sets of readings

or the number

of averaging

To make a satisfactory direct visual observation, the maximum permissible amplitudes of fluctuations given in table 5 shall be respected for each measured quantity. Where the operating conditions of a pump are such that fluctuations of great amplitude occur, measurement may be carried out by providing, in the elements of the measuring system, a filtering or damping device capable of reducing the fluctuation amplitude to within the values given in tatle 5. As the damping may significantly affect the accuracy of the

readings necessary to obtain consistent results having regard to the degree of accuracy required and within the limits of error stated in 6.4 is dependent on the steadiness of the operating conditions of the pump in the test installation. When several sets of readings have to be made, for the same

operating point, only speed and temperature may be controlled. Throttle valve, water level, gland, and balance water settings shall be left completely In order to determine steady, it is necessary unaltered.

whether the operating conditions are to check whether the different signals are steady,

readings, a symmetrical

and linear damping device, for example

a capillary tube, shall be used. Where pressure measurements particularly are concerned the damping device shall comply with the specifications of 8.4.1.3.

delivered by the measuring systems employed slightly steady or unsteady (see 4.1.6 and 4.1.7).

6.3.2.3.1

Steady operating

conditions

When operating conditions are steady, the signals delivered by the measuring systems may be constant or present steady flucTable fluctuations 6 - Maximum permissible amplitude of as a percentage of mean value of quantity for direct visual observation tuations. to When the signal is constant only one set of readings or only one averaging reading mav be taken at the considered operating When point. the observer shall check that the the quan

be measured,

Measured

quantity

Maximum permissible amplitude of fluctuations %

the signal fluctuates, conditions

Rate of flow Head Torque Power Speed of rotation

operating

are steady

before determining

titv to be measured, which requires several sets of readings or several averaging readings.

6.3.2.3.2

Unsteady

operating

conditions

When using a differential pressure device to measure flow, the maximum permissible amplitude of the fluctuation of the observed differential head can be i 6 %. In the case of separate measurement of inlet total pressure head and outlet total pressure head, the maximum permissible amplitude of fluctuation should be calculated on the basis of the pump total head.

In cases where the unsteadiness of test conditions gives rise to doubts concerning the accuracy of the tests, several sets of readings shall be taken for each operating point considered (see 6.3.2.3). The difference between the mean values deduced from the repeated readings of the same quantities of the test conditions, will be a which are measure of the unsteadiness at least partly influenced installation.

by the pump under test as well as the

13

IS 13538
ISO 5198

: 1993

: 1987

A minimum

of three sets of readings shall be taken at unequal

intervals at the chosen point and the mean value of each quantity and of the efficiency derived from each set of readings shall be recorded. The percentage difference between the largest and smallest mean values of each quantity shall not be greater than that given in table 6. It will be noted that a wider tolerance is permitted if the number of readings is increased maximum requirement of nine readings. These tolerances up to the

Scale effects are not sufficiently established to permit precise performance forecasts outside these limits and therefore should be a matter of agreement. For a combined motor pcmp unit, the motor efficiency change between specified and test speeds shall be established at the time of agreeing the contract.

are designed to ensure that the errors due to

6.3.4

Control

of operating

conditions

scatter, taken together with the systematic error limits given in plauses 7 to 12 will result in overall measurement errors not greater than those yi.`en in table 7.

The test conditions may be obtained, among other methods, by throttling at the outlet or possibly at the inlet or both at inlet and outlet. Nevertheless, control of the operating conditions by throttling at the inlet is not considered a normal test method. When throttling at the inlet, due consideration shall be given to the possibility of flow distortion, increase in turbulence, or of air coming out of the water, all phenomena which may affect the operation of the pump (see 12.2) or of the flow measuring device (see 7.1) or both.

between repeated mean Table 6 - Limits of variation values of the same quantity (based on 95 % confidence limits as defined in annex A)
Maximum permissible difference

Number of sets of readings

6.3.5

Tests

carried

out with

a different

liquid

If the liquid used during the tests differs from the liquid pumped in normal operation, its kinematic viscosity and the speed of rotation of the pump shall be such that the mean friction coeffi cient 1 estirnated for the whole pump does not differ by more than 5 % from its value In the conditions of use of the pump In the case of larger variations of the friction coefficient A, a conversion formula may be used by agreement between the parties. The variations of the Reynolds number : all sets of

3 5 7 9

0.8 1.6 2.2 2.8

025 0.5 0,7 0.9

L

The

arithmetic

mean

of the

mean

values

from

readings for each quantity shall be taken as the actual value given by the test for the operating conditions considered. where If the values given in table 6 cannot be reached, the cause shall be ascertained, the conditions rectified and a new complete set of readings made, i.e. all the readings in the original set shall be rejected. No reading or selection of readings in the set of readings may be rejected because it lies outside the limits given in table 6. Where the excessive variation is not due to procedure or inThe tests for total head, flow rate and efficiency carried out under these conditions are valid as long as no cavitation appears and compressibility IS negltgible. is the inlet diameter of the pump; is the head generated by stage;

4

II'

shall be estimated

from figure 29 and the admissible variations

of the ratio n/v shall be deduced. strumentation errors, and cannot therefore be eliminated, the number of sets of readings shall be increased and the limits of error shall he calculated by statistical analysis (see annex A). It is unlikely that variations outside the requirements of table 6

will occur for the majority of pump tests carried out under wellcontrolled conditions, particularly In a laboratory or at the manufacturer's works.

6.4
6.4.1

Measuring

uncertainty

General

6.3.3

Deviation

from

specified

speed When the methods, instruments, and calibrations employed comply with this International Standard, the measurements obtained represent. at the time, the best estimates of the true value ot the quantities being measured. Better, or more accurate, estimates It is essential can be obtained only by gathering the parties concerned should new data. establish,

A difference of + 20 % between the specified speed of rotation and the test speed of rotation measurement may be allowed for the determination of flow rate, head and pump efficiency. For (NPSH), measurements, the difference allowed between the test speed and the specified rotational speed shall be within the limits of f 20 % provided that the flow rate is between 70 % and 120 % of the value corresponding to the maximum efficiency at the same speed. For cavitation appearance tests, see annex D.

that

before the test, the range of uncertainty

that can be tolerated. can only be are complete.

Strictly speaking, the measuring uncertainties calculated when the results of the measurements

14

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

6.4.2

Level of confidence

6.4.5

Mean

values

The uncertainty on a set of measurements of a single quantity depends on the confidence level attached to this uncertainty. The higher the confidence level, the higher the absolute value of the uncertainty and the higher the probability that any measurement falls within the uncertainty bandwidth. It is then necessary to specify the confidence level with which this uncertainty is evaluated, In this International together with the permissible uncertainty. Standard, the uncertainty is associated to a

The mean value of a large number of repeated measurements is a better estimate of the true value than the average of a smaller one, provided there is no systematic change with time of the measuring system or the measured quantity which cannot be corrected. When analysing test results, the chief of tests shall satisfy himself that no such tendency is present.

6.4.6

Treatment

of errors and random errors separately

95 % confidence level, i.e. tnere is one possibility out of twenty that a reading lies outside the measurement uncertainty bandwidth (see IS0 3534).

It is advisable to treat systematic as described in annex A.

6.4.3

Uncertainties

of individual

quantities is seldom available to make

Table

7 -

Maximum

permissible

limits

of uncertaintyl)

In any one test, enough evidence

exhaustive analyses of all possible sources of error and deduce percentage confidence levels as described in textbooks on statistics. Where there is such evidence, it should be used, but in its absence estimates should nevertheless be made based on the available data together with past experience of the method of measurement. Strictly speaking, the uncertainty on each individual measured when the

w

J

Pump total head Pump power input (direct method)

quantity QV, H, P, 0, etc.) can only be evaluated results of measurements are complete.

e--I=______

Electrical power input by the motor-pump Pump power Input IdetermIned from the

+1

1

fl;----

The fact that the uncertainties used may be, at best, estimates in no way detracts from the value of defining agreed explicit terms in a contract using numerical quantities which can be processed in an unbiased way.

_I tj:/;j
J

Overall efficiency of motor-pump unit

For guidance, some values of the uncertainties which may be expected in satisfactory measuring conditions are given in clauses 7 to 11 dealing with the measurement methods of each quantity, and maximum values which should not be exceeded for precision class tests are given in table 7.

1) This table gives, as guidance, maximum values of the uncertainties
which may be obtained with the apparatus existing at the present time. These values are for normal site conditions : laboratory and works tests may be more accurate.

6.4.4

Errors depends partly on the residual

5.5

Analysis

of test

results

The error of a measurement error in the instrument

6.5.1

Test

data

required

for the analysis by the manufac-

or measuring

system at the start of the The characteristics which may be specified turer are given in clause 5. The measurement calculation methods of the quantities

tests. At this time, all known errors will have been removed by calibration, careful measurement of dimensions, proper installation, etc. The uncertainty still remaining is called systematic error, and always exists, however small. Another source of error arises from discrimination. the non-repeatability of

necessary for the

of these characteristics

are given in clauses 7 to 12.

measurements, equipment either from

which must always exist provided the readout Such errors may arise system, or of the measuring

has adequate

6.5.2

Conversion

of the test

results

to the specified

the characteristics

conditions Such conversion serves to determine whether the performance

from changes in the quantity being measured, or both. They are observed directly in the form of scatter readings, unlike systematic errors, which do not affect repeatability during the test. This second type of error is called random error. Repetition of a set of measurements using the same equipment can reduce the uncertainty introduced by random experimental errors, but has no effect on the systematic error. The latter can be reduced only if equipment of a higher standard of accuracy is used, or if the same equipment standard. The systematic to the scatter of repeated can be calibrated to a higher in any way error does not contribute observations.

specification would have been fulfilled if the tests had been conducted under the same conditions as those nn which the performance specificatron IS based.

652.1 Conversion of the test results inro data based on the specified speed of rotation or frequency All test data obtained of rotation n,P. at speeds of rotation other than the one to the basis of the specified speed

specified shall be converted

IS13538:1993 ISo5198:1987

If the deviation

from

this

speed

of rotation

to the specified

If these tolerances, are exceeded, manufacturer

i.e. 1 % for frequency

and 5 % for voltage, and the

speed of rotation nsp does not exceed the permissible variations stated in 6.3.3, and if the deviation from test liquid to specified liquid is within the limits stated in 6.3.5, the measured data on the flow rate q, the total head H, the power input P, and the efficiency r], can be converted by means of the equations:

it will be necessary to reach agreement.

for the purchaser

6.5.2.2

Tests made with

(NPSH)

different within

from that specified the permitted at a higher limits

After correction (see 6.3.31, cannot

for speed of rotation pump to indicate

measured

performance performance

(NPSH)

be accepted

at a lower (NPSH).

After

correction

for speed of rotation

within

the permitted

limits

(see 6.3.31, measured pump performance at a low (NPSH) can be accepted to indicate performance at a higher (NPSH) proI-`, =P

vided that the absence of cavitation cordance with clause 12.

has been checked

in ac-

6.5.3 and the results obtained for the (NPSH) can be converted by means ot the eauation:

Presentation

of test

results

\
gas separation pump can affect correct opera-

The presentation of test results shall be made using the overall uncertainties computed from the test or alternatively using contractually pre-agreed values, chosen agreed test method and conditions. Taking into account the total uncertainty taking account of the

(NPSH)r

= (NPSH)

The value x = 2 may be used as a first approximation for the (NPSH) if the specified conditions given in 6.3.3 for the speed of rotation and me flow rate have been fulfilled and if the physical state of the liquid at the entrance of the impeller is such that no awkward tion limits, of the pump. If the operates near the cavitation

on each coordinate,

each measured operating point may be represented by an ellipse. The axes of this ellipse represent the total uncertainty for a confidence level of 95 %. They are calculated in annex A.

The absolute --

values

of the uncertainties

are:

or if the deviation

of the test speed from

the specified for pump discharge -t ~J~>Q

speed exceeds the specifications given in 6.3.3, the phenomena may be influenced by factors such as thermodynamic effects, the variation of the surface tension or the differences in dissolved or occluded air content. 1,3 and 2') have been observed parties datory. to establish Values of exponent .x between and an agreement between the formula to be used is man-

--

for pump

head

the conversion

for pump

input

for pump efficiency In the case of combined formance specifications motor-pump are with units, or where the per where being c represents considered. the fractional respect to an agreed frequen-

+ enq total error in the quantities

cy and voltage instead of an agreed speed, the flow rate, pump total head, power input, and efficiency data are subject to these conversion laws, provided that nsFl is replaced by the frequencyj,, and n by the frequency f.

After

having

determined

the total

uncertainties

and drawn

the

ellipses for each measured point, an upper and lower envelope of the ellipses shall be drawn (see figure 21. Such where 1 % above conversion, the frequency from the however, during frequency the voltage the other shall be restricted varies for the to the cases than The test result therefore the two envelopes. is a band of measurement within limited by the test prescribed on which operational by no more

characteristics characterno change.

specified.

If the voltage

used in the test is no more than 5 % the specified data require

All points

this band are equally valid.

or below

istics are based,

Concerning

adherence

to specificatron,

see annex

B

1)

See

RIJTSCHI,

K., Messwg

urd

Drehzahlumrechnrmq

des NPSH- Werles

he/ Krehelpumpen,

Schweizer lngenreur und Archltekt

39180

16

Is13538:1993

IS0 5198:1987

bJ

q

(y,J curve

cl

P (9") curve

Figure 2 -

Envelopes of the ellipses of total uncertainty

for each measured

point

Section

two

:

Measurement

methods

7
7.1

Measurement General

of rate of flow

Table 8 sets out the methods which may be envisaged for each case, and the accuracy or systematic uncertainty that may be expected when they are used in good measurement conditions by experienced personnel and in accordance with existing Inter-

The choice flow the following

of the method

for measuring

the volume

rate of

national Standards. In particular, the values of the uncertainty given in this table imply that the flow is steady and free from disturbance produced by the pump. It must be emphasized that the overall value of uncertainty for each case can only be determined after the tests. The methods mentioned vary considerably in accuracy, but they all have an estimated uncertainty of less than 2 % (at a confidence level of 95 %I. By virtue of this and depending on test conditions, any one of them may be envisaged for precision class tests. Other methods which are not indicated in table 8 may also be used subject to the following two conditions :

qv (see table 1) depends on a number of factors of which may. be cited :
the value of the ffow rate to be measured;

a)

b)

the type of test (on a model or on the full-size machine; or on site); of installation and layout of the

on a test platform c) practical circuit;

conditions

d)

the accuracy

desired;

their systematic measurement uncertainty determined and checked by periodic calibration
primary method; into operation and poss~ the resulting uncertainty shall be

shall be using a

e) the cost of putting the method ible time out of action.

compatible

with

table 7.

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table 8 -

Methods

for flow rate measurement
Values as percentages Systematic measuring uncertainty (at a confidence level of 95 %I T-Tests on full-size pumps Laboratory model ---. ---- .--on test tests on site platform c 0.1 to + 0.3 k 0.1 to f 0.3 r 0.1 to r 0.3 t 0.1 to r 0.3 k 0.1 to f 0.3 + 0.1 to + 0.3 + 0.3 to f 0.5 + O!iIo + 15

Measurement

methods

and standards

Primary methods Differential

by weight (IS0 41851 volumetric (IS0 8316) travelling screen llEC Publication 193) ____ _.__.__._~~. pressure devices') (IS0 5167 and IS0 2186)

~~

~~ _~~_~~ ~~ ~~

f. 0.3 to k 0.5 f 0.5 to It 1 1.5

f 0 !i

to '

1 1.5

Turbine flowmeterl) ___-.Electromagnetic flowmeter') ___. __.____ .--..--._..___ ..~~

_ .-_ ---__-. .f * 0.5 to t- 1 0,5 to f by a primary method ( by a secondary -~ method ___ --~_..___. + 0,5 to f _ __________--.-.

-....... 4 1 f0 +
1,5 2 1 _----. t 1 to t

Calibrated weir (IS0 1438/l. IS0 3846, IS0 4369, IS0 4360) ____ Standardized

.--

2

orifice plate (IS0 tube (IS0

5167 and IS0 2186) 2186)

' 1 to ._-__
+ 1 .-._ * 1

t

~__-_-

1.5

*

--

1

to + 1.5

- .

to + 1,5

Standardized vent& _____ Velocity area methods Tracer methods 1I Calibrated (IS0

by current meters (IS0 3354) by Pitot tube (IS0 3966) dilution 2975 and IS0 555/l to 3) transit time (

+_ 1 to f 2 to i 2 - _.-. "_. -...-.. __-_. -.. _..-_ to f 2 + 1 lo + 2

+ 1 to * 2 -. --------.+ + f + 1 1 1 1 to to to to + + + f 2 2 2 2

by a primary method.

7.2

Measurement

by weighing

7.3

Volumetric

method

IS0 4186 specifies two alternative methods: a) the "static weighing method" which cdnsists of diverting the flow alternately inside and outside the weighing tank ;
b) the "dynamic weighing method", where the weighing is made "in flight", the flow being directed permanently into the tank.

For the description of this method, see IS0 8316. The volumetric method approaches the accuracy of the weighing method and similarly only supplies the value of the
average capacity. The volumetric method is affected by errors relating to the flow rate during the time it takes to fill the gauged

The weighing method, which gives only the value of the average flow rate during the time taken to fill the weighing tank, may be considered the most accurate method of flow rate measurement. It is affected by errors relating to weighing, to measuring the filling time, and to the determination of the density taking into account the temperature of the fluid. There may also be errors in connection either with diverting the flow (static method) or with dynamic phenomena at the time of weighing (dynamic method). Furthermore, a buoyancy correction has to be made to the readings of the weighing machine to take account of the difference between the up-thrust exerted by the atmosphere on the liquid being weighed and on the reference mass used during the calibration of the weighing machine. With high quality apparatus, the systematic uncertainty on tt,e measurement of the flow rate (at a confidence level of 95 %I may be irl the region of 0,l to 0,2 %. It should be noted that the weighing method requires large fixed installations which are only really practicable in a laboratory and for relatively low flow rates (less than 1.6 m3/s for instance).

calibration of the reservoir, measurement of filling time, either with diverting phenomena Moreover, at the time

the measurement of levels, the and also by errors in connection or with dynamic method). of gauging (dynamic

the flow (static method)

the watertightness

of the reservoir shall be checked

and a leakage correction The calibration the water

made if necessary. by measuring determined

of the reservoir may be obtained volumes

level after successive

of water

either by weighing

or by means of a gauged pipette are poured

into the reservoir tank. With high quality apparatus, the estimated uncertainw (at a

confidence level of 95 %I may be in the region of 0.1 to 0,3 %. However, in its normal form as described above, the volumetric
method is subject to the same limitations

as the weighing

method. On the other hand, there exists a variant to the volumetric method which can be used on site and for larger flow rates, where a natural reservoir the volume of which has been determined by geometrical or topographical procedures can be used

as the gauged capacity (see IEC Publication 41). It must, however, be emphasized that the accuracy of this method is much less than that of the volumetric method used in the

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

laboratory,

notably on account

of the inaccuracy

in measuring

the reservoir, uncertainty about possible leaks or inflows, and the difficulty of determining the levels and disturbances due to atmospheric conditions. Depending on the particular circumstances (whether the reservoir is natural or artificial, the capacity of the reservoir compared to the flow rate to be measured, the stability of conditions over a relatively long period of time, measured etc.) the systematic uncertainty of a flow rate by this method may be estimated at 1 to 2 %.

on the flow rate tat a confidence level of 95 %) of 1 to I,5 %, for an orifice plate or an ISA 32 nozzle, and from 1 to 2 % for a long-radius nozzle or a venturi tube. If a departure greater is made from the standardized is required, the differential conditions, pressure or if device

accuracy

shall be calibrated in its particular conditions of use by means of one of the primary methods described in 7.2 to 7.4. In good measuring be obtained. conditions, a systematic uncertainty tat a confidence level of 95 %) of approximately 0,3 to 0,5 % can then

7.4

Travelling screen
for its use are

When

choosing

between

the

various

types

of

differential

pressure devices, A description of this method and the conditions given in IEC Publication 193.

the following

factors should be considered:

a) the greatest accuracy for uncalibrated devices conforming to the relevant International Standards is achieved with orifice plates, b) head the least with venturi tubes; lower for venturi tubes than for

Its principle, which is close to that of the volumetric method, makes this a very accurate one, for it only requires the measurement of the dimensions of the channel, and the moving time of the screen. However, as in 7.2 and 7.3, measurement maintained the level of the water

loss is much

orifice plates and nozzles (about five times as low, given an equal differential pressure); by travelling apparatus, screen so that c) the straight lengths required are much smaller for classical venturi venturi nozzles; d) tubes than for orifice plates, nozzles and

requires large and very carefully

it can only be used for laboratory tests or tests in the works on a full-size pump platform. It is particularly well adapted to the latter type of test, as it enables relatively high flow rates to be obtained (around 3 m3/s, for example) with a systematic uncertainty (at a confidence level of 95 %J of about 0,2 to 0,3 %.

building and positioning

is much simpler for an orifice the latter requires

plate than for a nozzle or a venturi tube a large distance between flanges;

7.5

Differential

pressure devices
installation and use of orifice see IS0 2166. plates, on

e) in the case of orifice plates, a significant error can arise if buckling of the plate occurs due to the existence of a large differential pressure across the plate.

For the construction, connecting

nozzles and venturi tubes, see IS0 5167; for specifications piping for the manometer, differential types of standardized figure 3. In particular, straight

Different

7.6

Weirs

pressure devices are shown in The specifications for thin-plate weirs and measuring flumes are given in IS0 1438/l and IS0 4359 and those for various

attention

should

be

drawn

to

the

minimum

lengths to be adhered

to upstream

of the differential

types of broad-crested weirs in IS0 3646 and IS0 4360. Figure 4 shows the different types of standardized structures schematically. However, even for rectangular thin-plate weirs, which are the

pressure device; these are specified in IS0 5167 for various configurations of piping. If it is necessary to place the differential pressure device downstream of the pump (a case not covered in IS0 51671, the pump may be considered to create a disturbance in the flow equivalent to two elbows not in the same plane. However, when working away from the operating

best known and the most stable, the uncertainty which surrounds the normalized discharge coefficient is not compatible with the accuracy being sought in thus International if it is possible to calibrate in the approach Standard

conditions corresponding to the best efficiency of the pump, the swirl of the flow produced by the pump can involve more severe conditions, To overcome these it will be necessary

On the other hand, velocity distribution

the weir in its exists and

to

position in the exact conditions periodically

of use since great sensitivity to channel by means of one of the or platuncerwith an estimated

install, downstream of the pump, a swir! remover or flow straightener of one of the types given in IS0 5167, provided the straight upstream with. It should also be noted that the diameter of the pipe and the Reynolds number must fall within the ranges specified in the International Standard for each type of device. lengths specified in this International Standard and downstream of the straightener are complied

to check this calibration described

primary methods

in 7.2 to 7.4, for laboratory

form tests a flow rate measurement

tainty (at confidence level of 95 %) of about 0.5 to 1,5 % may be attained. For on-site tests, calibrating the weir by means of one of the methods described in 7.8 or 7.9 can lead to a systematic uncertainty of

1 to 2 %.
great care must be taken to maintain

To achieve this, however,

In these conditions, if there is no special calibration, using the discharge coefficient indicated in the relevant International Standards may be considered to give a systematic uncertainty

the weir in perfect condition; it may be noted that it is easier to conserve and check the sharpness of the edge of a thin-plate weir than the roughness of the sill and walls of a broad-crested weir or a measuring flume.

10

IS13538:1993

IS0 5198:1987

Orifice

plate

(with corner taps, D and D/2 taps, or flange taps)

Nozzle
(long radius or "ISA 32")

Classical
Venturi tube

Venturi nozzle

I I

Figure 3 -

Different

types of standardized

differential

pressure dsvicts

(see IS0 5167)

20

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

7.7 Turbine flowmeters"

meters

and electromagnetic

Where the plant comprises a sufficiently long artificial open channel, the discharge may be measured by the velocity area method using current meters in this channel (see IEC Publication 198).

Though quite different in conception, these two types of flowmeter have many points in common with regard to practical conditions of use. In no circumstances should they be used unless calibrated beforehand by means of one of the primary methods described in 7.2 to 7.4. Although these devices do not require very long upstream straight pipe lengths, in general it is desirable that the conditions of calibration should reproduce the circuit configuration in which they will be used. If they are installed permanently on a test platform, the possibility of a periodic check on their calibration must be taken into account. In these conditions, a flow rate may be obtained with a systematic uncertainty (at a confidence level of 95 %) of about 0,3 to 0.5 % for turbine flowmeters and 0,5 to 1 % for electromagnetic flowmeters.
NOTE - The fact that these flowmeters send an electric signal direct makes their integration into an automatic measuring system panicularly easy.

7.9

Tracer

methods
of the

The various parts of IS0 2975 apply to the measurement

flow rate in pipes, by both the dilution method (constant rate injection) and the transit time method (also called the salt velocity method) ; each method uses either radioactive or nonradioactive tracers. Furthermore, IS0 555/l to 3 specifies dilution methods for discharge measurements in open channels.

These methods have the advantage of being usable for a very wide range of flow rates, and some of them only require minimal interference with the pipe. The length required in some cases to ensure adequate mixing of the solution injected can in practice be reduced on the one hand by injecting into the suction pipe of the pump which is then used as a mixer or on the other hand by increasing in each section the number of injection positions and sampling or measuring positions. These methods should only be used by trained staff and it may be noted that the use of radioactive tracers is subject to certain constraints.

7.8
IS0

Velocity
3354 and

area
IS0

methods
3966 specify methods for discharge

measurements in closed conduits by means of current meters and Pitot tubes respectively. They give all the specifications considered necessary concerning conditions for application, choice and operation of the apparatus, the measurement of point velocities and the calculation of the flow rate by graphical or numerical integration of the velocity distribution. In the most favourable measuring conditions, the systematic

It may be considered

that the systematic

uncertainty

in the

determination of the flow rate fat a confidence these methods is from 1 to 2 %.

level 95 %) with

8
uncertainty in the measurement level of 95 o/o) is 1 to 2 %. The main disadvantages of the flow rate (at confidence

Measurement General
Principles

of head

8.1
8.1 .I a

of these methods

are that lengths to ensure

of measurement

a) they require fairly long straight regular velocity distribution; b) with current pipes; meters,

8.1.1.1
Although

Total head and specific hydraulic expressed as a height of pumped

energy liquid column, the

they can only be used in large

diameter

pump total head, H, calculated in accordance with its definition given in table 1, represents in actual fact the energy transmitted by the pump per unit weight This concept of liquid.

c) it is rather difficult to put them into operation; as a result the installation may not be available for several days. Onthe other hand, the velocity integration method is often the only one that can be applied when testing pumps with large flow rates. Among precautions to be taken, it should be particularly ensured that the support of the current meters or Pitot tubes does not create excessive obstruction in the pipe. Furthermore, except in very Jong pipe installations, it is preferable that the measuring section should be placed upstream of the pump in order to avoid too much turbulence or swirling flow.

of specific energy may replace the one of head

and its use is to be recommended, since for instance the column of liquid representing the total head is not exactly the difference in height that may be read at a liquid column (supposing no difference in elevation or available kinetic energy between inlet and outlet). This discrepancy is due to liquid compressibility and atmospheric pressure related to elevation.

8.1 .I 2

Effect of liquid compressibility

on total head evaluation

Total head is in fact the maximum amount of mechanical energy per unit weight that may be released in bringing the liquid from its actual conditions to reference conditions,

11

These will form the subject of a future

International

Standard,

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

7
Rectangular full-width weir / /

__~--/

/////

Thin-plate weirs (see IS0 1438/l)

Rectangular

notch

Triangular

notch

-/ / M
/' /

Rectangular profile weir with sharp upstream edge

Broad-crested weirs (see IS0 3846)

Rectangular profile weir with rounded upstream edge

+ / \\`\\\\\\\\\\\.\ \\

Triangular

profile weir (see IS0 4360)

Standing wave flume (with rectangular, lsee IS0 4359)

trapezoidal

or U-throat)

NOTE - The accuracy required in this International individual on-site calibration: thus it is not permmed

Standard can only be a&icved if the discha rge coefficient of such devices is determined to use the values of coefficients as they are given in the relevant lnternatlonal Standards,

by

Figure

4 -

Different

types

of standardized

weirs

and

flumes

22

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Reference conditions are generally sea level and standard atmospheric pressure, but within the frame of a test where only differences in energy level are of concern, other reference conditions may be chosen, for example floor elevation and atmospheric pressure at the time of test. For liquid at elevation zi at the pressureper, with velocity y and g being constant, the correct evaluation of total head is given by the equation : H, = z, :' +
Petdp

Direct evaluation of pump total head is recommended where compressibility cannot be disregarded, due to the following 1 Pe2dp --s PO Q g 1 g s Pe' dp _=_ PO Q 1 g s Pe2dp &I Q

s

PO Q

VI2 + a,, -

This calculation requires analytic expression of the state funCtion v =f(p). However, if linearization is possible, the following will be valid :
1 Pa2 Q s

23

This integration is to be evaluated for an isentropic process. Tables and formulae may be found giving the value of this integral for water. Generally speaking, Q varies with pressure and temperature, therefore evaluation is not straightforward. However, pressure dependence is low and nearly linear and one may write Hi = q +

7 where
Q, p2

-= PSI Q

2 (P&! - PA

(Q2 + Q&

is unit mass of fluid at paI and 81; is unit mass of fluid at pB;!and 0,.

2 Pei
(Qi + Qo)g

+ a,;-

ut2 2g
NOTE - The temperature at the end of the reversible process is slightly different from 8,. The error due to neglecting this difference does not exceed 0.1 % on efficiency when the pressure is less then 150 bar and the temperature is leas than 250 OC (see 11.2).

This approximation holds for water up to 40 OC and up to 15 MPalr. The definition of total head given table 1 is a complementary simplification based on the assumption that Qi = Qa It is the responsibility of the chief of tests to decide whether compressibility may be fully neglected in relation to the acceptable uncertainty allowed by each specific tests.

8.1.1.3

Available velocity head

The velocity head prevailing in a measuring section cannot be fully converted into total head. This is especially the case at the pump outlet [see section (2) of figure 51.

Figure

5 -

Determination

of available

velocity

head

1)

1MPa

= 10bar

23

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

In section (3) of figure 5, further downstream, part of the velocity head remains as such, part is converted into a pressure increase Ap and the remainder the flow. is dissipated as friction within

Some requirements concerning the definition of the measuring sections in various types of installations and a method of estimating the head losses are given in 8.2.

8.1.2 This friction is due to velocity rearrangement and is definitely unavailable to the user. Available velocity head is then given by the equation

Various

methods

of measurement conditions of the pump and on

Depending

on the installation

the layout of the circuit, the pump total head may be determined either by measuring the inlet and outlet total heads separately, or by measuring the differential pressure between inlet and outlet and adding the differences in velocity head, if applicable, taking into account potential head and density variations due to the measuring system. Total heads may also be deduced either from pressure in

aa

-=-+a-+H &vi! 2g

fJ,=

AP

u32 3 2s

J2=a2-

u2=

2g

-H,

where HF is the friction loss caused by velocity rearrangement. Where practicable, Q,Q shall be evaluated from the static head line plotted from measurements in successive sections, as shown in figure 5. Where this is not possible it may be assumed and its value may be evaluated from the deterthat cra2 = LYE mination of the velocity distribution in section (2) (see 8.2.4.2).

measurements basins.

in conduits or from water level measurements

8.1.1.4 Loss of head between
and measuring sections specified

inlet or outlet sections

The selection of the measuring section, the various measuring devices which can be used and the determination of the velocity head for each of these cases are dealt with in 8.3 and 8.4.

The various quantities

in the definition

of head (see

8.1.3

Uncertainty

of measurement shall be

table 1) should as a rule be determined in the inlet section S, and the outlet section S, of the pump (or of the pump set and fittings which are the subject of the tests); practically, for reasons of convenience and of measurement accuracy, the measurements are generally carried out in cross-sections S; and S; some way upstream from S, and downstream from 52 (see figure 6). Thus, account shall be taken of the friction losses in the pipe, i.e. H,, between S; and S, and HJ2 between S, and S; (and possibly far the local head losses), and the pump total head is given by the equation

The uncertainty

of the pump total head measurement

obtained by combining the estimated uncertainties of each term of which it is composed; thus the manner of conducting this calculation depends on the methods of measurement used: separate measurements of the inlet and outlet total head or differential measurement between the pump ends, pressure or water therefore level measurement and type possible to give only general of apparatus. It is information on the

various errors involved.

H = Hi

- Hi

+ HJ, + HJ*
8.1.3.1 Errors in potential energy values

where Hi and H; are the total head at Si and S;. The elevations, referred to an arbitrary reference plane, of the central point of the measuring sections as well as those of the zero or the reference point of the various sets of measuring apparatus are given by surveying processes which are generally very accurate. The uncertainty of these components may be

, ! -

regarded as negligible compared Total head line

to other sources of error.

8.1.3.2

Errors in kinetic energy values on the one hand on the uncertainty in the

These are dependant

mean velocity in the measuring sections, and thus of the determination of the cross-sectional areas and principally on the method of flow rate measurement used; and on the other hand on the uncertainty in the evaluation of the velocity head coeffi~ cient rx,. which is a function of the flow conditions (see 62.4). These errors may become more significant in pumps generating a low total head.

I Si
Figure 6 Determination of pump total head

6.1.3.3

Errors in water level measurements

Apart from the errors which can be due to the unsteadiness and to slope of the water level, errors in water level measurements are dependent principally on the measuring apparatus used.

613538:

1993

IS0 5198

: 1987

For guidance only, a rough estimate of the uncertainties the apparatus (see 8.3.2) may be taken as follows AZ lot020 f

due to

(see 8.3.1)

so as to minimize

these influences.

Due allowance

:
mm;

-

staff gauges, float gauges,

plate gauges: bubbler apparatus: point or hook

5 to 10 mm;

shall be made for the velocity head at the measuring location (if it is not negligible compared to the pump total head) and for the pressure acting on the surface (generally the atmospheric pressure).

liquid manometers, gauges :

f 1 to 3 mm.

8.2.1.2

Outlet measuring

section

8.1.3.4

Errors in pressure measurements

If the pipe into which the pump discharges is not considered as part of the pump, the outlet measuring section shall be established, if the practical conditions allow, in this pipework at a distance of at least 2 diameters in a straight parallel section. from the pump outlet flange,

If every precaution related to pressure tappings and connecting pipes has been taken, and if the measurements are not falsified by undue pressure fluctuations, the following estimates of systematic uncertainties be used for guidance : due to the apparatus (see 8.4.2) may

Errors may arise in the case of asymmetric

or swirling

flow

conditions in the measuring section; such a flow maldistribution is a reflection of the inadequacy of the pump to straighten + 0,2to1 %; the flow after it passes out of the impeller into the casing. This is often inevitable at flow rates other than that for which the pump was designed, especially for pumps of high type number. It may be possible to extend the flow range over which head measurement is possible within the accuracy required for precision class tests by establishing the measuring section further downstream and making allowance for the head losses HJ2 between the outlet flange and the measuring section calculated according to 8.2.5. In order to ensure that the velocity distribution is satisfactory or to assass the kinetic energy coefficient to be applied, an investigation of the flow conditions at various loads may be necessary according to 8.2.4. For pumps which discharge directly into a free surface reservoir through pipework which may be considered as part of the pump, the outlet total head is obtained from water level measurement in the reservoir; the same remarks as in 8.2.1.1 shall then apply.

liquid manometers: dead-weight manometers,

pressure weighbeams: spring pressure gauges: pressure transducers:

f f f

0,05to0,5 0.5to 1 %;

56;

0.2 to 1 96.

8.2

Definition

of the

measuring

sections

8.2.1

General

case of a pump

tested

alone

In most cases, the purpose of the tests is to check the hydraulic performance of the pump, without any upstream or downstream fittings; thus it is desirable, as far as possible (see 8.2.3), to measure the pump total head as close as possible to the inlet and outlet flanges of the pump as described in 8.2.1 .l and 8.2.1.2.

8.2.2 8.2.1.1 Inlet measuring section

Pump

tested

with

fittings

If the tests are on the combination of the pump and the whole or part of its upstream and downstream connecting fittings, these being considered an integral part of the pump, the provisions of 8.2.1 apply to the inlet and outlet flanges of the fittings instead of the inlet and outlet flanges of the pump. This procedure debits against the pump all head losses caused by the fittings.

If the pipe connecting the pump to the source of supply is not considered as part of the pump, the inlet measuring section shall be established, if practical conditions allow, in this pipework at a distance preferably diameters from the pump inlet flange, equal to at least two in a straight parallel sec-

tion in which the flow conditions are as nearly as possible those specified in 6.2.1. Errors may arise if such is not the case, for example if a pre-swirl of the flow occurs at partial loads or if the layout of the circuit induces an asymmetrical or swirling flow pattern. In such circumstances, an investigation of the flow conditions may be necessary according However, to 8.2.4.2. to measure the

8.2.3

Pump

with

inaccessible

ends

If it is impossible to gain access either to the inlet or outlet of the pump, or to both sides (this case occurs particularly where the tests are carried out on site), the measuring be located under the best local conditions; by mutual agreement whether the tests will apply to the combination of the pump and of the part of the circuit included between the measuring cross-sections, in which case the requirements of 7.2.2 apply; or whether the pump total head shall be deduced from the total heads as evaluated at the measuring cross-sections by adding the pump, with 8.2.5. the head losses these sections shall it shall be arranged

in some cases, it may be advisable

inlet total head either in the suction pipe at some distance from the inlet flange or even in the free level reservoir from which the pump is supplied. In both cases, it is necessary to take into account the head losses H,, between the measuring section and the inlet flange, calculating them according to 8.2.5. When the head is obtained by water level measurement, errors may arise if the free surface is unsteady (for example if surging or waves exist), or if there are locally high velocities, shall bs selected and appropriate arrangements or if vortices occur near the pump intake; the location of measurement shall be used

H,, and /.IJ2 on both sides of
calculated in accordance

losses being

Is 13538: 1993

.

ISO5198: 1987

Refereflceplane7\

J

a)

L

b)
Figure 7 Examples of total head determination by water level measurements

26

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

-u
I

I
I
I

I

I

-Ia) Wedge-shspedprobe

I
8
b) Cylindrical probe

i
I

Figure 8 -

Exsrnplss of yew probes

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

8.2.4 Choice of the measuring sections and effect of flow conditions 8.2.4.1 Choice of the measuring sections

Special attention shall be given to the location of water level or pressure-measuring sections. In pump installations, where the pressure distribution and the velocity distribution at the inlet and outlet of the pump are such that the calculation of the pressure head and the velocity head from the mean values measured in these sections would result in a significant error in the determination of the pump total head, other measuring sections further upstream or downstream shall be used (see 8.1.1). For pressure measurements in a pipe, the measuring section should be arranged in a straight pipe section of constant crosssection extending five diameters upstream and two diameters downstream from the inlet measuring section and two diameters upstream and one diameter downstream from the outlet measuring section. If the available straight length is not sufficient (for example in the case of a rather short inlet bellmouth), this length should be divided between upstream and downstream parts of the measuring section so as to take the best possible advantage of the actual conditions (for example in the ratio of 2 to 1 approximately). Sections where the velocity pattern is seriously distorted by an elbow, valve, any other flow disturbance or by the vicinity of the pump itself should be avoided. For water level measurements, the measuring location should be selected so that either the velocities in the measurement area of the reservoir are very small, and thus the velocity head is negligible [see figure 7 a)]; or the cross-sectional area used to calculate the velocity head is sufficiently well defined and readily measurable [see figure 7 b)l. 8.2.4.2 Investigation of the velocity distribution

The investigation of the velocity distribution should comprise the determination of the direction and magnitude of the local velocity at a number of points along at least two diameters at right angles in the plane of the measuring cross-section. This may be accomplished in a number of ways using probes. Figure 8 shows an example of such a probe. For more details, see IS0 7194. Large and varying indicated yaw angles measured across the pipe diameter show the presence of three-dimensional flow and the probability of non-uniform pressure as well as velocity distribution; in these conditions, the measuring section is unsuitable for accurate head measurement. A measuring section where probing has been carried out will be considered as satisfactory if : at no measurement point the velocity direction deviates by more than lo0 from the axis of the pipe, at no measurement point the value of the velocity is higher than twice the value of the mean velocity,

the pressures measured at the various pressure tappings in the measuring section are satisfactorily balanced (see 8.4.1.4).
8.2.4.3 Effect of pre-swirl induced by the pump

Errors in the determination of the inlet total head can occur if at part load the pump induces a pre-swirl of the flow in the suction pipe; figure 9 illustrates such a case. These errors can be detected and corrected on the following basis.

Gauge used for the determinationof H,

When the inlet or outlet total head is obtained by pressure measurements in conduits, it is generally unnecessary to determine the velocity distribution across the measuring section. This is particularly the case where evidence of satisfactory conditions may be considered as established, either by previous tests carried out in the same test rig or if a straight length of conduit is used, sufficient to create a fully developed velocity distribution, provided the pump itself does not induce a preswirl in the suction pipe. Nevertheless, if such evidence does not exist and if the ratio of the velocity head to the pump total head is more than O,OZ, an investigation of the velocity distribution in the manner here described shall then be necessary in order to ensure that the selected measuring section is suitable to accommodate measurements and also in order to allow an evaluation of the available velocity head coefficient, a,. In case of doubt, for example where the outlet measuring section is not very far from the outlet flange of the pump, checking the pressure distribution over the measuring section by using four pressure tappings (see 8.4.1.1 and 8.4.1.4) may be useful for deciding if an investigation of the velocity distribution shall be carried out.

Figure 9 -

Example of installation

with pm-swirl

If the pump draws from a free surface reservoir where the water level and the pressure acting on it are constant, the head losses between this reservoir and the inlet measuring section follow, in the absence of pre-swirl, a quadratic law with rate of flow and therefore the same holds true in respect of the inlet total head, HI = Hi - H,, bee figure 10). With higher rates of flow, measuring points ranged along a straight line, H, = A - Bq$ will be obtained; however, with lower rates of

ia

IS 13538 IS0 5198:

: 1993
1987

Figure 10 -

Correction

of measured

inlet total head

flow the appearance of pre-swirl will result in errors both in pressure measurement and in velocity head evaluation, resulting in measurements deviating from this straight line. It is then agreed to adopt as the value of the inlet total head the value read on the interpolation of the straight line obtained at higher flow rates. This value is not the true value, free from errors of measurement of the total head existing in the presence of pre-swirl, but it is the value which would exist if pre-swirl were not to occur. This procedure may be justified by the fact that the energy in the form of pre-swirl is indeed provided bv the pump to which it is thus logical to attribute it. If the pump does not draw from a constant head reservoir, another measuring section shall be selected sufficiently far upstream where the pre-swirl is known to be absent and it is then possible to use the same reasoning for the head losses between the two sections (but not directly about the inlet total head). 8.2.5 Head losses at inlet and outlet

if Re < 23 4

(smooth pipe) :

2.51 A-"2 = - 210gro -Rt-&

if 23 e

< Re < 560 4

(transition zone) : k + 3,713

A -112 = - 2log,o

-

2,51

Re fi

if Re > 560 4 (rough pipe).:

d-l/Z

=

-

2

loa,,&j

where Re=E. k

As stated in 8.1.1, it may be necessary to add to the measured pump total head the friction head losses and possibly the local head losses between the measuring sections and the pump flanges. Nevertheless, such a correction may be neglected if H,, + HJ2 < 0,001 5 H

Y '

is the equivalent uniform roughness.

If the pipe between the measuring sections and the pump flanges is free from any fitting and of uniform circular crosssection, the friction head losses in a piece of pipe having a length I and a diameter D are given by the equation
H

Annex E gives guidance or) how to check whether a correction needs to be made and on how to calculate this correction if necessary. For the friction head losses in pipes other than those of uniform circular cross-section and for the local head losses due to any irregularity in the pipe (bend, branch, valve, etc.), the correction to be applied shall be the subject of mutual agreement before the tests. Nevertheless, by reason of'the poor accuracy with which such head losses are known, it is desirable that no irregularity exists in the measuring range.

`-

-ALc2
D2g

where A is given in turbulent flow by one of the following equations

10

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

8.3 Water
8.3.1

level

measurement of the measuring section

However, if it has been established that the flow conditions are favourable (see 8.242). or if the velocity head does not exceed 1 % of the pump opposite total head, only two tappings located diametrically may be used by mutual agreement.

Arrangement

At the measuring site, the flow shall be steady and there shall
be no local disturbances. If the free water surface is disturbed depending on the 8.4.1.2 The Shape and size of pressure tappings bore of the pressure tapping opening in the by small waves or swell it may be necessary,

type of measuring device used, to provide a stilling well or a stilling box. This may be, for example, a well in the wall of the conduit in communication with the flow through a connecting pipe leading to the conduit through a perforated plate flush to the wall, or else a vertical pipe immersed in the flow, the bottom of which is formed by a perforated plate; the holes of the plate shall be small enough (about 3 to 5 mm in diameter) damp the pressure fluctuations. It is advisable cross-section. to use at least two measuring points to

cylindrical

conduit boundary should have a diameter between 3 and 6 mm or equal to O,O8 D, whichever is the smaller, and should have a minimum length of 2,5 times its diameter `figure 11). The bore shall be free from burrs and irregularities, and normal to the inner wall of the pipe; it shall be rounded off by a radius r < r1/4 or at least a small chamfer. The surface of the pipe shall be smooth values in the vicinity of the

in each

tappings for a length at least equal to the smaller of these two

:

8.3.2

Measuring

apparatus

~- 400 mm or 20 upstream
(free surface accessible or not, to the The required most accuracy in commonly used 150 mm or ID downstream

Various types of water level measuring apparatus may be used,
according steady regard to the circumstances etc.) total and head. pump or disturbed, of the

.

The tappings regularity

shall be located

as far as possible from any irjoint.

devices are

:
fixed along a wall;

of the pipe. such as welded

a)

vertical or inclined gauges,

The material of the pipe shall be resistant to abrasion, corrosion or chemical reaction with the liquid being pumped ; failing this, a metal plate which is unaffected by the liquid shall be fastened in the wall, flush with it, through which the tapping shall be drilled (figure 12).

b! point or hook gauges, for which a stilling well and a supporting frame set close above the free surface are essential

;
metal disc

cl plate gauges, consisting of a horizontal suspended from a graduated steel-ribbon tape;
d) float gauges, which

8.4.1.3

Connecting

pipes and damping

devices

must be used in a stilling well; in absolute or differential form, as

Connecting

pipes leading from each pressure tapping shall be

at least equal in bore to the bore of the tapping. e) liquid manometers described in 8.4.2.1; f) g) bubbler apparatus, immersed The pressure tappings nected through using a purge of compressed air; cross-sectional sectional tapping area of each measuring not less than if required the section shall be conof sum of the cross-

individual shut-off

valves to a ring manifold

pressure transducers. suitable where the free sur-

areas of the tappings, may be measured

so that the pressure from any (figure 13). pipes shall be fitted during to avoid any it is recom

The three last types are particularly face is inaccessible. See IS0 4373 for a description

Any high point in the line of the connecting with a purging valve to avoid trapping Piping shall be carefully how small. Whenever measurements. leak, no matter

of air bubbles checked possible,

of these types of apparatus.

8.4
8.4.1 8.4.1.1

Pressure

measurements
of the measuring section

mended that transparent tubing in plastic material be used. IS0 2186 gives detailed indications as to the connecting pipes Where it is necessary to reduce the amplitude of oscillations, damping devices may be inserted into measuring instruments or their connecting lines. In order not to falsify the time mean of the fluctuating pressure, it is necessary that the damping be symmetrical and linear; this can be achieved by means of a capillary tube located in the manometer liquid. Bending or pinching fhe flexible connecting pipes or inserting any asymmetrical solutely nozzle, needle valve, forbidden. Moreover. gate valve, etc., shall be abin the case of a differential

Arrangement

Number and location of pressure tappings

As a rule four static pressure tappings at the wall shall be provided at each measuring section. In circular pipes, they shall be located on two diameters at right angles to each other; the tappings should not be located at or near the highest nor the lowest point of the cross-section in order to avoid air pockets or dirt accumulation in the pressure connections. In rectangular pipes, the tappings shall be located at the quarter and threequarter points of the vertical walls.

manometer, it may be necessary to balance the damping of the two circuits. Additional information an how to deploy and check damping devices is given in IS0 3966.

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Thick wall

d=3to6 I > 2.5d r < d/4

01

0.06 D

Thin wall

Figure

11 -

Examples

of pressure

tappings

in metallic

wall

400mm

Figure

12 -

Example

of pressure

tapping

in concrete

wall

al

Figure

13 -

Pressure

tappings connected through ring main a) purging; b) pressure gauge; c) drainage.

to pressure

gauge:

Is13538:1993 IsO5198:1987

8.4.1.4 Checking

of pressure measurements

use whether in its simple or in its differential form. However, it can only be used beyond a minimum pressure corresponding to the weight of the rotating assembly. The effective diameter d, of the simple type manometer can be taken as equal to the arithmetic mean of the piston diameter d,, measured directly, and of the cylinder diameter d,; it can then be used for calculating pressures without further calibration if the following condition is satisfied before testing :

Whenever possible, pressure readings shall be checked before and after the tests by comparison with headwater elevation under static conditions in the conduit.

In normal operation, the difference between the pressure measured at any one tapping and the average of the pressures measured at all tappings of the measuring section shall not exceed 0.5 % of the pump total head nor half the velocity head in the section. When the pressure tappings are used for NPSH measurements, this difference shall not exceed 1 % of the NPSH value nor half the velocity head. If any pressure tapping appears to be in error, and if this cannot be attributed to the flow pattern (see 8.2.4.21, the source of the discrepancy shall be determined and removed; if this is not possible, the tapping concerned shall be eliminated.

4 - 4, < 0
d, +`d,

'

1 %

Friction between the piston and cylinder may be practically eliminated `by rotating the piston at a speed not less than 30 r/min. It is desirable to check the dead-weight manometer by comparison with a liquid column manometer to determine the effective piston diameter in a pressure range to be as wide as possible.

8.4.2 8.4.2.1

Measuring

apparatus

Liquid column manometers Similar principles apply to the differential type weight manometer. For the measurement of variable pressures it may be advantageous to use a weight manometer mounted in series with a liquid column manometer (see figure 16) or a special weight manometer incorporating a liquid column manometer.

Liquid column manometers are used to measure comparatively low pressures. Under these conditions, compressibility effects on the manometer liquids are small and can be ignored. The length of the liquid column may be modified by providing an inclined manometer or by using one manometric liquid with suitable density in place of another; the most commonly used liquids are water and mercury, but others may also be used such as ethyl tetrabromide (CZH2Br4), carbon tetrachloride (Ccl,), diiodomethane (CH,I,), some metallic bromides or iodides, etc. If possible, the use of liquid columns less than 100 mm high shall be avoided; if this is impossible, attention shall be specially drawn to the errors of measurement. In order to minimize capillarity effects, the bore of the manometer tubes shall be at least 8 mm for mercury gauges and 12 mm for water and other liquid gauges. The cleanliness of the liquid in the manometer and of the internal surface of the tubes shall be maintained to avoid errors due to variation of surface tension.

8.4.2.3

Pressure weighbeam of the dead-weight manometer is the pressure

An extension

weighbeam, which comprises a weighbeam mounted on frictionless pivots and bearing on a weight manometer. The force exerted on the piston of the weight manometer is balanced by a jockey weight moving along the weighbeam (see figure 17). The operation of the weighbeam and jockey weight may be manual or automatic by means of a servo-motor and a screw. The sensitivity, repeatability and accuracy of such a device shall be checked against a manometer without a servo-balancing system wherever possible.

8.4.2.4 The.design of the manometer shall be such that parallax errors are minimized. Liquid column manometers may be either open-ended, or

Spring pressure gauges deflection of a loop of to in-

This type of gauge uses the mechanical tube, plain or spiral (Bourdon dicate pressure.

dial gauge) or a membrane

closed with the air in. the circuit connecting both limbs compressed to the amount required to permit the differential head to be read on the scales, or formed by a U-tube filled with the manometric liquid. In the first case, pressures are measured from a fixed reference plane and above the surrounding atmospheric pressure which is taken as constant. The two last from a single types allow the pump total head to be obtained differential measurement.

For precision class tests, it may be used, by mutual agreement, provided : a) the gauge is of the highest precision; range (usually

b) it is used within its optimum measuring from 60 to 100 % of its full scale); cl the Interval between two consecutive

The use of some typical liquid column manometers diagrammatically in figures 14 and 15, to which should be made for the calculation equations.

is shown reference

scale graduations

corresponds

to not more than 2 % of the pump total head, against standards before and

8.4.2.2

Dead-weight

manometers

The gauge shall be calibrated after the tests. Figure
if3

For pressures exceeding the possibilities of the liquid column manometer, a dead-weight or piston manometer is of practical

shows diagrammatically calculation

the use of such gauges and

the corresponding

formulae.

IS13538:

1993

IS0 5198: 1987

y'z2,+p*
Air vent

Q

*-+,I+

aa*ui?
zg

> 2 pipe diameters (see 8.2.1.2)

-

> 2 pipe diameters

`M2

Reference

plane (centreline

of shaft, in the case of a horizontal pump)

,
of pumped liquid

_/

I

I

-5-Q H1 -g, (z,2-21,

'

%i ui +-+(z,

3

29

,-113)

a)

Pump inlet under vacuum > 2 pipe diameters (see 8.2.1.1)

-3

aa1 u: )+2g + ti=%z,2-z,,
Ql

31

I

i

Tube containing Tube containing pumped liquid Tube contailiing manometnc

air

liquid

The drawngs show the principles, but not full technical details b)

Figure 14 -

Test of a centrifugal

pump by means of liquid column

gauges

33

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Qa

-T
x
cl

u

x
t

t

f

Q,

b

--I
Lr
AH+

/,

=

QI -Qa

ola2

Q,

u&x,, u:
29
b) Mercury differential manometer

a)

Air-water differential manometer

The drawings show the principles but not full technical details. These equations are valid only if p1 = 4 which can never be assumed for precision class tests.

Figure 15 -

Direct measurement

of pump total head

34

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

0
1

h, = zI

- zM

h2 =2,-z,

Reference

level for instrument

2~

Ap

Differential

pressure Acting masses, m Differential-pressure measuring device

01
0
2

0
@

3

Water Oil

where p

= --x d',

4w

with d,

= ~-

4 + d,
2

Figure 16 -

Dead-weight

manometer with stabilization by differential (transducer or liquid manometer)

pressure measurement

IS13538:1993 isO5198:1987

0
@

1

Weighbeam Friction& Jockey pivot mass m

a@
Counter screw Zero point

Electric contacts

0 3 0 4 0 5

weight,

Piston. cross-section

s

Measuring Servo-motor

Altitude of the point pressure of which is to be found

Figure

17 -

Pressure

weighbeam

36

1s 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

the manometer a) Arrangement for determining reference plane of Bourdon type gauge

Pressure reading f12

eference plane kentreline of shaft, in the case of a horizontalpumpt

b) Pump inlet under vecuum

> 2 pipe diameters Pressure reading p, > 0

f-f
B

Tube containing air Tube containing pumped liquid

c)

Pump inlet under pressure

The drawings show the principles but not full technical details.

Figure 18 - Test of a centrifugal

pump

by means

of a Bourdon gauge

37

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

8.4.2.5

Other types of manometers

the gear are determined by the calorimetric method applied to the cooling liquids of the gear unless otherwise agreed. 10.2

There is a wide diversity of pressure transducers, absolute or differential, based upon the variation of various mechanical and/or electrical properties. They may be used by mutual agreement provided the required accuracy, repeatability and reliability are achieved, the transducer is used within its optimum measuring range and the transducer together with its electronic equipment are calibrated before and after the test against pressure standards of adequate accuracy. Other methods which are not listed may also be used subject to the following two conditions : their systematic uncertainty shall be determined and checked by periodic calibration using a primary method; the maximum resulting uncertainty shall be compatible with table 7.

Indirect method

Since the motor coupled to the pump acts not only as a driving machine but as a device for measuring power, the losses should be determined accurately under the conditions of load, voltage, power factor, speed, temperature, etc., of the pump test. These losses may then be different from those obtained under standardized conditions for the measurement of the losses of the electric motors. The losses of an electric motor shall only be determined by a specific test if the uncertainty of the assessment of these losses under test conditions by means of the available data cause an uncertainty of measurement of the pump power which is higher than the values specified by this International Standard. Clause 10.2.1 gives necessary details for this measurement. 10.2.1 The efficiency of the electric motor shall be determined taking into account all the losses specified in IEC Publication 34-2 (provided that it does not contradict the specifications of this International Standard). When IEC Publication 34-2 does not give details of the procedure to be followed for these measurements, the procedure shall follow the regulations of one of the official national codes in existence, chosen by common accord between the parties at the time the pump is ordered, and taking into account the obligatory requirements of 10.2.2. Generally the efficiency of an electric motor is determined by indirect measurement, consisting essentially of measuring the aggregate losses of the machine (total losses), and in assuming that these losses represent the difference between the electric power input absorbed and the mechanical power output. In practice, the determination of the above "total losses" is generally accomplished by the individual measurement or. calculation of the various categories of losses and by their summation. Thus this method of measuring efficiency is said to be by "separate losses". 10.2.2 Measurement of the electrical power input shall be made at the motor terminals if at all possible. If this cannot be done, the measured power shall be decreased by the losses occurring between the motor terminals and the location of the measuring device; these losses are determined by calculation, During pump tests, the motor shall operate, as far as possible, at its nominal voltage; in the case of an a.c. machine at its nominal frequency and for a synchronous machine at a power faCtOr equal to unity. If these conditions cannot be fulfilled, due allowance shall be made in calculating the losses and corresponding inputs, and in estimating the probable error in the measurements. The electric power shall be measured by means of accuracy class wattmeters or by watt-hour meters; they shall be calibrated and fed if necessary by accuracy class instrument transformers. The accuracy of the measurement of the power input to an electric motor on site or on a test rig will not be better than f 0,2 %, this value depending on the accuracy class of the instrument transformers the accuracy of which shall not be inferior to that of the instruments.

-

9

Measurement

of speed of rotation

As far as possible the speed of rotation shall be measured directly by counting the number of revolutions during a known time interval with a tachometric dynamo or alternator, or an optical or magnetic counter linked to a frequency meter. In the case of an a.c. motor-driven pump, if the speed cannot be measured directly, it can be determined by measuring the mains frequency and the slip of the motor, for example with a stroboscope or an induction coil. The uncertainty of measurement of the speed obtained with an electronic counter or any other device with an equivalent precision class is generally about f 0,05 % to f 0,2 %.

IO

Measurement

of power input

10.1 General
The pump power input, P (see table 1). shall be measured by one of the following methods: a) indirectly, by subtracting the various electrical and mechanical losses from the measured electrical power input to the driving motor; b) directly by determination of the speed and torque at the pump shaft. This method can be applied to any form of driver. The accuracy required for precision class testing is such that the tests shall be carried out according to laboratory methods by suitably qualified personnel who fully understand the test requirements. The measuring apparatus and test procedure shall be such that the accuracies required for precision class tests are achieved. It must be realized, however, that normal facilities on a manufacturer's test bed are unlikely to be satisfactory for this class of test. Where the power input to an electric motor coupled to an intermediate gear, or the speed of rotation and torque measured by a dynamometer between gear and motor are used as a means for determining the pump power input, the losses due to

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

I II

Potentialcommutator Currentcommutator

Figure 19 -

Measurement

of the power at the terminals

of a motor: three wattmetar

method

The accuracy of these devices shall permit the whole measuring channel to comply with the requirements of table 7.

If the neutral of a three-phase motor is brought out and connetted to the network or to earth, it will be obligatory to use the three wattmeter (or watt-hour meter) method (see figure 19).

If the neutral of the motor is brought out but not connected to the network or the earth during the test, either the three w,sttmeter (or watt-hour meter) method or the two wattmeter (or watt-hour meter) method may be used. The three wattmeter method is recommended. If the neutral of the motor is not brought out, the two wattmeter (or watt-hour meter) method shall be used (see figure 20).

I II

Potentialcommutator Currentcommutator

Figure 20 -

Measurement.of

the power at the terminals

of a motor: two wattmeter

method

IS 13538 : 1993 1%) 5198 : 1987

It may be necessary to allow for temperature

correction

in the

To obtain the true power

input,

due allowance in 10.3.2.

shall be made

above instruments. In the case of very great temperature fluctuations, it may be advisable (particularly for watt-hour meters) to place the instruments in a constant-temperature enclosure. In addition voltage, current to the be measurement measured by of input suitable at the accuracy terminals, class in-

for parasitic torque losses as specified

10.3.1 The torque reaction dynamometer consists of an electric motor with its casing and field windings mounted on separate measuring bearings system. from the rotating shaft, so that the whole by the shaft is balcasing is free to rotate but is restrained The torque by means of a torque-

current shall

per phase,

excitation

voltage

and excitation

struments. The temperature in the stator winding and other factors necessan/ to establish the losses and input of the machine under the test conditions shall also be measured. During measurement of the power input of an asynchronous motor, the slip value should be determined (by measuring the leakage flux or by means of stroboscopic measurement). If the power is measured by direct-reading instruments, the number of readings will depend on the duration of the test and fluctuations in the load. The number of readings shall be sufficient to permit as accurate a calculation as possible of the mean power over the duration of the tests. It is recommended that the various wattmeters used in the measurement of power should be read simultaneously. If the power is measured by watt-hour meters, they be used simultaneously with direct reading wattmeters shall and

delivered

anced by an equal and opposite torque reaction on the casing, and it is this that is measured either by means of a weight or by some other high-accuracy mechanical or electrical system.

10.3.2 Torque errors in torque reaction dynamometers be avoided if the following precautions are taken. a) It is necessary to limit the rotational movement

may

of the

dynamometer b) The

or to have a fixed balance point. shall be so constructed that the

dynamometer

cooling fluid enters and leaves so as to avoid torque errors due to tangential velocity components. Similar precautions shall be taken regarding winding. if used, pressure. shall impose Dash pots, if used, Flexible pipe connections, restraint when under to shall be demonstrated in either direction. shall impose copper no tangential

checked against them in the course of each measurement. The duration of the recording of the integrating devices shall be measured by means of stop-watches or other time-measuring devices sufficiently accurate to permit the determination of the time to at least 0,l %. The power shall be measured during the same period in which the flow through the pump is measured. Because of the measuring direct possible currents inaccuracies in shunts used for of high intensity, the degree of

impose equal resistance to motion c) Electrical connections tangential

to the dynamometer restraint.

no noticeable

Brarded flexible

leads or mercury

pots are suitable for this purpose.

d) The effective radius arm of the dynamometer shall be measured with an error not exceeding & 0,l %. The inaccuracy of the force-measuring system shall not exceed + 0,l % of the reading. weights in the direction It shall be checked against certified of both increasing and decreasing

accuracy obtained in the measurement of direct current power may be considerably lower than achieved in the measurement of alternating current. Because of the accuracy (including required for the electric transformers), measuring the usua\

load. In the case of vertical shaft machines, and sometimes others, metal tapes and frictionless pulleys are used for app\ving the torque ba\anc\ng weights. and linkage shall be

instruments switchboard Similarly meters,

the instrument

types are not to be used for precision class tests. Before and after tests, the dynamometer instrument transformers or other meters, supplying electrical the wattmeasuring carefully checked.

the

watt-hour

instruments

specially installed for the tests, shall be used solely and may not be used to supply at the same

for that purpose

10.3.3 The torsion dynamometer for torque tube) comprises a length of shafting the torsional strain of which, when rotating at a particular speed and delivering method. a certain torque, is measured by some convenient Some torsion dynamo-

time the measuring and protective circuits, etc., of the plant. An exception may be made to this rule only if, by agreement between the parties, it is decided (and possibly checked by calibration) that the same degree of accuracy can be obtained with the use of certain switchboard instrument transformers (in view of their accuracy class, their effective conditions of use), as can be obtained with independent set of instruments and reserved for the test specified above. load and their the use of the specially

meters use optical techniques to measure angular strain, others use capacitance, inductance or wire resistance strain gauges as electrical transducers. Whatever type of torsion dynamometer shall be is used, it shall be calibrated some primary method. before and after the tests against will not influence the torque

transformers

The design of the dynamometer

such that speed and temperature

10.3

Direct

method

reading, or such that this influence can be measured quan titatively either by experiment or by means of a specral device designed for this purpose. High accuracy in any measuring equipment is virtually useless

The power input to the Pump may be measured by torque reacti,on dynamometer or by torsion dynamometer. Both methods involve the simultaneous measurement of net torque and shaft speed. The torque on the reaction dynamometer force applied it is applied. is determined by the effective radius at which to the dynamometer arm and For the torsion dynamometer by means of a

unless It can be checked and proved quickly and easily by the user to his own satisfaction. With careful calibration and use,
2 0,25 % of the actual reading can be achieved over the range 15 to 100 % of full scale, improving toward the higher end of

the

scale.

It

is generally

impossible a reliable

to

check

a

torsion I? is

(torque tube) the torque previous calibration.

shall be computed

dynamometer directly running under load.

against

reference

when

40

IS 13538 : 1993 1%) 5198 : 1987

Examples of the strain gauged types are torque tubes with slip rings and d.c. excitation and those with inductive couplings and a.c. energization. The slip ring type can provide high accuracy, of the order of 0,l % of their full load, but require more care and maintenance than the inductive coupling type which are essentially for higher speeds but are also more suitable for permanent installations where the accuracy requirements are not stringent. The systematic uncertainty of torque measurement is most torque,

table 11, by applying the thermodynamic method. This method is based on the evaluation of the energy per unit mass of water received by water from a pump shaft. It may be determined by measurements of the performance variables (pressure, temperature, velocity and level) and from the thermodynamic properties of water. Technological aspects of instrumentation are dealt with in a general way taking into account the fact that the apparatus presently available varies obsolete in the future. widely and may possibly become

generally of the order of f 0,15 % of the maximum arising from the following sources: calibration, sensitivity, reading, 3~ 0,l t f 0,l %; %;

The only requirements of instruments are to satisfy conditions stipulated in this International Standard (accuracy, heat exchange, etc.). Due to the lack of uniformity in values measured at the inlet and outlet sections of the machines, the limitations of measuring equipment and the relatively high magnitude of the correction terms originating from the imperfect measuring conditions, the scope of this method is limited and it can only be used for pump total heads in excess of 100 m. However, under highly favourable conditions, the range could be extended by mutual agreement to cover lower heads subject to an analysis of the accuracy of the measurements.

-

0,05 %.

11 ,Measurernent of pump thermodynamic method

efficiency

by the

11.O

Introduction

This clause serves as a basis for the measurements to be made on pumps and for the computation of pump efficiency, 9 (see

41

IS 13538:

1993 1987

IS0 5198:

11.1

Terms,

definitions,
defined

symbols
in table

and units
1, the terms given in table

In addition

to the terms

9 also

apply.

Table
Term 11.1.1

9 -

Terms,

definitions,

symbols

and units
Definition

(thermodynamic

method)
iymbol Unit

Hydraulic energy per unit mass11

The necessary energy per unit mass for the fluid to pass over from state 1 at the pump inlet to pressure p2 at the pump outlet when the pump is operating without losses. Under experimental conditions allowing the thermodynamic method to be used, the specific hydraulic E, can be determined by means of the equation :

E, = VM (p2 - P,) +
The measurement 1, 2, in figure 21. 11.1.2 Mechanical mass') energy per unit

aa

USi

aal

G + g k*

- r,l

Eh

J./kg

points for determining

E, are marked

:

The energy per unit mass received by water from a pump in the case of actual operation

E',

+

%2

Gl

-

aa1 Gl

2

+

g k*,

-

r,,)

+ Al&

= h,, - h,, +
+

aa26

- aat UC+
2

g f-72, -

z,,)

t

AE,

The measurement points for determining 11, 21, 22, in figure 21. 11.1.3 11.1.4 Corrective term for energy due to secondarv ohenomena Energy per unit mass corresponding to contractual losses Pump efficiency*1
"=E,

E,

are marked:

--given in 11.3. J/kg

AL\E, is calculated

according

to the recommendations

--__

Energy per unit mass corresponding to contractual losses in the machine which are not removed by water between the measuring sections (for example losses through bearings, where applicable)
Eh --~~

11.1.5

--~
per unit mass m3/ kg

11.1.6

Volume

oar unit masse)

Volume

11.1.7

Isothermal factor4'

Factor characterizing

a thermodynamic

property of water

ma/ kg

-11.1.9 11.1.9 Specific heat capacity51 Mean value of a61 Values of (I and c,, corresponding to 11.1.W Mean value of c,6' Specific heat capacity at constant

D

pressure the mean value, p, where p = 731 mean
41 =-_ +

`;!
"

m3/kg

+ 2

P21

and the where
@

value,

-`;,
021

J-kg-`.K-

~.
11.1.1' Mean value of V,,@. Value_of V, corresponding value 0 where :

_4 -t e2
to mechanical

2

-I__

to the mean value p and to the mean

ii

ma/kg

~ p=11.1.1; Shaft power

Pl

+4

2 _

and e=

T-

Shaft power co&ponding P,,, = e2qv.G

energy per unit mass

= q,,,Fm

1) Use of the term "energy per unit mass" is considered to be preferable to "energy per unit weight" because it offers a more general meaning. Nevertheless, energy per unit weight (i.e. specific head for the installation considered) can be used as a basis. Conversron of numerical values expressing energy per unit mass into head is ensured by dividing the former by x, the mean value for acceleration due to gravnv between the extreme levels of the installation. 21 Under experimental Values for Q ( 4) 5) = $) WI conditions allowing the thermodynamic method to be used, it can normally be assumed that a,, = oa2 = 1 (see 8.1 .l .l)

31

are given in table 16.

Values for a are given in table 15. Values for cp are given in table 1'7. 0 and

6) Fractional error in E, and E, attributable to the adoption of mean values c V,,, and C, instead to exact integrals lfor pressures between 300 bar (30 MPa) and temperatures between 0 and 150 "Cl does not exceed 0,4 x 10 3.

42

IS 13538

: 1993

IS@ 5198 : 1987

11.2

Principle

prises only a single inlet and a single outlet of water. In fact, there can be the following supplementary inlets and outlets :

The thermodynamic method results from the application of the principle of conservation of energy (first law of thermodynamics) to a transfer of energy between water and the machine through which it is flowing. In the case of actual machine operation, the energy per unit mass received by water from a pump shaft may be determined by measurement of the performance variables (pressure, temperature, velocity and level) and from the thermodynamic properties of water. This exchange of energy will be referred to as "mechanical energy per unit mass" (see 11.1.2 and 11.4). In the case of ideal operation (100 % efficiency), i.e. frictionless

_

leak-off at the balance disc; injection into the seals; extraction from the seals;

~-

leak-off at the seals.

flow, the same application can be used for calculating the ideal energy per unit mass received from a pump shaft. Such energy is dependent solely upon the properties of the water and the characteristics of the plant. It is referred to as "hydraulic energy per unit mass" (see 11.1.1 and 11.5). The need to measure mass rate of flow, which is a difficult and expensive measurement, is eliminated by using the two values of energy per unit mass calculated as above. (Inversely, using the thermodynamic method together with measuring the power input may allow to determine the flow rate without its direct measurement is needed. 1An assessment of the flow rate is sufficient for calculating kinetic energies in section 1 and section 2 and secondary corrective terms. A procedure by trial and error can be used, if required, to reduce the uncertainty on flow rate. The above principle presupposes that all losses in hydraulic .machines are dissipated in the main flow. Generally, friction losses in the seals and bearings are dissipated differently and a corresponding correction shall be made to mechanical energy per unit mass (see 11.3.1). The determination the computation of the hydraulic energy per unit mass uses of the integral s V,,,dp (see8.1.1.2).

It is then convenient to break down the fluid flow into a number of elementary circuits, i, each of them having one inlet (subscript e) and one outlet (subscript s). The correction term AE, to be introduced is then given by the equation

AE,

= c

p,

I

h,, - h,, + -2-

Gl

G,

+ Y (isi - I,,) I

where the difference between enthalpy h, at the outlet and enthalpy h, at the inlet is determined from pressure and temperature measurements, either by means of the tables or basic formulations, or by the equation

h, - h, = a (/& - pe) + `,, (8, - 8,)
and where cp,is the ratio of the mass flow rate, q,,,,, of the circuit involved to the main outlet mass flow rate Y,,+

This calculation

takes strictly into account

all the frictions

be-

tween the fluid and the pump shaft at the balance disc or at the seals. It should be noted that the energy per unit mass corresponding to rhe losses in the bearings is given by the equation

In practice,

there are two ways to calculate this integral from properties of water

the thermodynamic

:
where Y,,,,, is the mass flow rate of the oil supplying the pump

1)

5,
v,,,

2

dl,

-c

5,

(~2

--

~1)

bearings; c,+, is its specific heat capacity.

In the range of normal efficiency

for pumps covered

by this

International Standard and in the range of pressures and temperatures defined by the tables given in annex C. the difference between these two calculations is not significant. The approximation H = HI may similarly be made

An example of decomposition

of the fluid flow in the case of a

feed pump of vapour thermal cycle is shown in figure 23 b). The correction energy term AE, and the loss in the bearings E, are indicated in the legend.

11.3 11.3.1

Correction

energy

terms
11.3.2 Heat the walls in Only heat transfer with the surroundings through

Particular flow arrangements
energy per unit mass, E,,

The equation for the mechanical

t:wsfcr:, wt-,c:re !Ile w,::rrr ! fl~`!qwtl k involved art.-

table 9 relates to the very simple case where the machine

com-

dealt with her kI.

43

IS 13538 IS0 5198:

: 1993 1987

High pressure Section 2

Low pressure Section 1

Variant

:

Free surface level

Pu
NOTE -

isolation or expansion

orifices

For use of one or other of the operating

procedures

for determining

mechanical

energy per unit mass, see 11.4

Figure

21 -

General

schematic

diagram

of measuring

vessels

h

\ \

\

'\

\

\

\ \ \ \ \ \ \

'\

`\ s \\ '
\ \ \

\

0 /
Figure 22 Enthalpy

1

i
\

\
/ NO \

\
11

91

e2

\ \ &I

le, `e11
(5)

5
diagram water

(h

1 - entropy

- thermodynamic

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

al
7
Water

5

2

4

6 3 b)

5
Oil 0

7

36a i

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

pump suction pump discharge injection into the seals leak-off at the balance disc and extraction extraction from the seals BP leak-off at the seals bearings oil inlet bearings oil outlet energy terms and loss in the bearings, h,) h,) + qs fh, ~ h,) the variations of kinetic and potential energy being neglected: hJ) + (pS (h, h-J + `Pi (h, hJ) from the seals HP

I
Oil

8

Correction

AI?,,, = 4,., US, EX where
(0.. I, -

+ ~0% UI, -

= cpm VI, -

!E!
qrrr2

("36 =

%ia + %b
Figure 23 - Example of deco.nposition of the fluid flow in a pump (case of a boiler feed pump of vapour thermal cycle)

45

IS 13538:

1993

IS0 5198 : 1987

The heat transfers through following correction

the metal

wails

give rise to the

where

5
AE,
where P' is the power, expressed in watts per square metre per keivin, exchanged; from experience, P' is considered equal to 10 W. rn-`. K-l; qm2 is the mass flow rate, expressed in kilograms per

=

-&.,A(6, m

is the mean specific heat capacity at constant pressure, expressed in joules per kilogram per kelvin; d0/dt second is the temperature gradient, expressed in kelvins per

B,)

;

t is the transit time, in seconds, of water between the inlet and outlet sections of the machine; t,
is the transit time, in seconds, of drawn-off tween the inlet section and measuring vessel; water be-

second, A

of the water; surface;

is the area, in square metres, of the exchange

t2 is the transit time, in seconds, of drawn-off between the outlet section and measuring vessel.

water

S, is the temperature, air; Be is the temperature,

in degrees Celsius, of the ambient

in degrees Celsius, of the water

in

The cyclic variations of temperature which may be observed in the boiler feed pumps of thermal power stations can reach 0.05 K/min. In such cases, to avoid a large measurement error, measurements shall be taken at intervals of about 1 s.

the pump. If there is considerable exchange dripping, the resulting increase of heat 11.3.4 Limitation of corrections

(in practice always less than about four times) shall

either be calculated from the air and water temperatures and the relative air humidity or efficiently depressed by sufficient heat insulation of the metal surfaces by screening jackets. Calculation of condensation influence can be made with sufficient accuracy by increasing the correction AE, for the "dry" heat exchange in the proportion w given by the equation

Measurements shall be considered non-valid whenever the corrections obtained from the measuring procedures or calculations given in 11.3.2 and Il.33 exceed the following limits in relation to E,: a) heat exchange between water in the measuring circuit and surroundings (see 11.32) at inlet or outlet: 1 %; b) sum of the corrections detailed in 11.3.2 and 11.3.3:

1

`=
where

1 -249OAxlAh

1,5 %.

Ah

is the air enthalpy per kilogram ; Ax is the difference

difference,

expressed

in kilojoules

11.4

energy
11.4.1 The

Procedure for measurement per unit mass
General

of mechanicat

in relative water content of the air, exper kilogram. the condition of the humid air sur-

pressed in kilograms The differences

are between

main

difficulty

to

be

overcome

in

determining

the

rounding the pump and that of the saturated air at the metal surface temperature and shall be taken from a normal Mollier diagram for humid air.

mechanical energy per unit mass lies in the accurate determination of the mean fluid temperatures on both sides of the pump. It can however be noted that, when the diameters of sections 1

11.3.3

Instability

of energy

at inlet

and 2 are similar, the absolute measurement a great effect ference, upon the determination

errors do not have dif-

of the temperature

It is recommended

that any inflow of water or energy to the in-

as long as the measuring probes are of identical design

let conduit (for example a conduit near a heat source) should be avoided. Moreover, if the same conduit supplies several units, the operating point of the pumps not under test shall be maintained constant. A slow and continuous variation of temperature of less than

and are similarly set up. On the other hand, when the diameters of the sections 1 and 2 are very different, the velocities WI and U2 are different and a differential heating may bias the probes. Then it is necessary to apply a correction to take this effect into account at least when the pump total head is low. Moreover, necessary the flows in conduits being turbulent ones, it is of the

0,005 K/min during one test is admissible. Nevertheless, a suitable correction shall be applied to E,,, according to the equation AE,,, = Trp$ It t, + t2)

to establish the temperature

profiles in the measur-

ing sections in order to determine fluid.

the mean temperatures

46

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

When the temperature difference between inlet and outlet of the pump is sufficiently high, the energy E, is determined by direct measurements by means of probes mounted in the flow. In this case, pressurespll andpzl and temperatures 8,, and 19~~ used in 11.1.2 for the definition of E, are simply substituted by PI, ~2, 8, and t$. In case of difficulty in carrying out direct measurements in the flow with the required accuracy, the energy E, is determined by indirect measurements by means of specially designed vessels with tappings for determination of pressure and temperature (see 11.6.2). When the measuring sections are under pressure, the procedura consists of extracting a sample flow, generally of between 0.1 and 0.5 dm3/s, by a total head probe. The water thus extracted is led to the measuring vessel through an insulated pipe to ensure that the heat exchange with the exterior, estimated in accordance with the procedure described in 11.3.2, gives rise to a correction not exceeding the limit fixed in 11.3.4. This sampling is valid if the recommendations given in 11.6.2.1 regarding extraction points are followed. The U2/2 and gt terms are of minor importance and their determination calls for no particular remarks. It should be noted that levels zll and zzl are those of the middle points of the measuring vessels. Pressure values are expressed with reference to these levels. Utt and r/z, are similarly measured in the vessels. Other terms defining E, shall be determined by one of the operating procedures described in 11.4.2 to 11.4.5 which are practical variations of the method. The selection of operating procedure should be based upon machine characteristics and the quality of measuring apparatus available. At pump inlets, it may be useful, depending upon the selected operating procedure, to reduce water pressure within the measuring vessel to atmospheric pressure.

(02, - fIrI) and (pzl - p,,) shall be measured simultaneously and at regular intervals. The temperature difference between the inlet and outlet of the pump shall be determined to within 0,020 OC when this difference is greater than or equal to 3 OC. It shall be determined to within at least 0,005 OC when this difference is less than or equal to 1 OC.

11.4.3

"Partial expansion"

operating

procedure

This procedure may only be used when the pressure at the pump inlet is sufficient to ensure that the temperature of the water expanded to atmospheric pressure in the measuring circuit is at least equal to that of the water at the pump outlet. An expansion valve is located in the sampling circuit between the inlet pipe and the corresponding measuring vessel. The adjustment of the valve should be very fine and stable such that, by partial expansion, temperature equality is achieved in the measuring vessels at the intake and outlet. Thus, in the expression for E,, the term Fp (e2, - 8,,) becomes zero and the determination of E, essentially entails the measurement of (P21 - p,,) with an accurate manometer (see 11.6.2.2). The thermometer shall be highly sensitive and reliable (see 11.6.2.3). its purpose is to record temperature equality. In practice, it is desirable to establish graphically the correspondence between (p2, - pII) and &t - B,,). As often as not, p,, is practically invariant and only ~21 need be measured. The pressure value used for calculation is that obtained by graphical extrapolation for a nil difference of temperature. In all cases where temperature equality cannot be obtained, it is possible to work by graphical extrapolation provided that the range of pressure involved by extrapolation is small compared with the pressure range accurately measured.

11.4.2

"Without

expansion"

operating

procedure 11.4.4 "Auxiliary expansion" operating procedure

This procedure may be used when the temperature difference between inlet and outlet of the pump is sufficiently high. It brings into play either direct measurements by means of probes mounted in the flow, or indirect measurements by means of vessels supplied by water extractions with minimum expansion between pipe and vessel. If the enthalpy calculation is not accurate enough, the terms for E, given in 11.1.? are determined as follows :
O(P21 -

This procedure is a variant to that described in 11.4.3. But, in contrast, it may be used even if the pump inlet pressure is insufficient. The pressure p1 1corresponding to the equality of temperatures 8,, and e2, is not measured, but determined on the basis of a comparative expansion of the outlet extracted water in such a way that the temperature variation of the expanded water is equal to that of the water crossing the machine (deviation method).

p,,)

requires a precision manometer (see 11.6.1.2); values of u are given in table 15 (annex C);

11.4.5

"Total expansion"

operating

procedure

L;pcl+, - e,,) requires measurement of

e,, - e,, with requisite accuracy (see 11.6.1 .l 1; values of cp are given in table 17 (annex C).

This procedure is used mainly when the pump inlet pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure. An expansion valve is located in the sampling circuit between the outlet pipe and the corresponding measuring vessel. The adjustment of the valve allows the water expansion until a pressure equal to that at the pump inlet. Thus, in the expression for E,, the term CI (p2, r ~11) becomes zero and the determination of E, essentially entails the measurement of

The thermometer plays a very important role in this procedure. lt shall be very sensitive and reliable, and calibrated beforehand. Whenever this procedure is adopted, "partial expansion" procedure (see 11.4.3) for one test point or in situ calibration of the thermometer will be undertaken for checking purposes (see 11.4.6).

(e,, - e,,).

47

IS 13538: 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

This operating procedure is generally less accurate because the measurement of the temperature is more difficult than the measurement of the pressure. Moreover, cD is less well-known. 11.4.6 Expansion procedure for differential thermometer calibration Two thermometric gauges are placed in two vessels separated by an expansion valve through which water flows after having been withdrawn from the conduit. As the efficiency of the whole of the expander unit is zero, the transfer of mechanical energy per u18itmass is zero and thus

11.6.1 .1.2

Thermometers protected by thermometric pockets

As fluid pressures are generally high, thermometric probes are often placed in thermometer pockets. The thermometer pockets and the external insulation of bosses and thermometers shall be identical in pairs in order to eliminate the possible errors in the determination of temperature differences. For point measurements, care shall be taken to ensure thermal contact between the thermometer end and the pocket bottom,
if possible using a support For exact temperature with a liquid having silicone, etc. 1. spring. the pocket may be filled properties (water, oil,

measurements, good thermal

Or

e, - e,, =

ap21 - Pp) +

w:, - c&/21
G

+ gk2, - 22)

11.6.1.1.3 Number of temperature measuring points Temperature distribution The mean temperature, B,, of a fluid of approximately constant density in a cross-section of area A is given by the equation

Thus, the difference in temperature between the two vessels is known and the thermometer may be calibrated for use in the operating procedures described in 11.4.2. For this procedure, it is essential that expansion shall be progressive and stable, the vessels be perfectly thermally insulated from the exterior, suspended material content in the water shall not exceed 0.1 g/dm3 and that dissolved gas content shall be below the saturation point. If the expander operation is satisfactory, the calibration is kept when the thermometric gauges are inverted.

8, = -

ev, b4

where v, is the axial component of the local velocity in the element of section dA. When the Prandtl number (see 4.1.13) is close to unity and for a small temperature difference between the centre and the wall of the pipe, the velocity and temperature distributions can be considered identical, to a first approximation.
Under such conditions, the value of 19, can be expressed as the

11.5 betermination
mass

of hydraulic

energy

per unit

This energy per unit mass is represented by the expression given in 11.1 and is determined by separate measurement of the U2/2 and gz terms, and by determining F,? ipg - p,) or (hzs - h,); (See 11.2.) Conditions governing the measurement of p, and p2 are given in 8.4, and g values are given in table 1. 11.6 Measuring apparatus Recommendations

arithmetic mean of the temperatures taken at a given number of points of the profile provided these points are located at welldefined distances, r, from the pipe axis. Thus, for Reynolds numbers greater than 6 000, table 10 gives the ideal positions of the probes when their number varies from one to five.

for use
11.6.1 11.6.1.1 11.6.1.1.1 Direct measurements Measurement of main temperatures Thermometers directly immersed in the fluid

Table 10 Nutnber of probes 1 2 3 4 5

Ideal positions of probes Distance from centre as a fraction of radius, r/H 0.72 0.46; 0.86 0.37; 0,67; 0.91 0.34; 0.57: 0.75; 0.93 0.27; 0.47: 0.70; 0,8O; 0.94

As far as possible, the thermometers shall be directly immersed in the fluid. Their design shall take into account the characteristics of the fluid and the dynamic solicitations and resonance phenomena liable to involve their breaking. They shall be located far from any pipe irregularity. Where the temperature distribution at pump inlet and outlet has to be determined, the thermometers shall be in pairs and their settings identical.

For flow measurements by the velocity area log-linear method,
slightly different posed. positions as defined in table 11 have been proit appears that the difference between no calr;ulated in both cases has practically By experience,

mean temperatures influence

on the test results.

IS 13538 IS0 5198:

: 1993 1987

Table 11 -

Positions of probes (velocity area log-linear method) Distance from centre as a fraction of radius,
rlR

11.6.1.2 Pressure measurements The precision manometer used shall allow an assessment of pressure to an accuracy of a+ least 0,l %.

Number of probes 2 3 4 5

0.42; 0.36; 0.31; 0.28:

0.81 0073; 0.94 0.63; 0,77: 0.96 0.57; 0,69; 0.85; 0.95

11.6.1.3 terms

Auxiliary measurements for estimation of correction

Measurements of temperature, flow rate or pressure in auxilian/ circuits do not require as high an accuracy as the previous
measurements. For example, meters, calibrated thermocouples tanks, etc., ten be pressure for used for temperature devices, turbine measurements, volumetric and differential

11.6.1 .1.4 Types of thermometer Any sensitive and accurate thermometer can be used for the thermodynamic method provided its calibration and stability ensure the desired accuracy in the measurement of the temperature difference. It is recommended to use a differential thermometer. This sensitivity and this accuracy shall be between 0,001 OC and 0,020 OC according to the pump total head and the temperature of the water. They should not be unstable over a range of f 5 "C about the mean temperature to be measured. This property shall be checked before and after each test. Measurements have been made with thermocouples, thermistors and quartz thermometers, but resistance thermometers are mostly used. If measurements are made far from the pump, the resistance thermometers should be of the four wire type to eliminate the resistance of connecting wires in an appropriate bridge mounting. Special care should be taken, in connecting the wires to the thermometer and measuring bridge, to minimize electromotive contact forces. An a.c. or d.c. bridge can be used provided the direction of current is reversed for each measurement (automatically if possible) in the latter case. Thermocouples are suitable for measurement of the average temperature by series mounting. Such mountings cannot be used, however, to evaluate energy space instability. A high speed data acquisition system overcomes
of neglecting possible fluid temperature slidings. the possibility

flow

measurements.

11.6.2 11.6.2.1

Indirect measurements Main measurements Sampling water circuits

11.6.2.1 .l

Water samples from the conduit shall be taken by means of a sampling probe fixed perpendicular to the conduit and protruding into the conduit. This probe shall have a perfectly smooth orifice at its end, of diameter equal to the internal diameter of the probe and pointing upstream. The distance of this orifice from the internal wall of the conduit shall be at least 0.05 m and if possible 0.26 R (see 11.6.1.1.3). At least two sampling points shall be provided, away from any disturbance, up to 1 m in diameter and more for bigger conduits. The depth of the various probes may vary. A mean sampling may also be made by mixing samples taken at various points. The probe shall be designed to avoid vibration and rupture and marked such that the orifice can be correctly orientated and identified. The external diameter of the probe in the vicinity of the sampling holes may be chosen in the range 15 to 40 mm, the internal diameter being at least 8 mm. In order to ensure sufficient mechanical strength, the external diameter may be increased gradually towards the wall provided it does not affect the flow essentially.
NOTE - The measuring vessel5 should be designed so that the kinetic energy of water is converted into pressure energy and that good mixing occurs before the flow passes around <he thermometer pockets. Particular construction arrangements are necessary to avoid, as far as possible, heat transfer at the walls of these pockets or by the connecting wires: for example the wires shall be in contact with the walls under the insulation of the vessels. The expansion orifices shall ensure a high degree of flow stability and when adjustable shall ensure steady progressive varia-

11.6.1.1.5 Thermometer

calibration

A calibration accuracy of a few thousandths of a Celsius degree is difficult to obtain, but it is generally sufficient to proceed to relative calibration of the thermometers with respect to each other by comparison in a limited range and, if possible, to group them in pairs. The stability and homogeneity of calibration baths, of the element of comparison and of the measuring bridge performance shall correspond to the desired measuring accuracy. Each measurement shall be repeated at least once.

tion in discharge. All the active elements of the sampling circuits (Pipes, expanders, vessels) shall be carefully insulated so that the sampling flow is of constant total enthalpy; imperfections in

46

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Ahcz,

Correct value of E,
----l-------

i

I

0
q is the sampling flow common to all efficiency test points

NOTE negative.

The figure is drawn in the case of heat transfer from the surroundings to the circuit. In the opposite case, the slope of the line should be

Figure 24 -

Example of graphic determination of the correction AE, to allow for heat transfer in a sampling circuit

the thermal insulation shall be taken into account ing procedure :

by the follow-

total pressure measured

in the vessel, considering

the probe as

a total pressure tapping (when its orifice is located at a distance from the nearest wall equal to about l/7 of the pipe diameter and with no sampling flow), shall be compared with the sum of the static pressure measured at the wall plus the dynamic pressure, ,p(U2/2), measured in the pipe. Any significant difference shall be considered as abnormal.

a)

it is assumed, as a first approximation, that the rate of heat exchange with the exterior is constant, so that the Ah,, varies linearly with the inverse flow rate; shall be measured for at least three

value of total enthalpy value of the sampling b) this quantity Ah,,

sampling

flow rates;

11.6.2.1.2

Pressure measurements used shall permit direct reading of pressure that the to

c) a graph of Ah,, as a function of the inverse of the flow rate permits, by interpolation, determination of the correction AE, required to allow for heat transfer (see figure 24).

The manometer with an accuracy

of about 0.1 %. It is recommended

same manometer shall be used for measuring E, and E, minimize the effect of systematic error of the manometer.

This check shall be made for all points of the efficiency curve. However, if the correction is less than 0,2 % of E,, the number of measuring points for which these auxiliary measurements 11.6.2.1.3 Temperature difference measurements shall be made may be reduced by mutual agreement, The thermometer used shall directly indicate the temperature difference between measurement points. It shall be sensitive and accurate to at least 0,001 "C.

It is recommended that the probe be checked in the following manner, as rupture is always possible, but difficult to see. The

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

11 B.2.2

Auxilian/ measurements

It is necessary to provide an apparatus to check the sampling flow with an accuracy of about 5 %. The temperature of the water drawn off shall be continuously monitored by thermometers of at least f 0,05 OC accuracy. The use of a recorder is recommended.

Whilst primarily the object of cavitation tests specified in this International Standard is the verification of certain performance guarantees, it is recommended that the same principles and methods be applied for research tests. 12.1.2 Cavitation tests will in most cases be conducted with clean cold water. Cavitation tests in water cannot accurately predict the behaviour of the pump with liquids other than clean cold water. The following methods are for liquids for which the vapour pressure is single-valued. Mixed hydrocarbons and other liquids where vapour pressures cannot be defined by a single value at the test temperature are excluded. Cavitation may affect the behaviour of a pump in several ways. It may cause noise, vibration, material damage and alteration of performance, as defined by changes of head, rate of flow, efficiency, etc. In no case shall the cavitation tests be used to ensure that the pump will be free from cavitation erosion during its service life. Measurements not relating to the hydraulic performance of the pump such as noise and vibrations are not covered by this International Standard. Assessments of cavitation performance shall be made on a head drop or efficiency drop basis at a given rate of flow or on a drop in rate of flow or efficiency basis at a given total head. Other methods such as cavitation visualization and sound pressure measurements which are still subject to research and not yet generally accepted, are described in annex D. 12.1.3 There are different types of cavitation tests.

11.7 11.7.1

Accuracy

of measurements errors

Random errors and systematic

Errors arising in determining each quantity which occurs in efficiency calculatrons include random components, the uncerteinty of which at 95 % confidence level can be determined, and systematic components, for which only a maximum value can be estimated. Nevertheless it is admissible to treat these errors as if they were all random errors, by associating the systematic errors with an uncertainty equal to half the maximum estimated range of the error. For more details, see IS0 5155. 11.7.2 General expression of uncertainty efficiency

in

The relative uncertainty, 5r7ll. in efficiency is obtained from the root mean square of the relative uncertainties in the numerator and denominator of the efficiency expressions given in 11.1.5. Disregarding the error in E, in these expressions gives

The relative uncertainties in hydraulic and mechanical energy per unit mass themselves arise from several sources :

E Ina .

determination of the main quantities involved in E,., and

12.1.3.1 A check may be made to show that the hydraulic performance of the pump is not affected by cavitation at the specified duty and (NPSH). The pump meets the requirement if a test at a higher (NPSH) gives the same total head and efficiency at the same rate of flow. 12.1.3.2 In other cases, cavitation performance is explored more fully by reducing INPSH) until measurable effects are noted. This type of test may be conducted either to check the requirement of the pump or as a research test. From such a test, the behaviour of the pump at various departures from the specified (NPSH) may be judged. For instance, the following cavitation extent may be characterized by corresponding values of the (NPSH) : a) bl c) x % reduction in total head, INPSH)", the beginning of performance alteration, (NPSH),;

determination of corrections allowing for secondary phenomena in the calculation of E,. For more detailed information on analysis, propagation and evaluation of these errors, SW annex C. As a guide, it may be assumed that the uncertainty in efficiency measurement carried out by experienced staff in satisfactory experimental conditions lies between 0,5 to 1 %, if the pump total head exceeds 100 m. This limit may be lower if the uncertainty given in table 7 is agmed.

12
12.1

Cavitation General

tests

12.1.1 When a contract specifies a (NPSH) a test may be conducted to verify that the (NPSH) required by the pump is equal to or less than the specified (NPSH).

51

Is 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

dl

x % reduction in efficiency, (NPSH),;

12.2.1.3

Condition of the test liquid

e) blockage of flow rate by fully developed cavitation, (NPSH)r. If not otherwise agreed, a drop of be used unless it is shown that invalid. % in total head shall on this basis are

The liquid shall be clean and clear and should not contain solid matter (see table 41. The total gas content, including both entrained and' dissolved gas of the liquid used in the test rig, should be known for the test. It shall be taken at the inlet close to the pump. Present experience in closed circuits indicates that the influence of air content on a cavitation test in water may be neglected if the total air content at standard conditions of pressure and temperature [15" C, absolute pressure 1 ba01, is not less than 2 parts by volume in 1 000 and if the pump works in practice with normal industrial water. Conversely, to avoid degassing in any part of the pump, the liquid of the circuit should not be supersaturated. De-aeration of.liquid used for a cavitation test is necessary if the pump is to be used in practice with de-aerated liquid. It is possible to examine the influence of gas content by repetition of the same teat run under different gas content conditions as permitted by the test installation. To avoid any degassing in open or closed circuits, an increase of general pressure level may be required (see 12.2.1 .l).

In the case of multistage pumps, only the head generated by the first stage shall be considered whether actually measured or estimated.

12.2 12.2.1 12.2.1.1

Test installations Qeneral test conditions
General characteristics of the circuit

The circuit shall be such that when cavitation appears in the pump, it shall not occur elsewhere to an extent where it affects the stability or the satisfactory operation of the installation or the measurement of the pump performance. Cavitation or gas released by cavitation in the pump shall not affect the functioning of the instrumentation, particularly the flow measuring device. The measuring conditions on the cavitation test rig, whether this be the same as the rig used for the determination of the efficiency curves or not, shall conform to the conditions specified in this International Standard. The types of installations described in 12.2.2 may necessitate special flow control valves at the inlet and outlet to avoid cavitation in these items influencing results. Cavitation in the flow through a flow control valve can sometimes be prevented by using two or more control devices connected in series or by arranging for the flow control valve to discharge directly into a closed vessel or a tank of large diameter interposed between the control and the pump inlet. Baffles and means of extracting air from such a vessel may be needed, especially when the (NPSH) is low. When a flow control valve is partially closed the pipe shall be full of liquid at the position of the inlet pressure tappings. 12.2.1.2 Viewing conditions

12.2.1.4

Flow conditions

The general flow conditions specified in this International Standard, especially at the inlet of the pump, shall be fulfilled.

12.2.2

Types of installation

The following types of installations may be used.

12.2.2.1 For liquids where the error in temperature measurement produces an error in determining the liquid head equivalent to vapour pressure of less than f 0,lO m or f 2 % of the measured (NPSH) whichever is the higher, the installations shown in figure 25 are acceptable.

12.2.2.1.1 The pump is installed in a closed pipe loop as shown in figure 25 a) in which the pressure level or, by alteration of temperature, the vapour pressure may be varied without changing the pump head or rate of flow until cavitation occurs in the pump. Arrangements for cooling or heating the liquid in the loop may be needed in order to maintain the required temperature, and a gas separation tank may be also required. A liquid recirculation loop may be necessary to avoid unacceptable temperature differences in the test tank.

Whatever the type of circuit used, it is recommended where possible that provision be made for visual observation of the condition of the water, with particular reference to the bubble content coming into the pump, and the cleanliness both at the inlet of the pump and upstream of the flow measuring device.

~~~
1)

-~-

1 bar = 0.1 MPa

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

The tank shall be of sufficient size and so designed as to Prevent the entrainment of gas in the pump inlet flow. Additionally stilling screens may be needed in the tank if the average velocity exceeds 0.25 m/s.

b) The physical separation or Van Slyke method has the advantage of permitting the extraction of the quantity of air contained, whether in dissolved or occluded form, by cascading the sample under vacuum in an insulated column. The method is relatively rapid, but necessitates working on small volume samples.

12.2.2.1.2 The pump draws liquid through an unobstructed suction pipe from a sump in which the level of the free liquid surface may be adjusted. [See figure 25 bI.1

c)

Gas content recorders (as used in thermal power plants1

permit a continuous recording of the total gas content, but must be adapted to the range of use in the laboratory where the water is usually saturated, in a thermal power plant. whereas it is nearly gas-free

12.2.2.1.3 The pressure of the liquid entering the pump is adjusted by means of a flow control valve installed in the inlet pipe at the lowest practical level. [See figure 25 cl.1

NOTE - The above-mentioned methods are hardly operational industrially.

12.2.2.2

For liquids where the error in temperature

measure-

ment is greater than that specified in 12.2.2.1, the determination of (NPSH) by direct measurement as described in 12.3.2.4 shall be used by agreement.

12.3.2.3 Measurement

of temperature

For the installations described in 12.2.2.1, the vapour pressure of the test liquid entering the pump shall be determined with sufficient accuracy to comply with 12.3.2.5. When the vapour pressure is derived from standard data and the measurement of

12.3 Determination the pump 12.3.1 Methods

of the (NPSH) required by

the temperature of the liquid entering the pump, the necessary accuracy of temperature measurement may have to be demonstrated.

of varying

(NPSHI

The tests specified in 12.1.3 can be conducted in any of the installations shown in figure 25 and 26 according to one of the different methods indicated in figure 27. It is possible to vary two control parameters and thus keep flow rate constant during a test, but this is usually more difficult.

The active element of a temperature-measuring probe shall be not less than one-eighth of the inlet pipe diameter from the wall of the inlet pipe. If the immersion of the temperature-measuring element in the inlet flow is less than that required by the instrument manufacturer, then a calibration at that immersion depth may be required. Care shall be taken to ensure that temperature measuring probes inserted into the pump inlet pipe do not influence the measurements of inlet pressure.

12.3.2

Measurement

methods 12.3.2.4 Determination of INPSH) by direct measurement

12.3.2.1 rotation The

Measurement

of pump head, flow rate and speed of

The pump is installed in a closed loop in which a free surface is maintained at vapour pressure by allowing liquid to flash into a circuit (see figure 26). The (NPSH) is then tank in a secondary

recommended

methods

in clauses 7 to 9 regarding

the

measurement of head, outlet flow rate and speed of rotation shall be applied during cavitation tests unless otherwise agreed. For tests in accordance with 12.2.2.2, the (NPSH) shall be directly measured using a liquid column gauge. Particular care is needed to ensure that in the measurement of flow, cavitation does not affect the accuracy of the flowmeter. Ingress of air through joints and glands should be avoided.

measured directly on a liquid level column gauge mounted on the savitation bottle, due account being taken of the inlet pipe head loss which, if below 0,05 m can be considered of negligible influence on the (NPSH) value being measured.

Changes in (NPSH) from the cavitation

can be accommodated by bleeding liquid bottle to a separate storage tank. Care when returning such liquid to the

needs to be taken, however,

marn circuit, and adequate mixing shall be allowed to occur so that true vapour pressure conditions are established at the free surfsce.

12.3.2.2

Measurement

of gas content

Gas content measurement, a requirement of all precision class cavitation tests, may be made by any method shown to give an error in measurement saturated water. a) The Winkler of less than + 10 % when applied to

12.3.2.5

Limits of error in determination

of (NPSHj

The maximum limits of error in (NPSH) measurements determined by the above methods shall be I 3 % of the measured (NPSH), or + 0,15 m whichever is the greater. For (NPSH) temperature tests with fluid temperature over the saturation at ambient pressure, an exact error calculation

method

enables

the

determination

by It is

iodometr-y of the dissolved oxygen content of the water.

comparatively accurate, but necessitates titrated solutions which are difficult to keep and requires sampling without reaeration of the specimen. It only yields the value of dissolved air content by calculation.

shall be made and agreement reached between the manufacturer and the purchaser about the acceptability of the measuring uncertainties obtained.

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987
To vacuum or pressure control

_ / Cavitation, bottle Il.

Spray nozzle for liquid de-aytion -

Stilling screens

tl
/,,`)I
-_ _-

,A\
-

I,

-_
-

--_-_-----mm--

___

--- _-

\

I-\.
-

-

Flow control valve

Cooling or heating coils!: =& hoa G""`F"' i ) T

'
NOTE

L isolating

valve open during the test

-

Cooling by means of a coil may be replaced by an injection of cool water above the liquid free surface and an extraction a) Variation of (NPSHJ in a closed loop by control of pressure or temperature

of heated water.

Adjustable

liquid level

To flowmeter, flow control valve and measurement of gas content point

To flowmeter

and

measurement of gas content point

b)

Variation of (NPSH) by control of liquid level at inlet details. 25 Cavitation

cJ Variation of INPSH) by means of a flow control valve at inlet (to avoid)

NOTE

._ The drawings show the principle but not full technical Figure

tests

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

To flash tank

,~~-`+--l__
II -

_' l-

7-

Cooling or heating coils

Pump L Isolating valve open during the test u

(if necessary)

a)

Measurement method by level gauge in the cavitation tank

slash

tank /

From stz (if necessary)

tank

(if necessary)

(NPSH) direct measurement by manometer or differential pressure gauge

b)
NOTE The drawings

Measurement

method by gauge manometer
details

show the principles but not full technical

Figure ZB - Cavitation torts - Direct rnoaruremdnt method [no assessment of (NPSH) from temperature measurement]

55

rype

of

~nstellation Independent tierisble

Open sump

Open sump

Open sump

Open sump Inlet flow control valve

Open sump Water level

Closed loop Pressure in the tank

Closed loop Temperature (vapour pressure)

Closed loop Pressure reference

Closed sump or loop Temperature lvapour pressure)

Inlet flow control valve

Outlet flow control

Water

level

1valve I I I
Inlet flow control valve Head, flow rate, INPSHI, water level Inlet and outlet flow control valve Head, flow rate, (NPSH)

Constant Quantities variation which of

Outlet flow control valve the Head, flow rate, INPSHI, water level

Flow rate

Flow rate

Flow rate

Flow rate

Inlet and outlet flow control valve

Outlet flow control valve [for constant flow rate). head, (NPSHI

(NPSHI, head, outlet flow control valve

Heat, (NPSH), outlet Flow control valve (for constant Flow rate, when head begins lo drop!

is depen-

dent on control

(NPSH), head, outlet flow control valve lfor constant flow rate when head begins to drop1

Head, flow rate, (NPSH)

After onset of cavitation

-_.._ Head characteristic curve

x

[NPSHI characteristic

Figure 27 -

Methods

of determining

required (NPSHI

for AH/H

=

%

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Annex Estimation and analysis

A of uncertainties

A.1

General

The degree of uncertainty in any measurement (for example the efficiency of a pump) can properly be found only by a special examination of all the sources and contributory causes of error in the test arrangement and equipment being used, and fluctuations and variations of the phenomenon being measured. It is usually not practicable to make an exhaustive study of this sort for every measurement taken, and so assessments of reliability of measurements will be more or less exact depending on the amount of evidence available and the analysis made. What is required is a conclusion that the value indicated by the measurements is unlikely to have differed from the true value by more than a stated amount. Both systematic and random experimental errors or uncertainties shall be taken into account, and it is important to remember that observations of unsteady phenomena, such as those encountered in pump testing, are not necessarily exactly repeatable. For this reason, precision class accuracy cannot be guaranteed in advance of the tests, even with the highest standards of instrumentation and calibration. Non-repeatability of results arising from the pump and/or its installation may make it impossible, or meaningless, to represent characteristics by mean lines drawn through the scattered points. In this case, the contracting parties shall agree on the arrangements to be made (improvement of the test conditions, of the methods, etc.).

sufficiently large number will tend to be grouped in a pattern known as the normal or Gaussian distribution of error. Other patterns are possible, but in the absence of evidence to the contrary, random variation with the consequent normal distribution will be assumed. If a set of n repeated observations, xi (i = 1, 2, 3 . . . . n), of the same quantity is considered, in which the normal distribution of errors occurs, then the arithmetic mean, X. is given by the equation
n

x=

1 It ._ c
i=l

xi

. . . (1)

and the standard deviation, s, of these observations is:

JS i=
1

. . . (2)

As R increases, the values of Ytend to approach the true mean value of the instrument readings within its fundamental limits of precision. For example if a pressure of 50 units is to be measured on a gauge with 1 unit graduations, the true mean value can be established to within approximately + 0,5 units, but not within say f 0,05 units for which an instrument of greater precision would have to be used. If n were sufficiently large and the variations were normally distributed, it would be found that if, a priori, a certain percentage (the confidence level) of readings is required to be grouped around the mean value within certain limits (confidence interval), these limits would be related to the standard deviation s given by equation (2). As an example, if the confidence level were 95 % the odds are 19 to 1 that any single one of the observations will lie within these limits. If the confidence level were 99 %, these limits would be much wider since 99 % of the readings would be required to lie within these limits. For practical pump tests, a 95 % confidence level is generally accepted as providing sufficient certainty and is used throughout this International Standard. The arithmetic mean of a small number of consecutive measured values of the same quantity will, in general, differ by a'greater amount from the true mean value than would the arithmetic mean of a larger number of consecutive readings. For values ot n less than 30 the assumption of a normal distribution becomes invalid, i~uweve:, sm& (or exact) sampling thmry mav be ar~pliod. l;ftidt+ni'~:! distribution gives the probability of th,; IY,c+~? value n:' 1, ri!.?dings !ving b&ween chosen limit? 1 ~s:.,/~n vhei9 t is a fuXtr0ll On II dS given in table 12, for a @I $6 i*qnfidence level:

A.2

Analysis

of errors

This International Standard is mainly concerned with the measurement of the basic quantities, pump head, discharge, torque and shaft speed (or input power) at one set stable test condition at a time. The concept of a stable test condition implies that during a test these quantities will remain virtually constant until the circuit resistance or speed is deliberately altered. To obtain the pump characteristics, pump head, input power and efficiency are plotted against flowrate, using results from a number of different test conditions. The uncertainties will change for each of these conditions, and repeated sets of readings will be taken for those points for which it is considered important to calculate uncertainties, or where a single measuring point appears to differ from the trend of measuring points taken at other conditions. This is the normal type of pump test, and this annex deals with the method used to calculate the uncertainties of the results of each test condition studied in such circumstances.

A.3 Estimation of the uncertainty with random errors

associated

If the scatter of repeated observations of the same quantity about a mean value occurs in a truly random manner, then a

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table 12 n 3 4 i 7 8 9 10 11

Values of Student's

t distribution
I

Table 13 -

Values of &It

t
4.30 3.18 2.78 2,57 2,45 2s 2,31 2.26 2,23

n

12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

2,20 2.18 2.16 2.14 2,13 2.12 2.11 2.10 2.09

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

0,629 0,8oQ 0,953 1.080 1,198 1.299 1.399
1,487

The procedure, therefore, to determine the uncertainty at a 95 % confidence level due to the scatter of experimental results about the mean is as follows: a) determine the mean value, X. of the readings, using equation (1); b) calculate the standard deviation, $, from the value of X so obtained, and using equation (2); cl multiply this value of s by the appropriate value of

The possibility exists that one reading may deviate much more widely from the mean than the remainder in the set. Suppose the value of this reading is x,. The following test should be used to determine whether or not it may be rejected. a) Estimate the mean, Fand the standard deviation, s, for the whole set, including the suspect reading. b) Calculate the ratio R = lx, - x7/s between the deviation of the suspect reading from the mean, X. and the standard deviation, s (i.e. calculate the "number of standard deviations" by which the suspect reading differs from the mean). Only if this ratio ("number of standard deviations") exceeds the value given in table 14 may the suspect reading be rejected., Note that if a reading is rejected, n is then reduced by 1, and X and s shall be recalculated. The final value of n shall not be less than 3.

tlfi.
The answer so obtained will indicate within what limits 96 out of 100 mean values obtained under identical conditions might be expected to lie with respect to the true mean indicated values of the instrument being used. The random uncertainty tdfiis denoted by e,.

In order, therefore, to check the random error for a single stable test condition, a number (at least three) of readings of each quantity should be made at that condition. The readings should be synchronized, i.e. head, flow, torque and speed readings should be made simultaneously. If one or more of the readings are being time-averaged mechanically or electrically over a period (for example weightank or revolution counter), the other readings should be observed over the same period, and their average for that period recorded. In order to restrict the number of repeated readings, it is helpful to have previous agreement between the parties to the test concerning the amount of uncertainty arising from scatter that can be tolerated. If the measurements or results are contained within a specified band, they may be accepted without further repetition or analyses. If the agreed random error tolerance is + E then a permissible standard deviation can be expressed for different numbers of test points by applying the condition

Table 14 - Maximum permissible value of ratio R (number of standard deviations)
n

1

R
1.15 1.48 1.71 1.89 2,02 2.13 2.21 229 2,36

n 12 13 14 15 16
17

R

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

18 19 20

2,41 2.46 2,51 2.55 2.59 2.62 2.65 2.68 2.71

%,,

Itis preferable, whenever possible, to estimate random errors from repeated readings at one or more selected stable test condition, as described here, rather than to try to deduce them from the scatter about a mean line of points taken from single sets of readings at a number of test conditions. Clause A.6 gives general guidance on procedures for curve-fitting.

that is

s<-

4
t
are given in table 13.

A.4 with . . . (3)

Estimation systematic

of uncertainty errors

associated

Values of @t

All known corrections may be applied to the value of an instrument reading taken in perfectly steady conditions without any observer error, and yet it may still differ from the true value of

!a

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

the quantity being measured. This residual uncertainty is called systeFatic error, and arises from the limitations of calibration, change of installation compared with calibration conditions, and inherent and constructional limitations of the instrument itself. The uncertainty associated with systematic errors cannot be assessed experimentally without changing the equipment or conditions of measurement. Whenever possible this should be done since the alternative is to make a subjective judgement on the basis of experience and consideration of equipment involved. The first step in the estimation of systematic uncertainty is to identify those aspects of the measurement that can affect its value; the second step is to allocate uncertainty limits to allow for each of these effects. for example if the independent variables (such as density, temperature, datum height, velocity head) for calculating the head, H, are denoted X1, X,, . . . . X,. then : H=ftX,,X2 I..., X,J . . (4)

Alternatively some instruments such as differential pressure flowmeters are covered by national and International Standards which give details of construction and use, together with coefficients, corrections, and uncertainties. Values given in clauses 7 to 12 are based on experience and judgement and are the likely ranges of the systematic uncertainty, at a 95 % confidence level, for the methods employed. These should be used only as a guide for the estimation of the systematic uncertainties and read in conjunction with the appropriate clauses of this International Standard and the relevant standards for each method.

A.5 Combination uncertainties

of random

and systematic

There is no universally accepted method of combining random and systematic uncertainties. Although it is of value to list systematic and random uncertainties separately, this would be confusing when related to specified conditions. The overall error in any one quantity shall be obtained using the square law propagation method e= Jm

Then the standard deviation, sH, of H, due to the standard deviations arising from uncertainties in the individual variables, is given by:

. . . (8)

(5)

provided the variables are mutually independent. If f is a linear function

The systematic error is entirely controlled by the choice of measuring method and the characteristics of the installation, for example the value of the kinetic energy calculated using the mean velocity can differ from its true value if the velocity distribution of the measuring section is not sufficiently regular. Random error is, however, influenced by the care taken during measurement, the number of measurements taken and the site conditions.

SH

=

c Ji=

"

..

(61

1

A.6 Estimation around a fitted

of errors curve

from

scatter

and thus the confidence limits, e,, of systematic error at a 95 % confidence level, are given by

esH =

Jc
i=l

n

dxi

...

Computer programs are available for fitting curves to test data, qnd these may be used to advantage in a contractual situation where two or more people have interests in the interpretation of the test results. Fitting a mathematical curve to such data imposes constraints over and above those implicit in the data, and the choice of curve itself may therefore become the subject of conflicting interests. With a limited number of test conditions, especially if none are repeated, a complicated curve passing through each of the points may well be a worse estimate of the true mean curve than a simpler expression about which the test data are scattered .

where eM = 1.96 s,., In practice it is necessary to draw largely from past experience and published data to arrive at an estimate of systematic uncertainty in the measurement of any one quantity. Often it is possible to have an instrument calibrated by a recognized national authority who will include, with the calibration certificate, the uncertainty at the 95 % confidence level or the standard deviation of the results of the calibration. Even if the instrument is calibrated locally, it must be against some secondary standard the limits of error of which must be known if the calibration is to be meaningful. At least two calibrations are necessary, one before and one after the test, but it is preferable to have a history of a number of calibrations than to rely on only previous calibration.

Curve fitting for acceptance test purposes is best confined to a fairly narrow range of duties (say f 10 %I around the condition specified for acceptance. As many repeats, or near repeats, as are technically and/or economically feasible should be made wrri,fn this range. Usuetly it will be found that, within such a range, srrnple low order polynomials may be fitted, such that the fitting of a pnl~~nonnal otrizor more crder higher results in no z4va;r:yjr-' .,vitCj rwpcc:! tn `31~: L.onfrdencelimits obtained at the specif,+hr: x*ty pt~~:

59

IS13538:1993 iSO5198:1987

End conditions can be imposed on such a curve by "spline-fit" programs linking a simple curve covering one range to similar curves over adjacent ranges on either side.

If it becomes apparent that the range selected contains characteristics with inflexions, discontinuities, or other singularities, it may be necessary to narrow or shift the range so as to investigate thoroughly the true curve shape. Figure 28 gives an example.

Area requiringclarification

ii

9v
Figure 28 Example of a discontinuity

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

Annex Comparison

B duty

of test results with specified

B.0

Introduction

This International Standard does not specify any constructional tolerance nor any global tolerance for acceptance purposes. Nevertheless, after these points have been agreed in the contract, it remains necessary to compare the results of measurements with the specified duty, taking into account both the uncertainties of measurement and the agreed tolerances. This annex gives different possible methods of comparison which may be used as a guide. Positive and negative tolerances have been used though this may not always be the case.

---m
-------

-4
i

.B

B-1 Comparison of test results with specified quantities at a given flow rate 6.1.1 Pump total head

The specification on head is met if, on the graph of H(g+, the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects or touches the tine A8 shown in figure 29, where rH is the agreed tolerance on the total head, H.

Figure 30 - Graph for comparison of measured efficiency with thrt specified at a given flow rate

8.1.3

Power

input

Plqv),

The specification on power input is met if, on the graph of the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, touches or is lower than the line AB shown in figure 31, where 1, is the agreed tolerance on power input, P.

H

I
I

I

9VSP
%
Figure 29 - Graph of comparison of measured total head with that specified at a given flow rate

L_._l----~
QV

6.1.2

Efficiency

9VSP

The specification on efficiency is met if, on the graph of 7 (@, the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, touches or is higher than the line A0 shown in figure 30, where I,, is the agreed tolerance on efficiency, q.

Figure 31 - Graph for comparison of measured power input with that specified at a given flow rate

61

IS 13538: 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

8.2 Comparison of test results with the specified quantities at a given total head 6.2.1 Flow rate

8.2.3

Power input

The specification on power input is met if, on the graph of H(P), the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, touches or is to the left of the line AB shown in figure 34, where

The specification on flow rate is met if, on the g:aph of H&I, the band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects or touches the line AB shown in figure 32, where tolerance on flow rate,

tp is the agreed tolerance on power input, P.

tq is the agreed

qv.

HSP _-_---H =P

H

I

I

I

i

I"a
A
I

'

i

/

,

/

I

I I I

I
I
I

I

I

I

I

4(/sp(l-t,)Qvsp

q,p+f,r

ep p (l+tp) SP
P
Figure 34 - Graph far comparison of measured power input with that specified at a given total head

Figure 32 - Graph for comparison of measured flow rate with that specified at a given total head

6.2.2

Efficiency
on efficiency is met-if, on the graph of H(q),

The specification

the `band of measurement as defined in 6.5.3 intersects, touches or is to the right of the line AB shown in figure 33, where

8.3 Comparison of test specified duty point 8.3.1

results

with

a

t, is the agreed tolerance on efficiency, II.

Flow rate and total head
on the duty point &.,,, H,,) is met if, on the

1

The specification graph of

H(q,,), the band of measurement

as defined in 6.5.3

intersects or touches the rectangle ABCD shown in figure 35, where tq and tH are agreed tolerances on flow rate, 4,,, and total head, H, respectively. All points which lie simultaneously in the band of measurement

Hsp---H

and in the rectangle ABCD are delimited by DEF of figure 35. All the points of this zone are equally valid and conform to the specification.

8.3.2

Efficiency

The zone DEF delimited in figure 35 determines a range of flow rate. That part of the band of measurement on the graph of rrrC&, situated in this range of flow rate delimits a zone GHIJ. All points of this zone are equally valid. The specification on efficiency is met if the zone GHIJ intersects or touches or is higher than the rectangle A'B'C'D Figure 33 Graph for comparison of measured efficiency with that specified at a given total head shown in figure 36, where tq and t, are agreed tolerances flow rate, qV, and efficiency, 0 respectively. on

67

Is 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

B.3.3

Power input

in figure 37, where tq and tpare agreed tolerances on flow rate, qV, and powet input, P, respectively.

The zone DEF delimited in figure 35 determines a range of flow rate. That part of the band of measurement on the graph of P(q,,), situated in this range of flow rate delimits a zone KLMN. All the points of this zone are equally valid. The specification on power input is met if the zone KLMN intersects, touches or is lower than the rectangle ABCD shown

NOTE - In the case where is no agreed tolerance, the line AB in figures 29 to 34 or the rectangle ABCD in figures 35 to 37 is reduced to a point. The relevant specification is met if this point lies within the corresponding band of measurement or on the upper or lower limiting curve of the band.

q$p(l-6)

qv
Figure 35 Graph for comparison of flow rate and total head with a specified duty point

Figure 36 -

Graph for comparison with a specified

of flow rate and efficiency duty point

IS13538:1993

IS0 5198:1987

Figure

37 -

Graph

for comparison with a specified

of flow duty

rate and power

input

point

64

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Annex

C of

Thermodynamic properties of water and assessment of the accuracy efficiency measurements by the thermodynamic method

C.l

Tables

of thermodynamic

properties

of water
and pressure at intervals from 0 to 275 T

Values of coefficients CI,Q and cp are given in tables 15 to 17 as a function of temperature
and from 1 to 300 barl).

Table

15 -

Isothermal

coefficient,

a (low3 m3/kg)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

0 m 40 60 80 _~. ___100 ~_I____---~~..~ 120 140 160 -~180 200 220. 240 260 _~__ __

I,0186 1,015 3 -1,012 1 I,0089 1.0058 1,0027 0,999 7 0,996 a --_0.9938 0,990 9 0,988 1 0.985 3 ii.9825 0,979 8 0,977 2 -. 0,974 5

0,995 9

0,975 4

0,957 1

0.941 1 _~~~~

0,926 5 --_

0,912 4

0,899G

_ 0,960 5 0,958 2 0,9451 0,943 0

-

280 300

_ ~~. 0,930 9 0.929 2

_.-0,918 2 0,916 6 0,906 3 - .~ 0,904 9 0,894 8 0,8S36 0.8835 ..-___--__

0,882 6

1)

1 bar = 0,l MPa

65

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table 15 -

Isothermal

coefficient,

a (10m3 m3/kgl (continued)

0
20 ~ 40 60 80 _ loo 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280

0,886

1

0,873 9 0.873

0,862 3 o,a617 o,a610 0,860 3-

0,851

i

0,8400
0.8395 -mo,a39 i ~_~~ ~_ 0.838 7 0,838 3 0,837 a 0,837 4 _

0.828 a 0,828 5 0,828 2 0,827 9 0,827 6 0,827 3 0,827 0 0,826 fL ~~~ 0,826 4 0,826 1 0,825 7 0,825 4 0,825 1 0,824 7 0,824 4 0,824 0

0.817 a 0,817 6 0,817 4 0.817 2 0.817 1 0.8169 0,816 7 0,816 5 0,816 3 0,816 0 0,815 8

0.806 7 0,806 7

0,885 2 0,884 2 0,883 3 0.882 3 0.8614 0,880 4 0,879 5 0,878 5 0,877 6 0,876 7 0,875 7 0.874 a 0,873 9 0,873 0 0,872 1 --

i

0,850 6 0,850 0 ____ 0.8435 o&la 9

0.872 3 0,871 5

___~

0.806 6 0,806 6 0,806 5 0,806 4

_

0,870 7 0,869 9 0,869

,

0,859 7 0,869 0 0.858 3 0,857 6 -0,857 0 0.8563 0,855 6

_..___

0.848 4 0.8478

---

i

0,806 4 0.806 3 _ 0.806 2 0.806 1 0.806 0 0,805 9 0.805 7 0,805 6 0,805 5 0,805 3

0.869 3 0,867 5 o,& 7

0,837 0 o&473 ___--__---0,836 5 0,846 7 -~~____ 0,846 2 0.6456 0,&51 0,844 5 o,wo0,843 4.0,642a 0.836.1 0.8357 0,835 2 0,834 a o:a34 3 -o&339 0.8334

0.8659 o,a651 0,864 3 0,863 5 0,862 7 0,862 0 .

0,855 0 -__ 0.854 3 0,853 6 0,853 0 0.8523

~~-~~--~.-

0,815 6 0.8154 0,815

_____

I

0,814 9 0.8147

&

300

0
2o -____ 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 -

0,795 a
0,796 9 0,795 9 0.7960 0.7960 0,796 1 0,796 1 0,796 2 0.7962 0,796 2 -

0,784 9 0,785 I 0.796 3 0,785 5 0,785 6 0,785 a 0,785 9 0,786 1 ~0,786 2 0,796 3 0,796 4 0,786 5 0.796 6 0,766 7 0,786 8 t,7a68 --

0,774 1 0.774 4 0,774 7 0,775 0 0.775 3 0.775 6 0,775 8
~-

0,763 1 0,763 6 0,764 0 0,764 4 0,764 a 0,765 2 0,765 6 0,766 0 0,766 3 0,766 6 0,767 0 0,767 3 0.767 6 0,767 8 0,768 1 0,768 3

0,776

1

0.776 3 0,776 5 0,776 8 0,776 9 0,777 1 0.777 3 0.777 5 tO.7776t-

200
220
240 260 280 300 -Y

0,796 2
0,796 2 0,796 2 -0,796 1 0,796 1 0,796 i

66

Is 13538:1993 ISO 5198:1987

Table

15 �

Isothermal

coefficient,

a (10-3

m3/kg) (continued)

Pressure bar o -- 20 40 60 .---- 80 1(XI 120 .-- 1;0 .-- lMI ..-- I ----.. -- F,%4 o 0,7052 0,7C6 4 0,7075 0,7096 0,7097 0>107 0,7118 0,7127 0,7137 .---- 0,7146 0,7156 0,7164 � 0,7173 0,7181 I -- 0,6909 0,6923 0,6937 `0;695 0,6963 0,6975 .----- 0,6987 0,6989 0,701 1 0,7022 "" 0,7033 0,7043 0,7053 0,7063 0,7073 I f? -- 0,6775 0,6791 -- 0,6636 0,6654 -- 0,6484 0,6514 0,6534 0,6553 0,6571 0,6589 0,6607 I 0,6624 0,6641 0,6657 0,6673 0,6668 0,6703 0,6718 0,6732 I -- 0,634 6� 0,6368 0,6390 0,6411 0,6432 0,6452 0,6472 0,6491 0,6510 0,6528 0,6546 0,6563 0,6580 0,6596 0,6612 I 0,6189 0,6215 `- 0,6239 0,6263 0,6286 0,6309 0,5330 0,6352 0,6373 0,6393 0,6413 0,6432 0,6451 0,6469 0,6487 I `-- 0,6025 0,6053 0,6WI 1 0,6107 0,6133 0,6158 0,6182 0,6206 0,6229 0,6252 0,6274 0,6296 0,6316 0,6337 0,6357 !

0,6806 0,6672 - _---- ---_._. 0,6821 0,6689 --.-- 0,6836 0,6705 0,6850 0,6864 0,6677 0,6880 0.6903 0,6916 0,6828 0,6!34 o 0,6951 0,6962 I 0,6721 0,6737 0,6752 0,6767 0,6782 0,6796 0,6810 0,6823 0,6636 0,6649

I

--
..

180
2C0 ------ 220

.

240 260

780 . ._. --_ 300

160
Pressure bar o 20 40 60 ---- 80 ____ 100 120 .-- 140 -- 0,5853 0,5884 0,5914 0,5944 0,5973 0,6001 0,6028

165

170

175

180 !

185

190

195

-- 0,5672 0,5707 0,5741 0,5773 Ozio 0,5836 0,5866 5

-- 0,5483 0,5521 0,5559 0,5-95 0,5630 0,5665 0,5698 ------

-- 0,5285 0,5328'. 0,5369 0,5409 0,5448 0,5486 0,5522

-- 0,5074 0,5121 0,5167 0,6211 0,5254 0,5296 0,5336

-- 0,4843 0,4896 0,4848 0,4997 0,5045 0,5081 0,5136 0,4684 0,4654 0,4711 0,4766 0,4819 0,4871 0,4921

-- 0,4325 0,4392 0,4456 0,4518 0,4578 0,4635 0,4691

----

2m 220 240 260

0,6105 0,6130 0,6153 0,6177

0,5852 0,5979 0,6005 0,6031

0,5782 0,5822 0,5851 0,5880

0,5627 0,5659 0,5691 0,5723 "

0,!M5 1 0,5487 0,5523 0,5557

0,5263 0,5303 0,5342 0,5380

0,5062 0,!3107 0,5150 0,5192

0,4848 0,4797 0,4945 0,4982 .----

67

IS 13538 : 1993 .lSO 5198 : 1987

Table 15 -

Isothermal

coefficient,

a (10m3 m3/kg)

Iconcluded)

\ Temperature OC Pressure bar
0 ---I_ -~_ -_~_ 20 40 60 __ ao loo -120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 -__~ _---

200

205

210

215

220

225

230

235

_ 0.4037 0,411 2 0.418 4 -~ 0,425 3 0,432 0 0,436 4 0,444 6 0.450 6 ____-_I_0.4564 0,462l 0,4675 0,472 a 0.478 0 --

0.372 8 0.3813 0,399 3 -~- 0.3970 0.404 5 --____

0,33&g 0,349 4 0,358b 0.3670

_ --- .~~__ 0,315 5 0,325 5

_ -.-_ 0,279 5 0.290 7 ____~~~~~~ 0,301 4 Ojill 6 0,321 4 _

_. __ 0,241 5 --__0,254 0 __ __.__~~ 0.265 a 0,277 1 0,288 0 0.2984 0,308 4 ~~~~ ~~___~_. 0,318 i .~_~~ 0,327 4 0,336 4 0.199 4 0.213 3 0.2266 0.239 2 0,251 3 0.262 9 0,274 1 0.284 a 0.2951 0,305 0 0.314 6

_.
0,150 9 0,166 90.182 o0.196 4 0.210 1 0122i20,235 i0.247 7 0.259 3 0,270 4 0,281 I' __ _... 02914 o.ioi 3. 0.310 8

0,335 1 0,344 3 0,353 2 0,361 7 ~---0,369 9

. -.-

0,375 3

0,411 6 ___~___~.~ 0,418 5 0.425 2 0,431 7 0,437 9 0,444 0 0,449 9 0,455 6

0.383 2 __0.390 9 _~______ 0,398 3 --__

~._

0,330 9

0.405 5
~~ 0,412 4 0,419 2 0,425 6 0,431 9 _____-_-~ 0.443 9

0,340 0 .~ ~~__.~.. 0,348 7 0,377 9 ~____~ ~~~ .~~~~x__ 0,357 2 03855 0,392 9 0,400 1 ~______.._~ 0,407 0 ~~_ 0.420 2 ___~ 0.365 4 0,373 3 ___ 0.3809 0.388 2 0,395 4

___
~~-

0,345 1

~~_

0,353 4 __~~~. 0,361 5 0,369 3

_.~___

0,323 9 0,332 a 0,341 4

280
300

.

0,482 9
0.4878

0,461 1
0,466 4

0,438 0 0,413 7 --I__ ~_. .~~

240

245

250

255

260

265

270

275

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 -

o,o959 0,114 5 0,132 0 0,148 5 0,164 2 0,179

0.0344 0,056 1 0,076 4 --0,0955 0,113 5 0,130 5 0,146 7 0,162 2 0,176 9 0,191 0 0,204 5 0,217 4 0,229 8 ~---~ 0,241 6 .-

-0,oo!34

_

_ _ _ ._ 0.0792 0,051 am0,1563 -- 0,124 6 0,239 9 - 0,203 4 _

0,015 2

-~0,288 3

0,379 3

1

0,193 3 --0,206 9 0,219 9 0,232 4 0,244 4 0,255 9 0,267 0 0.277 6

---~.~-

__---.-.

~_

____~
0.0698 ---t-l

0,ooo 9 i
0.019 7

-. -- 0,056 3

300

1 -1' 0.0335

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table

16 -

Density,

Q (kg/m31

-

_._.

__ __~ 40
60 80 100 120

--~~ 20

0

~~~~~~---.--~--~--~~~ ._____-. 1 000.8 1 000.9

999.8

999.9

999,7
1 000,6 1 001.6 /

SS9.1
1 000.0 1 000,s

9S8,2 999.1 1000.0--

SS7,o 997,s 998.8

995,6 996.5 997.4 -998.3 999.1 ~_ 1 Oii.0 1 000.9 1 001.71 002,6 1 003.5 1 004.3 1 005.2 1 006,o 1 OcB.9 1 007.7 1 0@9,6

___--

994.0

_~~~______~

__~~~.~..
.~__

994.9
995.8 ~___ 9%6 SS7,5 SS8,4 999,2 1 000.1 1 000.9 -1001,8 1 002.6 1 003.5 1 004,3 ___-1 0052 _~ 1 006.0 -. 1 006.8

1 001,8 l 002.8 ~~_________. 1 003.8 1 004.8 ______._.~~ 1 005.8 1006.8 1 007.8

1 001,9

-

1 002.8 ~ -~~~~~ 1 003,8 _____~__~ 1 OQ4,8 ~__-.1 005.7 1 006.7 1 007.6

1 002.5 1 001.8 1 000.9 999,7 ~---~~ .~~_~___~_I_~__~__.._ 1 003.4 1002.7 1 001.8 1 OCQ,6 _______ ___~~.______ 1 004.4 1 003,7 1 002.7 1 001.5 ~. 1 005.3 1 006.2 1 007,2 1 004.6 1 cQ5,5 1 006.4 _~__~.~ 1 007,3 1 003.6 __I__ 1 ce4.5 1 005,4 1 006.2 1 007.1 1 008,o 1 008.9 1 00x7 1,010,6 1 011.5 1 002,3 1 003.2 1 004.1 1 005,0.--1005.8 1 006.7 1 0073 1 008,4 1 009.3 1 dla.1

-

140 160

_._

180 1 008.8 1008.6 1008.1 ~~ __-..._. ~. -_--~ 200 1 009,7 100x5 1 009.0 1 008.2 -.___ _.~ -- ~~ ~~ ~~. 220 1 010.7 1010.5 1 009,9 1 009.1 ~~~~_~_______.~~~~~~ .__. 240 1011.7 1 011,4 1 010.8 1010.0 _ __________~~ ~_~~~ ~--_---_~ 260 1 012.6 1 012.3 1011.7 1 010.9 ___ -~~.~-..-._~ 280 1 013.6 1 013.3 1 012.6 1 011.7 -. ~~~~_ ._____~_ __~~._ --_--_---~~~~ 300 1 014.6 1 014.2 1013.5 1 012.6

0 20

992,2
993.1

990.2
991.0 991.9 I__-~~ 992.8 _______~ 993,6 9%5 9%3 996,2 997,0 997,9 iSa, 999,6 - 1000,4 1 001,2 1 002.0 1 002.9

_~_ 988,9 983.7 SW.6 991.4 __~~. 992.3 __-. 993.2 SW.0 994.8 995.7 9s5 997,4 !a&2 999.0 999.8 1 000.7

988.0

.._

985,7 986.5 987,4 988.2 989.1 SW.0 SW.3 991.7 992.5 993.3 994,2 SS%O 995.8

983.2 ______~.~~__~ SW0 984.9 985,8 986,6 .987,5

980.5 981,4 982,3 983.1 984,O 984,8 985.7 986-6 --~987.4 9882 S=,l 989.9 990,8 S91,6 992.4 993.2 -

977.7 ~~ 978.6 979.5 ~_ 980.4 981.2 982.1 Sf32.S 983.8 984.6 985.5 xii Sm.2 S88.0 988.9 989,7 SW5

974.8 -_ 975,7 976.6 977.4 -~ 978.3 979,2 980.1~980.9 981.8 982,6 Se5 964.3

40 993.9 -~~~---_-~~ 60 994,8 ~______.__~~ SO 995,7 .- ~~_____ ~_~~ ~~ 100 996,5 ----~~ ~~_~. 120 997.4 140 ~~~~ __~.---~ 160 180 _ ~__~_200 ~____~~~ 220 _~~_I__--~~ 240 260 .__ _~__. 998,2 999,l 999.9 1 000.8 -1001.6 1 002.4 1 003.3 1 004.1 1 004.9

988,3 =__P_-mm 98%2 -990.0 990.9 -GS1,7 992,5 SS3,4 994.2 995.0 995.8

_~~_ ____-

985.2
986,0S&8967.7

_-_I_~~. 280 300

996.7 ____-_. 997.5 998,3

69

IS13538:1993 ISo5198:1987

Table 16 -

Density, Q (kg/m31 (confinued

I I

40 80
952.8 9538

--__
979.6 980.5 981,3 98x2

954.7

976,5
977.4 978.2 -979.1 .Go,o -~.__

955.6 956.6 _._
957.5 958.4

l-xl r--300
bar

260

983.0

959.3

-

G.2
961.1

155

0 20
40 60 80 100 -___ 120 _~ 140 160 180 200

-

_
~~ --__~~

9440
945,0 946.0 947,o 948.0 948,9 949.9 950.8 951,8 952.7 -___ .~ ~~____--_

922.5
~~ 923.6

9n.9 919.0 .920.1 921.2

--

913.2 914.3 _ 915.5 916.6 917.7 918.8 . . 919 9 921.0 9221 923.2 924.3 925.3 926.4 -. ..~ 927.5 -_ I928.5

--.--_-_-

924.7 925.8 926.9 927,9-. 929.0 -930.0 931.1 932.1 933.2 --

922.3 ~923.4 924.5 9256 926.7 927,7 9288 929.8 ~~ 930.8 931i 9i2.9

..~-___-.
260 .._ 280 300 955.5 966.5 -957.4 951.7 952.6 953.5 --~ 947.7 948.6 949.6 943,6 944.6 945,5 939.4 940.4
941.4

934.2 935.2 ~. -_ .__~~. 936.2 937.2

70

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

Table

16 -

Density,

Q (kg/m3) (confinbed

0 -_-___.-~ 20 40 60 ______ 80 _~~_~~ __~__

908.3 909.5 910.7 911.8 _~. 913.0 914.1

100 _-___120

_ ___ ___.~ ~~_______ 903.3 898.3 as3,l 887.7 __904,6 889,5 894,3---~pm 889.1 .~~~_____~.. ----~~---__-~ 905.8 900.7 895,6 890.4 ~~~_.----~~-~~ -906.9 902.0 896,9 891,7 _~~~__._____ ~~...~---~ .-~-~~----908.1 903.2 698.1 892,9 _~.___~~~ 909,3 904.4 899.3 894,2

-

~.~~~

_ 882.3 883.6 _____ 885.0

876,7 878.1 ---~ 879,5 Sf30.9 882.2 883.6 884.9

871,O _ ~872,4 ~-~ -.873.9 875,3 876,7 878,i 879.5 ~ .______~_~~ 880.8 882.2

1

886.3 887.6 889.0 090,3 __ 891.5 -892,8 894.1 895,3 896.5 897.8 899.0 900.2 -

____.__

~. _~~_

140 915.3 910.5 SO!=+6 _~~_____~ ~~ .~~.~ ___.-~~~~.~-----~~-~-~ 160 916.4 911.6 906.8 ~~~ ___~. ____. 180 917.5 912.8 so7,9 ~ _ --_-__ ~_ ~~___ 200 918.6 913,s SOS.1 _.___~_~------~~ _~ 220 919.7 915,0 910.2 _______~~ 240 920,a 916,l 911.4 ______-_--___-~-~ 260 921,9 917,2 912.5 _--___-~ -280 922,s 918.3 913.6 ~_~_._ ___~ 300 924.0 919,4 914,8

900.6 901.8 903.0 sO4.2

895.5

-.~~ __~

896.7

_I_---~

886.2

897.9

~~

~-

~_~~__I_-_888.8 _~~ ~__. SW.1 891.4 892.6 893,s -~ 895,l

887.5

--.~ _~_.

899.2

~~___.
906.5 907.7 908.8 910.0

905.4

.-~-___

900.4

883.5 "_ ..~~884.8 886.1

901,6 902.8 ~904.0 905.1

.

887.4 888.7 ~~ .I._. 890.0

0 20

~~~

___.~__ 865.1

_ 859.1 852.9 -_

~~ .____~~

_ -

___~ _~ -

~~~~.

~~.~.____
~_.___._..~~ ~~~ 872.5 873,9 _.___ 842,2 843,9 _ 835.8 829.1 831.0 832.8 834,6 836,3 838,l ~~._._ 839.8 841.4

_

-~

~____~~ ~~ 120 _____~~ ~~.~~~ 140 ___ ~~ ~. 160 __~ ~___~.~ 180

_-._.

~_.__ _
860.8

~~ ~.______ ~. ~~ ___~~~ ~~~~. -__-~~
850,2 848.6

866.7 868.2

_~._~ _ ~_~

200 878,l ~___-~.~-.--~~ 220 879.4 ____~

_~~~.__~~.~_

875,3 869.6 __ .I_L-~~.~~~ 876.7 871,l

~__~.__~~

862.3

863.8 865.3

~~

~-

~_.___

854.8 --_856.3

~__._ ..~ .~ -

~~-------~ ~-~

837,5 839,3 841,o 842.7 844.4

857.9 859.4

~~

~__-

.~. ~~~~ ~~

_

~__.~~

851.8 _~~ 853.4

~.~ .~--

845.6 ~~.~ ~___~.__~~ 847.3 848.9 850.5 852,l

-

872.5

240
260

_----~.

880.8
882.1 883.4

873.9 .~~~___ 875.3 876.6 878.0

8668 ~~~ ~_______ 868.2 869.7

860.9 ~~~ 862.4

855.0 ~--.._---~ -~ 856.5 858,l 859.6 ~~__~ 861.1

_ .~___~

.~

863,s

846.0 _ _.-. __~~ 847.6 849.2 850,8

__~~

871.1 872.5

280

865.4 ___~~~ 866.8 ~-

~_.._

853.7 _~ .~~.___.. 855,2 856.7

.._. ____~_ ~
s43.1

862.6

71

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

Table

16 -

Density,

Q (kg/m3) (concluded

_~. __~

~~_.__~___...~.~~~.
20 .~_~~ ~~_ 40 60 80 _ __~_~ 814,2 816,3 818.3 ~~~

0

_

_~ _~____._~_ 606.8 809.0 811.1

~ 801.4 803,7

_.____._~

_

_.

_ ___._.
_ _

_

~~_
777.0 779.7 782.3 784.9 787.3 789,7 792.1 794.4 796.7 798.9 801,l 803.2 SO5,3 ~---.~~~~~

.~.____..

._
._762.3 765,3 768,2 770.9 ..-..__ 773,6 _ 776.3 - n8;8781,3 783.8 786.2 788,5 790.8

793,6 795,s ~~-__.-.-~~

785.4 788.0

771,2 773,s 776,6 779.3 781,8 784,3 ~-~---.__ 786.7 789.1 791.4 793.7 795.9 798-l

805,s 820.3 813.2 100 "._.. -_ ~~__~. ~~~_.___.__.~_ ~-----~ 808,O 822.3 815.3 120 --_ ~~..__ _._______ ~~~_ ___ 810.1 824,2 817,3 140 _.__~~. ~~~~~~ . .._____~~ ~~ 812,2 826.1 819.2 160 _..~ ___. -. ____._ ----~._ 180 ~ -_ 828,0 _~____~~~~.__~__ 829.8 831.6 833.4 835.1 836,8 838,5 821.2 814.2 823,l ~~. ~~~_.___.___~ 825.0 826.8 ~-~--_--~~. 828.6 830.4 832,2 ,

798.3 790.4 ._ _.._~______.~~~ ~~~_ 600.5 792.8 802.7 804.9 807.1 ~~~. 795,2 797.4 799;7 801.9 804,O 806,l 808.2 810.3 812.3

200 ---_.-~~~220 ____~ _._~~~.~_ 240 -_~__~_._.

816.2 809,l ~~~ _._______ 818.2 811.2 820.1 822.0 823,9 825.7 813.2 815.2 817.1 819.1

260 _._____._~.. 280 300

Table

17 -

Specific

heat

capacity

per unit mass at constant

pressure,

c,, IJ/(kg.K)I

TY----p~__ 0 20 _I___-_ _ 40 4 207,5 ~~~_~~____..~_ 4 198.1 _~~ 4 189.0 ~~___ 4 180.1 ~. _~~ .~~~ 4 171.4 4 162.9 ~~~ 4154.6 4146,4 4138,5 ~__~~_~ ~~ ~~... 4130.7 4 123,1 __~ 4 115,7 4108,4 4 101.2 ~_~~ 4 094.2 4 067.4 ~_~ 4 202.7 4 194.1 4 1858 4 196.7 4 189.0 4189,7 ' 4 181.6 _____~ ~_ ~_~____._ 4 182,9 4 175.7 4 176.2 -.__ 4 169.6 __~~ 4 181,5 ~.---.--.___~~ 4 174.1 4 177,6 ~.~ _~.~~ 4 166.9 4 169.6 ~~---__-~ ~~ 4 159,8 4 161,8 4154,z 4146,7 413S,3 -4 132.2 4 152.8 4 146.0 ~_~.__ 4 139.3 ~~___ 4 132.7 4 126.3 _ ~_~_ 4 120.0 4 113.8 4 107.7 4 101.7 4 095.9 -. -

25

30

35

4 182.1 4 176.4 --.~~ ~

4 182.0 4 176,6 ~~_-I._~

4 181.6 4 176.3 ~____.. 4 171,2

60 ~~~_.____ 80

_

~~

100 _____~_..__~~ 120 140 160

4 169.9 4 170,8 4 171.2 ~~__._~_ 4164.2 4 166.1 4 165,3 4 165.9 ----~ _~~~~~ 4 161.1 4 163.1 4158.5 4 159,8 4 160.6 ____--~ ..~~_._____.. ~_...~. ._ -----~~ 4 156.8 4 153.0 4156.1 4164.4 4 155,4 .--_-_ ~. _~_~ ___I__~ ~_~ _ _____ 4 151.2 4 150.5 4 147.5 4 149,l 4150.3 ~~. __-_ _. ~~_ ~___.~~ ____.____~~ 4 146.4 4144,4 4 142,l 4 143,s 4 145.3 ______~~ _~~ _ .__._._ 4 141.6 4 138.4 4 136.8 4138,8 4140.4 4 132.5 4 126.7 4 120,9 4 115,3 ~~ 4 109,8 4 104,4 4 OSi,o 4 131,5 4 126,3 413x7 4 128.7 4 123.8 4 118.9 4 114.1 4109.4 4104.8 4 135.5 4130.6 4 136.9 4 132.3

180 ~_~~ 200 --~ -~~ 220 _..._~~_ 240 l-l_ 2M) _ ~ 280 ~~~.______ 300

4 125.1 _~~._______~~~ 4 118.2 4 111.5 4104.9 4 098.4 4 092.0

~~ ~~_____ _

4 121,2 ~_~___.__~ 4 116.2 .~___ ~~ 4 111.3 ~----. _ 4106.4 4 101.6

4 ?25,9 4 121.2 4 116.6 4 112.0 4 107.5

4 127.7 ~4 123.2 4 118,8 4 114,4 4 110.0

72

ts 13538 so 5198

: 1993 : 1987

Table Temperature "C
Pressure \bar

17 -

Specific

heat

capacity

per unit mass at constant

pressure,

cP [J/(kg.K)l

(continued)

40

45

50

55

60

65

70

75

~__I_________-.~-. _~~_________._~~____-_ __~~___ ~--

~.---.-~

4 191.6 ~I_~~._ 4 187.2 . 4 182.9

4 178.6 -__~~ ~_ 4 174.4 4 170.2

_

__.______._.~
-

__~ ~_
L

4 147.2

4 142.7

4 147.9 ~~~.--4 143.6 4 139.3 4 135,0 4 130.9

414a,5 4144.4 4140,4 4 136.3

4 151,2 4 147,i4 143,0 4 139.0

---~-4 153,7 4 149.6 4 145,6 4 141.6 4 137.6 4 133.7 4 129,8 .-___. 4 126,0 ----~ 4122.2

4156.3

4 166,l ____ _____~__ _~___ 4159.1 4 162,O 4 157,9 4 153.9 -

4138,z

4 152.3 4 155.0 __~_.__I-_.~~__ 4148.2 4 151.0 4144.2 4 140.3 4 136,4 4 132,5---_____-~~4 128.7 4 124,9

4 133.7 4129,3

4 125.0 4 126.7 -I_. _~~_____._~~~ 4 120.7 4122.6 4 116.5 4 112,4 4 118,6 4 114,6

4 132.4 4 135.0 ~__ _._..___._ _~__. 4 128,4 4 131,l 4 124,5 _~____._~._._____ 4 120,7 4 116.9 4 127,2 4 123,4 4 119.6

4 147.0 4 150,o ___ ~~._.._. .~_ 4 143.1 4 146,l 4 142.2 __.____~_ 4138,4 _--4 131,6 4134.6 __~___I_~ 4 127.8 4 130,9 4 1352. 4 139.2

- I 280 ~~ ~. ___.__ 300

~~-~~

r

~~.

4 137,9

_..___~ ~~

~~ ______~~ ~~ . 4 141.7 4 145,9

____.__ ~~~

__ ~. ~~ .-.._ ~~ 4 150,8 4 155,8 4 147.0 4 151,9

_____._~ _~~.-_

4 161,l 4 157.1

4166,6 4 162.5

.-_

4 172,4

---.

4 134.2

4138.0

4 142.2

4168,z

73

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table

17 -

Specific

heat

capacity

per unit mass at constant

pressure,

cP [J/(kg.K)]

(conrinued)

120

125

130

135

140

145

150

155

0 20 40 60

4239.9 4234,8 4 229,8 4 224,8 4219,94 215,l 4 210.3 --4205,6 4 201,o -4196.4 4 191,9 4 187,4 4163.0 4 178.6 ____.-_. 4 174,3

4 248.3 4243.0 -4 237.8 4232.7 4 227,7 4 222.7 4 217.8 4 213,0 4208.2 __-4 203,5 .~4 198,9 4194,3 4189,7 4 185.3 4 180.9 4 257,2 4 251.8 4246,4 4 241.2 4 236,0 4 230.9 4 225,8 4 220.9 4 216.0 _---__. 4211.1 4206.4 4 201.7 4 197.0 ~~----~ 4 192,5 4 187.9

--~

-

4 276.0 4 271,l ---~ 4 265,4 4 289.4 4 302,5 ~.~ ___~~ 4 283,3 4 296.2 -__-~~ -.__ 4 277,4 4 289.9 4 316.4 ~~~_~.__ 4309.7 ~~~ ___ 4 303.2

4 266,7 4 261.1

- ___~__

4 255.6

1

~

..I__~~

.~~ ~__ .~
4 283.8 4277.8

~__

80 __.___
100 __-___ 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280 300

- 4 250.2 4244.9 4239.6 4 234,4 4 229.3 -4 x24,3 4 219.4 4 214.5

4 259.9 4254.4 4 249.0 4 24307 4238.5 4 233,3 4 228,2 4 223,2

4 271.5 4 265.8 4 260.1 ..---~. _~ 4 254,6 4 249.1 4 243.7 4238,3 ~ .___~-.4 233.1 4 227,9 l__~ 4 222,9

4 296.7 4 290.4 4 284.2 4 278.1 4 27i,l 4 266.2 4 260.4 4254.7

4 271.8 -.--_~..._~_ ~_ 4 266.0 4 260.3 4254.6 4 249.1 _.~~ ~~~_____~_ 4 243.6

___.___

~~~ ~. _

- 4 218,3 4209.6 __~_ 4 204.9 4 213.4 ~~__I~~~_____ 42cQ2 4208.6

.-I_--_

4249.0 4238.2 _.~~ _~______~~ ~~ ~~~ _ 4 243,5 4 232,9 ~~_ ~~_~~~_.__._ __~~~ 4 217.8 4 227.7 4238.1 4 212,9 4 222.5 4 232.7

4 195.6

4 203,8

0 20 40 60 ~ ---~

4330,9 4 323.9 4317,l 4 310,3 4 303,7 4 297.2 4290,8 4 284.6 -_ 4 278.4 4 272.3 4266.4 4 260.5 4264.8 4 249,l 4243,5 4 346.2 _~~_._______. 4339.9 ___~~ ~_ 4 331,7 4 324,7

4 362.3 ____ 4354,7 4 347.2 4 339.8 4 332.6 4 325.5 4 318.6 4 311,8 4305.1 4 298,5 ____-~~~ 4 292,l 4 285.8 4 279.5 4 273.4 4 267.4 4 379.4 4 371.4 4 363.5 4 355.8 4 348.3 4 341,0 4 333,7 4 326.6 4 319.7 ~-__4 312.9 ____ 4306.2 4 299.6 4 293.1 4 286.8 4 280.5

4 401,4 4 392.7 4 384.1 4 375,8 4 367,7 4 359.7 4 351.9 4 344.2 4 336.7 4 329.4 4322.2 4 315.1 4308,2 4 301,4 4 294.8

4424.1 4 414.7 4 405.4

4 447.6 4 437.4 4 427.4 ___..~. 4 417.7 4 408.3 4 399.0 4390.0 4 3a1,2 4 372,7 4 364,3 4356.1 4 348.0 ~~ 4 340.2 4 332.5 4 325.0 -4 471.8 4 460,8 4450.2 ~~-~ _._ 4 439.8 4429.6 4 419.8 ~4 410.2 4400.8 4 391.6 -~ 4 382.7 4 374.0 4 365.4 4 357.1 4349.0 4 341.0

a0
100 120 140 160 180

~~______
4 387.6 4 379.0 4 370,6 4 362.4 4354.4 4 346.5 4338,8 4 331.3 4 323.9 4 316.7 4309.6

4 396.4

_~.. __._. _

.

4 317.8 4 311.0 4304.3 4 297.8 4 291.4 4 285,l 4 278.9 4 272,8

-.-

___

200

220 _~~..~.~ 240 260 280 300

4266,8 _____~ 4 260,9 ~___._~ 4 255.1

_I_---~ ~-~~.-_-~~

~~~~

74

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Table 17 - Specific heat capacity per unit mass at constant pressure, cP [J/(kg,K)J (concluded)

-~ -~

0 20 40 -4496.9 4 485.1

-. 4522.8 4 so,2

4 649.6 4 636,3

~. 4 563,2 _ 4 591.1 4 620,l

-___. 4 664,7

_

_-

-

.~

4 712.3

240

245

260

255

260

265

270

275

py

0 20 40 60 80 loo 4763.0 4740,3 i 718,7

-~ ~ _~___

_ ~_.I_~ __~~~___~_~_ _ --~ ____~_~_____~ 4 817,0 ___I~ .~______._~_~_ 4 791.7 4 046,3 4 904.3 --.~_4 767,8 4 820.0 4 875,6

_ ~~_____._I__ ____~_.~_ 4 965,7 4934.5 .~_II-

__~~__~~ ~_____ _~___..___~ 4 996,9

~_~.__.___ -

_ ~~_____~_~~-.__ _ ~____._ _I__~.--_ 5 062.8 5 132.4

15

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

C.2

Accuracy

of measurements

C.2.1.2.2

Second

equation

in 11.1.2

The general principles for estimating the uncertainties in efficiency measurement by the thermodynamic method are given in 11.7. Complementary information on the evaluation and propagation of the individual components of the errors is given in C.2.1 and C.2.2.

Errors arising are: a) Sk*, b) the relative uncertainty h,,)lUQ, h,,); in the corrections due to the in the enthalpv difference:

the relative

uncertainty

secondary

phenomena

: SAE,l

E,.
takes in

Estimation of the uncertainty in the C.2.1 determination of the energies per unit mass
C.2.1.1

As previously, into account

the uncertainty the

in the enthalpy difference of the uncertainties

combination

Hydraulic

energy

per unit mass

Errors arising are: a) the relative error in the pressure difference measure-

temperature measurements (errors in calibration, of measuring bridge, in reading), of those in pressure measurements and in determination of the enthalpies. Let Sh be the absolute total uncertainty enthalpy, is then of the mean value S - (hzl hll) h. The relative uncertainty in the determination of

ment (pz - p,):

SAplAp;

in the enthalpv difference

b) the relative error in the determination of the volume per unit mass: S vm/ vm Therefore tion the relative uncertainty

z I _I-

2 Sh

1

SE,lE,., is given by the equaThe uncertainties in the velocity and altitude terms have generally a very small effect.

C.2.1.3

Estimation

of the uncertainty

in corrections

due

to the secondary C.2.1.2 C.2.1.2.1 Mechanical energy per unit mass
These phenomena

phenomena
are: between surroundings and measure-

First equation in 11.1.2

a)

heat

exchange

ment circuits a~ inlet and outlet; Errors arising are: b) a) the relative error in the pressure difference pII): SAplAp; factor: &i/a; measurec) parasitic exchanges. ment (~2, instability of energy at inlet;

b)
c)

the relative error in the mean isothermal the relative error in the temperature

It may be estimated that each correction is biased by an uncertainty equal to 10 % of its value and each corresponding relative uncertainty Vl 6f2 E,"" shall be evaluated by reference to E,, i.e:

difference:

BAlVA6;
d) the relative error in the mean specific heat capacity: E,' error in the corrections due to secondary

SC&,; e) the relative

phenomena: The absolute

SAE,lE,.
in E,.

These residual errors being independent of each other, they shall be combined by the root sum square method. An estimation of the uncertainty in the mechanical due to corrections is thus obtained : energy per urlit mass

uncertainty

SE,,

is given by the equation

(hEmI = (Ap.Sa7'
Whence

+ (U.8A)12 --

+ (A&6C,,)2 + (c,,G~A/~)~

62;

@)2+

(Z)`+

the relative uncertainty,

8E, c., m

can be derived

C.2.2

Relative

uncertainty
Sq/q,

in efficiency
tn the determination of the effl-

The relative uncertainty, ciency is then

76

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198: 1987

Thus

In the case of the partial expansion

operating

procedure,

where the temperatures

are equalized,

the above equation

reduces to

77

IS 13538 : 1993 IS0 5198 : 1987

Annex Other

D tests

cavitation

D.0

Introduction

During these tests, the speed of rotation shall be kept constant within measurement errors.

The purpose of other cavitation tests is to allow the evaluation of the development of the cavitation from other criteria than the pump total head drop, i.e.

:
cavities significantly ex-

D.l

Cavitation

appearance

visual

test

development tended;
significant

of

cavitation

The net positive suction head associated of cavitation appearance visually (NPSH),i,. In cavitation appearance

with a defined onset is denoted

detected,

changes

in sound-pressure

level.

The appearance of the phenomenon or of the detected effect generally arises at various (NPSH) values according to the criterion selected, as shown schematically in figure 38. It should be noted that the (NPSH) associated with each criterion allows the detection of the early effects of the cavitation and the sensitivity of a given impeller design to the cavitation but that no criterion is at this under various flow conditions,

visual tests, cavitation

is induced

by

reducing (NPSH) or other changes progressively until cavities appear which have a significant characteristic length (a few millimetres), the length of the cavities general direction of flow. being measured in the

Stroboscopic observations may be sufficient instances. For more accurate observations of appearance, photographic techniques may be used. or high speed

in many cavitation

time available allowing connection of the (NPSH) values so defined with other effects such as erosion or vibrations.

cinematographic

(NPSH)
Figure 38 Detected effect

at various (NPSHI
78

values

according

to criterion

selected

IS13538:1993 ISO5198: 1987

Cavitation the pump

appearance

tests necessitate

some components

of

or of the circuit

being constructed

of transparent

For arbitrary comparisons of cavitation performance on a sound-pressure level basis, octave bands with centre frequenties of 16 kliz and 31.5 kHz should preferably be used, unless it is shown that comparisons on this basis are invalid. In such cases, a smaller bandwidth (third octave), higher frequency band, or higher discrete frequency analysis may be used.

materials at appropriate is usually only effective cavitation impeller at higher flows. For the cavitation rotation

areas. For most pump designs, the test at flow below best efficiency point, the

being difficult to observe on the pressure side of the

appearance from

tests described, speed

the speed by

of

may deviate

the specified

5 20 %.

Particular care is needed in these tests to ensure that cavitation noise from other parts of the test rig does not influence the assessments made from the test data. Cavitation may occur in areas such as wear rings, between shroud and casing, or at the impeller tip. This may produce changes in sound-pressure level which appear before, or dominate, the sound-pressure level associated with the cavitation effect being investigated, which is generally located on the impeller blades. A hydrophone having a suitable frequency response for the tests to be carried out may be used. It should be mounted flush

Nevertheless, taking into account the qualitative nature of the cavitation appearance criterion, a higher deviation may be admitted specified by mutual agreement. Translation of results to the speed may be made using the relationship 7

' (NPSH),

= (NPSH)

0.2 Cavitation sound-pressure
The net positive

onset determination level measurement
suction head associated with with

by

with the wall of the inlet pipe, preferably at a distance inlet diameter away from the pump suction.

of one

a significant (NPSH),, [freof the such (NPSH)

If no special acoustical method and/or arrangement are used, sound pressure level measurement may only be made for arbitrary comparisons use of hydrophones of cavitation mounted performance (see 12.1). The in pipe wall recesses or externally

clrange in the sound-pressure quency figures]. or frequency When

level

is denoted

bands to be quoted shall be specified

such a test is required, change

the amount

sound-pressure

in the contract.

mounted sound probes are acceptable. It should be noted that these methods may only be valid in measuring changes in sound-pressure and not absolute values because there are reflections and disturbances associated with the recess or effects of pipe wall stiffness and pipe system characteristics. Sound-pressure level measurement shall be made with an apparatus the sensitivity and accuracy of which are consistent with the change in sound-pressure level to be measured. The value of the sound-pressure level cannot be translated to a speed of rotation other than the speed at which the measurement has been made, but the value translated in the same way as in D.I. of (NPSH),, can be

In- these tests, cavitation varies in intensity by progressively varying the (NPSH) whilst maintaining a constant flow rate. The sound-pressure level in a given frequency band or at a given frequency is measured with each change of (NPSH). To avoid the results being invalidated by mechanical or

hydraulic phenomena

related to the pump but not to cavitation,

sound-pressure level tests should preferably be conducted above 10 kHz or at least five times the passing frequency that an impeller blade makes with a volute topgue, or similar hydraulic passage. diffuser blades,

79

IS13538:1993 ISO5198:1987

Annex Friction

E losses

The

equations

given

in 8.2.5

for calculating which

head loss due to would lead in many

Table

20 -

Typical

values

of equivalent

uniform

friction

involve

a lengthy

calculation

roughness (Source:
MARKS,

h for pipes Engineer's Handbook,

cases to the conclusion

that a correction

need not be applied. L.S. Mechanical McGraw-Hill,
I-

Figure 39 may be used as a preliminary check as to whether a calculation needs to be made. It applies to straight steel or wrought iron pipes of constant circular crosssection, handling cold water. Outlet and inlet pipes are assumed of equal diameter, and measuring points two diameters upstream and downstream of the inlet and outlet flanges, respectively. If the pipes are of different diameters, the diameter of the smaller pipe should be used. is indicated, the calculation need not be

1959.)
Typical values of equivalent uniform roughness of the surface ,Tlm

Commercial

pipe Inew)

1

material

Glass, drawn brass,

copper

or lead
Steel (wrought) cast !ron iron Asphalted Galvanized Casr Iron concrete Rtveted steel

0 0.05 0.12 0.15 0.25 0.3 to 3.0 1,o to 10.0

Then if "no correctron" made. If correction is needed,

the Moody

graph

(see figure

40) may be

used, or the appropriate equations for A solved (see 8.25). For the pipe roughness h- the values given in table 20 may be used.

93 IS 13538: 19! 187 IS0 5198 : 19

250

200

-5
Tl

f 150 8

loo

50

Velocity
Figure 39 Graph showing

(m/s)

"T)fFB172. :S#Cs are roquirWl velocities above which SU.ZY 81

