**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9401-12 (1992) : Method of measurement of works in river 
valley projects (dams and appurtenant structures) : Part 12 
Topographical surveys [WRD 23: Measurement and Cost 
Analysis of Works For River Valley Projects] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



k^v i imj£2>*$^a is^arrrF^ 



£«> \\ i %^s^^^>9i^: 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 9401 ( Part 12 ): 1992 

( srf sr affc ^n^s ^rttt ) 

/«rf/a« Standard 

METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN 

RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 

PART 1 2 TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEYS 



UDC 69003 12-627-82:528.42 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

January 1992 Price Group 1 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 2000 

TO 

IS 9401 (PART 12): 1992 METHOD OF 

MEASUREMENT OF WORKS IN RIVER VALLEY 

PROJECTS (DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES) 

PART 12 TOPOGRAPHtCAL SURVEYS 

[ Page 1, clause 3J(ii) ) — Substitute *10 m 2 ' for '0.01* hectare. 



(WRD23) 



Rcprognphy Unit, BIS. New Delhi, India 



Measurement of Works of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, RVD 23 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 12 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Measurement of Works of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the River Valley Division Council. 

In measurement of works of river projects a large diversity of methods exist at present according 
to local practices. This lack of uniformity creates complications regarding measurements and 
payments. Keeping in view the large amount of financial outlay involved in river valley projects 
and also the fact that the authorities responsible for completing these projects, are of the state 
level or national level, it is felt that a suitable methodology is needed for adopting uniform 
practices towards the measurement of works so that the scope of complications and misinter- 
pretation of items of work is reduced, as far as possible. This standard is intended to provide a 
uniform basis for measuring the work done in respect of topographical surveys for river valley 
projects. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2:1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) 9 . The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



IS 9401 (Part 12 ):1»2 



Indian Standard 

METHOD OF MESUREMENT OF WORKS IN 

RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 
( DAMS AND APPURTENANT STRUCTURES ) 



PART 12 TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEYS 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard covers the methods of 
measurement in respect of topographical surveys 
to be carried out for river valley projects. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The Indian Standard listed below is a 
necessary adjunct to this standard: 



ISNo. 
IS 5497 : 1983 

3 GENERAL 



Title 

Guide for topographical 
surveys for river valley 
projects ( first revision ) 



3.1 Clubbing of Items 

Items may be clubbed together provided the 
detailed description of the surveys carried out 
in accordance with the items enumerated in 
IS 5497 : 1983. 

3.2 Booking of Dimensions 

In booking dimensions the sequence order shall 
be consistent and generally in the sequence of 
length, breadth or width and height or depth or 
thickness. 

3.3 Units of Measurement 

All works shall be measured net in decimal 
systems subject to the following limitations 
unless otherwise stated: 

i) Linear measurements to the nearest 
00 1 m; and 

ii) Areas to the nearest 0*01 hectare. 

3.4 The following work shall not be measured 
separately and allowance for the same shall be 
deemed to have been made in the description of 
the main item: 

i) Control surveys including control points; 

ii) Laying and fixing of permanent bench 
marks to be linked up with the nearest 
Survey of India bench mark (see 
IS 5497 : 1983 ); 



iii) Collection of appropriate and adequate 
field data; 

iv) Field control charts and records; 

v) List of survey bench marks and stations, 
duly identified. Topographical survey 
plans as submitted/shown, should clearly 
indicate the reduced level of railways 
PWD, CPWD, Geological Survey of India 
or Survey of India wherever each references 
are available ( see IS 5497 : 1983 ); 

vi) Maintenance of proper survey records, 
including sketches and survey 
computations; 

vii) Topographical and other surveys as 
required; 

viii) Survey and other maps to requisite scale; 

ix) L-sections and cross section of rivers, 
canals or highways, etc; and 

x) Handing over all the above records in a 
complete manner including the originals. 

4 MEASUREMENTS OF RIVER VALLEY 
SURVEYS 

4.1 Area Survey 

The measurement of area surveys shall be done 
in hectares and it shall include all items as 
mentioned in 3.4. These surveys shall include 
reservoir survey, site survey, flood control 
survey, catchment area survey, command area 
survey, and other similar surveys. 

4.2 Longitudinal Section Survey 

The measurement of longitudinal section survey 
shall be done on linear basis and it shall include 
all items as mentioned in 3.4. These suneys 
shall include alignment of canals, drains, 
highways and other similar features. 

4.3 Cross Section Survey 

The measurement of cross section survey shall 
be done on linear basis and it shall include all 
items as mentioned in 3*4. There surveys shall 
include alignment of canals, drains, highways 
and other similar features. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Irdian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS, 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. RVD 23 ( 4412 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW Delhi-1 10002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams': Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephones 

331 01 31 
331 13 75 



37 86 62 

53 38 43 

412916 



6 32 92 95 



Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAGATI, 
HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUV^NANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delta, India 



