NAT HIAF IS 17386 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Rer Hador forge — Aa Watt À 
UINGIZE IES: IER GEIGE 
farae cht waa 


Electric Traction Lifts — 
Replacement of Existing Passenger 
and Goods Passenger Lifts in 
Existing Buildings 


ICS 91.140.90 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 6 


Lift and Escalators Sectional Committee, ETD 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Lift and 
Escalators Sectional committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


When provisions of this standard are different from those stated in IS 14665 standard, the provisions of this 
standard take precedence over the provisions of the IS 14665 standard. 


Where one or several requirements in IS 14665 cannot be fulfilled, due to reasons, such as the constraints of 
the structure of the existing building, the corresponding requirements in this Indian Standard shall apply. The 
application of alternative measures to prevent the risk of crushing above and underneath the lift car is restricted 
to installations where the requirement for free space or refuge is impossible to fulfill and may be subject to prior 
approval by local authorities. 


The main concern dealt with in this standard is the non availability of the required top and pit clearances due to site 
conditions. This situation can arise either due to the existing structure not being as per the current Indian Standards 
or enhancement of lift specifications, for example, speed, in the replaced lift as compared to the existing lift. The 
adopted principle of safety is based on two levels of achievement, first by means of an electrical stopping of the 
lift car, then by means of a mechanical stopping of the lift car. When drafting this standard, the following has been 
considered for reduced overhead and pit: 


a) Risk reduction measures that rely solely on operations in compliance with procedures are considered 
as not acceptable, except in a few situations in which mistake-proof solutions are not available 
(for example, some activities in repair and installation in which safety devices cannot be operational); 
and 
b) The risk reduction measures shall be automatically (without any intervention) activated, or may be 
manually activated, if mistake-proof-by-design, or a combination of both is used. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


ELECTRIC TRACTION LIFTS — REPLACEMENT 
OF EXISTING PASSENGER AND GOODS PASSENGER 
LIFTS IN EXISTING BUILDINGS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard specifies the safety rules related 
to replacement of existing lifts permanently installed 
in existing buildings where in some circumstances 
due to limitations enforced by building constraints, 
some requirements of IS 14665 cannot be met 
(see also Foreword). 


1.2 This Indian Standard addresses a number of these 
constraints and gives requirements for alternative 
solutions. It shall be read and applied in conjunction 
with the IS 14665 and its amendments. 


1.3 This Indian Standard covers the replacement of 
an existing lift by a new one in existing lift well and 
machinery spaces. 


1.4 This Indian Standard does not cover: 


a) Replacement or modifications of some parts to a 
lift already installed; and 


b) Applications outside of the scope of IS 14665. 
2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
14665 Electric traction lifts 
(Part 2/Sec 1 and2) Part 2 Code of practice for 
: 2000 installation, operation and 


maintenance, Section 1 
Passenger and goods lifts, 
Section 2 Service lifts 


(Part 3/Sec | and 2) 
: 2000 


Part 3 Safety rules, Section 
1 Passenger and goods lifts, 
Section 2 Service lifts 


IS No. 


(Part 4/Sec | to 9): 
2001 


Title 


Part 4 Components, Section 
1 Lift buffers, Section 2 Lift 
guide rails and guide shoes, 
Section 3 Lift car frame, 
car, counterweight and 
suspension, Section 4 Lift 
safety gears and governors, 
Section 5 Lift retiring cam, 
Section 6 Lift doors and 
locking devices and contacts, 
Section 7 Lift machines and 
brakes, Section 8 Lift wire 
ropes, Section 9 Controller 
and operating devices for 
lifts 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purposes of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in IS 14665, in addition to the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Authorized Person — A person authorized by 
appropriate authority for carrying out one or more 
of lift related functions, such as inspection, testing, 
maintenance, rescue and who may carry out the 
function(s) with permission from the owner of the lift. 


3.2 Existing Building — Building or structure, which 
is authorized and whose occupation or equivalent 
certificate is already issued before publication of this 
standard. 


NOTE — A building whose internal structure is completely 
renewed is considered as a new building. 


3.3 Existing Lift — A licensed/statutory compliant 
lift, to carry passengers or goods or both and that is, in 
existence at the disposal of its owner. 


3.4 Movable Stop — Movable stop is a device that 
limits the travel of the car to ensure sufficient safety 
space in the headroom or in the pit when a person enters 
the car top or the pit, however allows free movement 
of the lift between normal terminal stops under normal 
operation. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


NOTE — Where a person enters on the car top or in the pit, 
the device limits the travel of the car to ensure sufficient safety 
space in the headroom or in the pit. 


3.5 Triggering Device — Device for operating a 
stopping gear by a mechanical linkage when the lift car 
passes a predetermined position in the well. 


NOTE — This device is actuated when a door giving access to 
the lift well is opened by means of a key. 


3.6 Stopping Gear — Mechanical device for stopping, 
and maintaining stationary the lift car in the case of 
unintended movement of the lift car above and/or 
below a predetermined position in the well to protect 
person(s) on the car top and/or in the pit 


3.7 Pre-triggered Stopping System — System 

including the triggering device, the mechanical 

stopping gear and a mechanical linkage in between. 
NOTE — Under normal operation of the lift, the system allows 
the free movement of the lift between normal terminal stops. 


Where a person enters the car top or the pit, the system ensures 
sufficient safety space in the headroom or in the pit 


4 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
PROTECTIVE MEASURES 


AND/OR 


Lifts within the scope of this standard shall comply 
with the relevant safety requirements and/or protective 
measures of this clause where one or several 
requirements in IS 14665, and its amendments cannot 
be fulfilled. 


4.1 Perforate Wall of the Lift Well 


The requirements of IS 14665 are completed by the 
following: 


Any existing well enclosure may be perforate provided 
that: 


a) 10.7.7 and 10.7.8 of IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) is 
fulfilled; and 


b) A protective imperforate rigid screen shall be 
provided around the landing door locking devices 
in order to prevent any manipulation of the locking 
devices by means of a rigid rod 0.30 m long. 
NOTE — Preservation of historical buildings may require 
retention of an existing perforate enclosure. 


4.2 Clearances between Car, Counterweight or 
Balancing Weight 


The car and its associated components shall be at a 
distance of at least 25 mm from the counterweight or 
balancing weight (if there is one) and its associated 
components. 


To avoid any impact between the car (and its associated 
components) and the counterweight or balancing 
weight (and its associated components), in case of 
failure of normal guidance, emergency guidance on the 
car and counterweight shall be provided to maintain the 
car and the counterweight in their horizontal position. 


4.3 Pulleys in the Well 


Diverter pulleys may be installed in the headroom of 
the well within the projection of the car top provided 
that: 


a) The diverter pulleys shall be protected to avoid 
bodily injury and to prevent the ropes leaving the 
pulleys, if slack; 


b 


we 


Retaining devices shall prevent diverter pulleys 
from falling in the event of a mechanical failure 
of the pulley, shaft or bearings. The devices shall 
be able to support the weight of the pulley and the 
suspended loads; 


Examinations and tests and maintenance 
operations can be carried out in complete safety 
from the car top, from inside the car, from a 
platform or from outside of the well; and 


c 


ma 


d 


w 


Clearances in the headroom shall comply with 
5.5 of IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) or the requirements 
of 4.4. 


4.4 Reduced Top Clearances 


The requirements of 5.5 of IS 14665 (Part 2/Section 1) 
may be replaced by the following: 


4.4.1 General 


The lift shall be equipped with devices providing safety 
spaces in the headroom (see 4.4.2) and a safety system 
(4.4.3) controlling the operation of the lift. 


4.4.2 Devices Providing Safety Spaces in the 


Headroom 
The devices providing safety spaces in the headroom 
shall be: 

a) Either movable stops; or 

b) A pre-triggered stopping system. 


4.4.2.1 Movable stops 


Automatically operated movable stops shall be 
designed to prevent damage due to any collision 
when they are moved between the fully retracted and 
extended position. 


4.4.2.1.1 Arrangement 


In the case of traction drive lifts, the movable stops shall 
be installed under the counter weight to mechanically 
stop the car. 


4.4.2.1.2 Buffering of movable stops 


In the case of traction drive lifts, the movable 
stops shall be fitted with buffers complying with 
IS 14665 (Part 4/Sec 1). 


4.4.2.2 Pre-triggered stopping system 


4.4.2.2.1 The pre-triggered stopping system shall 
include a triggering device with its actuation means for 
tripping a mechanical stopping gear by a linkage when 
the car reaches a fixed tripping point in the up direction. 


4.4.2.2.2 The triggering device shall be easily 
accessible so that examinations and maintenance 
operations can be carried out in complete safety from 
the pit, or from the car top or from outside of the well. 


4.4.2.2.3 The pre-triggered stopping system shall 
comply with the following: 
a) The stopping gear shall be fixed on the car and act 
on the guide rails of the car; 


b) The stopping gear shall be tripped by a mechanical 
triggering device using a mechanical linkage for 
the tripping operation; 

c 


<~ 


The stopping gear shall be kept tripped by the 
triggering device and the linkage, when the car is 
at any position above the tripping point; In case 
of a release of the stopping gear due to dynamic 
effects or rescue operations, it shall be re-engaged 
when the car moves again in up direction above 
the tripping point keeping the required safety 
space; 

d 


wn 


The stopping gear shall be operated positively: 
1) Where springs are used, they shall act by 
compression; or 


2) Where a rope is used, the safety factor of the 
rope shall be 8 to the tensile force produced in 
the rope when tripped. 


e 


wm 


The force required to activate the stopping gear 
shall be at least the greater of the following two 
values: 


1) Twice the engagement force of the stopping 
gear taking into consideration the tolerances 
due to friction; or 


2) 300N. 


f) The stopping gear shall operate an electric safety 
device, if it is engaged; 

g) When the stopping gear has been tripped, 
its release shall require the intervention of a 
competent person; 

h) After the release, the stopping gear shall be in a 
condition to operate; 

j) The pre-triggered device shall be protected 
against the accidental insertion of objects, dirt and 
corrosion; 

k 


wa 


The pre-triggered stopping system shall be able 
to stop the car and keep it stopped from any 
speed between zero and the tripping speed of the 
ascending car over-speed protections means; 


m) The maximum retardation by the stopping gear 
shall not exceed 1 g, in the worst case. [g, is the 
standard acceleration of free fall (9.81 m/s’)]. 
The worst case should consider load in car 
(no load/full load), failure of lift machine, brake 
status (engaged/not engaged), tolerances on 
components which may increase or decrease 
braking force, variation in friction coefficient, 


IS 17386 : 2020 


wear of components, etc. The maximum 
worst-case braking distance shall be used to 
decide location of the triggering source. The 
minimum worst-case braking distance shall 
be used to calculate the maximum retardation 
values. 


n 


wm 


When the stopping gear operates, the floor of the 
car with or without the load uniformly distributed 
shall not incline more than 5 percent from its 
normal position; and 


wm 


The pre-triggered stopping system including 
triggering device, linkages, and stopping gear 
shall be verified in a laboratory with a test 
stand/lift test tower with masses on both sides of 
a traction sheave and detachable inertia masses. 
Measurements with reference to time shall be 
made of acceleration, speed, braking distance, 
retardation. Sufficient number of, but not less than 
six, observations shall be made. From average 
retardation, the average braking force shall be 
calculated. 


4.4.2.3 Clearances 


When the buffering parts of the movable stops are 
fully compressed or when the car is stopped by the 
pre-triggered stopping system, the following conditions 
shall be satisfied: 


a) The free vertical distance between the level of 
the highest area of atleast 0.12 sq m with lesser 
dimension of atleast 0.25 m, on the car top (areas 
on parts such as guide shoes or rollers, rope 
attachments, barricade, etc excluded) and the level 
of the lowest part of the ceiling of the lift well 
(including beams and components located under 
the ceiling above the clear area) situated in the 
projection of the car, expressed in metres, shall be 
at least 1.2 + 0.035 v? (here v is the speed/velocity 
of the lift). 


The vertical clearance between any equipment 
mounted on top of the car and the nearest overhead 
obstruction shall not be less than 0.15 + 0.035 v? 
metres (here v is the speed/velocity of the lift). 


4.4.2.4 Operation 


The movable stops or the triggering device shall be 
operated: 


P 


b 


ma 


a) Automatically at the latest when the safety system 
(see 4.4.3) has been activated; or 


b) Manually. 
4.4.2.4.1 In the case of power failure: 


a) The automatic movable stops or the automatic 
triggering device shall be activated and maintained 
in the active position at least up to the power 
restoration; and 


b) For manually operated movable stops or 
for manually operated triggering devices, a 


IS 17386 : 2020 


mechanical safety device shall maintain the car 
stationary. This device shall be activated and 
maintained in the active position at least up to the 
power restoration. 


4.4.2.4.2 In case of manual operation of moveable 
stops or automatic triggering device, the mechanical 
safety device according to 4.4.2.4.1 (b) shall be 
operated by the safety system (see 4.4.3), in order to 
prevent any movement of the car in the up direction if 
the movable stops or the triggering device is not in the 
active position. 


4.4.2.5 Electrical monitoring 


The movable stops or the triggering device shall be 
provided with electric safety devices that monitor: 

a) The fully extended (active) position; and 

b) The fully retracted (inactive) position. 


4.4.3 Safety System 


4.4.3.1 An electric safety device shall: 


a) activate a safety system that deactivates normal 
operation; 

b) be operated when any door giving access to the car 
top is opened by means of a key; 


c) bea bi-stable switch; 


d) be reset together with the resetting of the safety 
system (see 4.4.3.2). 


For lifts with manual landing doors, a second 
switch shall prevent any movement of the car if 
any door giving access to the car top is open. This 
switch shall not be accessible without using a tool; 
and 


e) The improvement of the refuge space is possible 
due to the arrangement of the mechanical devices 
providing safety spaces and does not require an 
alteration of the existing building. 


4.4.3.2 The resetting of the safety system and the 
return of the lift to normal operation shall only be made 
by operation of an electrical reset device. 


4.4.3.2.1 The resetting shall be effective only when: 


a) The lift is not in inspection operation; 


b) The stopping devices in the pit and on the car top 
are not in the STOP position; 


c) Any door giving access to the car top is closed and 
locked; and 


d) The devices providing the safety spaces are in the 
inactive position (see 4.4.2). 


4.4.3.2.2 A power failure shall not reset the safety 
system. 
4.4.3.3 The electrical reset device shall be: 


a) Lockable with the use of a padlock or equivalent, 
to ensure no inadvertent operation, 


b) Placed outside of the well and accessible to 
authorized persons only (maintenance, inspection 
and rescue); and 


c) Monitored by an electric safety device which 
prevents normal operation when the reset device 
remains activated. 


4.4.3.4 An additional final limit switch shall interrupt 
movements of the ‘car under inspection’ operation in 
up direction before the buffering parts of the movable 
stops are hit or before the triggering device is tripping 
the stopping gear. The car shall be stopped before the 
stopping gear is tripped. 


This switch shall allow the movement of the car only in 
the down direction. In the position the car has stopped, 
examinations and test and maintenance operations for 
all components, which are located in the headroom 
shall be able to be carried out in complete safety from 
the car top or from outside of the well. 


4.4.3.5 Normal operation of the lift shall only be 
possible, if the movable stops or the triggering device 
are in the inactive position and the safety system is not 
activated. 


4.4.3.6 When the safety system has been activated, 
inspection operation shall only be possible if the 
movable stops or the triggering device are in the active 
position. 


4.4.3.7 When the safety system has been activated and 
the movable stops or the triggering device are not in the 
active position, electrical emergency operation shall 
only be possible in down direction. 


4.4.4 Visible and/or Audible Information 


On opening, by means of a key, of any door giving 
access to the car top (see 4.4.3.1), a signal visible 
and/or audible from the landing shall inform about the 
positions (active and not active) of: 

a) The movable stops; or 

b) The triggering device. 
If both ends of the travel are protected by the movable 
stop(s) and/or by pre-triggered stopping system(s), this 
information shall allow noticing whether it is from top 
or bottom end of the well. 
The audible signal may be switched off after 60 s 
provided that the movable stops or the triggering device 
are in the active position. 


See also 7.2.1. 
4.4.5 Protection for Group of Lifts 


When the well contains several lifts, the partition wall 
in the pit/shaft according to 8.3.14.1 (c) of IS 14665 
(Part 2/Section 1) shall extend to full depth & height 
of the shaft, thus preventing access to the lift(s) having 
reduced top clearances. 


4.5 Car Top Barricade 


The requirements of 5.5.2 of IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) 
regarding top car clearance are completed as follows: 


4.5.1 Where the requirements of 5.5.2 of IS 14665 
(Part 2/Sec 1) cannot be fulfilled, an easily and safely 
extendable barricade for the full periphery of the car 
top shall be permanently installed on the car top. 


See also 7.2.2 


4.5.2 The extendable barricade shall meet the following 
requirements: 


a) The design of the barricade shall provide enough 
strength and fixings to resist a force of the 
300 N and shall allow the barricade to remain 
in the unfolded or extended position. The fully 
extended height of the barricade shall be minimum 
0.7 m where the free distance in the horizontal 
plane beyond the outer edge of the handrail of 
the barricade is between 0.3 m and 0.5 m; and 
minimum 1.1 m if that distance is greater than 
0.5 m. The provision of barricade on car top is 
optional, if the free distance is less than 0.3 m. 


b 


wm 


The barricade shall be designed in such a 
way that it can be totally unfolded/folded or 
extended/retracted while standing on a safe area; 


c 


wa 


If the standing area is on the car top, it shall be: 


1) Clear area for standing of at least 0.12 m?, in 
which the lesser dimension is at least 0.25 m. 


2 
3 


wa 


Clearly indicated and visible from the landing; 


wa 


Placed at a distance from the edge of the car 
top not less than 0.50 m, where the risk of 
falling exists; 


d 


wn 


Electric safety devices shall prevent the movement 
of the car if: 


1) In normal operation, the barricade is not fully 
retracted; 


2) In inspection operation, the barricade is not 
fully extended. 


e 


wm 


For emergency electrical operation, a direction 
dependent switch shall prevent upward emergency 
operations in the zone where the, barricade if not 
folded or retracted, can collide with the ceiling of 
the well. 

NOTE — This direction dependent switch for the barricade 


can be achieved with the additional final limit switch according 
to 4.4.3.4. 


4.6 Reduced Bottom Clearances 

The requirements of 5.5.1 of IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) 
may be replaced by the following. 

4.6.1 General 


The lift shall be equipped with devices providing 
safety spaces in the pit (see 4.6.2) and a safety system 
(see 4.6.3) controlling the operation of the lift. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


4.6.2 Devices Providing Safety Spaces in the Pit 

The devices providing safety spaces in the pit shall be: 
a) Either movable stops, or 
b) A pre-triggered stopping system. 

4.6.2.1 Movable stops 

Movable stops shall comply with the following: 


a) The movable stops shall be installed in the pit to 
mechanically stop the car; 


b) The movable stops shall be fitted with buffers 
complying with IS 14665 (Part 4/Sec 1); and 


c) Automatically operated movable stops shall be 
designed to prevent damage due to any collision 
when they are moved between the fully retracted 
and extended position. 


4.6.2.2 Pre-triggered stopping system 


4.6.2.2.1 The pre-triggered stopping system shall 
include a triggering device with its actuation means 
for tripping the mechanical stopping gear by a linkage 
when the car reaches a fixed tripping point in the down 
direction. 


4.6.2.2.2 The triggering device shall be easily accessible 
so that examinations and maintenance operations can 
be carried out in complete safety from the pit, or from 
the car top or from outside of the well. 


4.6.2.2.3 The pre-triggered stopping system shall 
comply with the following: 

a) The stopping gear shall be fixed on the car and act 
on the guide rails of the car; 

b) The stopping gear shall be tripped by a mechanical 
triggering device using a mechanical linkage for 
the tripping operation; 

c 


wm 


The stopping gear shall be kept tripped by the 
triggering device and the linkage, when the car is 
at any position below the tripping point; 


In case of a release of the stopping gear due to 
dynamic effects or rescue operations, it shall be 
re-engaged when the car moves again in down 
direction below the tripping point keeping the 
required safety space. 


d 


wm 


The stopping gear shall be operated positively: 


1) Where springs are used, they shall act by 
compression; or 

2) Where a rope is used, the safety factor of the 
rope shall be 8 to the tensile force produced in 
the rope, when tripped. 


e 


wm 


The force required to activate the stopping gear 
shall be at least the greater of the following two 
values: 


1) twice the engagement force of the stopping 
gear taking into consideration the tolerances 
due to friction; or 


2) 300N. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


f) The stopping gear shall operate an electric safety 
device, if it is engaged; 

g) When the stopping gear has been tripped, 
its release shall require the intervention of a 
competent person; 

h) After the release, the stopping gear shall be in a 
condition to operate; 

j) The pre trigger device shall be protected against 
the accidental insertion of objects, dirt and by 
corrosion; 

k 


a 


The pre-triggered stopping system shall be able to 
stop the car and keep it stopped from any speed 
between zero and the tripping speed of the safety 
gear; 

m) The maximum retardation by the stopping gear 
shall not create retardation higher than the one 
created by the safety gear; 


n) When the stopping gear operates, the floor of the 
car with or without the load uniformly distributed 
shall not incline more than 5 percent from its 
normal position; and 


wm 


The pre-triggered stopping system including 
triggering device, linkages, and stopping gear 
shall be verified in a laboratory with a test 
stand/lift test tower with masses on both sides of 
a traction sheave and detachable inertia masses. 
Measurements with reference to time shall be 
made of acceleration, speed, braking distance, 
retardation. Sufficient number of, but not less than 
six, observations shall be made. From average 
retardation the average braking force shall be 
calculated. 


4.6.2.3 Clearances 


When the car rests on the fully compressed buffers 
of the movable stops or when the car is stopped 
by the pre-triggered stopping system, 5.5.1 of 
IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) shall be satisfied. 


P 


4.6.2.4 Operation 


The movable stops or the triggering device shall be 
operated: 


a) Automatically at the latest when the safety system 
(see 4.6.3) has been activated; or 


b) Manually. 


4.6.2.4.1 In the case of power failure: 


a) The automatic movable stops or the automatic 
triggering device shall be activated and maintained 
in the active position at least up to the power 
restoration; and 


b) For manually operated movable stops or 
for manually operated triggering devices, a 
mechanical safety device shall maintain the car 
stationary. This device shall be activated and 


maintained in the active position at least up to the 
power restoration. 


4.6.2.4.2 In the case of manual operation, the 
mechanical safety device according to 4.6.2.4.1 b) shall 
be operated by the safety system (see 4.6.3), in order to 
prevent any movement of the car in the down direction, 
if the movable stops or the triggering device is not in 
the active position. 


4.6.2.5 Electrical monitoring 


The movable stops or the triggering device shall be 
provided with electric safety devices that monitor: 


a) The fully extended (active) position; and 
b) The fully retracted (inactive) position. 


4.6.3 Safety System 


4.6.3.1 An electric safety device shall: 
a) activate a safety system that deactivates normal 
operation; 
b) be operated when any door giving access to the pit 
is opened by means of a key; 
c) be a bi-stable switch; and 
d) be reset together with the resetting of the safety 
system (see 4.6.3.2). 
For lifts with manual landing doors, a second switch 
shall prevent any movement of the car, if any door 
giving access to the pit is open. This switch shall not be 
accessible without using a tool. 
Any door/trap door whose sill is having a distance less 
than 2.5 m from the pit floor, is considered as access 
door to the pit. 


4.6.3.2 The resetting of the safety system and the return 
of the lift to normal operation shall only be made by 
operation of an electrical reset device. 


4.6.3.2.1 The resetting shall be effective only when: 

a) The lift is not in inspection operation; 

b) The stopping devices in the pit and on the car top 
are not in the STOP position; 

c) Any door/trap door giving access to the well are 
closed and locked; and 

d) The devices providing the safety spaces are in the 
inactive position (see 4.6.2). 


4.6.3.2.2 A power failure shall not reset the safety 
system. 


4.6.3.3 The electrical reset device shall be: 
a) Lockable with the use of a padlock or equivalent, 
to ensure no inadvertent operation; 
b) Placed outside of the well and accessible to 
authorized persons only (maintenance, inspection 
and rescue); and 


c) Monitored by an electric safety device which 
prevents normal operation when the reset device 
remains activated. 


4.6.3.4 An additional final limit switch shall interrupt 
movements of the ‘car under inspection’ operation 
in down direction before the buffering parts of the 
movable stops are hit or before the triggering device is 
tripping the stopping gear. This switch shall allow the 
movement of the car in the up direction. 


In the position the car has stopped, examinations and 
tests and maintenance operations for all components 
which are located in the lower part of the car shall be 
able to be carried out in complete safety from the pit or 
from outside of the well. 


4.6.3.5 Normal operation of the lift shall only be 
possible, if the movable stops or the triggering device 
are in the inactive position and the safety system is not 
activated. 


4.6.3.6 When the safety system has been activated, 
inspection operation shall only be possible if the 
movable stops of the triggering device are in the active 
position. 


4.6.3.7 When the safety system has been activated and 
the movable stops or the triggering device are not in the 
active position, electrical emergency operation shall 
only be possible in upwards direction. 


4.6.4 Visible and/or Audible Information 


On opening, by means of a key, of any door giving 
access to the pit (see 4.6.3.1), a signal visible 
and/or audible from the landing shall inform about the 
positions (active and not active) of: 


a) The movable stops; or 

b) The triggering device. 
If both ends of the travel are protected by movable 
stop(s) and/or by pre-triggered stopping system(s), this 


information shall allow noticing, whether it is from top 
or bottom end of the well. 


The audible signal may be switched off after 60 s 
provided that the movable stops or the triggering device 
are in the active position. 


See also 7.2.3. 
4.6.5 Partition in the Pit/Shaft 


When the well contains several lifts, the partition wall 
in the pit/shaft according to 8.3.14.1 (c) of IS 14665 
(Part 2/Sec 1) shall extend to full depth and height of 
the shaft. 


4.7 Apron 


The requirements of 5.3 of IS 14665 (Part 4/Sec 3) 
may be replaced by the following: 


IS 17386 : 2020 


4.7.1 General 


Each car sill shall be fitted with an extendable apron, 
which shall satisfy the following: 

a) Fixed part and movable part(s) of the apron shall 
cover the full width of the clear landing entrance, 
which it faces; 

b 


wm 


The vertical section of the lowest movable part 
shall be extended downwards by a chamfer whose 
angle with the horizontal plane shall be not less 
than 60°. The projection of this chamfer on the 
horizontal plane shall be not less than 20 mm; 


Cc 


wm 


The extended apron shall have a mechanical 
strength such that when a force of 300 N, being 
evenly distributed over an area of 5 cm? in round 
or square section, is applied at right angles to the 
apron at any point from outside to inside of the 
well, it shall resist: 


1) Without any permanent deformation; 
2) Without any horizontal deformation greater 
than 35 mm; 


The height of the fixed vertical part shall be at 
least equal to the unlocking zone extending above 
the landing sill level; and 

e) The height of the vertical portion of the extended 
apron shall be at least 0.75 m. 


See also 7.2.4. 


d 


© 


4.7.2 Specific Requirements 
One of the following means shall be provided: 


a) An apron retracted under normal operation, 
manually extendable when needed and fulfilling 
the following conditions: 


1) If the apron is not in the retracted position, 
normal operation ofthe lift shall be deactivated 
by means of an electric safety device; 


2) The car door shall be equipped with a 
locking device in conformity with 10.9 of 
IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec1); 


3) A mechanical device reachable from the rescue 
landing shall be provided for unlocking the car 
door; 


4) The apron shall be unlocked by means of 
the emergency unlocking key operated at the 
apron; 

5 


wa 


Putting back the car apron into the retracted 
position shall be possible manually only from 
the lowest landing, the pit floor or the car top, 
by appropriate means; and 


6) A direction dependent switch shall prevent 
downwards inspection and emergency 
operations in the zone where the car apron, if 
not retracted, can collide with the pit floor. 

NOTE — This direction dependant switch for the apron can 


be achieved with the additional final limit switch according 
to 4.4.3.4. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


b) Or an apron retracted under normal operation, 
automatically extended on opening any landing 
door with the emergency unlocking key, and 
fulfilling the following conditions: 


1) If the apron is not in the retracted position, 
normal operation of the lift shall be deactivated 
by means of an electric safety device; 


2) The car door shall be equipped with a 
locking device in conformity with 10.9 of 
IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1); 


3) Amechanical device reachable from the rescue 
landing shall be provided for unlocking the car 
door; 


4) In the case of loss (interruption or isolation) 
of power supply, the car apron shall move 
automatically into the extended position; 


5 


wa 


Putting back the car apron in to the retracted 
position shall be possible: 


i) Either automatically, provided the landing 
doors are closed and locked, or 


ii) Manually, only from the lowest landing, 
the pit floor or the car top, by appropriate 
means. 


6) A direction dependant switch shall prevent 
downwards inspection and emergency 
operations in the zone where the car apron, if 
not retracted, can collide with the pit floor. 

NOTE — This direction dependent switch for the apron can 

be achieved with the additional final limit switch according to 

4.6.3.4. 

c) Or an apron extended under normal operation, 
retracted when the car is reaching its lowest 
position, and fulfilling the following condition: 


1) Normal operation shall be deactivated by 
electric safety devices if, the apron is not in 
the extended position when the car is not in a 
zone, which extends from the position of the 
car resting on its fully compressed buffers to a 
position of not more than | m above the lowest 
landing sill. 


4.8 Height of Machine Room 


The requirements of 10.6 of IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) 
for the height of the machine room may be replaced by 
the following: 


When the clear height at working areas is less than 
1980 mm, warnings for example, using yellow and 
black stripes according to Fig. 1 below and/or an 
adequate warning sign shall be appropriately placed 
and soft materials shall be provided under the ceiling 
above those areas. 


Fic. 1 


The clear height of the machine room, measured up to 
the lower surface of soft materials on the ceiling, shall 
not be less than 1.80 m for working areas. 


4.9 Height of Machine Room Doors 


Access doors shall have a minimum width of 0.60 m 
and a minimum height of 1.70 m. They shall not open 
towards the inside of the room. 


When the height is less than 1.80 m, suitable warnings, 
for example, using yellow and black stripes according 
to Fig. 1 and/or an adequate warning sign shall be 
appropriately placed on both sides of the door. 


4.10 Height of Pulley Rooms 


The following requirements are added to 10.6.2 of 
IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1). 


a) If there are control panels and cabinets in the 
pulley room and when the clear height at the 
working areas is less than 1980 mm, warnings for 
example, using yellow and black stripes as shown 
in Fig 1 and/or an adequate warning sign shall be 
appropriately placed and soft materials shall be 
provided under the ceiling above those areas. 


b 


wm 


The clear height of the pulley room, measured 
up to the lower surface of soft materials on the 
ceiling if required, shall not be less than 1.80 m for 
working areas. 


5 TESTS BEFORE PUTTING THE LIFT INTO 
SERVICE 


In addition to the tests listed in 11.3 of 
IS 14665 (Part 3/Sec 1), the following tests shall be 
carried out: 


a) For Top Clearances: 


1) Movable stops and pre-triggering safety 
system shall be dynamically tested with the 
empty car and at rated speed. For traction drive 
lifts, the brake shall be kept open. 


After the test, it shall be ascertained that no 
deterioration that could adversely affect the 
normal use of the lift has occurred. Visual 
check is considered to be sufficient; 

2) Test certificate review for the stroke of the 

buffers of the movable stop(s); and 

3) Check of the braking distance, in the case of 
pre-triggering safety system. 


wa 


b) For Bottom Clearances: 


1) Movable stops and pre-triggering safety 

system shall be dynamically tested with the 
car loaded with rated load and at rated speed. 
For traction drive lifts, the brake shall be kept 
open. 
After the test, it shall be ascertained that no 
deterioration that could adversely affect the 
normal use of the lift has occurred. Visual 
check is considered to be sufficient; 


2) Test certificate review for the stroke of the 


buffers of the movable stop(s); and 
3) Check of the braking distance, in the case of 
pre-triggering safety system. 


wa 


6 TECHNICAL NOTE 


In the general arrangement drawing, in case of reduced 
pit and/or headroom, information about protective 
measures taken shall be included. 


7 INFORMATION FOR USE 


7.1 Instructions 


The instruction manual shall include explanations on 
the functioning, use and maintenance of the provisions 
of this standard (for example, safety system, movable 
stops, pre-triggered stopping system, extendable 
barricade, extendable apron, etc.). 


For pre-triggered stopping system, the nominal, 
minimum and maximum braking distances shall be 
stated in the GAD (General Arrangement Drawing) and 
in the instruction manual of the lift. Information shall 
be given on how to proceed if the braking distance of a 
site test is outside of this range. 


7.2 Notices and Warnings 


All labels, notices, markings and operating instructions 
shall be indelible, legible and readily understandable 
(if necessary, aided by signs or symbols). They shall 
be untearable, of durable material, placed in a visible 
position, and written in English and the local language 
where the lift is installed (or, if necessary, in several 
languages). 
The minimum height of the characters used for the 
notices shall be: 
a) For machinery spaces, emergency operation 
devices and for resetting device location: 
1) 10 mm for capital letters and numbers; or 
2) 7 mm for small letters. 
b) For pit and car top locations: 
1) 17 mm for capital letters and numbers; or 
2) 12 mm for small letters. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


7.2.1 Reduced Top Clearances 


A notice bearing the following inscription: “Danger 
— Reduced top clearances — Respect instructions” 
shall be affixed: 


a) In machinery spaces at the emergency operation 
devices; 


b) On or at the device for resetting the lift; and 
c) On the car top. 


This notice may be accompanied by the warning sign 
given as Fig. 2: 


Fic. 2 


7.2.2 Extendable Barricade 


A warning shall be affixed on the car top in order to 
inform about the need of extending the barricade before 
any work is performed on the car top. 


7.2.3 Reduced Bottom Clearances 


A notice bearing the following inscription: “Danger — 
Reduced bottom clearances — Respect instructions” 
shall be affixed: 


a) In machinery spaces at the emergency operation 
devices; 


b) On or at the device for resetting the lift; and 

c) In the pit. 
This notice may be accompanied by the warning sign 
given as Fig. 3: 


Fic. 3 


IS 17386 : 2020 


7.2.4 Extendable Car Apron 


A notice clearly visible from the landing when the doors 
are opened shall be affixed on or near the mechanical 
device required in 4.7.2 (a)(3) and 4.7.2 (b)(3) or on the 
fixed part of the apron, warning: 


“Apron shall be fully extended before rescuing 
persons” 


This notice may be accompanied by the warning sign 
given as Fig. 4: 


10 


Fic. 4 


IS 17386 : 2020 


ANNEX A 


PERIODICAL EXAMINATIONS AND TESTS, EXAMINATIONS AND TESTS AFTER AN 
IMPORTANT MODIFICATION OR AFTER AN ACCIDENT 


A-1 PERIODICAL EXAMINATIONS AND TESTS 


These periodical tests should not, through their 
repetition, cause excessive wear or impose stresses 
likely to reduce the safety of the lift. This is the case, in 
particular, of the test on components, such as the safety 
gear, the buffers and the movable stop(s). If tests on 
these components are made, they shall be carried out 
with empty car and at a reduced speed. 


A-2 EXAMINATIONS AND TESTS AFTER AN 
IMPORTANT MODIFICATION OR AFTER AN 
ACCIDENT 

a) The movable stops; 

b) The pre-triggered stopping system; 

c) The extendable car top barricade; and 

d) The extendable apron. 


IS 17386 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Lift and Escalators Sectional Committee, ETD 25 


Organization 


Central Public Works Department (CPWD), 
New Delhi 


Chief Electrical Inspector, Maharashtra 
Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Tamil Nadu 


Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Maharashtra 


Chief Electrical Inspectorate, Energy & 
Petrochemical Department Government of 
Gujarat 


Electrical Inspectorate, Labour Deptt, Govt of NCT 
of Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited 


Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation 
(MIDC) Fire Service 


Electrical Contractors Association of Maharashtra 
Fujitec India Pvt Ltd, Tamil Nadu 


Johnson Lifts Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Kone Elevator India Private Limited, Chennai 


Lerch Bates Private Limited, Mumbai 


Otis Elevator Company (India) Limited, Mumbai 


Schindler India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tak Consulting Private Limited, Mumbai 
Thyssenkrupp Elevator India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Bis Directorate General 


Representative (s) 
Suri C. K. Varma (Chairman) 


Suri S. R. BAGDE 


Suri T. AL TENAPPAN 
Suri D. KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate) 


SHRI N. G. BEHRAM 
Suri V. H. SHAHARE (Alternate I) 
Suri D. M. Nikuate (Alternate II) 


SHRI HAIDERALI H. KHoJa 
Suri AsHWIN B. CHAUDHARY (Alternate I) 
SHRI GoraL K. Prasarartı (Alternate II) 


SHRI MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI JOGENDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI MANUJ SINGHAL 
SHRI MANJEET Kumar (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUMIT KUMAR SHARMA (H/TERNA/E II) 


SHRI SANTOSH S. WARICK 


SHRI ANIL GACHKE 


SHRI S. P. RAO 
Suri R. Rases (Alternate I) 
SHRI ARUNSANKAR M. S. (Alternate ID 


SHRI T. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI V. KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate) 


Suri Tipnis P. M. 
Suri P. GURUMOORTHY (Alternate I) 
Suri U. VISWANATHAN (Alternate II) 


SHRI SUMEET MAJUMDAR 
SHRI PRASHANT KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY JAYCHANDRAN 
SHRI ABHIJIT DANDEKAR (Alternate I) 
Suri H. N. PRASHANTH (Alternate II) 


SHRI NIMISH DESHPANDE 
SHRI RonNIE DANTE (Alternate I) 
Suri Nitin Kanam (Alternate ID) 


Suri TAK MATHEWS 

SHRI WILLIAM REBELLO (Alternate) 
SHRI VISHNU PARASHAR 

Suri Rasesu Jost (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ETD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms MEGHNA MUDGAL 
ScIENTIST ‘C’ (ETD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 25 (11992). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


