WAT AA IS 16368 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


Wasnt cea UR sat ulead 
na Be dier dé 
Ren 2q uao ufenar 


Test Procedure for Thermosyphon 
Type Domestic Solar Hot Water 
Heating Systems 


ICS 27.160;91.140.65; 97.100.99 


© BIS 2015 


Ta AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW HAT, 9 ETE ri nb ae faeeft-110002 
Lim MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2015 Price Group 7 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Renewable 
Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


The Government of India has been promoting solar thermal systems and devices in the country by implementing 
wideranging programmes. A s a result, significantindustrial infra-structure has been established for manufacturing 
of these systems and devices, and new design variations have also emerged over the period of time. The solar 
thermal industry is manufacturing different types of solar water heating systems and the government is 
implementing various programmes related to large-scale promotion and dissemination of this technology. This 
test procedure is envisaged for testing of the domestic solar water heating systems manufactured by the solar 
thermal industry. The test procedure would enable quality control of the solar water heating systems promoted 
and disseminated in the country. 


The standard has been formulated to evolve a uniform test procedure for solar hot water systems, especially of 
domestic type, using flat plate collector or evacuated tubular collector. The standard is based on a draft test 
procedure developed at Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay under a Research and Development Project 
sponsored by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and further experiments conducted at Regional Test 
Centre, Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore. 


The composition of Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding of numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16368 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


TEST PROCEDURE FOR THERMOSYPHON TYPE 
DOMESTIC SOLAR HOT WATER HEATING SYSTEMS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers test procedure to evaluate thermal 
performance of domestic solar hot water systems, using 
flat plate collector (FPC) or evacuated tubular collector 
(ETC), working on thermo-syphonic flow of water 
under natural outdoor conditions. 


The solar water heating system may employ electric 
heater in the storage tank as an auxiliary source of 
heating, however performance of the system is 
evaluated under solar operation mode only. 


This standard may also be applied to solar water heating 
systems employing unglazed/glazed solar flat plate 
collector, or any other non-concentrating design of 
solar collectors with appropriate benchmarking of 
performance parameters. 


This standard does not apply to solar hot water systems 
employing concentrating solar collectors. 


2 TEST SYSTEM 


2.1 Requirement for the System Submitted for the 
Test 


A complete set of domestic solar water heating system, 
designed to work on thermo-symphonic flow, shall be 
erected at the test site by the manufacturer/supplier in 
consultation with the testing laboratory. The system 
shall consist of a solar collector, a storage tank of 
appropriate capacity and piping to connect inlet and 
outlet of the solar collector to the storage tank. The 
piping may be insulated in accordance with the 
specifications of the systems marketed by the 
manufacturer. The testing shall be carried out on the 
system on an installed basis. Any deviation in the 
specifications may render test report invalid. 


2.2 Specific Requirement of Tank for the Test 


The tank of the system submitted with the system for 
testing should have inlet/outlet of 25 mm size and on 
25 mm pipe opening at the top centre of the horizontal 
cylindrical tank for inserting resistance temperature 
detectors (RTD) sensor. 


3 NOMENCLATURE 


A, = Gross area of solar collector, in m? 


A, = Absorber area of solar collector, in m? 


A, = Total outside surface area of the connecting 
pipes, in m? 

A‘, = Total outside surface area of pipes which 
may be effective for loosing heat during 
night-test, in m? 


A, = Outside surface area of storage tank, in m? 
C p = Specific heat of water, in J/kg K 
F' = Collector efficiency factor 


G4 = Solar irradiance on the inclined plane of the 
solar collector, in W/m? 


GT - Average value of solar irradiance on the 
inclined plane of the solar collector during 
day-test, in W/m? 


(M C), = Thermal capacitance of the water in the 
storage tank only, in J/K 


Q = Total energy collected by the solar collector 
during period of the day-test, in kWh 


Q, =Total solar radiant energy incident on the 
collector during day-test period, in kWh 


t = Time, ins 
T, =Ambient air temperature, in °C 
T,q = Average ambient air temperature during 
day-test, in °C 
T,, = Average ambient air temperature during 
night-test, in °C 
Tm = Cold water temperature from mains, in °C 
T, = Temperature of water in storage tank, in °C 
T m = Final storage tank water temperature at the 
end of night-test, in °C 
Ta = Final storage tank water temperature at the 
end of the day-test, in °C 


T = Initial storage tank water temperature at the 
start of the day-test, in °C 


Ton = Initial storage tank water temperature at the 
start of the night-test, in °C 


Tas = Storage tank water temperature at mth 
interval during the night time, in °C 


U ysa = Average overall heat loss coefficient of the 
system during day-test, in W/m?K 
U, = Overall heat loss coefficient of solar 
collector, in W/m?K 


IS 16368 : 2015 


U ssn = Average overall heat loss coefficient of 

system during night-test, in W/m?K 

U, = Overall heat loss coefficient of piping, in 
W/m? K 

U, = Overall heat loss coefficient of storage tank, 
in W/m?K 

Greek Symbol 
At = Time duration of solar test, in s 


Mei = Maximum efficiency of the system averaged 
over the day-test period 


n,, = Efficiency of solar hot water system 
Nsys 
averaged over the day-test period 
(vo), = Effective transmittance-absorptance 
product of the solar collector for solar 
radiation 
Tcooling = Cooling time constant during night time test- 
period 


Subcripts 


a = Ambient conditions 

c = Collector 

d = Daytime 

f = Final value 

i = Initial value 

m = Mains, m time 

n = Nighttime 

p = Pipe 

S = Storage tank 

T = Ontilted collector surface 


4 MEASUREMENTS 


4.1 Physical Parameters 


All physical measurements, such as, length, width, 
thickness, etc, shall be measured and reported, in mm. 
Gross area of solar collector is defined as the total area 
on which solar radiation is falling (taking into account 
the gap, if any, between the tubes, and also the frame, 
etc, of the ETC based system and of the collector box 
of the FPC based system). It shall be calculated by 
multiplying width and length of the collector measured 
from outer edge to the outer edge. For the solar water 
heating models using all-glass ETCs, length shall be 
measured from bottom side of the storage tank to the 
outer edge of bottom tube holder while width shall be 
taken as equal to the length of the bottom tube holder. 
The measurement accuracy of the gross area shall be 
+0.1 percent. The volume of the storage tank shall be 
measured to an accuracy of + 1 percent. 


4.2 Climatic Parameter 


4.2.1 Solar radiation shall be measured using a Class 
| pyranometer on the plane parallel to the solar 
collector. For this, a separate mounting stand shall be 
used. 


4.2.2 For measuring ambient air temperature, the 
measuring sensor (a calibrated RTD) shall be located 
shaded by a Stevenson screen in the vicinity of the test 
set-up (not more than 10 m from it). It shall be ensured 
that there is no obstruction by any structure or building 
to alter (block or enhance) the free flow of the natural 
wind to the sensor. The outside surface of the Stevenson 
screen shall be of light colour, preferably white, and 
its bottom shall be kept at least 1 m above the ground 
level. 


4.2.3 The surrounding air speed shall be measured on 
the collector surface every 30 min with an accuracy of 
+0.1 m/s and the average value of the day will be 
reported along with the test results. 


4.3 Performance Parameter 


4.3.1 The duly calibrated RTDs shall be used for 
measurement of water temperature. The accuracy of 
measurement shall be +0.1°C or better. Measurements 
shall be made at three locations in the storage water 
tank. For this, measuring sensors shall be inserted 
through the opening provided by the manufacturer at 
the top centre of the tank. The sensors are placed at 
equal vertical distance from each one and from the top 
and bottom of the inner tank. The storage water tank 
temperature at any time t... shall be taken as mean of 
the temperature measured by the three RTD’s. 


4.3.2 The pressure shall be measured to an accuracy 
of 5 percent of actual reading. 


4.3.3 Elapsed time measurement shall be made to an 
accuracy of +0.2 percent. Computer based systems 
shall be used for data monitoring and logging. Analog 
or digital recorders shall have accuracy equal to or 
better than +0.5 percent of the full-scale reading and 
have a time constant of 1s or less. The peak signal 
indication shall be between 50 percent and 100 percent 
of full scale. 


5 SEQUENCE OF TEST 


The test shall be carried out in the following sequence: 


Sequence Test 
1 Pre-conditioning test 
2 Static pressure leakage test 
3 Thermal performance test (day time and 


night-time tests shall be performed one 
after another to complete one data set) 


6 TEST PROCEDURES 


6.1 Pre-Conditioning Test 


6.1.1 Fully assembled system filled with water shall 
be kept exposed to weather conditions for 15 days 
having daily solar irradiance on the plane of solar 
collectors more than 16 MJ/m?. The days with solar 
irradiance lesser than this value shall not be counted. 


6.1.2 All parts of the system shall be inspected for 
any visual sign of degradation, deformation, ingress 
of moisture/dust, etc, and shall be reported. 


6.2 Static Pressure Leakage Test 


6.2.1 The purpose of this test is to ensure the integrity 
of solar hot water system particularly its tank to 
withstand the pressure, which it might meet in service. 
Schematic of test set-up for conducting this test is 
shown in Annex A. 


6.2.2 Initially, air bleed valve is kept open and it is 
ensured that all air is removed from the collector by 
circulating water though it. T hereafter, the solar water 
heating system (Tank + Collector) is filled with water 
at a temperature of 60 + 2 °C. After filling, the bleed 
valve and all other valves are closed, and a hydraulic 
pressure 0.5 kg/cm? is applied for flat plate collector 
system and a hydraulic pressure of 0.2 kg/cm? is applied 
for evacuated tabular collector system. The system is 
kept pressurized for a period of 30 min for both ETC 
and FPC system. 


6.2.3 After 30 min, all parts of the system, especially 
the storage tank, shall be inspected for visual sign of 
any leakages. Results of the test in terms of the initial 
and final reading of the pressure gauge, temperature 
of the water, duration of the test and the result of 
inspection shall be reported. 


7 THERMAL PERFOMANCE TEST 


7.1 Thetest method is based on a lumped capacitance 
model, where it is assumed that average water 
temperature in the storage tank characterizes the 
behaviour of the whole system whether the storage is 
well mixed or stratified. 


7.2 The test procedure envisages characterizing the 
thermal performance of the system without any 
withdrawal of hot water from the storage tank. This 
strategy is adopted because the performance of the solar 
water heating system strongly depends on the pattern 
of withdrawal of hot water from the storage tank, and 
there could be wide variation in the withdrawal pattern. 


7.3 The system performance is evaluated in two parts 
corresponding to its performance during day time and 


IS 16368 : 2015 


separately during nighttime. U sually, the storage tank 
in solar water heating systems which are designed to 
work on the principle of thermosyphonic flow is 
located at higher level than the top edge of the solar 
collector with a view to suppressing reverse flow 
during night. In such a case, the solar collector and 
part of piping would not play rolein loosing heat from 
the tank during night as it does during the day. 
However, night time test would account for all thermal 
losses from the system. 


7.4 Day Time Performance 


7.4.1 The following energy balance equation would 
determine the thermal performance of the solar hot 
water system during the day time: 


Rate of Rate at which , 
change useful energy ius at M es 
in energy is supplied to Sha ce in 
contents of |=| waterinthe |- the storage- 
the water in storagetank ae RE 
the storage by solar ambient air 
tank collector 


„(1) 
7.4.2 Mathematically, this may be expressed as 
follows: 


dT 
-=A,F' [Gr (co), - U, (TT3] - (A U, + 


(MC), Gi 


A,U,) (T,- TJ ... (2) 


7.4.3 Rearranging and integrating equation (2) with 
respect to time, between the time period t,, to t,4 during 
which the energy is collected, one gets 


(MC), (Tea Togo) =AF' JG, (oai - (A,FU + 

AU, t AU, | (T,-T,) dt ... (3) 
7.4.4 Thetotal energy incident on the collector during 
the time period from ż to 1, is given by the following 
expression: 


t2d 


Q, =A, [G, dt .. (4) 


tld 


7.4.5 Dividing equation (3) by equation (4), one gets 
Tl. = Nyso — Usysa.X T (5) 
where 


n, = MO Tsu Tu) 


IS 16368 : 2015 


ba 


A,F Ja, (ox) .dt 


Tyso = e ... (6b) 
A, JG; dr 
= A,F'U, + AU, +AU 
Usysd = 2 È = per r (6c) 
A, 
tog 
Ja -T,)dr 
— V . (6d) 
[6;dı 


ha 


The parameters Nys, and Ussa are defined as the 
characteristic parameters of the thermosyphonic solar 
water heating systems during the day test period. 


7.5 Night Time Performance 


7.5.1 During night time, no solar radiation is received 
and also there is no flow of water through the solar 
collector. The heat is therefore lost primarily from the 
storage tank and part of the piping. In view of this, the 
equation (3) may be re-written as follows: 


t OT, 
(MO) | = (AU, +A,U)d (7) 
or 
Ter 
(MC), In fate = Usysn Alt, 1) tee (8) 
where 


Usysn Ac = (A, U, +A) U,) and tn tin =10 h= 10x 
3 600 s ... (8a) 
7.5.2 Cooling time constant to rate the performance 


of the solar water heating system during no-radiation 
period may be expressed by the following expression: 


T. Te 
ee da 
(Usysn.Ac) [tan — tin] Ti, —T an 


sin 


Here, the Tooling represents the time at which the 
difference between the hot water temperature in the 
tank and the mean ambient temperature drops to 36.8 
percent of its initial value. 


8 TEST CONDITION 


The total duration required for one cycle of the daytime 
testis 7 h, comprising 3.5 h before solar noon and 3.5 h 
after solar noon. The total solar irradiance during the 
test duration of 7 h shall be greater than or equal to 
14 MJ /m?. The ratio of solar irradiance in the forenoon 


and afternoon periods, each of 3.5 h, shall lie in 
between 0.5 and 1.5. The average value of wind speed 
during the test period shall be less than 4 m/s. 


9 EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 


9.1 Thermal performance of the thermo-syphon 
domestic solar hot water system shall be characterized 
by three parameters namely My. U syss and Tooling under 
this test procedure. The testing of the system shall be 
carried out in two steps, namely, the solar test 
(Day test) and the no-solar test (Night test). As the 
present test procedure proposes tests under conditions 
of no-load withdrawal, the performance thus obtained 
may be treated as the lower limit of the performance. 


9.2 A schematic sketch of test-up is given in 
Annex A. The main components of the test set-up are 
as follows: 


a) Domestic solar water heating system, as 
installed by the manufacturer, consisting of 
solar collector(s), storage tank, inter- 
connecting piping, and supporting stand. 

b) A hydraulic loop integrated with the test set- 
up, consisting of a circulating pump 
(capacity > 40 litre/min) for mixing the water, 
one Rota meter to measure water circulation 
rate, ahydraulic pressure source, bleed valve, 
pressure gauge, and other accessories. 

c) Measurement system, which shall include a 
computer based data logging systems, 
instruments/sensors for measuring solar 
radiation on the plane of solar collector, 
ambient air temperature in the vicinity of test 
set-up, air velocity on the plane of solar 
collector, and pressure gauge, along with 
necessary fixtures for their installation. 


9.3 It shall be ensured that there is no shadow or 
obstruction to the solar radiation falling on to the solar 
collector or onto the Pyranometer during the period of 
day test. Also, all the piping including for hot water 
withdrawal, mixing pumps, etc, shall be insulated with 
50 mm glass wool insulation with necessary cladding 
to protect it from moisture ingress, etc. Provision of 
cold water supply shall also be made. 


9.4 Day time test shall be conducted in the following 
steps: 


a) Determine Indian Standard Time (IST) 
corresponding to the solar noon. 

b) Solar collector is shaded completely with an 
Opaque cover, white on the top exterior, at 
about 4 h before the solar noon. The storage 
tank of the solar water heating system is filled 
fully with water. The quantity of water filled 
in the storage tank shall be taken as notional 


capacity of the solar water heating system. 

c) The water in the storage tank is fully mixed 
by switching on pump for 5 min before 
beginning of the test at the designated time 
instant. 

d) Initial value of the storage water temperature, 
T. is measured and recorded, and the shade- 
cover is removed at 210 min before the solar 
noon. 


e) Measurements for ambient air temperature, 
water temperature of the storage tank, and 
solar irradiance on the plane of solar collector 
get commenced at the start of the test. The 
measurements are continued subsequently for 
the entire period of the test at an interval of 1 
min or less, however, recording of data is 
adequate at an interval of 10 min. 

f) To end the day-test cycle, the solar collector 
is again shaded on expiry of 210 min from 
solar noontime. The water in the storage tank 
is again mixed by operating the pump for 
5 min and final storage water temperature 
(Ta) is measured and recorded. 

g) Thetestis repeated for at least ten days with 
different values of initial storage water 
temperature. The first test shall be carried out 
with cold (supply) water in the storage tank. 
For subsequent days, initial water temperature 
shall be raised in uniform steps to cover up to 
70°C (fully mixed storage). 

h) Different initial temperature in the storage 
tank may be achieved by adding appropriate 
quantity of cold water to the previous day’s 
heated water in the storage tank. A Iternatively, 
hot water from any other source may also be 
used to achieve the required temperature of 
the water in the storage tank. 

j) Data may be recorded in a format given at 
Annex B. 


9.5 Night Time Test 


Night time test essentially intends to find out overnight 
heat loss characteristics of the solar system. The 
duration of test is 10h under no-solar conditions. The 
following steps are undertaken to perform this test: 


a) Measure the amount of solar radiation falling 
on the plane of solar collector(s) before 
starting the night-test; if the measured value 
is more than 50 W/m?, cover the solar 
collector(s) by an opaque shield. This may 
be done by fixing the cover leaving a, gap of 
about 0.5 m above the solar collectors to allow 
free flow of surrounding air. After the solar 
radiation falls below the value of 50 W/m?, 


IS 16368 : 2015 


the cover should be removed. 

b) Switch on the mixing pump for about 5 min 
before the start of night test time so that water 
temperature in the storage tank is fully mixed 
and attains uniform temperature. Undertake 
measurement of initial storage water 
temperature, T... 

c) Carry out measurements of water temperature 
of storage tank, and ambient air temperature 
at an interval of 10 min during the test period. 

d) Again, switch on the mixing pump at the end 
of test period of for about 5 min and measure 
final storage water temperature, T... 

e) Repeat the experiments for number of days 
for which the test was performed. 

f) Data may be recorded in a format given at 
Annex C. 


9.6 Computation 


9.6.1 Based on the measured data obtained during day- 
test and night-test, the characteristic parameters of the 
solar hot water system shall be evaluated as given 
subsequently. 


9.6.2 Calculate Nys from the following expression 
using data recorded during the day time test: 


PE = (MC), Ta = Tua) M (11) 
AG, dt 


h 


9.6.3 The calculation of X involves integration of 
storage water temperature over the duration of daytime 
test, as is clear from equation (6d). For this, the test 
period is broken into m® intervals, each of 10 min, 
and piece wise integration is performed for each of 
the m^ time interval using the following expression: 


Dg 
| (Tsi—Tea) dt 
ha 

x= Dg 


| Gide 


ha 


42 ( (7 T. dA 
3| um ) —T adm } (fam E^ Im P 
msl 


> (Grim Orn) ye- hs Ja 


.. (12) 


m-l 


where 7,,, represents average ambient temperature 
during the mth time interval; Tim and Tim represents 
the water temperature of the three RT D’sin the storage 
tank at the end and start of the mth time interval, 
respectively. Similarly Gzim and G;;, are the solar 


irradiance value recorded at the end and at the start of 


IS 16368 : 2015 


the m, time interval obviously, the value of (ta - fima 
in the above expression is equivalent to 10 min. 


9.6.4 Plot a curve with values of 7, on y-axis and 
those of X on x-axis. Draw atrend line using regression 
method of least squares of curve fitting, and obtain for 
all the ten days values of Nys, and Ussa from the 
intercept of the trend line with y-axis and slope of the 
trend line respectively. 


9.6.5 System efficiency corresponding to the 
following standard test conditions may be calculated 
using equation (5): 

= 50°C 
=25°C 


a) Average storage temperature 
b) Average ambient air 
temperature during test period 
c) Average of total solar radiation = 700 W/m? 
incident on the plane of solar 
collectors 


9.6.6 Amount of thermal energy stored in the storage 
tank during a period of 7 h corresponding to the 
standard test conditions, in kWh, may be calculated as 
follows: 


Q — 1, (corresponding to standard conditions) ...(13) 
XAcx0.7x7 


9.6.7 The value of Tooling can be calculated using 
equation (9). Tooling can also be calculated by plotting 


a straight line curve between In[7,,,, - T4, | versus 


time fmn. Tsnm iS the storage tank water temperature at 
tmntime thus obtained. The inverse of the slope of the 
trend line shall give T.ooting: 


10 TEST REPORT 


A test report shall be generated in the format given at 
Annex D. 


IS 16368 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.2.1) 
EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP 


A-1 A schematic diagram of test set-up for conducting this test is shown below: 


dN-LaG 1VININIFIdX I AHL AO WVvuovi(] DILVWSHSS T DIY 


TI 


Ajddng Beas 


INEM PIOD Y 


PL Lg Lg Lg Lg Lg Lg Ll Pl Pg Lg Lá LA 


Li 


\ 


eImmssa 4 


sanog x 
S 


101229[[02 


3jo-t1q TRI 
THEM 10H pezeno PAT 


LIII 


UAF UOSUTA 


IS 16368 : 2015 


ANNEXB 
(Clause 9.4) 
DAY TIME TEST 
FORMAT TO RECORD TEST RESULTS 


SE Storage Water Temperature Wind 
SE Speed 
m/s 


[esi | Senna | sonors arme | — 


Time 


0000 


0010 


0020 


0030 


0040 


0060 


0070 


1000 


IS 16368 : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 9.5) 
NIGHT TIME TEST FORMAT TO RECORD TEST RESULTS 


Ambient Temperature Storage Water Temperature 
°C °C 
1 2 3 


IS 16368 : 2015 


ANNEXD 
(Clause 10.1) 
FORMAT FOR TEST REPORT 


[Name and address ofmanufsenmeriupplier TT 
[Contact details of manufacnwerkuppiier — | — 
Details of sample submited/modelfany — (| — | 


Latitude and longitude of test laboratory a) Latitude: 
b) Longitude: 


SPECIFICATION OF THE TEST SAMPLE 
(All dimensions in mm, unless specified otherwise) 


Evacuated Tube Collector (ETC) 
Make/Model 


Complete address of the manufacturer including e-mail/web site 
etc. 


c) Type (All glass direct flow/ Heat-pipe type/Any other (please 
specify) 
Inner diameter of inner tube PO 
Outer diameter of outer tube ERN 


h) Details of selective coating 
(data from manufacturer may be used) 
p Exposed area (gross) of a single Tube (Di L), m? 


Gross aperture area of the collector, m? 


Reflector below the tubes 
(Provided/Not provided) 


lat Plate Collector 


Box material LI 
Box length ei 
Box thickness Po 
Box width si 
Absorber material Po 
Absorber thickness Po 
Absorber coating Po 
Insulation thickness (Back) EEE: 
Insulation thickness (Side) Po 
k-Value at 100° C ,Wm?K"! Po 
BIS Certified (Yes/No) Po 


BIS Certificate No Attach a copy 


a 


10 


IS 16368 : 2015 


3) [Storage Tank EIU 
Inner tank thickness and material Po 
Material and thickness of outer cladding Po 


Capacity (kg) 


(without taking into account water in the collector) 


Material and thickness of insulation: 
1) Plane side of tank 
2) Circular side of tank 


f) | Height of cold water inlet point from bottom of the tank 

4) | = | O 
Dfm O SSS 
b | Outevinnerdiameter TC 
Fo [Outer surface coating OOOO S 
oy | Insulation material and thickness SSCS 

5) | Supporting Stands/Frame o | 
o [Mae Ta NE 
(6) | type andai TC 
Fo]oweswmeemdg — — — — T______ — 

C | TEST RESULTS 

Ð | Pre-Conditioningtet —— — — — — — — — —[-—————— —] 
Results ofinepection after IS daysoftest — — — — | — 

è) | Static Pressure Leakage Tet TT 
[n [inital and Final Pressure gem) SSCS 
(2) [Temperature of water inthe storage mk CC) — — | | 
[3 | Duration ofthe test period i II SSCS 


4) | Results of inspection Leakage observed /not 
observed 


c) | Thermal Performance Test Po 
Percentage Maximum efficiency of the system, 775.0 EE 


Overall heat loss coefficient of the system during day-time test, 
Usysa (W/m?K) 

Night-time heat loss coefficient of the system, U,,,,, (W/m?K) and 
Teooling,n (days) 

Percentage system efficiency at 

standard test conditions 


1 I 


Date: 
Place: 
(Testing officer) (Head of the test laboratory) 


11 


IS 16368 : 2015 


ANNEX E 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


Organization 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 
Ankur Scientific Energy Technologies Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 


Bipin Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Borosil Glass Works Ltd, M umbai 


Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Wind Energy Technology, Chennai 


Consumer Coordination Council, Noida 


Directorate General of Meteorology, New Delhi 


Emmvee Solar Systems Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 
Gadhia Solar Energy Systems Pvt Ltd, V alsad 
Gujarat Energy Development A gency, V adodara 


ndian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


ndian Institute of Technology, M umbai 


ndian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


ndian Renewable Energy Development Agency Ltd, New Delhi 
Karnataka Solar M anufacturers Association, Bangalore 
aharashtra Energy Development A gency, Pune 


aharashtra Solar M anufacturers Association, Pune 


inistry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


ational Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, M umbai 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Regional Test Centre-Cum-T echnical Backup Unit 
For Solar Thermal Devices, Indore 


Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research Institute, 
Vallabh V idyanagar 
Solar Energy Centre, Gurgaon 


Solar Energy Society of India, New Delhi 


Solchrome Private Ltd, Parwanoo 


12 


Representative(s) 
Dr B. Banpyoraphyay (Chairman) 


Dr B. C. JAIN 
Suri G. P. Naconi (Alternate) 


SHRI H.S. REVANKAR 
SHRI A. K. BAIKERIKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. Das Gupta 
SHRI SHREEVAR KHERUKA (Alternate) 


DR Piyush C. PANDE 


SHRI S. P. BARNWAL 
SHRI A. K. Goet (Alternate) 


Dr S. GOMATHINAYAGAM 
SHRI A. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI RAMABEN R. MAVANI 
Suri R. K. KAPLASH (Alternate) 


Dr R. D. VASHISTHA 
Suri M. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI Vijay Kumar C. R. 
SHRI BADAL SHAH 


SHRI K. V. DosHI 
Suri S. B. Patit (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. TANDON 
Dr A. K. Dusay (Alternate) 


SHRI J. K. NAYAK 
Dr SHireesH B. KEDARE (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. MuLLICK 
Da T. C. KanpraL (Alternate) 


SHRI D. MAJUMDAR 
SHRI A. PALANI 


SHRI S. R. CHAUDHARI 
SHRI H. M. KuLKkARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI SUHAS GHOTIKAR 
Suri Mangar AkoLE (Alternate) 


Dr ASHVINI KUMAR 
Dr A. K. SINGHAL (Alternate |) 
Dr A. R. Shuka (Alternate ||) 


SHRI S. S. RAJSHEKHAR 
Suri V. K. TREHAN (Alternate) 


Dr M. G. TAKWALE 


Dr S. P. SINGH 
Dr R. N. SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr S. MOHANA 
SuniMATI H. S. Desai (Alternate) 


Dr B. BANDYOPADHYAY 
Dr S. K. SincH (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAJINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. SINGLA 


IS 16368 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi SHRI SHIRISH S. GARUD 
Dr IsHan PuroHiT (Alternate) 
In personal capacity (C-103A, JVTS Garden, Chatarpur Extension, SHRI ATAM KUMAR 
New Delhi 110074) 
BIS Directorate G eneral Suni C. K. Vepa Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI M. K. PARAMANIK 
Scientist ‘C’(MED), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : M onthly A dditions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 04 (1050). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
M anak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar M arg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar M arg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. SchemeVII M, V. I. P. Road, K ankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, M arol, Andheri (E ast) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branche: AHMEDABAD.BENGALURU.BHOPAL.BHUBANESHWAR.COIMBATORE.DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HY DERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


