WAT 971% IS 17923 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


unite TARA, qa sit dle vasa — 
Aa Geri sie ‚тей da 
этетайяї A аат & fora Тазда 


Physical Activity, Sports and Injury 
Management — Guidelines for Safety 
in Educational Institutions and 
Community Sports Academies 


ICS 03.180; 11.020.99 


© BIS 2022 


FRAT AM A 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
ee ңер NG, 9 96194 Me 19 MM, 15 fea - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2022 Price Group 6 


Health, Fitness and Sports Services Sectional Committee, SSD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Health, Fitness 
and Sports Services Sectional Committee had been approved by the Service Sector Division Council. 


The play and recreational spaces have to be inherently safe spaces for participants. They are a hub for child play 
in schools and community spaces, fun for families, enjoyment with friends, and places for communities to come 
together. However, these places are also locations where unintentional injuries occur and recent research has 
shown playgrounds and equipment are places where participants are exposed to hazards. 


This standard provides the guidelines for safety of participants involved in physical activity and sports including 
guidelines related to playground, layout, accessibility, maintenance, monitoring, entrapments, injury prevention 
for educational institutions and community sports academies. 


This standard is aimed to promote awareness on safety in physical activities and sports in educational institutions 
and community sports academies. It is intended for use by primary school teachers, middle and secondary school 
officials, community sports academies, equipment manufacturers, purchasers and installers, playground designers, 
architects, engineers and designers concerned with public playground safety. 


The guidelines given in the standard are not the sole method on safety in physical activities and sports to minimize 
injuries associated with playground and equipment. However, the recommendations in his standard on safety 
aspects contribute substantially to safety of participants while they are engaged in physical activities and sports. 


These guidelines would help the decision makers in developing and implementing a systematic safety 
management programme for physical activities and sports in educational institutions and community sports 
academies. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 
2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17923 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


PHYSICAL ACTIVITY, SPORTS AND INJURY MANAGEMENT 
— GUIDELINES FOR SAFETY IN EDUCATIONAL 
INSTITUTIONS AND COMMUNITY SPORTS ACADEMIES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides the guidelines for safety of 
participants involved in physical activity and sports in 
educational institutions including pre-schools, 
schools, colleges, universities, and community sports 
academies. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Barrier — An enclosing device around an 
elevated platform that is intended to prevent both 
inadvertent and deliberate attempts to pass through the 
device. 


2.2 Composite Structure — Two or more play 
structures attached or functionally linked, to create one 
integral unit that provides more than one play activity. 


2.3 Critical Height — The fall height below which a 
life-threatening head injury would not be expected to 
occur. 


2.4 Designated Play Surface — Any elevated surface 
for standing, walking, crawling, sitting or climbing, or 
a flat surface greater than 50 mm in length and breadth 
having an angle less than 30° from horizontal. 


2.5 Distinct Play Areas — A clearly segregated fields 
of play for participants of different age groups or for 
different types of sports/physical activities. 


2.6 Entanglement — A condition in which the user’s 
clothes or something around the user’s neck becomes 
caught or entwined on a component of playground 
equipment. 


2.7 Entrapment — Any condition that impedes 
withdrawal of a body or body part that has penetrated 
an opening. 


2.8 Fall Height — The vertical distance between the 
highest designated play surface on a piece of 
equipment and the protective surfacing beneath it. 


2.9 Field of Play — The part of the field which is 
marked for playing. 


2.9 Guardrail — An enclosing device around an 
elevated platform that is intended to prevent 
inadvertent falls from the elevated surface. 


2.10 Infill — Material used in a barrier or between 
decks to prevent a participant from passing through the 
barrier. 


2.11 Landing Sector — An area on grass or suitable 
material with an even surface soft enough to ensure 
that the place of the initial fall (for example, shot-put, 
hammer, javelin and discus) can be easily established 
by the supervisors. 


2.12 Loose-Fill Surfacing Material — A material 
used for protective surfacing in the use zone that 
consists of loose particles such as sand, gravel, 
engineered wood fibres, or shredded rubber. 


2.13 Projection — Anything that extends outward 
from a surface of the playground equipment. 


2.14 Platform — A flat horizontal surface that is 
usually higher than the level of adjoining area such as 
a raised flooring. 


2.15 Pre-school Participants — Participants of 3 
years above and up to 5 years of age. 


2.16 Protective Surfacing — Shock absorbing (that 
is, impact attenuating) surfacing in the use zone. 


2.17 Protrusion — A projection which, when tested, 
is found to be a hazard having the potential to cause 
bodily injury to a user who impacts it. 


2.18 School Participants — Participants of 5 years 
above and up to 18 years of age. 


2.19 Shading — An overhead protective structure 
(natural like tree or manmade structure) that protects 
participants/spectators from the direct sunlight and 
rain. 


2.20 Supervisor — A professional (for example, 
physical education teacher, sports coach, physical 
activity teacher/trainer, primary teacher, pre-school 
teacher, coaching staff), seasonal worker (for example, 
physical education college intern), volunteer or 
caregiver (for example, parent of the participants 
playing in the playground) responsible for conducting 
physical activities and sports. 


IS 17923 : 2022 


2.21 Toddlers — Participants of 1 year above and up 
to 3 years of age. 


2.22 Use Zone — The surface under and around a 
piece of equipment onto which a child falling from or 
exiting from the equipment would be expected to land. 


3 SAFETY IN PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND 
SPORTS 


3.1 Safety in physical activity and sports includes a 
broad perspective of conduct of physical activity, 
operational aspects, usage, infrastructure, equipment, 
maintenance and environmental factors. The 
following aspects should be covered to ensure safety 
of participants involved in physical activity and sports: 


a) Playground; 

b) Layout; 

с) Access; 

d) Maintenance; 

e) Monitoring; 

f) Fall surfacing; 

g) Entrapments; 

h) Injury prevention; and 
j) Injury management. 


4 PLAYGROUND 


4.1 For the purpose of laying down the requirements, 
the playground should be divided into the following 
parts: 


a) Field of play; 

b) Platform; 

с) Guardrails and barriers; and 
d) Shading. 


4.2 Field of Play 
4.2.1 The outdoor area should: 


a) be regular and generally flat surface (slope, if 
any, should be from center to outwards and 
within 2° of the horizontal); 

b) have adequate drainage; 

с) have no debris; 

d) have adequate lighting arrangement for use, 
whenever required; and 

e) be not more than 500 mm above from the 
general ground level, for toddlers. 


4.2.2 The indoor area should have: 


a) adequate free space around the field of play 
to minimize obstruction; 

adequate and uniform lighting as required for 
each physical activity/sport; 

adequate ventilation and airflow in line with 
the requirement of physical activity/sports; 


b 


= 


c 


ми 


а) height as рег the minimum height 
requirement of the physical activity/sport; 

e) not be more than 800 mm above from the 
ground for toddlers; and 

f) adequate fire safety 
emergency fire exits. 


equipment and 


4.3 Platform 


The compliance of the following should be ensured 
while designing the platform of the playground: 


a) In case of multilevel structures in Ше 
playground, the platform should be layered or 
tiered so that participants should access the 
higher platform without steps or ladders. 
Unless there is an alternate means of access, 
the maximum difference in height between 
consecutive steps of the platform should not 
be more than: 

1) 150 mm for toddlers; 

2) 300 mm for pre-school participants; and 
3) 400 mm for school participants. 
However, an access component (such as a 
rung) is needed if the difference in height is 
more than 300 mm for preschool participants 
and 400 mm for school participants. 

b) In case of open gap between the consecutive 
platforms, infill should be used to reduce the 
space between the consecutive steps in the 
platform to minimize the entrapment hazards. 
The gaps should be reduced to a maximum 
of: 

1) 70 mm for toddlers; and 
2) 90 mm for pre-school and 
participants. 


school 


4.4 Guardrails and Barriers 


In order to avoid participants from climbing over or 
walk through the barrier and accidental falls from 
elevated platforms, the guardrails and barriers should 
be: 


a) designed to completely surround any elevated 
platform to prevent participant from climbing 
over, cross through or getting entrapped; 

b) fixed in such a way to prevent unintentional 
falls from the platform; and 

c) provided on elevated platforms, walkways, 
landings, stairways, and transitional surfaces. 


4.5 Shading 


Adequate arrangement for shading should be available 
to safeguard the health of the participants. The efforts 
should be made to utilize existing shade (for example, 
trees, sheds) or creating more shade (for example, 
man-made structures). 


5 LAYOUT 
The following factors should be considered while 
laying of the playground: 

a) Accessibility — In order to facilitate 


b) 


с) 


d) 


participation for participants, both abled and 
persons with disabilities, in physical 
activities and sports, appropriate design of 
the playground, access, selection of 
equipment, protective surfacing and location 
should be ensured. 

Distinct Play Areas — Adequate 

arrangements should be made to ensure 

distinct play areas by providing separate 
buffer zones, for participants belonging to 
different age groups. 

Conflicting Activities — In order to avoid the 

conflicting activities on the playground, the 

following should be ensured: 

1) The play area is organized into different 
sections to prevent injuries caused by 
conflicting activities; 

2) Active physical activities are conducted 

separately from the more passive or quiet 

physical activities; and 

Area for playground equipment, open 

fields, and sand boxes are located in 

different and relevant sections of the 
playground. The following aspects to be 
ensured for designing of the play areas: 

i) Field of play for athletics and outdoor 
sports like football, cricket, etc should 
be at the centre of the playground; 

ii) Jump areas (high jump, long jump, 
etc) should be next to the athletic 
tracks; 

iii) Throw activities like javelin, shot-put 
and discus throw should have 
protection area around them and safe 
landing sector as relevant to the sports. 
Ensure that no movement of people is 
outside the protection area and landing 
sector; and 

iv) Moving equipment, such as swings 
and merry-go-rounds, should be 
located towards a corner, side, or edge 
of the play area. 

Sight Lines — The following aspects should 

be considered for the sightlines of the 

playground : 

1) The playground should be designed, 
installed, and maintained in such a way 
as to allow caregivers to keep track of 
participants as they move throughout the 


3 


wm 


е) 


IS 17923 : 2022 


playground environment. In case of 
playgrounds with areas for different 
ages, the elder participant’s area should 
be visible from the younger participant’s 
area so to ensure that caregivers of 
multiple participants can see elder 
participants while they are engaged in 
interactive play with younger ones; and 
2) Visual barriers should be minimized so 
that play areas and equipment are visible 
from different directions. 
Signage or Labelling — Signs and/or labels 
posted in the play area or on the equipment 
should give guidance to participants as well 
as supervisors. Labels and signage should be 
displayed in Hindi/English and vernacular 
language. 


6 ACCESS 


6.1 The following aspects should be considered while 
designing safe access and egress to platforms : 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


е) 


Access to platforms using ramps, stairways 
with steps, ladders with steps or rungs and 
climbing components, such as arch climbers, 
climbing nets, and tire climbers should 
provide an intermediate standing surface so 
that the participant can pause and decide 
whether to keep going up or find another way 
down; 

In case there are difficult access approaches 
to the platform, should be easier and if 
possible multiple approaches for egress; 

In case of ramps, stairways, rung ladders and 
step ladders, the slope and tread dimension as 
mentioned in Table 1 may be different, but 
the steps or rungs should always be evenly 
spaced; 

Openings between steps or rungs and 
between the top step or rung and underside of 
a platform should prevent entrapment; 

When risers are closed, treads on stairways 
and ladders should prevent the accumulation 
of sand, water, or other materials on or 
between steps; and 

Climbing equipment should allow 
participants to descend as easily as they 
ascend. Wherever possible, provide an easier, 
alternate means of descent, such as another 
mode of egress, a platform, or another piece 
of equipment (for example, a stairway can be 
added to provide a less challenging mode of 
descent than a vertical rung ladder or flexible 
climbing device). 


IS 17923 : 2022 


Table 1 Recommended Dimensions of Access Ramps, Stairways, Step Ladders and Rung Ladders 
(Clause 6.1) 


SI. No Type of Access Toddler Preschool-age School-age 
(1) (2) (4) (5) 
1) Ramps 
a) Slope(vertical : horizontal) <1:8 <1:8 <1:8 
b) Width (single) > 480 mm > 300 mm > 400 mm 
11) Stairways 
a) Slope <35° < 50° < 50° 
b) Tread width (single) 300 mm to 530 mm > 300 mm > 400 mm 
c) Vertical rise < 180 mm < 230 mm < 300 mm 
ш) Step ladders 
a) Slope 35 ° to 65° 50° to 75 ° 50° to 75 ° 
b) Tread width (single) 300 mm to 530 mm 300 mm to 530 mm 2 400 mm 
c) Vertical rise > 130 mm and < 180 mm < 230 mm < 300 mm 
1v) Rung ladders 
a) Slope Not applicable 75° to 90° 75° to 90° 
b) Rung width Not applicable > 300 mm > 400 mm 
c) Vertical rise Not applicable < 300 mm < 300 mm 
d) Rung diameter Not applicable 24 mm to 40 mm 24 mm to 40 mm 


6.2 Rungs 


For the safety of participants to have proper 
gripping, rungs should be round in shape and the 
surface of the hand grips should be semi-finished to 
prevent turning of grip. 


6.3 Handrails 


In order to provide hand support to the user, 
handrails should be extended continuously over the 
full length of the access on both sides of all stairways 
and step ladders, regardless of the height of the 
access. Handrails should be available for use at the 
appropriate height, beginning with the first step. The 
vertical distance between the top front edge of a step 
or ramp surface and the top surface of the handrail 
above it should be as follows: 


a) 350 mm to 500 mm for toddlers; 

b) 400 mm to 660 mm for pre-school 
participants; and 

с) 500 mm to 960 mm for school 
participants. 


7 MAINTENANCE 


7.1 In order to keep the play area, environment and 
equipment in a safe condition and protect the 
participants from the injury, a systematic and 
proactive maintenance programme for playground 
and equipment should be predefined and regularly 
executed. The detailed maintenance schedule with 
the assigned responsibilities should be available as 
document and communicated to all concerned. In 


case of equipment, the manufacturer’s maintenance 
instructions and the recommendations should be 
considered. The different aspects related to safety 
should be considered, while preparing the 
maintenance schedule. The frequency of inspections 
and maintenance should also be decided based on 
usage of equipment/playground. 


7.2 All playground areas and equipment should be 
inspected for excessive wear and tear, deterioration, 
and any potential hazards. The metallic surfaces 
should be periodically treated using paints, 
galvanization or other techniques to prevent 
corrosion thereby minimizing injury due to heat, rust 
and sharp edges. The wooden surface should be 
made of naturally rot and insect-resistant wood and 
should be periodically treated using paints and other 
coatings to avoid deterioration. The surface coatings 
containing pesticides are not recommended. 


7.3 The action on maintenance issues should be 
taken as per the laid down maintenance schedule 
which should include the actions required for 
various maintenance issues as given in 7.3.1 and 
7.32. The records of actions taken for 
implementation of maintenance plan of playground 
and equipment should be maintained.The checklist 
for maintenance of playground and equipment as 
given in Annex A may be used. 


7.3.1 Playground 


The following actions are recommended on the 
maintenance issue of the playground: 


IS 17923 : 2022 


SI No. Maintenance Issue Action Required 
1) Uneven surface Use of rollers at regular intervals 
11) Water stagnation/blockage Clear the drainage and level the ground 
ш) Potholes Repair 
iv) Debris/trash Remove and dispose of 
v) Sharp/unwanted materials Remove and dispose of 
vi) Weeds/unwanted vegetation Pluck and dispose of 
уп) Discontinuity of turf Repair/replace 
viii) Deterioration of turf Repair/replace 
7.3.2 Equipment 


The following actions are recommended on the maintenance issue of the equipment: 


SI No. Maintenance Issues 


Action Required 


1) Protective surfacing under and 
around the equipment 


11) Deterioration of surfacing 
materials of the equipment 


111) Rust, rot, cracks or splinters 
1v) Missing components 
v) Anchoring/loose fastening device 


of equipment, wherever applicable 


vi) Peeling, cracking, chipping, or 
chalking of paint 
vil) Visible paint chips or 


accumulation of dust 


viii) Crush and shearing points on 
exposed moving parts 


1x) Worn out moving parts of 
equipment 


Repair/replace surfacing 
Repair/replace surfacing 
Repair/replace 


Reinstall/replace as per equipment 
manufacturer’s manual 


Repair/replacement of anchor point and 
fasteners 

Repaint 

Remove and repaint 


Repair 


Repair/Replacement 


NOTE — The records of actions taken during maintenance of playground and equipment should be maintained. 


8 MONITORING с) 
The designated supervisor should be responsible for 
overall monitoring of safety of participants using the d) 
playground and equipment. The supervisor should 
also be responsible for maintenance of playground е) 


as well as equipment including but not limited to: 


a) checking for unfit equipment and making f) 
sure participants don’t play on/with it; g) 
b) identification and condemnation of 
redundant equipment; 


checking and removing unsafe 
paraphernalia; 

checking for maintenance of protective 
surfacing; 


ensuring that participants use the suitable 
age appropriate sports specific equipment, 
apparel and footwear; 

ensuring discipline in the ground; and 
overseeing the activities of participants, 
equipment, open spaces and identification of 
the areas and activities of potential danger. 


IS 17923 : 2022 


9 FALL SURFACING 


9.1 The surface of the playground should be 
commensurate to the intended physical 
activity/sport being played. To the extent possible, 
the playground protective surfacing should have 
shock absorbing properties and compliance 
regarding its critical height should be ensured. The 
guidelines given in 9.2 to 9.4 should be followed to 
ensure fall surfacing protection. 


9.2 Appropriate Materials 


Appropriate material like engineered wood fibre, 
pea gravel, sand, shredded/recycled rubber mulch, 
wood mulch (not copper chrome arsenate (CCA) 
treated), wood chips, loose-fill material (wood 
products, sand, pea gravel, and crumb rubber) and 
unitary surface material (rubber tile, poured-in- 
place, and other artificial surfaces) should preferably 
be used. Usage of inappropriate surfacing materials 
include grass, carpet, mat, asphalt, cement, dirt, and 
concrete are not recommended. The loose-fill 
surfacing in areas under swings and at slide should 
be given special attention to reduce the displacement 
of material and maintain adequate depth to absorb 
the shock. Also, good drainage should be maintained 
to minimize material compaction and decomposition 
of loose fill surfacing. 


9.3 Assembly and Installation 


The equipment should be securely anchored and 
installed as per the manufacturer’s assembly and 
installation instructions. The records of 
assembly/installation including date of installation, 
name of supplier, period of warranty/guarantee, 
functionality/fitness, etc, should be maintained by 
the supervisor. 


9.4 Equipment Height 


To provide protection and minimize the probability 
of injury in the event of fall of the participant, the 
type and quality of the playground surfacing 
material should be commensurate to the height of 
the equipment. 


10 ENTRAPMENTS 


As participants are prone to entrapment related 
injuries in the playground, the following measures 
should be taken to minimize such injuries: 


a) Secure the openings in the equipment 
including ladder rungs, posts, and railings; 

b) Ensure that the participants are dressed in 
appropriate attire to avoid entrapment 
because of loose or inappropriate 
clothing/accessories; and 

c) Ensure that they are no loose ropes or loop 
forming materials which may lead to 
accidental strangulation. 


11 INJURY PREVENTION 


11.1 The appropriate precautions in terms of 
preparation, sports gear and discipline should be 
taken to prevent the chances of injury on the 
playground. The precautionary measures given in 
11.2 to 11.8 are recommended. 


11.2 Preparation 


Before participation in any activity, the compliance 
of followings should be ensured by the 
management/designated supervisor: 


a) A voluntary consent or assent should be 
taken from the parent/caregiver and 
records should be maintained; and 

b) Prior to the participation in organized 
sports, physical examination of the 
participant should be done by a qualified 
medical practitioner and records should be 
maintained. 


11.3 Warm Up and Cool Down 
It is recommended to engage: 


a) in general, and/or specific warm up 
activities before every practice and game 
in the presence of supervisor; and 

b) in cool down activity after every practice 
and game. 


11.4 Sports Gear 


It is recommended to use appropriate and properly- 
fitted sports gear to prevent or reduce the severity of 
injuries. A list of sports gear such as helmets, shin 
guards, mouth guards, ankle braces, shoes, etc, 
should be prepared and communicated to the 
participants in advance by the supervisor for each 
physical activity and sport. 


11.5 Compliance of Rules and Regulations 


In order to play a safe game, the rules and 
regulations of the game should be abided by all 
concerned. The supervisor should share the 
applicable rules and regulations to all the participant 
before start of the sports activity. 


11.6 Hydration 


Before and after participation in any activity, the 
compliance of followings should be ensured by the 
supervisor/participants: 


a) Before the start and after any sport or 
physical activity there should be mandatory 
and sufficient water intake; 


b) Mandatory water breaks should be given 
during the practice and the games for the 
participants to stay well-hydrated; and 

c) The supervisor should keep a watch on 
participants for any signs of dehydration 
and other forms of heat illness in the 
participants and take immediate actions. 


11.7 Concussion 


Before and after participation in any activity and 
during game/practice, the compliance of followings 
should be ensured by the supervisor/participant: 


a) Supervisor and participants should be 
aware of the signs and symptoms of a 
concussion for example, headache, blow to 
the head, unconsciousness, dizziness, 
nausea, vomiting, slurring speech, double 
vision, fatigue, temporary memory loss, 
etc; and 

b) Participant(s) with suspected concussion 
should be immediately withdrawn from 
play until evaluated and cleared by a 
medical practitioner. 


11.8 Rest 
The participants should ensure the followings: 


a) Take adequate rest before/after the practice 
and game to avoid injuries; 

b) Have breaks during the practice and game 
as prescribed for each game to recover 
from fatigue; and 

c) Take adequate rest to recover from an 
illness, pain or injury before any practice or 
game as per the advice of a medical 
practitioner. 


12 INJURY MANAGEMENT 


12.1 Prompt and appropriate management of injury 
including first aid and shifting the injured participant 
to a medical centre/hospital/clinic should be ensured 
to minimize the harm. 


12.2 First Aid 


In case of injuries during physical activities or 
sports, the following should be ensured: 


a) Providing first aid in accordance with 
established first aid principles; 

b) Communicating details of the incident to 
appropriate authorities; 

c) Recognizing an emergency and calling for 
help, if required; and 

d) Performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR) by a trained person, if required. 


IS 17923 : 2022 


12.3 First Aid Kit 


The first aid kit should contain at least the following 
items in sufficient quantity: 


a) Analgesic spray; 

b) Antiseptic adhesives/dressings, liquid and 
ointment; 

c) Bronchodilator inhalers; 

d) Packaged sterilized absorbent cotton; 

e) Digital sphygmomanometer (Blood pressure 
measuring apparatus); 

f) Foil space blankets or preferably ambulance 
type blankets to keep players warm when 
injured; 

g) Glucometer; 

h) Ice packs; 

j) Latex or nitrile disposable protective gloves; 

k) Medicines including analgesics, 
antipyretics, antispasmodics, anti-emetics, 
anti-allergic antacids, nitroglycerine and 
aspirin; 

m) Micropore; 

n) Oral rehydration solution (ORS); 

р) Paper writing pad and pencil/pen; 

q) Thermometer, stethoscope and pulse 
oximeter; 

г) Resuscitation face shield or pocket mask for 
rescue breathing; 

s) Roller, crepe and triangular bandages; 

t) Sachet of sugar; 

u) Safety pins; 

v) Surgical scissors; 

w) Splints; 

y) Sterile gauze and trauma type clean 
dressings; and 

z) Torch and tweezers. 


NOTE — Administration of medicines and inhalers 
should preferably be done in consultation with a 
qualified medical practitioner. 


12.4 In addition, the access to the following 
equipment/area for a match or competition should 
be ensured: 


a) First aid room or space; 

b) Stretcher or spine board; 

c) Hot and cold running water; 

d) Ambu bag; 

e) Automated external defibrillator (AED); 

f) First aid manual; 

g) Ice box; 

h) Nebulizers; 

j) Normal saline water; 

k) Player injury record forms (kept inside 
lockable cupboard); and 

m) Portable oxygen cylinder with support 
mask. 


IS 17923 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.3) 
(Informative) 


CHECKLIST FOR MAINTENANCE OF PLAYGROUND AND EQUIPMENT 


A-1 The checklist for maintenance of playground is given below: 


SI No. Maintenance of Playground Yes No Action 
1) Uneven surface 
ii) Water stagnation/blockage 
111) Potholes 
1v) Debris/trash 
v) Sharp/unwanted materials 
vi) Weeds/unwanted vegetation 
vii) Discontinuity of turf 
уш) Deterioration of turf 


A-2 The checklist for maintenance of equipment is given below: 


SI No. Maintenance of Equipment Yes No Action 


1) Protective surfacing under and around the equipment 
ii) Deterioration of surfacing materials of the equipment 
111) Rust, rot, cracks or splinters 
iv) Missing components 


v) Anchoring/loose fastening device of equipment, wherever 
applicable 


vi) Peeling, cracking, chipping, or chalking of paint 
vil) Visible paint chips or accumulation of dust 
viii) Crush and shearing points on exposed moving parts 
1x) Worn out moving parts of equipment 
x) Is the main frame safe and secure 
х1) Are all moving parts in working order 
xü) Is the site clear of litter and dangerous objects? 


xiii) Are the trees free from potential falling deadwood and other 
hazards 


xiv) Is access to the site in good condition and clear of obstruction? 
ху) Are seats and attachments in good condition? 

XVi) Are chains and shackles in good condition? 

XVii) Are all bolts in place and secure? 


хуш) Is the sliding surface secure and free of gaps from side rails? 


IS 17923 : 2022 


SI No. Maintenance of Equipment Yes No Action 
xix) Is the gel-coat surface of fibreglass slides intact and free 
from glass fibre protrusions? 
хх) Have incident records and ће hazard register been reviewed to 
identify hazards? 
xxi) Is the sliding surface clear of obstructions? 
xxii) Are timber posts sound and free of large structural cracks and 
splinters? 
xxiii) Are timber floors and palings stable and free of large cracks 
and splinters? 
xxiv) Are all nail heads flushed with timber? 
xxv) Are all joints and connections firm? 
xxvi) Are chains and ropes secure and in good condition? 
xxvii) Are frames maintaining shape? 
xxviii) Is the sandpit regularly raked, weeded and checked for 
dangerous objects? 
XXIX) Is the sandpit regularly checked and appropriately treated for 
animal fouling? 
XXX) Is the sand replaced or replenished when necessary? 
ххх1) Are borders free of splinters, exposed nails and pins? 
xxxii) Is the sandpit covered when not in use? 
xxxiii) Is the material loosened and levelled with a rake and cleared 
of objects to prevent compaction? 
XXXIV) Is material that gathers under platforms and other structures 
removed and spread to main areas of impact? 
XXXV) Is the material maintained to recommended compacted depth 
depending on fall height? 
XXXVi) Is the grass well maintained? 
xxxvii) Areas free of spiders or other dangerous Insects/animals? 
xxxviii) Other potential risks 


IS 17923 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Health, Fitness and Sports Services Sectional Committee, SSD 05 


Organization 
Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai 


Athletics Federation of India, New Delhi 


All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
New Delhi 

CSIR- Human Resource Development Centre, 
Ghaziabad 

Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Health Services, 
New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
New Delhi 

Dr Lal Path Labs, New Delhi 

Employees State Insurance Corporation 
(ESIC), New Delhi 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry, New Delhi 


Fitness and Sports Sciences Association, 
Gurugram 
Healthcare Sector Skill Council, New Delhi 


Heartfulness Institute, Gurugram 


HSCC (India) Limited, Noida 
Indian Medical Association, New Delhi 


Indian Council of Medical Research, 
New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Health Management and 
Research, Jaipur 

Indian Olympic Association, New Delhi 

Kalam Institute of Health Technology, 
Vishakhapatnam 

Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, New Delhi 

Lakshmibai National College of Physical 
Education, Thiruvananthapuram 


Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Ministry of Ayush, New Delhi 
Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, New Delhi 

National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and 
Healthcare Providers, New Delhi 


10 


Representative(s) 
PROF HARSHAD THAKUR (Chairman) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHTA 
SHRI GOPAL KRISHNAN (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR SHOBHNA CHOUDHARY 


SHRI ANUPAM KAUL 

Ms MANDAKINI PAWAR (Alternate) 
DR VINEET JAIN 

DR AJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR SEEMA KOCHHAR 
DR DEEPAK SAXENA 


DR AMIT BHALLA 

SHRI RAJNEESH PATHAK (Alternate I) 

SHRI SAMIKSHAN MAJUMDAR (Alternate П) 
SHRI GURNIT SINGH DUA 


SHRI SATESH KUMAR SETHURAMAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUSH JAIN 

Ms ANSHU VERMA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANUJ SETYA 

DR RAHUL MEHROTRA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
DR J. A. JAYLAL 

DR К. У. ASOKAN (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR CHEKURI 
SHRI AMIT SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI BINU ASHOKAN 
DR USHA S. NAIR 
DR PRADIP DUTTA (Alternate 1) 
DR S. JAYARAMAN (Alternate II) 
DR DHANANJAYA SABAT 
DR VEDPAL Y ADAV (Alternate) 
DR PRADEEP DUA 
DR ISHWARA N. ACHARYA 
DR GURU DEO (Alternate 1) 
SHRIMATI HIMANI SHOKHAND (Alternate ЇЇ) 
SHRI SIDDHARTHA SANKAR BANERJEE 


DR ATUL MOHAN KOCHHAR 
DR PUNAM BAJAJ (Alternate) 


Organization 


Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, 
New Delhi 

National Skill Development Corporation, New 
Delhi 

Physical Education Foundation of India, 
New Delhi 

Public Health Foundation of India, Gurugram 


Patanjali Yogpeeth, Haridwar 

Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, New 
Delhi 

Sequoia Fitness and Sports Technology Private 
Limited, Gurugram 

Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Sports Authority of India, New Delhi 


School of Planning and Architecture, 
New Delhi 

UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru 

Voluntary Organisation in Interest of 
Consumer Education, New Delhi 

Yoga Certification Board, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17923 : 2022 


Representative(s) 


DR ANIRBAN MALLICK 
DR JAHNAVI DANDE (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TARUN KUMAR 

DR SHARAD KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SANDEEP BHALLA 

MS SHIFALIKA GOENKA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SUJIT PANIGRAHI 


SHRI CHANDRANSHU AWASTHI 

SHRI MAYANK SHARMA (Alternate I) 

SHRI RAJESH KUMAR (Alternate II) 
COL RAJ SINGH BISHNOI 

Ms RACHNA GOVIL (Alternate I) 

DR G. KISHORE (Alternate ЇЇ) 

MS LALITA SHARMA (Alternate III) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
REPRESENTATIVE 


DR ISHWAR V. BASAVARADDI 

MS SOBIKA RAO (Alternate) 
SHRIS. К. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST E/DIRECTOR AND HEAD 
(SSD-II) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENEAL (Ex- 


Officio) 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DHARAMSOTH SANTHOSH 
SCIENTIST C/ DEPUTY DIRECTOR (SERVICE SECTOR DEPARTMENT-I), BIS 


Working group for drafting standard on Physical Activity, Sports and Injury Management — Guidelines for 
Safety in Educational Institutions and Community Sports Academies, SSD 05/WG 01 


Organization 


Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, New Delhi 

CSIR- Human Resource Development Centre, 
Ghaziabad 

Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, 


New Delhi 
Fitness and Sports Sciences Association, Gurugram 
Ministry of Ayush, New Delhi 
Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, New Delhi 
Sequoia Fitness and Sports Technology Private Limited, 
Gurugram 
Services Export Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Sports Authority of India, New Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 


SHRI BINU ASHOKAN (Convenor) 
DR SHOBHNA CHOUDHARY 


MS MANDAKINI PAWAR 
SHRI SAMIKSHAN MAJUMDAR 


DR ANKITA MALHOTRA 
DR PRADEEP DUA 


DR ANIRBAN MALLICK 
SHRI SUJIT PANIGRAHI 


SHRI MAYANK SHARMA 
DR RUPALI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: SSD-II 05 (17442). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


