( Reaffirmed 2012 )

IS : 11884- 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE-RESISTANT BRATTICE SHEETING MADE FROM. UNSUPPORTED PLASTICS
Treated Fabrics Sectional Committee, PCDC 16

Chairman SRRI S. L. GANDHI Flat NO. 232, Narmbada Apartment, Alaknanda, Pocket D, New Delhi Members Representing SARI R. L. ARORA Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SHRI 5. C. BATRA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. T. BASAR Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, Nt w Delhi SIIRI P. K. BASU ( Alternote ) SRRI BASANT KUJ~AR Basant Pran Electric Co Pvt Ltd. Calcutta SARI J. S. NARULA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. L. BEHRANI Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) . LT-COL R. G. WASTRAD ( Alternate I ) SHRI RAJENDER SINQH ( Alternate 1 I ) SHRI D. J. BHARUCH~ Bayer ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. K. CHaTTERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI T. S. BIDDAPA National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI J. K. V.~DODARIA ( Alternate ) DR S. N. CH~KRAVARTY Modi Rubber Ltd, Modipuram SRRI S. K. M~ST_~FI ( Alternate ) SHRI B. DUTTA Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. N. W_~HIE ( Alternate ) SHRI A. G~OSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI N. N. GOYAL Fihreglass Pilkington Ltd, Bombay SHRI G. K. TAEIAR C Alternale ) SHXI 2. S. KAJTJI ' Caprihans India Ltd, Thane SHRI M. K. MAIII. Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI P. L. NAU ( Alternate ) Dn S. P. MATII( Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SHRI J. R. MODI Ahmadabad Textile Industries' Research Association, Ahmadabad SHRI RAMAN M. PATEL Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. L. SHAH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page2 @ Copyright 1987 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Art.

)

IS : 11884 - 1986
( Conlinuedfrom page 1 ) Members Representing

Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI K. R. NARAYANA RAO SHRI GEORQEKURUVILLA ( Allernafe I ) SERI D. K. SETH1( Al&a& II ) East India Rubber Works Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI B. ROY Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI P. P. SEARBXA ' New Delhi SHRI N. K. A~ARWAL ( Altcrnafe ) Varma Industrials Ltd, Bangalore SHRI R. C. TRIVEDI SHRI R. KRISHNA PILLAI ( Altctnatr ) Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi SEBI P. R. VISHWAMBHARAN SHRI K. GOPINATHAMENON ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex:oficio Member ) SHRI M. S. SAXENA, Director ( P & C ) Secretary SHRI DILEEP KTJHAR Assistant Director ( P & C ), BIS

Protective

Fabrics

for Mining

Industry

Subcommittee,

PCDC 16 : 3

Convener SHRI K. M. KAISER Members SHRI S. M. VH~aa.a( Alternate to Shri K. M. Kaiser ) Swastik Mining Industries, Dhanbad SHRI G. S. AGAR~ALLA SHRI R. P. AQARWALLA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI M. K. BARDRAN SHRI B. C. SEN ( Alternate ) Basant Pran Electric Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI BASANT KTIMAR SERI J. S. NAHULA ( Alternate ) Central Mine Planning & Design Institute, Ranchi DR P. K. CHAERAVARTY Eastern Coalfields Ltd, Burdwan SHRI B. M. GHORAI GENERALMANAQER ( SAFETY ) ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOR OF MINES Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SAFETY DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF MIXES SAFETY ( Alternate j Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad SHRI S. V. KR&HNAZXIJ~TAY IndigloJ,",`,' Industries' Research Association, SHRI S. P. MONDAL Sam M. N. SHAH DR A. Btsu ( Alternate ) SHRI K. L. SHAH F. Hatley & Co, Calcutta Ltd, Bombay Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dbanbad

Bhor Industries

2

IS : 11884- 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE-RESISTANT BRATTICE SHEETING MADE FRO&I UNSUPPORTED PLASTICS
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 July 1986, after the draft finalized by the Treated Fabrics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council.

0.2 The Committee had originally formulated IS : 4355-1977" for the requirements of fire-resistant brattice cloth. However, due to reported complaints from some mine users of this material, emitting ammonia under certain conditions causing irritation, it was decided to prepare an alternate specification. Accordingly, brattice sheeting made from unsupported thermo-plastics which is increasingly being used for coursing air around underground working faces in mines, was considered a suitable substitute. Since Directorate General of Mines Safety is increasingly approving this material, an alternate specification for fire-resistant brattice sheeting made from unsupported plastics has been formulated. 0.3 This standard is essentially based on IS : 2076-1981) for the Other requirements considered necesphysico-chemical characteristics. sary for use of PVC sheeting as brattice cloth, have been included in this standard. 0.4 Two tests for fire resistance requirement have been prescribed in this standard, namely, Barthel burner test and interim flame test. It has been found that certain types of fire-resistant brattice sheeting pass As in the mines both condione of the tests but may fail in the other. tions might exist, the sheeting is, therefore, required to pass both, Barthel burner test and interim flame test. 0.5 The Committee felt the need for inclusion of a requirement for antistatic property specially in those cases where surface printing is done. However, in the absence of necessary test method and data, the Committee decided to include the same in due course as and when the details in this regard are available. *Specification for fire-resistant brattice cloth (Jirst reuision). tSpecitication for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting (Jrst revision ). 3

IS :11884-

1986
assistance has been derived from

0.6 In the preparation of this specification, from the following publication: NCB Specification No. unsupported plastics.

440/1964 Brattice sheeting made National Coal Board, London.

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordThe number of significant places retained in ance with IS : 2-1960*. the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of sampling and test for brattice sheeting made from unsupported plastics for use in the coursing of air in mines.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For
1964?

the purpose shall apply.

of this standard,

the definitions

given in IS : 2828-

3. REQUIREMENTS

3.1 General
materials

Requirements
plastic freely

3.1.1 The

sheeting shall be manufactured from suitable and shall have a finished surface free from stickiness. shall unroll

3.1.2 The sheeting shall be supplied in rolls which and retain flexibility during storage and in use.

3.1.3 The material shall not contain such concentrations as to introduce any significant danger of dermatitis.

of substances

3.2 Thickness - The minimum thickness of sheeting shall be 0'3 mm. The value of the gravimetric thickness of the sample, determined in accordance with the method given in 4.2 of IS : 2076-1981: and computed to the nearest 0.001 mm, shall not differ from the nominal thickness by more than & 7.5 percent. 3.3 Tolerance on Width - Unless otherwise agreed, the negative tolerance on nominal width of brattice sheeting at any point shall not be less than one percent.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). *Glossary of terms used in the plastic industry. ZSpecification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting (Jirsl revision ).

4

IS : 11884- 1986 Eyelets made of non-light nietal alloys shall be fixed at an interval not exceeding 0.45 m. These eyelets shall be made of brass or thermoplastic material in order to have anti-rust property.
3.4
NOTE Eyelets made of aluminium and other light metal alloys shall not be used.

3.5 Performance

Requirements

3.5.1 Breaking Load and Elongation at Break - The longitudinal and transverse breaking loads and elongation at break of the brattice sheeting when tested in accordance with the method described in 4.3 of IS : 20761981* shall be not less than 175 kg/cm and longitudinal and transverse elongation at break not less than 250 percent.

3.5.2 Tear Strength - The tear strength in longitudinal and transverse directions of the brattice sheeting when tested in accordance with the method described in 4.4 of IS : 2076-1981* shall be not less than 32 kg/cm. 3.5.3 Fire Resistauce
3.5.3.1 The brattice sheeting shall fulfil the following conditions when tested according to the method prescribed in Appendix A of IS : 4355-19757. However, the leaching operation prior to the resistance test as prescribed in A-2.1.1 of Appendix A of IS : 4355-1977t may be omitted:

4
b)

4

The flame or the glow of the material at any time during the test shall not extend above the marker wire. After the burner flame has been removed, neither the mean persistence time of the flame on 6 test pieces shall exceed 3 seconds nor the persistence time of the flame on any one test piece shall exceed 10 seconds. After the burner flame has been removed, neither the mean persistence time of the glow on 6 test pieces shall exceed 10 seconds nor the persistence time of glow on any one test piece shall exceed 30 seconds.

3.5.3.2 The brattice sheeting shall also fulfil the following conditions when tested in accordance with method prescribed in Appendix A of this standard: a) After the spirit lamp has been removed, neither the mean persistence time of the flame on 6 test pieces shall exceed 6 seconds nor the persistence time of the flame on any one test piece shall exceed 12 seconds.
*Specification tspecification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting (Jirst revision ). for fire-resistant brattice cloth (first revision ).

5

IS:11884

-1986

b) After the spirit lamp has been removed, neither the mean persistence time of the glow on 6 test pieces shall exceed 10 seconds nor the persistence time of the glow on any one test piece shall exceed 30 seconds. 3.5.4 Electrical Resistance Test of 1s : 4355-1977f , .the electrical not exceed 3 x 10s ohms. 3.5.4.1 The required incorporation of suitable not by surface treatment. 4. PACKING AND When tested in accordance with resistance of the plastic sheeting resistance ingradients shall be achieved in the composition 3.4.5 shall by and

electrical antistatic

MARKING be securely packed so as to ensure its safe

4.1 The material transportation.

shall

4.2 Each roll of material shall be indelibly marked with the following information at an interval not exceeding 3 m throughout the roll: a) Manufacturer's b) Length d) Month 4.2.1 Each name and trade-mark, per square if any; metre; and Mark. and width of the material sheeting and year of manufacture. roll may also be marked with the Standard in metres;

c) Mass of the plastic

NOTE - The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

5. SAMPLING 5.1 For testing, a full width representative sample of sheeting, sufficient for carrying out tests shall be taken, marking the longitudinal direction on the sample. The sample shall be preserved, rolled on a core of adequate diameter, away from any other plastics material that may cause contamination. 5.2 In any consignment, all the rolls of unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting of the same type, colour and finish shall be grouped together and each group shall constitute a lot ( roll is normally about 50 metre length of the sheeting ).
*Specification for fire-resistant brattice cloth (Jirst reuision ).

6

IS : 11884 - 1986
5.3 The conformity of the lot to the requirements of this specification The number of rolls to be shall be ascertained for each lot separately. selected at random for this purpose shall be in accordance with Table 1.
TABLE
LOTSIZE N !I) -

1

SCALE

OF SAMPLING No. OF RoLLsTOBE
SELECTED n (2)

up to 100 101 to 500
501 and above

1
2 3

5.4 The rolls shall be selected at random and to ensure randomness selection, the following procedure is recommended for use: Arrange all the rolls in the ing from any one, count them where r is the integral part of number of rolls to be selected be withdrawn till the requisite

of

lot in a systematic manner and startas 1,2,. . . etc, up to I and so on, X/n ( N being'the lot size and n the ). Every rth rolls thus counted shall number of rolls is obtained.

5.5 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the requirements for various characteristics referred in this specification if for each of the characteristics, the test results on all the individual specimens are found to be within limits of the specification. 5.6 If the specimen, taken from the sample, fails in one or more tests, For this purpose, two more each such test shall be repeated twice. samples shall be taken from the roll, and the specimens cut from each of them so that duplicate tests may be conducted in respect of each If all the specimens pass the duplicate tests, the lot shall be failure. declared conforming to the specification, otherwise not. 6. TEST

METHODS
oe carried out as prescribed in 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 of 3.4.5 and Appendix A of IS : 4355-1977t and A of this standard.

6.1 Tests shall IS : 2076-1981*,
Appendix

*Specification for unsupported flexible polyvinyl chloride sheeting (&t TSpecification for fire-resistant brattice cloth (Jirst revision ). 7

revision ).

IS : 11884- 1986

APPENDIX

A
.

( Clauses 3.5.3.1, 3.5.3.2 und 6.1 >
FIRE A-I. RESISTANCE TEST

APPARATUS

*

A-l.1 A methylated

spirit lamp of capacity 125 ml. The spirit lamp shall be supplied with 95 percent absolute alcohol and 5 percent methanol, and the fuel level shall be half the capacity of the lamp.

A-1.1.1 The visible flame shall be 32 mm high when measured from the top of the ceramic/metallic wick holder to the top of the flame.
A-I.2 A suitable stand consisting of a framework and clamps to hold the sample in the required position during the test as shown in Fig. 1.

t 13
STAND\

CERAMIC WICK HOLDER

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 1

APPARATUS USED FOR THE INTERIM FLAME TEST 8

IS : 11884 - 1986 A-I.3 A draught-free out the test. A-2. CONDITIONING cabinet in which the test stand is placed to carry OF TEST SPECIMENS

A-2.1 Each of the six test pieces, 76 x 356 mm in size, shall in turn be bent around a fixed 5 mm diameter rod as shown at (a) in Fig. 2. Each test piece shall be pulled from one end to the other so that it is in the position shown at (b) in Fig. 2 and then back to the position shown at (a) in Fig. 2. During the whole operation, the test piece shall be in contact with 180" of the surface of the rod. The cycle of two movements shall then be repeated ten times for each test piece. Each test piece shall then be turned over and the procedure repeated to complete IO cycles. All loose material shall then be shaken off the test pieces.

FIG. 2

METHOD OF CONDITIONING TEST SPECIMENS

A-3. TEST

CONDITIONS cabinet,

A-3.1 The test shall be made in subdued light in a draught-free A-4. PROCEDURE

A-4.1 Six test pieces, each 76 mm wide and 356 mm long, immediately after conditioning in accordance with A-2, shall be suspended from the clamp so that they may hang vertically with their lower ends held by horizontal clamps, one on each side in such a way as to prevent movement of the test pieces during the application of the flame. The lower edge of the clamps shall coincide with the lower edge of the test piece and shall overlap the edges by 13 mm. 9

A-4.2 The flame is positioned so that the top of the ceramic metallic wick holder is 19 mm below the middle of the lower edge of the test piece. A-4.3 Each test piece shall be held in the flame for 10 seconds and lamp and flame shall then be withdrawn clear of the test piece. . the

10

