NAT HA IS 15917 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Mia da HATO HOT HT 
feared IR cara — ofa far 


( TET IRIETTT ) 


Building Design and Erection Using 
Mixed/Composite Construction — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.040.01 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 6 


Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee, CED 51 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


Systems building and mixed/composite building construction, popularly referred to as pre-engineered building 
(PEB) construction, is now gaining importance for use in the country. Two aspects of such construction, specifically 
to be borne in mind, are the system to be adopted for the different categories of buildings and the sizes of their 
components. Here the principle of modular coordination is of value and its use is recommended. 


Since the aim of such an approach is to effect economy, improvement in quality and speed in construction, the 
selection of proper materials for mixed/composite construction, is also an important factor in the popularization of 
this technique. The use of locally available materials with required characteristics and those materials which, due 
to their innate characteristics such as light-weight, easy workability, thermal insulation and non-combustibility, 
etc, effect economy and improved quality, may also be tried. 

It is possible to achieve or evolve aesthetically satisfying designs using mixed and composite constructions. 
A careful and judicious handling of materials and use of finishes on such a building can help the designer a 
great deal in ensuring that the appearance of the building is aesthetically appealing. The purpose of finishes 
and architectural treatment is not only to give such buildings an individual character but also to effect better 
performance and greater user satisfaction. 


This standard was first published in 2010 to provide necessary guidance for design and erection of systems 
building and mixed/composite building construction. 


This revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate various changes found necessary as a result of 
experience gained and technological advances made in the field of prefabricated construction. 


In this revision of the standard, following major modifications have been incorporated: 
a) Definitions of some existing terminologies have been modified, wherever required; 
b) Aspects relevant to devising systems and structural schemes, have been updated; 
c) Provision for precast filigree slab panel has been added; 
d) Design considerations have been reviewed and modified based on latest thinking and practices; and 


e) Various provisions updated in IS 15916 : 2020 “Building design and erection using prefabricated 
concrete — Code of practice (first revision)’, such as those on joints, progressive collapse, tests of 
components, etc, have been referred. 


In this standard, an attempt has been made to prescribe general requirements applicable to all valid existing 
systems and mixed/composite constructions as also to accommodate any new system introduced in the country 
in future. 


The design of systems building and mixed/composite building shall include provision for all installations of 
services and their required piping, wiring and accessories to be installed in the buildings. 


A separate Indian Standard, IS 15916 : 2020 ‘Building design and erection using prefabricated concrete — Code 
of practice (first revision)’ exists, for prefabricated concrete building design and erection. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this Subsection. 


IS 15917 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


BUILDING DESIGN AND ERECTION USING 
MIXED /COMPOSITE CONSTRUCTION — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 

This standard covers recommendations regarding 
modular planning, component sizes, joints, 
manufacture, storage, transport and erection of 


prefabricated elements for use in buildings and such 
related requirements for systems building and mixed/ 
composite construction. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this Standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Authority Having Jurisdiction — The Authority 
which has been created by a statute and which, for the 
purpose of administering the standard, may authorize 
a committee or an official or an agency to act on its 
behalf, hereinafter called the ‘Authority’. 


3.2 Basic Module — The fundamental module used in 

modular coordination, the size of which is selected for 

general application to building and its components. 
NOTE — The value of the basic module has been chosen 


as 100 mm for the maximum flexibility and convenience. The 
symbol for the basic module is M. 


3.3 Cellular Concrete — The material consisting of 
an inorganic binder (such as, lime or cement or both) in 
combination with a finely ground material containing 
siliceous acid (such as, sand), gas generating material 
(for example, aluminium powder), water and harmless 
additives (optional); and steam cured under pressure in 
autoclaves. 


3.4 Component — A building product formed as a 
distinct unit having specified sizes in three dimensions. 


3.5 Composite/Mixed Construction — Construction 
involving two or more different kinds of components, 
such as prefabricated structural units of steel, 
prestressed concrete or reinforced concrete and cast 
in-situ concrete, ferrocement, timber, masonry in 
brickwork and blockwork, glass and glazing connected 
together, in such a manner that they act integrally. 


3.6 Increments — Difference between two 
homologous dimensions of components of successive 
sizes. 


3.7 Module — A unit of size used in dimensional 
coordination. 


3.8 Modular Coordination — Dimensional 
coordination employing the basic module or a 
multimodule. 

NOTE — The purposes of modular coordination are: 

a) To reduce the variety of component sizes produced, and 


b) To allow the building designer greater flexibility in the 
arrangement of components. 


3.9 Modular Grid — A rectangular coordinate 
reference system in which the distance between 
consecutive lines is the basic module or a multimodule. 
This multimodule may differ for each of the three 
orthogonal dimensions of the grid, two in plan and one 
in vertical direction. 


3.10 Multimodule — A module whose size is a selected 
multiple of the basic module. 


3.11 Prefabricate — To fabricate components or 
assembled units (on site or off site) prior to erection or 
installation in a building. 


3.12 Prefabricated Building — The partly/fully 
assembled and erected building, of which the structural 
parts consist of prefabricated individual units or 
assemblies using ordinary or controlled materials, 
including service facilities, and in which the service 
equipment may be either prefabricated or constructed 
in-situ. 


3.13 Sandwich Panels — Panels made by sandwiching 
a layer of insulation material between two outer layers 
of hard durable materials like steel, dense concrete, 


IS 15917 : 2020 


plastic, cement based sheet, ceramic, ferrocement, etc. 
The hard coverings on two outer faces may be of same 
or different materials. The three layers may or may not 
be bonded with each other to behave as a composite 
panel. 


3.14 Self-Compacting Concrete — Concrete that is 
able to flow under its own weight and completely fill 
the voids with in the formwork, even in the presence 
of dense reinforcement without any vibration, whilst 
maintaining homogeneity without segregation. 


3.15 Shear Connectors — Structural elements, such 
as anchors, studs, channels, loops and spirals, intended 
to transmit the shear between the prefabricated member 
and the cast in-situ concrete and also to prevent 
separation at the interface. 


3.16 System — The method of construction of 
buildings with certain order and discipline and 
repetitive operations using the prefabricated 
components, tunnel form or engineered shuttering, 
where the work is organized and follows a defined 
procedure. 


3.17 Unit — Building material formed as a simple 
article with all three dimensions specified, complete 
in itself but intended to be part of a compound unit or 
complete building. Examples are brick, block, floor 
panel, wall panel, beams,columns, etc. 


4 MATERIALS, PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 


4.1 Materials 


4.1.1 IS 15916 shall be referred for requirements 
of materials and also for the characteristics to be 
considered in their selection. 


4.1.2 The materials used in prefabricated components 
may be many and the modern trend is to use concrete, 
ferrocement, steel, treated timber, aluminium, cellular 
concrete, light weight concrete, ceramic products, etc. 
However, this standard pertains to mixed/composite 
construction using such materials. 


4.2 Plans and Specifications 
This shall be in accordance with IS 15916. 


5 MODULAR COORDINATION, 
ARCHITECTURAL TREATMENT AND 
FINISHES 


5.1 Modular Coordination 
This shall be in accordance with IS 15916. 


5.2 Architectural Treatment and Finishes 
This shall be in accordance with IS 15916. 


6 COMPONENTS 


6.1 The preferred dimensions of precast elements used 
and their casting tolerances shall be in accordance with 
IS 15916. 


6.2 The permissible tolerances of timber used shall be 
in accordance with IS 883. 


6.3 For permissible tolerances of steel and masonry, 
reference may be made to relevant Indian Standards. 


7 FORMWORK SYSTEMS 


The formwork systems which are utilized in buildings 
shall be as given in 7.1 to 7.5. 


7.1 Tunnel Form 


Thisisa system which casts walls and slab monolithically 
in a single pour of concrete. Fagade walls are precast 
or of block masonry to enable removal of tunnel form. 
All components of the formwork are made up of steel. 
This produces very rapid construction in a building 
where the plans are of modular nature suitable for this 
technology. Accelerated curing, if required, is possible 
enabling early stripping of formwork. 


7.2 Slip Form 


Slip form is a continuously moving form at such a speed 
that the concrete when exposed has already achieved 
enough strength to support the vertical pressure from 
concrete still in the form as well as to withstand 
nominal lateral forces. Slipform may be classified as 
straight slipform, tapering slipform and slipform for 
special applications. Construction of lift cores and 
stairwell using slipform technique comes under special 
applications because of their complex sizes, shapes and 
loads to be lifted along with the slipform like walkway 
truss, etc, which is essential for construction. This 
system uses hydraulic jacks avoiding crane for lifting 
of assembly during construction operation. This system 
facilitates rapid construction and continual casting, 
creating a monolithic structure thereby avoiding 
construction joints. 


7.3 Aluminium Formwork 


This system of formwork uses modular aluminium 
panels, which are light and rust free, in both sheathing 
and framework. It may be used for a broad range of 
applications from wall to slab construction panels to 
more complicated structures involving bay windows, 
stairs and hoods. Every component is light enough 
to be handled easily thereby minimizing the need for 
heavy lifting equipment. 


7.4 Large Panel Shuttering System 


This is a system, which gives an advantage of combining 
speed and quality of construction. The vertical load 


carrying members are made of steel whereas the 
horizontal members are of plywood inserted into two 
wooden beams. Thereby forming a web flange. All the 
formwork and support systems shall be designed for 
the loads coming during the actual execution stage. 


7.5 Other/New Systems 


Any other/new system may be used for systems building 
after due examination and approval by the Authority. 


8 SYSTEM AND STRUCTURAL SCHEMES 


8.1 Several schemes are possible, with certain 
constraints, using the same set of components. The 
degree of flexibility varies from system to system. 
However, in all the systems there is a certain order and 
discipline. 
8.2 The following aspects, among others, are to be 
considered in devising a system: 

a) Effective utilization of spaces; 

b) Straight and simple walling scheme; 

c) Limited sizes and numbers of components; 

d) Limited opening in bearing walls; 

e) Regulated locations of partitions; 

f) Standardized service and stair units; 


g) Limited sizes of doors and windows with regulated 
positions; 


h) Structural integrity and efficiency; 

j) Suitability for adoption in low and high rise 
building; 

k) Ease of manufacturing, storing and transporting; 

m) Speed and ease of erection; 

n) Optimization of available handling equipment; 

p) Simple jointing system; and 

q) Suitable for providing conduit/pipe inserts in 
components. 


8.3 Systems for Mixed/Composite Construction 


The system of mixed/composite construction depends 
on extent of the use of prefabricated components, their 
materials, sizes and the technique adopted for their 
manufacture and use in building. 


8.3.1 Combinations of System Components for Mixed/ 
Composite Construction 


The following combinations may be used in mixed/ 
composite construction: 


a) Structural steel work and timber roofs on precast 
frames; 


b) Precast floors onto steel and concrete beams, and 
masonry walls; 


c) Profiled metal decking on precast beams; 


IS 15917 : 2020 


d) Precast frames onto cast in-situ foundations, 
retaining walls, etc; 


e) Precast frames stabilized by masonry walls, steel 
bracing, etc; 


f) Precast cladding in steel or cast in-situ frames and 
vice-versa; 


g) Glass curtain walling, stone cladding or metal 
sheeting onto precast concrete frames, etc; and 


h) Reinforced concrete and structural steel as 
composite columns and beams. 


8.3.1.1 Precast concrete may be combined with cast 
in-situ concrete, often termed hybrid construction. Cast 
in-situ is mostly used to form homogenous connections 
between precast elements and provide a structural 
topping for horizontal diaphragm action. In other cases, 
it is used to form the foundations and sub-structure to 
the building. 


8.3.1.2 Structural steel work is largely used in long 
span prestressed concrete floors supported on rolled 
and prefabricated steel beams and also as steel roof 
trusses supported on concrete columns. 


8.3.1.3 Timber may be used as long span glue-laminated 
beams and rafters, with precast concrete. Precast floors 
may be used in timber frame construction. Similarly, 
timber frames with precast elements shall be used as a 
building system. 


8.3.1.4 Brick and block masonry may be combined 
with precast concrete structures and floors. The most 
common combination is to use prestressed floors on 
load bearing walls. 
NOTE — Any prefabricated floor system covered under other 
Indian Standards, for example, reinforced concrete plank 
system and speed floor system may be combined with load 
bearing masonry walls/insulating concrete form (ICF) walls/ 
precast large reinforced concrete wall panels/precast or cast 
in-situ reinforced concrete column-beam frames provided 
overall structural design safety, stability and integrity for 
composite structure is ensured in accordance with this standard 
and other safety standards, such as IS 1893 (Part 1), IS 4326, 
IS 13920 including fire safety and safety against progressive 
collapse as per provisions of respective Indian Standards, such 
as IS 1641, IS 1642, IS 456, IS 800 and IS 15916. 


8.3.1.5 Filigree slab 


Precast filigree slab panel as per IS 15916 may also be 
used. 


9 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


9.1 The mixed/composite structures shall be analyzed 
appropriately and the joints in them designed to take 
the forces of an equivalent discrete system. Resistance 
to horizontal loading shall be provided by placing 
beams, walls and/or bracings in two directions at right 
angles or otherwise. The individual components shall 


IS 15917 : 2020 


be designed, taking into consideration appropriate end 
conditions and loads at various stages of construction. 
The components of the structure shall be designed 
for loads in accordance with IS 875 (Parts 1 to 5) and 
IS 1893 (Part 1). In addition, members shall be designed 
for handling, erection and impact loads that may be 
expected during handling and erection. 


9.2 For mixed and composite construction, the 
following shall be considered: 


a) Positions of stability cores, walls, bracing, 
etc — In high rise buildings, the most popular 
method is a central core constructed several 
storeys ahead of the framework. The core could 
be built using precast concrete panels, cast 
in-situ walls, steel cross bracing or precast 
concrete diagonal bracing. 


b) Maturity of connections — Cast in-situ grouted 
joints need temporary propping until desired 
design strength is achieved unless combined 
mechanical connections are also used. The overall 
construction sequence should be planned ahead 
of time carefully as per the design requirements. 
The design of temporary bracing system using key 
components should be looked at critically. 

c) Availability and/or positioning of equipments 
to transport and erect components — The size 
and weight of the various components shall be 
organized to make optimum use of crane capacity, 
for example, the lightest units farthest from the 
operating zone. 


d) Erection safety and speed of construction, with 
attention to cast in-situ concreting sequences — 
This is particularly important where fixing gangs 
are unaccustomed to working with different 
materials. 


e 


wm 


Tolerances for economical construction — 
This is particularly important where different 
manufacturers are producing components in 
different materials. 


9.3 Other design considerations and safety requirements 
against progressive collapse shall be in accordance 
with IS 15916. 


10 JOINTS 
Design of joints shall be in accordance with IS 15916. 


11 TESTS FOR COMPONENTS/STRUCTURES 


Sampling procedure, testing on individual components 
and load testing of structure shall be in accordance with 
IS 15916. 


12 ERECTION 


12.1 Manufacture, Storage, Transport and Erection 


The requirements relating to manufacture, storage, 
transport and erection of precast concrete elements 
shall be in accordance with IS 15916, including 
the requirements applicable to mixed/composite 
constructions given therein. 


12.2 Decking 


Construction practices relating to decking shall be as 
given in Annex B. 


12.3 Concreting on Decking 


Concreting on decking shall be carried out in 
accordance with Annex C. 


13 EQUIPMENT 


The requirements relating to equipment used in the 
precast concrete construction shall be in accordance 
with IS 15916. 


14 PREFABRICATED STRUCTURAL UNITS 


For the design and construction of composite 
structures made up of prefabricated structural units 
and cast in-situ concrete, reference may be made to 
IS 3935. 


For design and construction of precast reinforced and 
prestressed concrete triangulated trusses, reference 
may be made to IS 3201. 


For design and construction of floors and roofs using 
various precast units, reference may be made to 
IS 6332, IS 10297, IS 10505, IS 13994, IS 14142, 
IS 14215 and IS 14242. 


For construction with large panel prefabricates, 
reference may be made to IS 11447. 


For construction of floors and roofs with joists 
and filler blocks, reference may be made to IS 6061 
(Parts 1 and 2). 


IS No. 


456 : 2000 
800 : 2007 


875 


(Part 1) : 1987 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 


883 : 1987 


1641 : 2013 


1642 : 2013 


1893 
(Part 1) : 2016 
3935 : 1966 


3201 : 1988 


4326 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


IS 15917 : 2020 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


General construction in steel — 
Code of practice (third revision) 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures 


Dead loads — Unit weights of 
building materials and stored 
materials (second revision) 


Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 
Snow loads (second revision) 


Special loads and load 
combinations (second revision) 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) 
for buildings and structures: 
Part 5 Special loads and load 
combinations (second revision) 


Fire and safety of buildings 
(general): General principles of 
fire grading and classification — 
Code of practice (second revision) 


Fire and safety of buildings 
(general): Details of 
construction — Code of practice 
(second revision) 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures 


Part 1 General provisions and 
buildings (sixth revision) 

Code of practice for composite 
construction 


Criteria for the design and 
construction of precast — Trusses 
and purlins (first revision) 


Earthquake resistant design and 
construction of buildings — Code 
of practice (third revision) 


IS No. 


6332 : 1984 


6061 


(Part 1) : 1971 
(Part 2) : 1981 


10297 : 1982 


10505 : 1983 


11447 : 1985 


13920 : 2016 


13994 : 1994 


14142 : 1994 


14215 : 1994 


14242:1994 


15916 : 2020 


Title 


Code of practice for construction 
of floor and roofs using precast 
doubly-curved shell units 
(first revision) 


Code of practice for construction 
of floor and roof with joists and 
filler blocks 


With hollow concrete filler blocks 


With hollow clay filler blocks 
(first revision) 


Code of practice for design 
and construction of floors and 
roofs using precast reinforced/ 
prestressed concrete ribbed or 
cored units 


Code of practice for construction 
of floors and roofs using precast 
reinforced concrete waffle units 


Code of practice for construction 
with large panel prefabricates 


Ductile design and detailing of 
reinforced concrete structures 
subjected to seismic forces — 
Code of practice (first revision) 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of floor and roof with 
precast reinforced concrete planks 
and RC joists 


Code of practice for design 
and construction of floors and 
roofs with prefabricated brick 
panel 


Code of practice for construction 
of floor and roof with RC channel 
units 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of roof with L-panel 
units 


Building design and erection using 
prefabricated concrete — Code of 
practice (first revision) 


IS 15917 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 12.2 ) 


CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE FOR DECKING 


B-1 RECEIVING, STORING AND LIFTING THE 
DECKING 


B-1.1 Receiving Decking 


Decking is packed by the manufacturer into bundles 
of up to 24 sheets, and the sheets are normally 
secured with metal banding. Each bundle may be up 
to 1 m wide (the width of a single sheet) by 750 mm 
deep, and may weigh up to 2.5 t, depending on sheet 
length. Loads are normally delivered by articulated 
vehicles approximately 16 m long with a maximum 
gross mass of up to 40 t, and a turning circle of 
approximately 19 m. It shall be ensured that there 
is suitable access and appropriate standing and off- 
loading areas. 


Each bundle will be given an identification tag by the 
manufacturer. The information on each tag shall be 
checked immediately upon arrival, to prevent incorrect 
sheets being used, or unnecessary delays if changes 
are necessary. In particular, the stated sheet thickness 
shall be checked against the requirement specified on 
the drawings, and a visual inspection shall be made to 
ensure that there is no damage. 


The bundles shall be lifted from the vehicle. Bundles 
shall never be off-loaded by tipping, dragging, dropping 
or other improvised means. 


B-1.2 Storing of Decking 


The decking shall not be delivered more than one month 
before its anticipated use, as it may be vulnerable to 
abuse and damage if stored for longer periods on site. 
If it is not for immediate use, the decking shall be 
stored on the steel frame. If this is not possible, it shall 
be located in an area where it will not be contaminated 
by site traffic, and placed on bearers, which provide 
a gentle slope to the bundle. This will allow any 
condensation or rain to drain and a free flow of air 
around the bundle. Bundles shall not be stacked more 
than 4 m high, and no other materials shall be stored on 
top of them. Bearers shall be placed between bundles, 
and positioned to prevent bending of the sheets. 


B-1.3 Lifting and Positioning the Decking 


The support steelwork shall be prepared to receive 
the decking before lifting the bundles onto it. The top 
surface of the underlying beams shall be reasonably 
clean. When through-deck welding of shear studs is 
specified, the tops of the flanges shall be free of primer, 
paint and galvanizing. 


The identification tags shall be used to ensure that 
bundles are positioned on the frame at the correct floor 
level, and in the nominated bay shown on the deck 
layout drawing. The bundles shall be positioned such 
that the interlocking side laps are on the same side. 
This will enable the decking to be laid progressively 
without the need to turn the sheets. The bundles shall 
also be positioned in the correct span orientation, 
and not at 90° to it. Care shall be taken to ensure that 
the bundles are not upside down, particularly with 
trapezoidal profiles. For most trapezoidal decking 
profiles, the embossments shall be oriented so that they 
project upwards. 


Care is needed when lifting the decking bundles, 
protected chain slings are recommended for the same. 
Unprotected chain slings can damage the bundle 
during lifting. When synthetic slings are used there is 
a risk of the severing them on the edges of the decking 
sheets. 


If timber packers are used, they shall be secured to 
the bundle before lifting so that when the slings are 
released they do not fall to the ground (with potentially 
disastrous results). Bundles shall never be lifted using 
metal banding. 


B-2 DECK INSTALLATION 


B-2.1 Placement of Decking 


Breaking open the bundles and installing the 
decking shall be done only when all the sheets can be 
positioned and secured. The decking layout drawing 
shall also be checked to ensure that any temporary 
support that need to be in position prior to deck laying, 
is in place. 


Access for installation may normally be achieved using 
ladders connected to the steel frame. Once the laying 
out the sheets is started by erectors, they shall create 
working platform by securely fixing the decking as 
they progress. 


The laying of sheets shall begin at the locations 
indicated on the decking layout drawings. These 
would normally be at the corner of the building at 
each level, to reduce the number of ‘leading edges’, 
that is unprotected edges where the decking is being 
laid. When the bundles have been properly positioned, 
as provided above, there shall be no need to turn the 
sheets manually, and there shall be no doubt which way 
up the sheet shall be fixed. 


Individual sheets shall be slid into place and, where 
possible, fixed to the steelwork before moving onto the 
next sheet. This will minimize the risk of an accident 
occurring as a result of movement of a sheet when it 
is being used as a platform. However, for setting-out 
purposes, it may be necessary to lay out an entire bay 
using a minimum number of temporary fixings before 
fully securing the sheets later. 


Sheets shall be positioned to provide a minimum 
bearing of 50 mm on the steel support beams. The ends 
of adjacent sheets shall be butted together. A gap of up 
to 5 mm is generally considered not to allow excessive 
seepage, but, if necessary, the ends of the sheets may be 
taped together. When end gaps are greater than 5 mm, 
it is normally sufficient to seal them with an expanding 
foam filler. The longitudinal edges shall be overlapped, 
to minimize concrete seepage along the seams. 
Although not normally required, seam fixings may be 
necessary in some circumstances. Sheets projecting 
freely more than 600 mm shall be avoided. 


If necessary, sheets shall be cut using a grinder or a 
nibbler. However, field cutting shall be kept to a 
minimum and shall only be necessary where a column 
or other obstruction interrupts the decking. Gaps 
adjacent to the webs of columns shall be filled in with 
off-cuts or thin strips of steel. Decking sheets shown as 
continuous on the decking layout drawing shall never 
be cut into more than one length. Also, sheets shall 


IS 15917 : 2020 


never be severed at the location of a temporary support, 
and the decking shall never be fastened to a temporary 
support. 


As the work progresses, scraps and off-cuts shall be 
disposed of in a skip placed alongside the appropriate 
level of working. The skip shall be positioned carefully 
over a support beam to avoid overloading the decking. 
If a skip is not available, scraps shall be gathered for 
collection as soon as possible. Partially used bundles 
shall be secured, to avoid individual sheets moving in 
strong winds. 


B-2.2 Fixing of Decking 


Decking sheets shall be fixed to the top of the 
supporting structure. All fixings shall be made 
through the troughs in the decking. Fixings shall be 
at approximately 300 mm centres (or in every trough) 
along the end supports, and at 600 mm centres (or in 
alternate troughs) along the internal supports. As an 
absolute minimum, each sheet shall be connected at 
least twice to each permanent support. The number and 
placement of fasteners will normally be given on the 
decking layout drawing. Fixings shall not be made to 
temporary supports. 


The fixings, together with ‘through-deck’ welded studs 
(if present) normally provide lateral restraint to the 
beams during the construction stages. 


IS 15917 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 12.3) 


CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE FOR CONCRETING ON DECKING 


C-1 PLACING CONCRETE 


C-1.1 Preparation 


Prior to beginning work on the decking, guardrails 
shall be in position at all perimeters, internal edges and 
voids. The positions of any props (and back props) shall 
be checked against the details shown on the decking 
layout drawings to ensure that adequate support has 
been provided. 


C-1.2 Cleaning the Decking 


The surface of the decking shall be reasonably free of 
dirt, oil, etc, prior to concreting. 


C-1.3 Construction Joints 


Although there is no technical limitation to the area 
that may be concreted, the usual pour area is up to 
1 000 m?/day. Where the limits of the pour do not 
coincide with permanent slab edges, construction joints 
are used to define the extent of the pour. 


The locations and details of the construction joints may 
have an effect on the cracking. The layout and details of 
the joints shall be determined by the structural designer. 
For example, when brittle bonded finishes are used, the 
relationship between the joints in the concrete and the 
joints in the finishes shall be considered at the outset, 
to reduce the risk of cracking in undesirable locations. 


Where possible, the construction joints shall be 
located close to butt joints in the decking. Where shear 
connectors are used, it is preferable to create the joint 
to one side of the line of the shear connectors, to ensure 
sound concrete around the studs. If the construction 
joint cannot be made near a butt joint, it is suggested 
that no more than one-third of the decking span from 
a butt joint shall be left unpoured. Concreting shall not 
be stopped within a sheet length, because excessive 
deflections may occur when the loads on a continuous 
decking sheet are not balanced on either side of the 
intermediate support beam. 


Stop ends, usually in the form of timber or plastic 
inserts, are used to create the construction joints. As 
with all the joints and ends of the decking, they shall be 
checked for potential grout loss. 


C-1.4 Reinforcement 


All reinforcement shall be properly supported so that 
it does not get displaced during concreting. Plastic 
stools, loops or preformed mesh may be used as 
‘chairs’, but not plastic channels, which can induce 
cracking. Chairs shall be robust. In particular, the 
handling and movement of concrete carrying pipes 


during pumping can cause significant local impacts on 
the reinforcement. 


The reinforcement that has been fixed shall be checked. 
Particular attention shall be given to checking any 
additional bar reinforcement, such as may be needed 
around openings. 


C-1.5 Grout Loss 


The decking joints shall be closely butted and exposed 
ends shall be ‘stopped’ with proprietary filler pieces 
to avoid grout loss. Gaps greater than 5 mm shall be 
sealed. 


C-2 PLACEMENT 


C-2.1 Concrete shall be placed in a way that minimizes 
the permanent deformation of the decking. This is 
particularly important for spans greater than 3 m. When 
concreting is progressed in the same direction as the 
span of the decking (that is, parallel to the decking 
ribs), it shall be placed first over supports where the 
decking is continuous, followed by the mid-span region 
and finally the areas above the end supports. When 
concreting is progressed in a direction perpendicular to 
the decking span (that is transverse to the decking ribs), 
it shall be placed first at the edge where a decking sheet 
is supported by the underlap of an adjacent sheet. This 
helps to ensure that longitudinal seams between panels 
remain closed. 


The concrete shall be well compacted, particularly 
near and around any shear connectors. This may 
be done using a vibrating beam, which may require 
adequate supports at either ends, or an immersion 
needle vibrator. Hand tamping is not recommended 
as a way of compacting the concrete. For slim floors 
with deep decking, or for other partially encased 
beams, a needle vibrator is needed to ensure proper 
concrete flow around the beams, beyond the ends of 
the decking. 


C-2.2 Concrete Pumping 


Pumping may be adopted for both normal and 
lightweight concrete mixes. Flow rates in the order of 
0.5 m? to 1 m* of concrete per minute may be achieved, 
although, clearly, the longer the pump lines and the 
higher the concrete is to be pumped, the slower the 
operation. A pump may normally lift the concrete up to 
30 m. Secondary pumps, placed at intermediate levels, 
may be necessary for higher lifts. 


Pump lines are normally 150 mm in diameter and 
are assembled in segments. As the force exerted at 


bends may be significant, straight line pumping is 
preferred. The lines shall be supported on timber 
blocks at intervals of 2 m to 3 m. Resetting of pump 
lines is required at frequent intervals as the pour 
progresses. This means that the outlet pipe shall 
be moved frequently and carefully so that concrete 
heaping is minimized. A minimum of two operatives 
are necessary for this operation, one to hold and 
manoeuvre the outlet pipe, the other to shovel away 
excess concrete. No more than 4 workmen shall 
be present around the pipe outlet during pumping, 
because of the potential for overloading the decking. 
The concrete shall not be dropped from the outlet 
pipe onto the decking from a height of more than 
about 1 m. 


C-2.3 Skip and Barrow 


Placing concrete from a skip hung from a crane may 
be difficult because of obstructions from beams and 
decking at higher floor levels. However, despite being 


IS 15917 : 2020 


time consuming, it is sometimes efficient to use the 
skip and barrow technique for small infill bays. 


Skips shall have a means of controlling the rate of 
discharge, and shall not be discharged from more 
than 0.5 m above the decking or barrow. When 
discharging into a barrow, the barrow shall be 
supported by thick (about 30 mm) boards covering a 
2m x 2 marea, or by a finished part of the slab. Either 
provision limits impact loads. Barrows shall be run 
over thick boards placed on the mesh, which shall be 
supported locally. 


C-3 FINISHING, CURING AND DRYING 


If power floating is to be carried out, this shall be done 
within 2 h to 3 h of casting. This allows time for the 
concrete to harden sufficiently. 


As the concrete is only exposed on one surface of a 
composite floor, it can take longer than a traditional 
reinforced concrete slab to dry out. 


IS 15917 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Composition of Planning, Housing and Prefabricated Construction Sectional Committee, CED 51 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Isavasyam TC 18/1023, 
B-8/2, Lakshmi Nagar, Kesavadasapuram, 
Pottam P.O, Thiruvananthapuram 695004) 


Army Welfare Housing Organization, New Delhi 
B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Limited, Pune 


Bhardwaj Bhardwaj & Associates (P) Ltd, New Delhi 
Biltech Building Element Ltd, New Delhi 


Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Government Employees Welfare Housing 
Organization, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


City and Industrial Development Corporation of 
Maharashtra Limited, Navi Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Delhi State Industrial & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation, Delhi 

Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, New Delhi 

Department of Science & Technology, Ministry of 
Science & Technology, New Delhi 

Development Alternatives, New Delhi 

Engineering Consultants (India) Ltd, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & 


Development, Almora 


Himachal Pradesh Urban Development Authority, 
Shimla 


10 


Representative(s) 


Suri V. SURESH (Chairman) 


Bric PRANV Dev 
Cor Pankaj MITTAL (Alternate) 


SHRI V. G. JANA 
SHRI YOGESH P. KAJALE (Alternate) 


SHRI A. BHARDWAJ 


SHRI RAJDEEP CHOWDHURY 
Suri D. V. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. P. PITTULE 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 


SHRI BHUPINDER SINGH 
SHRI M. NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MANU AMITABH 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. CHOTALIA 
Dr K. M. Gopsgore (Alternate) 


DR ASHOK KUMAR 
Suri S. K. Neai (Alternate) 


Dr J. PRABHAKAR 
Dr P. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
COMMISSIONER (PLANNING) (Alternate) 


SHRI BHAVESH GUPTA 
SHRI MANISH SAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. MAHAJAN 
SHRI JEET RAM (Alternate) 


Dr DEBAPRIYA DUTTA 


Ms ZEENAT NIAZI 
Dr Soumen Marry (Alternate) 


SHRI SUKHBIR SINGH MANN 
SHRI ADITYA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR DAs 
Suri ANISH KUNDU (Alternate) 


SHRI KIREET KUMAR 
Dr Varun JosHi (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KASHYAP 
SHRI DEWAN C. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Green Building Council, Hyderabad 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineers- in-Chief”s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Ministry of Rural Development, Govt of India, 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority, 
Mumbai 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Housing Bank, New Delhi 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


North Eastern Council, Shillong 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 

Shirish Patel and Associates Consultants Pvt Limited, 
Mumbai 

Tandon Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 

Telangana State Housing Corporation Limited, 

Hyderabad 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 
Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15917 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJESH GOEL 
Suri S. K. Jam (Alternate) 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR 


Suri M. ANAND 

SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR Soma (Alternate) 
Dr S. K. KULSHRESTHA 
SHRI K. P. RAGHAVAN 


SHRI S. KANAPPAN (Alternate I) 
Suri Amit BARDE (Alternate II) 


SHRIMATI RIVOO MAHENDRU 
Suri S. K. Misura (Alternate) 


Suri D. S. NEGI 
SHRI ZILE SINGH DISHODIA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Ms Uma ADUSUMILLI 
SHRI VISHRAN G. PaTIL (Alternate) 


Suri B. P. RANGA Rao 

Suri Amit TRIVEDI (Alternate) 
SHRI K. CHAKRAVARTHY 

SHRI VISHAL GOYAL (Alternate) 
SHRI ALOK MAHAWAR 

SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI P. K. H. SINGH 

Suri Dosa Jini (Alternate) 
Dr P. S. N. Rao 

Dr ARUNA R Grover (Alternate) 


Suri N. M. AJUGIA 
Suri P. S. BADRINARAYAN (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY GUPTA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CH. MALLIKARJUNA RAO 
SHRI P. SRIRAMULU (Alternate) 


SHRI BALBIR VERMA 
Suri Divya Kusu (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Dr VENKATACHALAIAH RAMACHANDRA 
SHRI SRINIVASA GOVINDAPPA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
Scientist ‘D’ (CrviL ENGINEERING), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 51 (12231). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


