**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10810-15 (1984): Methods of Test for Cables, Part 15: 
Hot Deformation Test [ETD 9: Power Cables] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UOC 621-315-221-8:621-315-616-9[678-073]:539-377 ( First Reprint MAY 1 997 ) '^ ' ^^'^" ^^JSj,liL^,iIJS1 



cn 

(0 
O 



tndian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2001) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR CABLES 

PART 15 HOT DEFORMATION TEST 



1- Scope — Covers a method to determine the resistance of thermoplastic insulation and sheath of 
electric cables to deformation when subjected to mechanical pressure at high temperature. 

1.1 This test is not applicable for insulation or sheath of thickness less than 0'4 mm, 

2. Significance — Thermoplastic compounds tend to soften when maintained at high temperature 
over a suflFlcient period. In that condition when they are subjected to mechanical pressure, they 
have a tendency to get deformed at the location of pressure resulting In a reduction in thickness. 
Thermoplastic insulation and sheath of electric cables are subjected to such conditions while they 
are in continuous operation and undue deformation will impair their functional uti^lity. This test is 
therefore carried out to check whether they have sufficient resistance to such deformation. 

3. Terminology — 'Hot deformation* is the change In the physical dimension of a solid material 
when subjected to external mechanical pressure at high temperature, in the hot deformation iest, 
the thickness retained at the point of impression expressed as a percentage of the initial thickness 
denotes the degree of resistance of the material to hot deformation. 

4. Apparatus 

4.1 Electric Oven ~ A thermostatically controlled electric oven In which the test temperature can 
be maintained with an accuracy of ± a^'C, mounted in such a manner as to be free from vibration. 

4.2 Hot Pressure Test Apparatus — An apparatus for exerting pressure on the test specimen, as 
shown in Fig. 1. It shall consist of a rectangular blade with an edge 0"70 ± 0*01 mm wide, which 
can be pressed against the test specimen. 






1 = Testing Frame 



2 « Sample 3 « Supports 4 ~ Load 

FIG. 1 HOT PRESSURE TEST APPARATUS 



« — Sector Angle 



4-3 Smooth Metal Pin ( Mandrel ) or Tube and Loading Weights 

4.4 Measuring Microscope or ^Graduated Magnifying Glass 

5. Materials — No material other than the test specimen is required for performing this test. 



Adopted 14 Marcti 1984 



® July 1985, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR t/IARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10810 (Part 15) -1984 

fl»^ Test Specimen 

8.1 From each core or the sheath to be tested, test specimens of about 50 to 100 mm in length 
shall be taken from a sample having a length of 300 mm. 

6.1.1 In case of twin or multi core non-sheathed flat cords, individual cores are not to be 
separated. 

6.2 Preparation of Test Specimen 

6.2.1 For insuiation —From each piece of core, any covering including semi-conducting layer, if 
any, shall be removed mechanically. According to the type of cable, the piece may be of circular 
or sector-shaped cross-section. 

6.2.2 For slieati) — For each piece of the sheath, a strip enclosing about one-third of the 
circumference shall be cut in the direction of the axis of the cable, if the sheath does not have 
ridges. 

If the sheath has ridges caused by more than 5 cores, the strip shall be cut in the same manner 
as above and these ridges shall be removed by grinding. If the sheath has ridges caused by five 
or less cores, the strip shall be cut In the direction of ridges so that it contains at least one groove 
which lies approximately in the middle of the strip throughout its length. 

If the sheath is applied directly over the armouring or the metallic screen and therefore, it is 
difficult to grind or cut away the ridges (unless the diameter is large), the sheath shall not be 
removed and the whole cable piece shall be used as test specimen. 

6.3 NufDber of Specimens— Two. 

7. Conditioning — No special conditioning of test specimen is required. The test specimen shall 
be tal^en directly for testing at specified temperature and duration. 

8. Procedure 

8.1 Prior to the commissioning of the test, the test oven shall have attained the specified test 
temperature. 

8.2 Position of Test Specimen • 

8.2.1 For insuiation — The test piece shall be placed in the position shown in Fig. 1. Flat cords 
without sheath shall be laid on their flat side. Test specimen having small diameter shall be fixed 
on the support in such a manner that it does not curve under the pressure of the blade. Specimen 
of sector-shaped cores shall be placed on a support provided with a suitable angular profile as 
shown in Fig. 1. 

The force shall be applied in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the core. The blade 
shall also be perpendicular to the axis of the core. 

8.2.2 For slieatf) — The strip shall be supported by a metal pin or tube, which may be halved 
in the direction of its axis to make more stable support. The radius of the pin or tube shall be 
approximately equal to half the inner diameter of the test piece. The apparatus, the strip and the 
supporting pin ( tube ) shall be arranged so that the pin supports the strip and the blade Is pressed 
against the outer surface of the test piece. 

-The force shall be applied in a direction perpendicular to the axis of the pin (or the cable 
when a whole cable piece is used ) and the blade shall also be perpendicular to the axis of the pin 
or tube ( or of the cable when a whole cable is used ). 

8.3 taicuiatlon of Compression Force — The force F, in Newton, which shall be exerted by the 
blade upon the test specimen, shall be calculated by the following formula : 

F = A V 2Dxt ~ t^ 
where 

O == mean value of the outer diameter (mm) of test piece ( insulation or sheath as 
the case may be). For sector-shaped cores, D is the diameter (mm) over the 
laid-up cores. In case of flat cords without sheath, D is the mean value of the minor 
dimension of the test specimen; 

t = average thickness ( mm) of the test specimen ( insulation or sheath ); 



IS: 10810 (Part 15) -1984 

A =s a constant, the value of which is as follows: 

A«= 0*6 for insulation and sheath of flexible cords and flexible cables; 

k « 0*6 for cables for fixed Installations having outer diameter D of core or sheath 
up to 10 mm; and 

A <-> 0*8 for cables for fixed installations having outer diameter D of core or sheath 
above 10 mm. 

For the above purpose, D and t shall be measured to an accuracy of 0*1 mm using any 
suitable mechanical or optical measuring instrument. 

The calculated force may be rounded off downwards by not more than 3 percent. 

However, in all cases the pressure, that Is, loader force indicated include the weight of the 
testing frame. 

8.4 Heating of Loaded Test Specimen — When the test oven has attained the specified test tempera- 
ture, the loaded test specimen shall be kept in the oven for the duration as specified in relevant 
specification. 

8.5 Cooling of Loaded Test Spec/Vnens — At the end of the test duration test specimen shall be 
removed from the testing apparatus and cooled within 10 s in cold water. 

8.6 Measurement — Immediately after cooling, the test specimen shall be prepared for determining 
the thickness retained at the point of impression, that is indentation. 

The conductor shall be withdrawn leaving the test piece in the form of a tube. A narrow 
strip shall be cut from the test specimen In the direction of the axis of the core, perpendicular to 
the indentation. However, small test specimen up to about 6 mm external diameter, shall be cut 
transversely at the indentation and also at about 10 mm from it on both sides, as shown in Fig 2 
and Fig. 4. 

The thickness at the point of impression ( that is, indentation ) and at a distance of about 10 
mm on both sides of this point is measured on a longitudinal or transversal section by means of 
a measuring microscope or a graduated magnifying glass to an accuracy of O'OI mm as shown in 
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. 



TEST PIECE 



NARROW STRIP 



/INDENTATION 
FIG. 2 NARROW STRIP FOR MEASUREMENT OF INDENTATION 



INDENTATION 
DEPTH 




CROSS WIRE OF 
MICROSCOPE 



FIG. 3 VIEW IN MEASURING MICROSCOPE 

3 



IS:108fO(Part15)-1984 



SECTION 2 



SECTION 1 





SECTION 2 



INDENTATION 




SECTION 1 



FIG. 4 MEASUREMENT OF INDENTATION FOR SMALL CORES 

9. Tabulation of Observations 



Test Specimen 



Thickness at the 
Point of Indentation Ti 



Thickness at At^out 10 mm 
from the Point of 
Indentation 



mm 



mm 



Tt' 
mm 



1. 
2. 



10. Calculation 

Percentage thickness retained » - 

S Tt' + £Tt' 



ST^I2 



X 100 



where f j 



Note » In case of failure, It shall be permissible to reeheck the test, but the number of test specimens 
shall be four In place of two and the mean value of four test results shall be compared for compliance with the 
specified value. 

11. Report 

11.1 Hot Deformation Test on Thermoplastic InsulationlSheath 
Batch No./Lot No, 

Cable No./Orum No. 

11.2 Results 

Reference Specification, 



Observed 
Value 



Specified 
Value 



Percentage thickness retained 



11.3 Co/?c/i/s/o/j — Specimen meets/does not meet the requirements of the specification. 

4 



Reprography Unit. BIS, New Delhi, India 



