IS 1661 : 1972 ( ( Reaffirmed Reaffirmed1987 2001) )

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR APPLICATION OF CEMENT AND CEMENT-LIME PLASTER FINISHES

( First Revision )
Fifth

Reprint SEPTEMBER

1996

UDC 693.621

: 69.001.3

0 Copyright

1972

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 7

August

1972

IS : 1661.1972

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR APPLICATION OF CEMENT AND CEMENT-LIME PLASTER FINISHES (
Flooring
Chairman SHRlO.P.MTTAL

First Revision )
Sectional Committee, BDC 5
New

and Plastering

Directorate Delhi

General

of Posts and Tekgraphs,

Members
DR D. BANERJEE National Rubber Manufacturers Ltd, Calcutta DR M. L. BHAUMIK ( Alt6mat6 ) SnmA.K. BHATTACHARYYA National Test House, Cakutta LALA G. C. DAM( A~tcmntc ) SHRI S. K. BOSE Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters MAJ D. D. SHARMA (Ahnot ) SHRI DWESHA. C~oxsxir Arcoy Industries, Ahmcdabnf SHRIRWIKLALA.CHOKSHI( Alkmats) DEPUTY CHOP MECHANICALEN~I- Ministry of Railways NEER, INT~ORAL COACHFACTORY, PERAYBUR D~~~~~I~~s$-), .%ANW& OROANIZAT~:~ LuoKNow ( Alt6mat6 ) DIRS~OR RE.%%RM OFFICZR, MATERIAL T-NO D~VZUON ( Altemak ) SHRI P. K. DOTTER Ssxax L. T. GRHANI SHRIRAMESH D. PATBL ( Altmati SHRIN. HARILAL DR PRANLALPATEL( Alternate) Smr S. C. KAPOOR SHRI A. C. KAP~~R (Al&m&) SRRI M. R. b'fALYA DR B. S. Bws~ ( Altmutr )

Maharashtra NaSik

Engineering

Research

Institute,

Concrete Association of India, Bombay Bhor Industries Ltd, Bombay ) Oxychloride Flooring Products Ltd, Bombay Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi BurmahShell Oil Storage India Ltd, Bombay St Distributing Co of

( Continud on pug6

2 )

BUREAU OF INDIAN MANAK BI-IAVAN, 9 BAHAIXJR
NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARC

IS: 1661- 1972
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
DR MOHAN RAI

Representing Cent~~rark~,tilding Research

Institute

( CSIR ),

SHRI R.K. JAIN (AZ&mulc) Coromandel Prodorite Pvt Ltd. Madras SHRIM.V.MURUGAPPAN SHRI R. SRINIVASAN (Alternate) Cement Service Bureau, Madras &RI K. K.NAMBIAR &RI S.SIVA~WAMI (Alternate) India Linoleums Ltd, 24 Parganas ( West Bengal) s~IH. M. NANDKEOLYAR National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DRA.V.R.RAO SHRI 0. P. RATRA ( Alternate) Indian Institute of Architects? Bombay SHRI G. C. SHARMA Institution of Engineers ( Indra), Calcutta SHRI N.V. SHASTRI ENGINEER Public Works Department, Government of Tamil SUPERINTENDING Nadu ( PLANNING ANDDESIGNCIRCLE ) DEPUTY CHIEF E N G I N E E R ( BUILDING ) (_Alternate ) or Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SUPERINTENDING YuR~~v0a WORKS ( NDZ ) SURVEYOR OF WORKSI, OPPICE or THESSW ( NDZ 1 ( Alternate) Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance SHRIV.k.VAISH . .. SHRI A. P. PARACER( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o$icio Member) SHRI D. AJITHASIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary
SHRI L. RAMACHANDRARAO

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

2

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR APPLICATION OF CEMENT AND CEMENT-LIME PLASTER FINISHES

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 February 1972, after the draft finalized by the Flooring and Plastering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Cement plaster and cement plaster gauged with lime are widely used Practice in in this country for finishing of walls and ceilings of buildings. the country with regard to the preparation, application and finishing of the plaster varies considerably from state to state and from department to department. It is th,: object of this standard to lay down a code of practice generally suitable to Indian conditions, and striking a workable This compromise between theoretical requirements and existing practices. standard which was first published in 1960 is now being revised taking into account the experience gained in the plastering work for the past one decade. 0.3 This code is intended chiefly to lay down requirements regarding the quality of materials, their selection and the manner of their application in plaster' work. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from BSCP 211 : 1966 published by the British Standards Institution. 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on plaster finishes. Other standards published so far in the series are: IS : 2394-1965 IS : 2402-1963 Code of practice for application of lime plaster fi-ish Code of practice for external rendered finishes 3

I!s:1661-1972
standard' is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value ix this standard. 1. SCOPE I.1 This standard covers application of cement and cement-lime plaster finishes to walti, columns, ceilings and similar surfaces on backgrounds normally met wrth, such as brick, stone or concrete ( plain or reinforced ). Lime plasters, mud plasters and other special plasters are not covered by this code. I2 Recommendations are laid down with regard to the minimum preparation of surfaces to receive the plaster. Different materials available, their suitable mixes and the best methods of their application are also discussed. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Materials 2.1 .I Fat Ihe - The lime which has high calcium oxide content and is dependent for setting and hardening solely on the absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. 2.1.2 Hydrated Lime - A dry powder obtained by treating quicklime with water enough to satisfy its chemical atity for water under the conditions of its hydration. It consists essentially of calcium hydroxide ._ and magnesium hydroxide. 2.1.3 Hy&aulic Limc- Lime containing small quantities of silica and alumina and/or iron oxide which are in chemical combination with some of the calcium oxide content, giving a putty or mortar which has the property of setting and hardening under water. 2.1.4 pl&,~ -The general term for a material used to cover surfaces, which is applied while plastic and which hardens after application. Cement-lime plaster ret&s to cement pIaster gauged with lime. calcined mat&l, the major part of which is 2.1.5 QUi&me -A calcium oxide in natural association with a relatively small amount of magnesium oxide, capabk of slaking in water. Lumplime is quicklime as it comes f&n the kilns.
*Rulea for roumihg off numerical vahaa (i8ni.d).

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this

4

Is : 1661- 1972 2.2 Tools and Accessories - For tools and accessories, such as drag or scratcher, floats, rules or battens, squares, templates, trowels and iron pan, the definitions are as given in IS : 1630-I960*.

temporary framework of bamboo, wood 2.2.1 Scugblding ( Staging ) -A or steel to provide a platform from which the mason does the plastermg work. 2.3 Site Operations
2.3.1 Finishing Coat - The final coat in two or three coat plaster work. This is also referred to as the final coat, setting coat, face coat or skimming coat ( the term ` skimming coat ' is also applied to single-coat work ).

2.3.2 Gauging - The mixing of various constituents of a plaster. This term is also used for denoting the addition of cement to a lime-sand mix or of lime to a cement-sand mix. c A gauging ' is the term given to an individual plaster work. 2.3.3 Screeds- Narrow strips or bands of plaster laid on walls or ceilings to serve as guides for bringing the whole work to a true or even surface, the screeds being incorporated in the final undercoats. 2.3.4 Undercoats - Plaster coats ( often referred to as backing coats ) the main function of which is to provide surfaces suitable for the application of succeeding coats. There are following two types of undercoats: a) Rmdering coat - The coat which is applied directly to the building surfaces to be plastered ( also referred to as the `first coat ' ). b) Floating coat - The coat used in three-coat work to bring the first coat to a true and even surface before the finishing coat is applied ( also referred to as the ` second coat ' ). 2.4 Characteristic
Defects

2.4.1 Blistering - The development of one or more local swellings on the finished plaster surface. 2.4.2 Cracking - The development of one or more 6ssures not assignable to structural cause. NOTE-Cracks in plasterin the vi&&y of a structural crack arc not aaignable to
structural failure unlessthey arc in conformity with the structural crack.

Cra&rg-The development of a series of hair cracks on the finished plaster surface. Known as ` map crazing `, when it forms an haphazard pattern over the wall surface affected.
2.4.3

2.4.4 Efirescence or background.

A deposit of solubIe salts on the surface of the plaster

*Specificationfor maoon'stools for plaster work and pointing work.

IS : 1661- 1972 2.4.5 Flading - The scaling away of patches of plaster surface due to lack or loss of adhesion with the previous coat. 2.4.6 Grinning-The appearance on the surface of the plaster of the pattern of joints or similar breaks in the continuity of the surface characteristics of the background. 2.4.7 Peeling - The dislodgement of substantial areas of plaster work from the background. 2.4.8 Popping OY Blowing - The appearance on the surface of the piaster of conical hollows ( pops or blows ) in the backing and/or finishing coats. 2.5 General 2.5.1 Dubbing Oub- The operation of attaching pieces of slate, tile, etc, to a wall with plaster, and then likewise covering them in order to fill out hollows or to form projections. 2.5.2 Fineness Modulus-A numeral indicating the fineness of an aggregate, as determined by ascertaining the percentage residue, by weight or volume, remaining on each of a series of fine sieves with apertures ranging from 40 mm to 150 micron, summing, and dividing by 100. 2.5.3 S&ion - The property of background which determines its rate of absorption of water. 3. NECESSARY INFORMATION

3.1 In the selection of materials for plasters and in their mixing and application, information is necessary on the following points' and detailed consideration shall be given to them before starting plaster work: a) Types of surface over which it is proposed to apply plaster, so that constructional details may be suitably adopted to them and the amount of subsequent preparation necessary before plastering may be minimized.
NOTE-This is of particular importance in the case of concrete soffits, and the construction details shall include the necessary provisions for adequate mechanical key left permanently embedded in or adhering.to the concrete. b)

types of f&ish and thicknesses required, together with sufficient details of the nature of the surface to be plastered. c) Details of finish at junctions with doors, windows, and other openings, with ceilings, linings, etc, and at a11 corners.
Area,

d) Types of cornice, arris and return treatments desired, and of dado treatments where required. e) Details of scaffolding ( staging ) for access to work in the correct sequence, together with provision for adequate protection of adjacent surfaces during plastering operations, particularly in ceiling work. 6

Is : 1661- 1972
f) Details of fixing accessories, plaster. templates, etc, to be embedded in the

g) Types of surface or decorative finish to be applied over the plaster and detailed information on the compatibility of the plaster with the proposed decorative finish. 3.2 All information required in 3.1 shall be made available to those who are responsible for the plastering work. Necessary drawings and instructions for preparatory work shall also be given. 3.3 Arrangements shall be made for the proper exchange of information between those engaged in plastering and all others whose work will affect or will be affected. 4. MATERIALS,

TOOLS

AND

ACCESSORIES
Indian Standard

4.1 The

following materials, conforming to relevant specifications, shown against them, shall be used: a) Cement conforming to IS : 269-1967* b) Lime Class B and C conforming c) Sand conforming

or IS : 455-I967t, and with where

to IS : 712-1964,f, also be complied

to IS : 1542-1960$. shall

4.2 The following applicable:

requirements

4

shall be obtained by slaking lime Lime Putty ( or Neru ) -This with fresh water, and sifting it. The slaking shall be done in Putty shall be kept moist until accordance with IS : 1635-19601[. used, and the quantity prepared at a time shall be not more than what may be consumed in 7 days. Water-The water used for mixing shall be clean, free from deleterious matter and also from unusual proportions of dissolved salts. Sea water or tidal astuary or brackish water shall not be used. Water fit for drinking is normally suitable; in case of doubt, the quality of water should be analysed to ascertain conformity with 4.3 of IS : 456-19647. The pieces of wood used for wood lath shall be free from all decay and insect attack. Both hard woods and soft woods

b)

C>Wood Lath m6sion

*Specification for ordiiry, rapid-hardening and low heat Portland cement (smd ). $Specification for Portland blastfurnace slag cement (second revision) . $Specification for building Iimev ( rcvirv~). (Uince revi& ) $+ecilication for sand for plaster. IlCode of practice for field slaking of lime and preparation ofputty. BCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrctc ( secondra6sivn ) .

7

IS : 166111972 to availability. Laths shall be free from knots or knot holes that are greater than one half the width of the lath. The timber shall be partially seasoned; and the moisture content shall not be greater than 20 percent. for plastering d) Metal Lathing - Metal lathing used as background should weigh not less than 1% kg/m*. e) Galvanized Wire .Netting - Where required to provide a mechanical key, galvanized wire netting of mesh not greater than 50 mm shall be used. 4.3 Tools and accessories used in plaster conformity with IS : 1630-1960*. 5. STORAGE OF MATERIALS work may advantageously be in
may be used according

5.1 Cement-Cement shall be stored off the ground, under cover and away from damp surfaces so as to prevent deterioration either by moisture or by intrusion of foreign matter. If these precautions are neglected cement will be rendered less effective or useless ( see IS : 4082-19671_ ). Lime shall also be stored off the ground, under cover and away 5.2 Limefrom damp surfaces. Quicklime may progressively deteriorate with keeping
through absorption of atmospheric moisture and carbon dioxide. For this reason, it shall be kept in a dry place and be protected from direct contact

Hydrated lime with water, fumes from boilers or similar contamination. will not develop any serious deterioration for a period of six months provided it is left undisturbed in the bag and kept in a cool dry place free from draughts, fumes from boilers or similar contamination ( see IS : 40821967-/' ). Sand for plaster shall be stored under clean 5.3 Sandprevent contamination by soil or other deleterious substances. 6. CARE OF TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES conditions to

effective life of the tools.

6.1 Tools - All tools shall be cleaned by scraping and washing at the end of each day's work, or after use with different materials. Metal tools shall be cleaned and greased after each operation. The tools shall be examined and thoroughly cleaned before plastering is begun. Cleanliness is particularly important with cement plasters, where contamination with set material may seriously affect the performance as well as reduce the
*Specification for mason's tools for plaster work and pointing work. tRecommendations on stacking and storage of construction materials at site. 8

IS : li?Sl - 1972

6.2 Scaffolding

( Staging ) - Wooden BALLIES, bamboos, planks, trestles and other scaffolding materials shall be sound and in accordance with local b-uilding regulations. These shall be properly examined before erection and use.
CONSIDERATIONS of Cement Lime Mixes

7. DESIGN

7.1 Suitability

7.1.1 Plastering mixes containing lime putty dry hydrated lime, cement and sand are characterized by high workability and marked ease of application. Such properties become less pronounced as the proportion of cement increases. 7.1.2 Cement-lime mixes have a reasonably longer working time (Max 2 h ), a fairly slow rate of strength development increasing with the amount of cement added and adequate early strength to withstand modern building conditions. They need moisture to complete the setting process and, therefore, rapid drying in the early stages should be avoided. 7.1.3 The weaker mixes of cement lime plaster containing smaller proportions of cement, shall not be used in conjunction with a strong finishing coat. Weaker mixes offer certain advantages over the stronger (richer ) mixes when applied to non-rigid backgrounds, such as lathing. 7.1.4 For trowel finishes ( very smooth surfaces ), mixes of lime and cement shall not, in general, be used for finishing coats, as their shrinkage on drying creates a tendency for surface crazing. 7.2 Number

of Plaster Coats

7.2.1 The ideal number of coats, where practicable, is two, namely, the undercoat followed by a finishing coat. It is recognized, however, that much successful work has been carried out in the past with plaster finishing coats with a single coat on reasonably plane backgrounds of brick, concrete and similar materials. However, for very rough surfaces, such as rough stone masonry, three coat plastering may be necessary. Metal lathing normally requires a three coat plaster finish for successful rtdts. Renovation work on wood laths should also be carried out in three coats. 7.2.2 The range of coats normally as follows: employed for different backgrounds is

Background
Brickwork Concrete, or hollow clay tiles cast in situ

flumber of CoatJ
2 or 1 2 or 1 2 or 1 3 or 2 9

Building blocks Wood or metal lath

IS : 1661.1972 Background Fibre building Cork slabs Uneven and rough stone masonry data board ( insulating board ) Wood wool slabs Number of Coats 2 or 1 2 or 1 2 or 1 3 or 2 for the internal plastering is

7.2.2.1 A summary of background given in Table 1 for guidance. 7.3 Thickness of Plastering

7.3.1 Finishing coats ( and single-coat work, where employed ) shall be of such minimum thickness as justto provide a sufficient body of material to harden satisfactorily under the site conditions in any particular case. 7.3.2 The total thickness of two-coat work exclusive of keys or dubbingout shall be generally about, but shall not normally exceed 20 mm and it shall not exceed 15 mm in the case of in situ concrete soffits. The thickness of three-coat work shall be about, but shall not normally exceed 25 mm. 7.3.3 The recommended thickness in Table of 2. an individual coat shall generally be as

-W

7.4 Recommended

Plaster

Specifications

7.4.1 A list of specifications for mixes suitable for various situations is given in Table 2, which covers single-coat work which is used generally and also two and three-coat works suitable for special situations. The lime in the mixes specified in Table 2 and in 7.4.2 is assumed to be measured as lime putty, but if it is measured as dry hydrated lime, the proportion of lime in any mix shall be slightly higher than is indicated and a suitable adjustment shall be made as indicated in 7.4.1.1. 7.4.1.1 The actual weight of hydrated lime which may be determined by using the following formula: a putty coma&

w*= &
where

(

w, -

1000 )

w, =

weight of dry hydrate

in kg/ms, ( see IS : 2394-1965* ), and

G = specific gravity of hydrate W, = weight of putty in kg/ma.

*Code of practice for application of lime plaster finish. 10

TABLE SL NO. (1) i) CLASS (2) Solid

1

SUMMARY

OF BACKGROUND (Clam DRYING SHRINKAGE MOVEMENT (4)

DATA

FOR INTERNAL

PLASTERING REMARKS (7) Sp;tt;rdz;h 3co;~ef.

7.2.2.1 ) SURFACE CHARACZRISTICS (5) Low suction and poor key PREPARATIONOF SURFACE (6) May require more than raking joints, for exambonding ple, spattagents, erdash or wire mesh or special plasters

TYPE (3) a) Dense bricks blocks clay and

Negligible

ment: coarse sand should be to allowed harden before applying undercoat. Wire mesh should be fixed at least G mm in clear of surface Should be dry to minimize efflorescences Use bonding treatment or special plasters according to manufacturers' recommendations

: 3

_

b) Normal clay brick and blocks c) Dense concrete, either precast or in siiu

Negligible

Moderate to high suction and reasonable key Suction generally low, but varies according to aggregate and water / cement ratio. Poor key unless provided by special shuttering or retarder Low suction and good key

Rake joints unless key provided Unless keyed, use spatterdash, bonding treatment or special plasters

Low to high according to quality. Differential thermal movement varies with aggregate

51 i.
None

d) No-fines concrete

Varies from low moderate. to with Varies aggregate

-

"

.&
Is

w

( Continued)

W
N

2

TABLE

1

SUhQfAR~

OF BACKGROUND D&NO

DATA

FOR INTEKNAL

PLASTERING-Cortd

tl

&.

CLASS

TYPB

SURFACE SHRI~LAQE CHARACTERISTICS MOVEMENT

Reu*Rlcs

i

(1)

(2)
e) Open textured concrete blocks and concrete containing light-weight aggregate f) Close textured concrete blocks

(4)
Moderate to high

(5) Low suction good key and None

(61

(7) Should be dry to minimize shrin-

Moderate

to high

Variable

suction

May need treatment with a bonding agent to provide key It may be sary to the unless plastcrr used necesreduce suction special are

.v

c

Differential ther. ma1 movement may be high with some aggregates Should be dry to minimize shrinkage movement

g) Aerated concrete

Moderate

to high

Moderate to high suction, reasonable key

ii)

Slab

a) Wood-wool

Hi h but generally s xed dry and also be may restrained

Low suction good key

and

None other than joints scrimmed

When used as permanent shuttering special precautions arc necessary

.

b) Strawboard

No key

Key can be provided by use of bonding treatment or wire netting or metal lathing. Joints should be scrimmed

c) Cork

-

Low suction, variable

key

If

the surface provides insufficient mechanical key a 1: I cement : fine sand slurry should be brushed on and wire meshed fixed

iii)

BoaKla

a) Plasterboard

Negligible

Low suction, adequate key with suitable plasters Low suction, adequate key with suitable plasters Low suction, adequate key with suitable plasters

Joints scrimmed unless gypsum lath is used Joints scrimmed Boards must be conditioned on site Considerat ion shouM be given to the strength of the board and the possibility of impact damage -

b) Insulating fibreboard c) Expand cd plastics

H' h, but fixed 2 ry and easily restrained

None, other than joint scrimming recomwhere mended by manufacturer

Metal lathing

Expanded meta and clay

Good key

None

Is : 1661-1972
TABLE No. 2 RECOMMENDED
OF

PLASTER

SPECIFICATIONS MS ( Proportion by Volume ) (4) 1:0:3 1:0:4 1:0:6 1:1:6 1:2:9 1:0:3 1:0:4 1:0:6 1:1:6 1:0:3 1:1:6 1:2:9 to 6 THICKN~~

( Clauses7.3.3 and 7.4.1 ) PLASTER (2) Single coat plaster
OF COAT %UATION

(1) i)

(3) Both internal and external

(5) 10 to 15 mm

ii)

Two coat plaster: a) Backing coat

do 10 to 12 mm

b) Finishing coat

3to

8mm

iii)

Three coat plaster:

Very rough surface; both internal and external 1:0:3 1:0:4 1:0:6 1:1:6 1:0:3 1:1:6 1:2:9 to6 10 to 15 mm

a) Base coat

b) Second coat

3 to

8 mm

c) Finishing coat

Fat lime and fine sand or marble dust in equal proportions

3 to

5 mm

Norm 1 -Where two or three coat plasters are adopted, as far as possible the mix for the under coats should contain coarse sand conforming to grading zone II of IS : 3831970t and having fineness modulus not less than 2.0. Nora 2 -For single coat plaster the fineness modulus of sand should be as far as possible 1.5 and conforming to grading zone IV of IS: 383-1970t. Where only fine sand is available the fineness modulus of sand may be improved by mixing the required percentage of coarse sand. The strength of plaster mix gets reduced with the reduction in the tincness modulus of sand. Norx 3 -Other mikes of cement/lime and sand may also be adopted depending on the quality of sand available and local conditions provided the strength conforms to any of the above mixes given in Table 2. *Cement : lime : sand. t+cification for coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete ( second revision ) .

14

IS : 1661 - 1972 7.4.2 colour then it 3 parts 4 parts The mix for the finishing coat shall of the surface desired. If the surface is advisable to have rich mix of 1 part of sand. For any rough finish a mix of sand is recommended. depend on the texture and is to have a lime-putty finish, of cement, 1 part of.lime and of 1 part of cement to 3 to

7.5 Surface Finish - Internal plasters are usually finished to a smooth surface. If textured finishes are required, special techniques may have to be employed and the success of the treatment is largely dependent on good craftsmanship. 7.6 Corrosive Effect on Metals 7.6.1 In normal circumstances, matured plaster work may be regarded as dry and therefore non-corrosive. Such dangers of corrosion as do arise should only occur during the initial drying period and subsequently during periods of heavy condensation. Plasters containing uncarbonated lime ( for example, lime and cement mixes ) have a protective effect on iron and steel, but are likely when persistently damp to corrode lead and aluminiym unless protected by a suitable paint. 7.6.2 Plastering mixes in which sand or water contaminated with seasalts have been used are likely to be continually damp, due to the deliquenscent or moisture-attracting nature of the salts, and may corrode metals in contact with them. Frost proofing additives containing soluble chlorides, for example, calcium chloride, are likely to have similar effects. 7.6.3 Protection may be given to steel and aluminium when necessary by means of suitable metallic or paint coatings. Sleeves of material resistant to any corrosive effects may sometimes provide a convenient means of avoiding contact of metal pipes or conduits with plasters which accelerate corrosion, or the metal may be embedded in a plastering mix of a more suitable composition. Under persistently wet conditions no form of plastering can be relied on to protect metals from corrosion. 7.6.4 With cold water service pipes the provision of an insulating sleeve serves also to avoid condensation of moisture in the plaster in their immediate vicinity during the subsequent life of the building. 7.7 Effect of Atmospheric Conditions at the time of plastering or during the period may affect the finished work as 7.7.1 The prevailing weather setting, drying and hardening follows:

a) Frost - The destructive effect of frost on plaster work is substantial. Unless special precautions are adopted, plastering work Recommendashall be suspended entireIy during frosty weather. tions have been made from time to time in countries which experience long continued periods of frosty weather and they should serve as a guide to good practice in this country. 15

IS : 1661- 1972 b) Cold - rhe setting and hardening times of all plasters are appreciably lengthened by a reduction in the atmospheric temperature. Where plastering has got to be carried out in cold weather, the time intervals shall be lengthened to allow for this, and the work programmed or re-programmed accordingly. c) Condensation - In certain localities condensation resulting from cold wintry conditions may be so excessive as to impair the finished plaster work. It may also retard or prevent the drying out of wet building operations for periods of week, or even months, thus presenting conditions unsuitable for plastering. d) Extreme dry Conditions-Under hot dry conditions the applied plaster may become dry before the setting process is sufficiently advanced. The partially set weak material often has a powdery surface which will not provide a satisfactory base for the subsequent coat or for decoration. Plasters containing cement are particularly sensitive in this respect. In such contingencies the surface should be continually kept wet during the curing period.
8. GENERAL PRECAUTION

IN PLASTERING

8.1 Cleanlbss

and Protection of Existing Work

8.1.1 Cleanl`iness is essential in carrying out plaster work. Adequate protection shall be given to all existing work and fittings which are liable to be damaged, not only in the area of plastering operations, but also in the approaches thereto by covering up with boards, dust sheets, etc, as necessary. 8.1.2 Cleaning off on Completion - On completion, all work affected by plastering operations shall be left clean. Special care is necessary when removing set plaster from glass to avoid damaging its surface. 8.2 Suction Adjustment 8.2.1 The careful adjustment of suction is very necessary for good plastering, and may be done either by wetting the backing suitably if it is dry, or by sprinkling with a cement-mix as in the case of a concrete surface with low suction. Without the aid of suction, plaster would creep and slide down due to its own weight. On the other hand, high rate of suction withdraws all moisture from the plaster and makes it weak porous and friable. Too much water makes it impossible to keep the mortar in position till it sets. A failure in bond due to excessive water leads to further failures as the pocket formed may hold water and break up the plaster when the water freezes; or if the water is salt-laden, the same results will be produced on evaporation by crystal formation. 16

IS : 1661.1972 8.2.2 The wall shall not be soaked but only damped evenly before applying the plaster. If the surface becomes dry in spots, such areas shall be moistened again to restore uniform suction. A fog-spray is recommended for this work. 8.3 Adjastment of Working to the Setting Properties of Plaster 89.1 Cement plasters and cement-lime plasters contain materials which set when brought into contact with water, and the fullest use of their strength producing properties is not made unless the mix is applied before the setting process has started. If retampering of such mixes is carried out after the set has commenced, an inevitable loss in strength and efficiency will result. 8.3.2 In the case of cement plasters, the commencement of the set is accompanied by a noticeable stiffening of the mix. In the case of cement plaster heavily gauged with lime, however, it is not always obvious to the operator when the set has started and it is with this type of mix that the retention of the full measure of strength afforded by the cementitious material is particularly important. Such plasters may be overworked both before and after application with resultant impairment of the set of the gauging plaster. This not only reduces the strength of the materia1, but also gives it the shrinkage characteristics of a pure-lime plaster with its It is essential, therefore, that liable accompaniment of the surface crazing. mixes shall be used as soon as possible after water has been added and that working periods recommended in this code shall not be exceeded. 8.4 Control of Cracking - This is normally a structural problem, but the plaster will be able to reduce the effects of structural cracking by making a trowel cut between adjacent surfaces. 8.5 Maintenance of Proper Time Intervals - Shrinkage, partly irreversible, occurs on drying, causing stresses to be set up both in the applied coat and in the undercoat or background, and in order to avoid break-down of adhesion between successive coats, it is very important that the drying shrinkage of the first coat should be materially complete before a subsequent coat is applied. The rate of drying will vary widely with Proper time interval conditions of temperature, humidity and ventilation. serves to diminish the possibility of efflorescent salts finding their way to the final plaster surface, and also of the drying and naturing shrinkage ( map crazing ) of the undercoat reaching the finished plaster face over a period The surface then shall be allowed to set for at least a day OF two of time. depending upon the weather ( one day in summer and two days in winter ). During this period the surface of this coat shall be kept damp and shall not be allowed to dry. 9. PRELIMINARY PROGRAMMING OF WORK 9.1 All materials necessary for plastering shall be kept readily available at the site, in cases where lime putty is to be used, it shall be run sufficiently 17

Is : 1661- 1972
in advance so as to mature before use. An adequate supply of water suitable for mixing the plaster and for curing purposes shall be available. 9.2 In building operations, such as construction of brick and block walls, the encasement of steel columns and beams with concrete, etc, requiring plastering shall be so programmed that they are sufficiently matured to receive the plaster without subsequent damage to plaster or decoration. Careful programming and avoidance of last minute alterations in the design or in the sequence of work can avoid serious damage to the plaster finish. Where such alterations are unavoidable the permanent decoration shall be postponed. 9.3 Plastering operations shall not be started until all necessary fixing, such as door and window frames, mantlepieces are completed and all pipes and conduits to be embedded in the wall or plaster are installed. 9.4 A preliminary inspection shall be made to ensure that the surfaces are in a suitable condition for plastering, particularly as regards their planeness and dryness. If dubbing out is necessary, it should be done in advance, so that an adequate time interval may be permitted before the application of the first undercoat. Plastering operations shall be so scheduled as to allow sufficient interval between undercoats and finishing coats. 10. SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS

plaster, the plastering operations may be started from the top floor and carried downwards. For internal plaster, the plastering operations may be started wherever the building frame and cladding work are ready and the temporary supports of the ceiling resting on the wall or the floor have been removed. 10.2 The surfaces to be plastered shall first be prepared as described in 12.

10.1 For external

10.3 When the preparation has been done, arrangements may be made for a constant supply of plastering material prepared as described in 11. 10.4 The first undercoat is then applied to ceilings and walls. It is an advantage to plaster the ceilings first to permit removal of scaffolding before plastering the wall. In the case of high rooms, the same scaffolding may be needed for plastering the top portions of the walls. 10.5 After a suitable time interval ( preferably not more than 5 days ) the second coat may be applied. Surface of the first undercoat shall be adjusted and screeds laid to serve as guides in bringing the work to an even surface. After a further suitable time interval, the finishing coat may be applied first to the ceilings and then to the walls. 10.6 Plastering of cornices, decorative features, completed before the finishmg coat is applied. 18 etc, shall normally

be

IS : 1661- 1972 10.7 Sometimes, ends of scaffolding BALLIES have to be housed in the In such cases after the BALLI..S wall which is being treated with plaster. are taken out, the hole or holes left in the wall shall be filled up with brick and mortar, and the patch plastered up true, even and smooth in conformity with the rest of the wall, so that no sign of any patch work shows out; 10.8 Where corners and edges have to be rounded off, such rounding off shall be completed along with the finishing coat to prevent any joint marks showing out later. 11. PREPARATION 11.1 Proportioning 11.1.1 The material
measured used in the preparation by volume using gauge boxes. of plastering mixes may be

OF PLASTER

11.1.2 Cement shall be measured by weight. For the purpose of proportioning one cubic metre of cement shall be taken to weigh 1 440 kg approximately. 11.1.3 Proportioning of lime may be done by measurement of volume as The mix lime putty or dry hydrated lime before the preparation of putty. proportion of lime, unless otherwise stated, generally refers to the volume of putty.
NOTE 1 - Lime putty weighs about 1280 kg/m*. m* of dry hydrated lime normally gives about 0.8 to 0'9 ma of lime NOTES -One putty.

work with 1 : 3 11.1.4 Quantity of Water- For general cement-plaster proportion the quantity of water required is about 70 percent by weight of This may, however, vary depending on the following factors, cement. and adjustment shall be done as explained in IS : 2250-1965*: a) `b) c) d) The nature and condition of the fine aggregate; The temperature and humidity at the time of working; Richness of the mix, namely, whether rich or leaner than 1 : 3; The varying quantities of lime in composite mortars; and added for improving the workability.

e) The use of admixtures 11.2 Mixing

11.2.1 Cement-Lime Plaster - The cement-lime plaster shall be prepared Lime putty by mixing dry in the required proportions cement and sand. mixed with water shall then be added to the mix and the contents mixed for sometime until a satisfactory mortar is obtained.
*Code of practice for preparation and use of masonry mortars.

19

Is : 16619 1972 11.2.2 Cement PlasterCement and sand shall be mixed dry in &he required proportions to obtain a uniform colour. Water sha!l then be added to get the required consistency for the plaster. 11.2.3 Cement-lime plaster .shall be used within two hours after the addition of water to cement provided it is kept agitated or turned over at intervals of at least 20 min. Cement plasters shall be used within half an hour after the addition of water. Any mortar or plaster which is partially set shall be rejected and removed forthwith from the site. 11.2.4 Mixing may be done either manually or mechanically. ` Hand mixing ' shall be carried out on a clean, water-tight platform. During mixing, the mortar shall be heed back and forth for 10 to 15 min after the water IS added. In c machine mixing ' the mixer shall run at least 5 min after placing all the ingredients in the drum. 11.2.4.1 Machine mixing is preferable to hand mixing for all mortars. OF BACKGROUND FOR APPLICATION OF

12. PREPARATION PLASTER

12.1 For the durability of the plaster or rendering, it is vital to obtain a satisfactory bond between the background and the first plaster coat and also to ensure that the bond is maintained subsequently. The requirements of good background in this respect are explained in 12.1.1 to 12.1.7.2. Necessary preparation of the background shall be done to fulfil these requirements. The preparation for different types of backgrounds is individually dealt with in 12.2 to 12.4. - The loose layer of dust on masonry shall be removed 12.1 .l Cl+fanlincss either by watering or by brushing as required. A freshly cast concrete surface is often covered by laitance and this shall be removed. A concrete surface may also often be contaminated by the soap which is formed with calcium hydroxide and the oils in the moulds. The contaminated layer shall be removed by brush. Special care shall be taken in repairing for rendering an bld plaster coat. Old layers of the plaster coat shall be completely removed and made good. Crumbled and frost-damaged par-U shall be cut out and patched. Any trace of algae or mass formation shall be removed. If the background contains soluble salts, particularly sulphates, the application of the plaster shall be done only after the efflorescence of the salts is complete, and the efflorescence is thoroughly removed from the surface. 12.1.2 Roughnm-The roughness of the background may generally improve the bond of the plaster.. A smooth surface may be roughened by wire brushing, if it is not hard; or by hacking or bush-hammering if.it is hard. Alternatively, to obtain a rough surface, a mortar 1 cement : 1* to 3 coarse sand by volume prepared to a wet consistency may be forcibly 20

Is : 1661- 1972 dashed or to the surface ( spatterdash treatment) by suitable means on to a hard surface like concrete. After roughening the surface, care shall be taken to moisten the surface sufficiently before plastering, as otherwise the surface may tend to absorb considerable amount of water from the plaster. In addition to general roughness in the masonry, the joints shall also be raked to a depth of about one centimetre for providing key to the plaster. On a soft smooth surface after hacking a thin coat of cement slurry (1:l : : cement : fine sand ) may be applied. In special cases wire netting, etc, may be fixed to improve further the key to the plaster. 12.1.3 Suitable Suction -The adjustment of suction of the background during the application of plaster is already dealt with in 8.2. The amount of water introduced in the bockground during its construction has an important bearing and adequate drying intervals shall be allowed between erection and plastering to bring! the surface suitable for suction adjustment. 12.1.4 EvennessThe background shall be even in order to avoid variations in the thickness of the plaster. Any unevenness must be levelled. before the plaster is applied. Local projections in brickwork are serious from the point of view of plastering. For three-coat plaster work, the local projection shall not exceed 1.2 cm proud of the general surface as determined by the periphery of the surface concerned and local depression shall not exceed 2.0 cm. For two-coat plaster, a local projection shall not exceed 0.6 cm and local depression 1.2 cm. 12.1.5 Strength and Elasticity - The strength and elasticity of the plaster shall be compatible with that of the background. The recommendations given in this standard already cover this aspect. 12.1.6 ImmobilityThe background must be immobile at the time of application of the plaster or subsequently the movements of the background shall be in step with and in the same direction as those of the plaster. Differential movements between the background and the plaster due to moisture change, temperature change, structural settlement: deflection, etc, will cause cracking of the plaster. The major part of such movements shall be allowed to set in before the plaster is applied, as for example, by giving in the case of moisture movement sufficient drying interval to the background. 12.1.7 Precaution Against Discontinuity in Backgrow& - Cracking of walls or of plaster is often caused by discontinuity, for instance changing from concrete to brickwork, from clay brickwork to lightweight concrete block work or even changing from one type of brick to another. Differential drying shrinkage is probably the main cause but difference in thermal movements may alsp contribute. Reinforcement of the plaster by metal lathing or scrim over the junction is not always successful. The best treatment may be to separate the two portions by a neat cut through the 21

I5:1661-1972
plaster at the junction. The junction fixing a cover strip to one side. may be masked, if so desired, by

12.1.7.1 A change from wall to ceiling can be regarded as a discontinuity. To provide for the crack, a cornice that would allow slight movement without cracking or a straight cut through the plaster at the junction may be provided. 12.1.7.2 When plaster is applied to provide an unbroken surface over a board or slab background, the plaster coat bridging the joints is subject to higher stresses and any movement in the background will show at once by cracks along the joints. To avoid this, the plaster is reinforced at the joints by fixing jute scrim ( namely, ` scrimming ' ), or a suitable wire netting, gauge. This treatment may still be ineffective if large changes in humidity take place and if thin board backgrounds with high moisture movement are used. 12.2 Surface Preparation for Brickwork or Hollow Block Masonry - The masonry shall be allowed to dry out for sufficient period so that initial drying shrinkage is fairly complete, and suction adjustment is possible during plastering ( see 12.1.3 and 12.1.6 ). 12.2.1 Joints of new brickwork or block masonry, if particularly the bricks or blocks are smooth, shall be raked out as the work proceeds (gee 12.1.2 ). Projecting bricks shall be trimmed off where necessary ( see 12.1.4 ). 12.2.2 Old brickwork shall be considered on its merits with the object of securing adequate key. The surface shall be thoroughly brushed down to remove dust and loose particles or efflorescence where it has occurred. Low spots may, where necessary, be dubbed out at this stage by means of a mix similar to that intended for the first coat of plaster but stronger ( richer ) and coarser. 12.3

Surface Preparation for in situ Concrete
surface shah be cleaned and roughened as in 12.1.1

12.3.1 The and 12.1.2.

12.3.2 Concrete surfaces shall have sufficient roughness to provide proper adhesion ( see 12.1.2 ). The surface shall be evenly wetted ( not saturated ) to provide correct suction ( see 12.1.3 ). 1243.2.1 If a chemical retarder has been applied to the formwork, a roughened surface may be formed by wire-brushing and all the resulting dust and loose particles cleaned off, and care shall be taken that none of the retarders is left on the concrete or on other surfaces, as it may interfere with the set of the plaster or with other building operations. 123.2.2 Where mechanical key-forming devices have been used in the concrete, these shall be stripped off if still adhering and the resulting surface cleaned down. 22

IS : 1661- 1972
12.3.3 Ridges or fins left on soffits or on the sides of concrete beams by shuttering imperfections shall be removed before cleaning down, to be compatible with the plaster finish particularly when it is not thicker than one centimetre. the boards or slabs are fixed in 12.4 Boards and Slabs - When accordance with relevant Indian Standard for fixing wall coverings and is all the preparation fixing ceiling coverings, ` scrimming ' (see 12.1.7) that is necessary. 13. APPLICATION

OF UNDERCOATS

full length of the wall or to natural breaking points like doors or windows. Before the rendering coat hardens, it shall be roughened to provide mechanical key for the second coat.

13.1 The Rendering or First Coat 13.1.1 The rendering coat shall be 10 to 15 mm thick and carried to the

13.1.2 Masonry walls on which plaster is to be applied directly, shall be properly set and cured with the joints raked to a depth of at least 10 mm. Before applying the rendering coat, the surface shall be cleaned and damped evenly to control suction, an essential treatment for securing first class work. The rendering coat shall be trowelled hard and tight, forcing it into surface depressions to obtain a permanent bond. 13.1.3 On smooth concrete walls, the surface shall be roughened according to 12.1.2 and the rendering coat shall be dashed on to ensure adequate bond. The dashing of the rendering coat shall be done using a strong whipping motion at right angles to the face of the wall, or it may be In either case, the applied with a plaster-machine or cement-gun. plaster shall be projected on to the surface with considerable force. 13.2 The Floating or Second Coat - Before starting to apply the second coat, the surface of the rendering coat shall be damped evenly as described in 8.2. The second coat shall be approximately 3 to 8 mm thick. It shall be brought to a true, even surface and then roughened to provide bond for the finishing coat. Each under coat shall be damp-cured for at least two days. 14. APPLICATION

OF FINISHING

COAT

14.1 Before starting

to apply the finishing coat, the second coat shall be damped evenly as described in 8.2. Whenever possible, textures shall be applied from top to bottom in one operation to eliminate joining marks. 14.2 Coloured Cement Work as follows: 14.2.1 This work may be classified under two categories

a) In which the coloured cement used in the work is made by intimately grinding mineral pigments with the cement clinker, and 23

I!3: 1661- 1972 b) Where mineral pigments are added to white or ordinary cement to get the required shade. (grey

)

The former method has the advantage that the work can be carried out in the absence of skilled workmen. The mineral pigment added shall not in any way interfere with the physical and chemical properties of cement. 14.2.2 In the case of coloured cement plastering, it is necessary to add an integral waterproofer in the undercoats to minimize the risk oi efflorescence. Where a coloured cement plastering is to be done on an already existing mortar base, it is recommended to apply a surface waterproofer on the base and also mix an integral water-proofer with the coloured cement plaster for the finishing coat. 14.3 Special Finishing Textures - Various types of special textures for rendered surfaces may be obtained by using special tools for the application of the final coat. The special finishes shall be applied in accordance with the details given in IS : 2402-1963*. 15. TRUENESS OF PLASTERING SYSTEM 15.1 The finished plaster surface shall not show any deviation more than 4 mm when checked with a straight edge of 2 m length placed against the surface. 16. CURING 16.1 To develop maximum strength and. density in the plaster, it is necessary to cure cement and cement-lime plasters properly. Each coat shall be kept damp continuously till the next coat is applied or for a maximum period of 7 days. Moistening shall commence as soon as the plaster has hardened sufficiently and is not susceptible to injury. The water shall be applied by using a fine fog-spray. Soaking of wall shall be avoided and only as much water as can be readily absorbed shall be used. Excessive evaporation on the sunny or windward sides of buildings in hot dry weather, may be prevented by hanging mattings or gunny bags on the outside of the plaster and keeping them wet. 16.2 After the completion of the finishing coat, the plaster shall be kept wet for at least seven days, and shall' be protected during that period from extremes of temperature and weather. 17. INSPECTION
17.1 Interrelation

AND DIAGNOSIS
of Various Factorm

the cause of any defects ,of plasterwork before any attempt is made to remedy or repair them and unless the *Code of practice for externalrenderedfinishes.
24

17.1.1 It is essential to determine

IS : 1881- 1972

cause is properly dealt with, the majority of defects will continue to recur after repair. The interpretation of defects of plasterwork and the determination of their causes can only be done by approaching the subject in a systematic and logical manner. 17.1.2 Since it is the final plaster finish which claims the attention of the casual observer, it is a common error to blame only the plastering materials or workmanship for all defects. Actually, these, although perhaps the most important, are not the only factors that may influence the final result. 17.1.3 Every defect in plastering is more or less connected with the whole history and treatment of the background. Consideration shall be given not only to the plastering material used and to the quality of workmanship, but also the climatic conditions prior to, during and after the plastering process, and to the correct choice of the plastering system. 17.1.4 Detailed consideration has already been made in 7 and 8 or several factors in this connection such as: a) the possible causes for lack of bond between successive coats of plaster and between the first undercoat and the background concerned, b) the possible effect of inadequate time intervals in promoting severe efflorescence or ` map crazing ' on the finished surface, and c) the effect of climatic conditions in causing or aggravating the above as well as other troubles. 17.1.4.1 Besides, the active influences of the various atmospheric conditions, the effect of the physical properties of the building surface prior to plastering shall also receive due consideration. 18. PLASTERING DEFECTS AND THEIR REMRDIRS

18.1 General - It is not possible to give simple rules for the correction of all plastering defects or failures. Many serious defects may be shown to have causes outside the materials or techniques used in the plastering operations and it is often useless to repair or even replace the plaster without first having discovered and corrected `;le nrimary fault. 18.1.1 Thus, penetration of moisture through an external wall may cause blistering, efflorescence, flaking or complete disintegration of the plaster. To patch or to replaster such a wall without first taking steps to prevent further damp penetration would be useless. Again, plastered ceilings may develop cracks because the ceihng constructron permits excessive d&&ion, and no plaster repair could be expected to be effective in preventing it. Recurrent surface dampness may be associated with the presence of deliquescent salts in the plasterwork, but it would not 25

IS : 166191972
necessarily be effective to renew background and would probably about a renewal of the trouble. use of an unwashed estuarine or out and erecting a new p!aster affected area. the plaster. The salts may also be in the migrate into the new plaster .and bring This type of defect usually traced' to- the sea sand, is best corrected by battening base out of capillary contact with the

18.1.2 Defects caused by the use of unsuitable plastering materials or by faulty technique may be corrected by means of an appropriate repair. 18.2 Typical Plastering Defects

18.2.1 Blistering - This is due to intense local relative movement of the final coat, where the component of the splitting force at right angles to the plaster surface exceeds the bond strength at the inter-face, which is aggravated by the absence of an adequate key between the final coat and undercoat. The most common cause is local exposure to radiant heat. according to its severity, 18.2.2 Bond Failure or Loss of Adhesion -This, results in ` hollow ' patches, flaking of top coats, or peeling of substantial areas. It is essential to prevent moisture penetration from the outside, as' otherwise peeling will eventually occur. 18.2.3 Cracking or the surrounding on cement or lime cracking of the final This is usually caused by movement in the background structure. Shrinkage movement in undercoats based or the use of unsuitable grades of sand may cause coat.

effect of this may, however, be reduced to 18.2.4 Crazing -The tolerable or even to negligible proportions by attention to the points enumerated in 18.2.4.1 and 18.2.4.2. 18.2.4.1 Cement plaster or cement-lime plaster, attempts to shrink on hardening but is restrained by bond with the background which, either has already undergone most of the shrinkage if of concrete, or is practically immune from movement, if of brick or stone. This restraint to shrinkage causes tensilestress in the plaster which is maximum at the skin. If the shrinkage.is great, these failures develop in:o cracks which exist through the In order to prevent this formation, it is whole depth of the plaster. necessary to limit the differences in shrinkage and thereby reduce the tensile stress to within safe limits. 18.2.4.2 Attention to the following surface crazing to a minimum: points will reduce the tendency proportions to of

4

Use of well-graded sand and the most suitable cement and sand as recommended in this code;

b) Avoidance

of overworking of cement finishings so that excess cement may not be drawn to the surface to cause skrinkage at the top layer; 26

IS : 1661- 1972
c) Observance of adequate time intervals between undercoats and subsequent finishing coat, so that each successive coat undergoes a portion of its shrinkage before the next is applied and thus, reduces the skin tension in the preceding coat; and d) Suitable control over variations in moisture-content and temperature subsequent to plastering. 18.2.5 E$orescence - This is caused by the presence of soluble salts, such calcium and magnesium normally in the as sulphates of sodium, background, and sufficient water to carry these to the surface as the structure dries. 18.2.5.1 Remedy - Sealing coats may not effectively hold back strong efflorescence. Dry brushing of the growth as it appears is the only remedy. Efflorescent salts shall not be removed by washing with water as it may carry some of the salts back into the pores. On redrying, efflorescence may be even worse than before if the salts were still present in the structure. Efflorescence will continue as long as there is sufficient water in the structure or plaster backings to carry the soluble salts forward and it is useless to attempt to seal the moisture by the paint film on the surface. The treatment of an old wall with silicone solution will frequently stop the efflorescence as the liquid blocks the passage for movement of moisture. In the case of efflorescence due to the rising of salt solutions through capillary action from sub-soil the only remedy is to provide bitumen or metallic seals in the walls above the ground level so that an effective barrier to the capillary action is created. 18.2.6 Grinning - Grinning is generally caused by marked differences in suction of the background which are not masked by the procedure of adjusting the suction, and which are manifested as areas of varying texture on the plaster surface. Such differences are often caused by the use of a mortar having suction characteristics markedly different from those of the bricks or blocks with which it is used. Grinning is more usually associated with single coat work ( two coat work is normally provided on most solid backgrounds and with this thickness of plasterwork grinning is rare ). 18.2.7 Irregularity of Surface Texture-This may be caused by faulty workmanship, but even a skilled craftsman may be unable to prevent it on backgrounds exhibiting varying suction characteristics unless three coat plastering is employed. 18.2.8 Pokbing or Blowing - These occasionally occur in plaster mixes which contain particles of materials which may keep on expanding even after the plaster coat has set. The expansive force is sutllciently great to push out the plaster in front of the particles, leaving a conical hole known as a ` Pop or Blow `. Insufficiently slaked and unmatured lime is frequently. the source of unsound particles causing popping or blowing. Popping may also be caused by the presence of particles of coal or other oxidizable material contained in the sand used for the plaster mix. 27

IS t 166101972 18.2.9 Recurrent Surf&e Dampness - The presence of deliquescent salts as occur in sea-water will bring about recurrent dampness in plaster dnisha when the atmospheric humidity is high. It may also be eau+d by condensation of moisture in chimney flues with a permeable lining, for example, where slow combustion stoves are employed. 18.2.10 Soj%tess or Chalkiness - This may result from excessive suction of the background, undue thinness of the finishing coat, working past the setting point, or subsequent exposure of the finishing coat to excessive heat or draught during settmg. 19. MAJNTJ3NANcE 19.1 Plastering work shall be protected at all stages of its life from persistent attack by water or moisture either through the undercoats or through the outer surface. The matter is particularly important during the interval between plastering and decorating. Subsequent decoration on the whole surface may be vitiated by a persistent stream of water down on particular part due to flooding of upper floors under construction, delay in provision of gutters, etc. Thus would be particularly serious if conditions are favourable to formation of efflorescence. In extreme cases, the plaster surface may be softened or badly channelled, necessitating local repair.

28

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS H~uaffefs: ManakBhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110992
Telephones: 323 0131,323 8375,323 9402 Fax : 91 11 3234062,91 11 3239399 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephcne
0-770032

contra/ Laboratoly: Plot No. M/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 Regional OtYbs: Central *Eastern

: ManakBhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1loo02 32376 17 : l/l4 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 799Cl54 337 86 62
663843

Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 166922 Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 609113 23523 15 TWestern : Manakafaya, E9. Behind Mar01 Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 832 92 95
MUMBAI 400093 Branch Of?kes: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380961 $Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, BangaforsTumkur Road, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, TT. Nagar, BHOPAL 462963 Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 841037 Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121991 Savibi Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 261601 53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 761003 C856C. L.N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 508601 E-52, Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302901 1171416 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 206005 Seth Bhavan. 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval ffishore Road, LUCKNOW 226091 Patkputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421, University PO. Pafayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM /nspecffon Offices (Wrth Safe Point): Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 449010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shiiaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 52 51 71 323635 5591348 639 49 55 554921 463627 21 01 41 8-26 66 01 8-71 1996 541137 201083 372925 216876 23 69 23 262305 695934 6 21 17

l Saies Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street,
CALCUTTA 700972 wales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 4oooo7 Gales Office is at `F' BIti, RANGALORE 569992 Unity Building, Namshimaraja Square,

`271065 3996526 2223971

Printed at New lndla Printing Press, Khurfa. India

