IS302-2-76(1999)
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard
SAFETY OF HOUSEHOLD AND SIMILAR ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES
PART 2 PARTICULAR Section 76 Electric REQUIREMENTS Fence Energizers

ICS 65.040.99

0 BIS 1999

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

December 1999

Price Group 9

Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, ETD 32

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 2/Set 76 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized Division by the Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Council. This standard covers the general and safety requirements for electric fence energizers. This standard is to be read in conjunction with IS 302-l ( 1979 ) `Safety of household and similar, electrical appliances : Part I General requirements (fifth revision ). For the sake of convenience, the clauses of this standard corresponds to those of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ), instead of reproducing full text of each clause, clauses of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) which are applicable ( which means that relevant provisions of the clause apply ) or not applicable and the subclauses or portions thereof which are not applicable are indicated as under: a) In case of clause, where it is applicable or not applicable, the wording used is `This clause of 1S 302-I ( 1979 ) is applicable/not applicable'; and b) In case of a sub-clause or part thereof `Not applicable'. Wherever a sub-clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 > is to be replaced by a new text, it has been indicated as under: `Replacement - followed by the new text'. Any addition to the existing provisions of a sub-clause of .IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) has been indicated as under: `Addition - followed by the text of the additional matter' Clauses/tables which are additional to those of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) are numbered starting from 10 1 and additional sub-clauses are numbered with the main clauses number followed by 10 1, 102 etc, for example 7.101. Should, however, any deviation exist between IS 302-l ( 1979 ) and this standard, the provisions of the latter shall apply. While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC 335-2-76 ( 1997 ) `Safety of household and similar electrical equipment : Part 2 Particular requirements, Section 76 Electric fence energizers' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ([EC). The Indian Standards which are necessary adjuncts to this standard are given in Annex-BB. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 3023-76 ( 1999 )

Indian Standard SAFETY OF HOUSEHOLD AND SIMILAR ELECTRICAL APPLIANCES
PART 2 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS Section 76 Electric Fence Energizers 1 SCOPE This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 1.1 Replacement This standard deals with the safety of electric fence energizers, the rated voltage of which is not more than 250 V and by means of which fence wires in agricultural, feral animal control and security fences may be electrified or monitored.
NOTE Examples of electric fence energizers coming within the scope of this standard are: Mains-operated energizers: Battery-operated electric fence energizers suitable for connection to the mains, as shown in Fig. 101: Electric fence energizers operated by non-rechargeable batteries either incorporated or separate. -

2.1 Addition For type D energizers, the rated voltage of the energizer is the rated voltage for battery supply. 2.5 Addition For battery-operated electric fence energizers not for connection to the mains, it is the average input current assigned to the energizer by the manufacturer. 2.10 Addition
NOTES The supply cord may be specially prepared and only available from the manufacturer or its service agent. A specially prepared cord may also include a part of the appliance.

2.17 Addition
NOTE - In class II electric fence energizers provision may be made for connecting at least one of the output terniinals to the earth electrode.

-

This standard does not in general take into account the use of appliances by young children or infirm persons without supervision: playing with appliances by young children.

2.29 to 2.34 Not applicable. 2.37 to 2.41 Not applicable. 2.46 Not applicable. 2.47 Addition It also includes terminals for the connection of the battery and other metal parts in a battery compartment, which become accessible when replacing batteries even with the aid of a tool. Additional Sub-clauses 2.101 Live Part Conductive part, which may cause an electric shock. 2.102 Normal Operation Operation of the appliance under the following conditions: the electric fence energizer is operated as in normal use when connected to the supply, with no load connected to the output terminals. 2.103 Electric Fence Energizer Appliance which is intended to deliver periodically
1

-

NOTES 1 Attention is drawn to the fact that for appliances intended to be used on board ships or aircraft, additional requirements may be necessary:

2 This standard does not apply to appliances intended to be used in locations where special conditions prevail, such as the presence of a corrosive or explosive atmosphere (dust, vapour or gas); separate battery chargers; electric fishing machines; electric animal-stunning equipment; and appliances for medical purposes.

.-

2 TERMINO~Y This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows.

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 )

voltage impulses to a fence connected to it.
NOTE - Electric fence energizers are hereinafter also referred to as energizers.

NOTE - Type D energizers are shown schematicall) in Fig. 101. 2.110Battery-Operated Energizer

2.104 Mains-Operated Energizer Energizer designed for direct connection to the mains. 2.105 Battery-Operated Energizer Suitable for Connection to the Mains: Energizer operated by batteries and having, or being designed for connection to, facilities for charging these batteries from the mains, or designed for operation from the mains and from batteries.

Energizer deriving its energy solely from batteries QI other sources of energy and not designed for connection to the mains. 2.111 Battery Charger Appliance to be connected to the mains and intended for charging one or more batteries. Not for connection to energizer directly.
NOTE-This also includes Solar PV Modulus and its circuitry for charging batteries. 2.112 Fence '

-

2.106 Type A Energizer Battery-operated energizer suitable for connection to the mains consisting of an impulse generating circuit, a battery when the energizer is in operation.
NOTE - Type A energizers are shown schematically in Fig. 101. 2.197 Type B Energizer

Barrier for animals or for security purposes, comprising one or more conductors, such as metal wires, rods or rails. 2.113 Fence Circuit All conductive parts or components within an energizer, which are connected or intended to be connected galvanically to the output terminals. 2.114 Earth Electrode Metal structure that is driven into the ground near an energizer and connected electrically to the output earth terminal of the energizer, and that is independent of other earthing arrangements. 2.115 Prospective Peak Voltage Peak output voltage of the impulse generator specified in 14 that would be obtained with the
energizer not connected to the test circuit. 2.116 Bated Voltage for Battery Supply

Battery-operated energizer suitable for connection to the mains consisting of an impulse generating circuit, a battery charging circuit and a battery, the impulse generating circuit being connected to the battery and disconnected from the battery charging circuit and the mains when the energizer is in operation. For recharging the battery the impulse generating circuit is disconnected and rendered inoperable.
NOTE - Type B energizers are shown schematically in Fig. 101. 2.108 Type C Energizer

Battery-operated energizer suitable for connection to the mains consisting of an impulse generating circuit and a battery, the impulse generating circuit being connected to the mains for the battery when the energizer is in operation, and where it is necessary to remove the battery to recharge it using a separate battery charger or, in the case of a non-rechargeable battery, to replace it with a new battery.
NOTE - Type C energizers are shown schematically in Fig. 101.

Voltage for battery supply, for types A, B, C and D energizers, assigned to the energizer by the manufacturer. 2.117 Rated Voltage Range for Battery Supply Voltage for battery supply, for types A, B, C and D energizers, assigned to the energizer by the manufacturer, expressed by its lower and upper limits. 2.118 Impulse Duration Duration of that part of the impulse which contains 95 percent of the overall energy and is the shortest interval of integration of I(t) that gives 95 percent of the integration of I(t) over the total impulse.
NOTE time. 2 I(t) is the impulse current as a function of

2.109 Type D Energizer Battery-operated energizer suitable for connection to the mains consisting of an impulse generating circuit and a battery, the impulse generating circuit being connected to the battery when the energizer is in operation, and the energizer or the battery being connected to a separate battery charger for recharging the battery.

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) 2.119 Output Current RMS value of the output current calculated over the impulse duration. 2.120 Medium Power Energizer Energizer which has an output energy per impulse not exceeding 5.l when measured in the 500 ohm component of the standard load. 2.121 Standard Load
f

per impulse

The tests are made on two energizers as delivered, one being subjected to all the tests with the exception of that of 18, and the other to the tests of 5 and 18. However, the tests of 22 to 28 may be made on separate samples. For types A and C energizers, an additional sample is required for the test of 18. Addition
NOTE - Where electronic circuiis, electronic components or other devices are normally encapsulated. specially prepared samples may be needed for the tests of 19.11 and 19.101.

Load consisting of a non-conductive resistor of 500 2.5 ohm and a variable resistor which is adjusted so as to maximize the energy per impulse or output current in the 500 ohm resistor, as applicable. The variable resistor is connected in series or parallel with the 500 ohm resistor, whichever gives the more unfavourable result. 2.122 Interconnection Cord External flexible cord provided as part of a complete appliance for purposes other than connection to the supply mains.
NOTE - A remote hand-held switching device, as external interconnection between two parts of an appliance and a cord connecting an appkmce and a cord

4.3 Addition If any electronic component has been damaged during the tests of 14, the tests of 19 are made twice, once before and once after the damaged electronic components have been replaced by new electronic components. 4.4 Addition The energizer is mounted in a normal position such that the deviation from the position for which it is designed does not exceed 15". However, if the energizer is provided with means for adjustment to the normal position, such as a spirit level, the energizer shall be adjusted to within *2" of the normal position. The earthing terminal of the fence circuit is connected to earth. However, if there is no indication as to which of the output terminals is to be connected to earth, the terminal, which gives the most unfavourable result is earthed. 4.5 Addition k or types A,B,C and D energizers where the terminals for the connection of the battery have no indication of polarity, application of the more unfavourable polarity of the voltage source replacing the battery. For battery-operated energizers where the supply terminals for the connection of the battery have no indication of polarity, application of the more unfavourable polarity. For mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains, the reference source impedance of the mains supply shall be 0.4 ohm + j0.25 ohm. 4.101 Unless otherwise specified, all energizers are tested as motor-operated appliances. 5 BATING This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable

connecting an accessory to the appliance or to a separate signalling circuit are examples of interconnection cords.

2.123 User Maintenance Any maintenance operation stated in the instructions for use or marked on the appliance which the manufacturer of the appliance intends the user to perform. 2.124 Electronic Component Part in which conduction is achieved principally by electrons moving through a vacuum, gas or semiconductor.
NOTE - Neon indicators are not considered to be electronic components.

2.125 Electronic Circuit Circuit incorporating component. at least one electronic

3 GENERALREQUIREMENT This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable. 4 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR THE TESTS This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 4.2 Modification Replace the test specification by the following:

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) except as follows:
5.1 and 5.2 not applicable.

terminals for the connection of the battery, the no-load d.c. output voltage shall not exceed 42.4V. Compliance is checked by measuring the no-load d.c. output voltage appearing at the terminals for the connection of the battery when the energizer is connected for mains supply and is supplied at rated voltage. 5.104 The peak value of the output voltage, Ue, shall be measured and recorded to enable the tests and measurements of 14.102, 14.103, 14.104, 16.3 and 29.1 to be carried out. Compliance is checked by the following test. The peak value of the output voltage is measured, using the measuring arrangement described in 5.101 with the energizer supplied with the voltage in 11.5 under condition of normal operation, but with a load connected to tbe output terminals consisting of a capacitor having a capacitance which can be varied between 0 nF and 200 nF in steps of approximately IOnF. 6 CLASSIFICATION This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 6.1 Replacement Mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains shall be class II with respect to protection against electric shock. Compliance is checked by inspection relevant tests. 6.2 Replacement Energizers shall be of at least IPX4 construction. Compliance is checked by inspection relevant tests. 7 MARKING AND INSTRUCTIONS This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 7.1 Addition Energizers shall be marked with the words `Read full instructions before use'. Types A, B and C energizers shall be marked with the rated voltage for battery supply or rated voltage range for battery supply, in volts. Battery-operated energizer shall be marked with the substance of the following `WARNING - Do not connect to the mains-operated equipment'. 4 and by the and by the

5.101 The energizer such that -

output characteristics shall be

the impulse repetition rate shall not exceed 1 Hz; the output voltage of the energizer not exceed IO OOOV; shall

the impulse duration of the impulse in the 500 ohm component of the standard load shall not exceed 0.1 s; for medium power energizers the energy per impulse in the 500 ohm component of the standard load shall not exceed 5 J; for other energizers the output current in the 500 ohm component of the standard load; shall not exceed the limiting value specified by line Cz of Fig. 22 of IS 8437 ( Parts 1 and 2 ); for an impulse duration of less than 0.1 ms, shall not exceed the current obtained from line from Cl of Fig. 22 of IS 8437 ( Parts 1 and 2 ) for an impulse duration of 0. lms.

-

-

Compliance is checked by measurement when the energizer is supplied with the voltage in 11.5, the energizer being operated under conditions of normal operation but with the standard load connected to its output terminals. When measuring the impulse repetition rate the standard load is not connected. The measurement are made using a measuring arrangement with an input impedance consisting of a non-inductive resistance of not less than I M ohm in parallel with a capacitance of not more than 100 pF. 5.102 If the energizer is provided with more than one fence circuit, the output characteristics shall be within the limits specified in 5.101 for any possible connection of the fence circuits. The impulses for the individual sets of output terminals shall be synchronized and -

the impulse duration shall not exceed the value specified in 5.101, the impulse repetition rate shall not exceed the value specified in 5.101, for any possible combination of individual impulses. by the measurements which have

Compliance is checked specified in 5.101.

5.103 For types A and B energizers

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) Medium power energizers which are marked with a maximum energy per impulse exceeding 5J shall also be marked with the corresponding load resistance at which the maximum energy per impulse is obtained. 7.6 Addition
5 ...................output ( Fence )

8.1 Addition Appliance shall be constructed and enclosed so that there is adequate protection against accidental contact with live parts. Compliance is checked by inspection and by the tests of 8.1 to 8.9 as applicable. The means for the connection considered to be a live part. of the fence is not

& ....... .............output ( Earth ) 7.12 Addition Instructions for use of types A, B and D energizers shall include a warning against rechargeable batteries; and using non-

8.2 This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is not applicable. 9 STARTING OF MOTOR-OPERATED APPLIANCES This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is not applicable.
10 INPUT

state that, during charging, lead-acid batteries must be placed in a well ventilated area.

This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows.
10.101 The maximum energy per impulse delivered by medium power energizers shall not deviate from the value marked on the energizer, if any, by more than *lo percent and the load resistance at which it is obtained shall not deviate from the value marked on the energizer by more than *5 percent.

The instructions for use for battery-operated energizers shall in particular emphasize the warning marke,d on the energizer, which states the substance of the following `WARNING - Do not connect to mains-operated equipment'. 7.101 Unless the correct mode of connection is obvious, marking shall clearly and indelibly identify the output terminals with the words EARTH and FENCE, or with the appropriate symbols. Where alternative output terminals are provided they shall be similarly marked, or marked with the words FULL POWER, REDUCED POWER or REDUCED VOLTAGE, as appropriate. If a switch to control the output energy is provided, the various positions of the switch shall be marked with the appropriate symbols, or with the words FULL POWER,REDUCEDPOWERor REDUCEDVOLTAGE, as appropriate. The lettering of the marking shall have a height of at least 3 mm and the symbols a height of at least 6 mm. Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement. 7.102 For types A, B, C and D energizers and battery-operated energizers the supply terminals for connection of the battery shall be clearly indicated by the symbol `+' or the colour red, if of positive polarity, and by the symbol `-' of the colour black, if of negative polarity, unless the polarity is irrelevant. Compliance is checked by inspection. 8 PROTECTlON AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979) is applicable except as follows. 5

Compliance is checked by the following test. The energizer is supplied at rated voltage or rated voltage for battery supply, as appropriate, under conditions of normal operation bet with a variable resistive load connected across its output terminals. The energy per impulse dissipated in the resistive load connected across the energizer output terminals is measured using the measuring arrangement described in 5.101. The resistive load value is measured after it is adjusted to maximize the energy per impulse measured.
NOTE -This test is only applicable to medium power energizers, which are marked with a maximum energ) per impulse exceeding SJ.

11 TEMPERATURE RISE This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as rc follows.
11.2 Addition

For type A energizers when connected for mains supply, type D energizers when connected for battery charger supply and type B energizers when connected for mains supply with battery charge operation, a battery of the largest type for which the energizer is designed is connected to the terminals for the connection of the battery supply. Before starting the test, the battery is discharged to such an extent that

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) the voltage delivered by the battery does not exceed 0.75 times its normal value.
11.5 Replacement

a source incorporating a series resistance of 1 ohm and having the form of:
l

The energizer is operated under normal operation, supplied as follows: A mains-operated energizer is supplied with the most unfavourable supply voltage between 0.85 and 1.1 times rated voltage. Types A and C energizers, when they are connected for mains supply, are supplied with the most unfavourable supply voltage between 0.85 and 1.1 times rated voltage. A type B energizer, when it is connected for mains supply with battery charge operation, is supplied with the most unfavourable supply voltage between 0.85 and 1.1 times rated voltage. Types A,B, C and D energizers, when they are connected for battery supply, and batteryoperated energizers are supplied at the terminals for the connection of the battery with the most unfavourable supply voltage between:
l l

a half-wave rectified sine-wave with an r.m.s value equal to the rated voltage for battery supply, a full-wave rectified sine-wave with an r.m.s value equal to the rated voltage for battery supply,

-

whichever is the more onerous. 11.7 Replacement The energizer is operated until steady conditions are established. 12 OPERATIONUNDER OVERWAD
CONDITIONS

-

This clause of IS 302-l (1979) is not applicable. 13 ELECTRICAL INSUI.ATION AND LEAKAGE CURRENTATOPERATINGTEMPERATURE This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 13.1 Modification Compliance is checked by the tests of 13.2 and 13.3 for mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains only.
Addition The energizer is operated under normal operation when

-

0.55 and 1.1 times rated voltage for battery supply, if the energizer can be used with non-rechargeable batteries; and 0.75 and 1.1 times rated voltage for battery supply, if the energizer is designed for use with rechargeable batteries only.

l

supplied as specified in 11.5 for mains operation. 14 RADIO AND TELEVISION SUPPRESSION This clause of IS 302- l(l979) follows: 14.1 Not applicable
INTERFERENCE

The values specified in table 101 for the internal resistance per cell of the battery shall be taken into account. Type D energizers, when they are connected for battery charger supply, are supplied from

is applicable except as

Table 101 Battery Source Impedance

Supply to the Terminals

for the Connection
N

of the Battery

Internal

Resistance

per cell ohm Rechargeable Batteries 0.0012 0.0015 0.0060 -

Non-rechargeable Batteries 0.08 0.10 0.75 2.00

I.1 times rated voltage for battery supply I .O times rated voltage for battery supply

0.75 times rated voltage for battery supply
0.55 times rated voltage for battery supply

NOTE - When determining the internal resistance of a battery, two or more cells connected in parallel are considered to be one cell.

6

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) Additional Sub-clauses 14.101 Energizers shall be resistant to atmospheric surges entering from the fence or from the mains. Compliance is checked by the tests of 14.102 to 14.105 for mains-operated energizers and types A,B and C energizers; 14.102 to 14.104 for type D energizers; and 14.104 for battery-operated energizers with a rated voltage exceeding 42.4 V.
NOTE 5.104. The value of U, is the peak value of the energizer output voltage obtained during the test of method is given in IS 2071 (Parts 1 and 2).

14.102 Five positive and tive negative impulses, each having a prospective peak voltage of 2 I/O but not less than 25kV, are applied between the output terminals and a.c. input terminals connected together and the metal plate, for mains-operated energizers and types A, B and C energizers; the output terminals and the metal plate, for type D energizers;

-

the interval between consecutive impulses being at least 10 s. 14.103 Five positive and five negative impulses, each having a prospective peak voltage of 2 UObut not less than 25kV, are applied between the output terminals connected together and the a.c. input terminals connected together, for mains-operated energizers and types A, B and C energizers; the terminals for connection of the external battery charger, for type D energizers;

Unless otherwise specified, during the tests, no disruptive discharges shall occur but surge protection devices are allowed to operate. Mains-operated energizers and types A, B, C and D energizers are fixed to a metal plate having dimensions which are at least 150 mm in excess of those of the orthogonal projection of the energizer on the plate, and are then installed as in normal use. Battery-operated normal use. energizers are installed as in

-

the interval between consecutive impulses being at least 10 s. if during this test a surge protection device operates the test is repeated with the surge protection device rendered inoperative. During the repeat test no disruptive discharges are allowed. If the energizer has more than one fence circuit, each fence circuit is subjected to this test in turn, the other fence circuits being open-circuited. 14.104 Five positive and five negative impulses, each having a prospective peak voltage of 2 UCI but not less than 25 kV, are applied between the output terminals, the interval between the impulses being at least 10 s. The input terminals are open-circuited. 14.105 Five positive and five negative impulses, each having a prospective peak voltage of 5 kV, are applied between the a.c. input terminals, the interval between consecutive impulses being at least 10 s. The output terminals are short-circuited. 15 MOISTURE RESISTANCE This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979) is applicable. 16 INSULATION RESISTANCE AND ELECTRIC STRENGTH(AFlERHUMIDlTYTREATMENT) This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 7

The tests are made by means of an impulse generator producing positive and negative full lightning impulses having a front time of I .2 ps and a time to half-value of 50 ps, the tolerances being:
l

5 percent for the peak value,

f 30 percent for the front time, and f 20 percent for the time to half-value. Small oscillations in the impulse are allowed, provided their amplitude near the peak of the impulse is less than 5 percent of the peak value. For oscillations during the first half of the front time, amplitudes up to IO percent of the peak value are allowed. The shape of the impulses is adjusted with the energizer connected to the impulse generator. The adjustment shall be made at approximately 50 percent of the test voltage specified. If for the test of 14.104 or 14.105, it is not possible to obtain the correct shape of the impulses, it is only necessary to ascertain that the front time has the required value at approximately 50 percent of the prospective peak voltage specified. The impulse generator to be used for the tests shall have an energy content of at least 1255 at the test voltage.
NOTE More information with regard to the test

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) 16.1 Modification 16.2 Modification

Compliance is checked by the tests of 16.2, 16.3 and 16.102 for mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains; and 16.101 and 16.102 for battery-operated energizers.

The test voltage is the upper limit of the voltage in 11.5. 16.3 Addition Other values of the test voltages and the points of application are shown in table 102.

-

Table 102 Additional Test Voltages

Points

of

Application

Test Voltage')
2 Ue but not less than 10

Between the supply circuit and accessible parts for metal-encased class II energizers Between the Between the
fence circuit and accessible parts*) supply circuit and the fence circuit

OOOV OOOV OOOV

2 Ue but not less than 10 2 l/o but not less than IO

*)

I) The value 2 A gap of 50

Cl, is a peak value equal to twice the maximum peak value of the output voltage measured in 5.104. mm around the output terminal shall be provided in the metal foil in contact with accessible parts.

16.101 For battery-operated energizers the supply term'inals are connected for 10 min to a voltage between I. 1 and I .5 times rated voltage for battery supply, which is so chosen that the output voltage, without a load connected, has the maximum value, protective spark gaps, if any, being disconnected. The insulation between the poles of the supply circuit is then subjected for I min to a d.c. voltage of approximately 5OOV.Before this test is made capacitors, resistors, inductors, transformer windings and electronic components which are connected between the poles of the supply circuit are disconnected. When a capacitor forms part of an integrated circuit and cannot be disconnected separately, the circuit as a whole is disconnected. No breakdown shall occur during the test. 16.102 Immediately after the tests of 16.3 and 16.101, the output characteristics are measured as specified in 5.101. The values measured shall be within the limits specified in 5.101 and shall not deviate in an unfavourable way by more than 10 percent from the values measured during the tests of 5.101.
17 OVERLOAD PROTECIION

Compliance is checked by the following test. Mains-operated energizers and types A and C energizers when they are connected for mains supply are operated under conditions of normal operation. The voltage applied is the rated voltage. Type D energizers, when connected for battery charger supply, are operated under conditions of normal operation. The voltage applied is as specified in 11.5. Battery-operated energizers and type B energizers connected for battery operation are placed in their normal position and are fitted with a battery having a nominal voltage equal to the rated voltage for battery supply of the energizer. The battery shall be of the largest type for which the energizer is designed. The battery shall be fully charged at the beginning of the test and shall be replaced by a fresh one as soon as during the test, the voltage of the battery decreases to 0.75 times its nominal voltage for a rechargeable battery or to 0.55 times its nominal voltage for a non-rechargeable battery. For types A and D energizers, a battery of the largest type for which the energizer is designed connected and placed in the battery compartment. Before starting the test the battery is discharged to such an extent that the voltage delivered does not exceed 0.75 times its nominal value. The other sample, for types A and C energizers, is to be connected for battery supply and supplied from a battery of the largest type for which the energizer is designed. The battery shall be fully charged at the beginning of the test, and shall be replaced by a fresh
8

This clause of 302- I ( 1979 ) is not applicable. 18 ENDURANCE Energizers shall be so constructed that they are able to endure extreme temperatures that may be encountered in normal use. Moreover, overload protection devices shall not operate under these conditions.

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 )

one as soon as, during the test, the voltage of the battery decreases to 0.75 times its nominal voltage for a rechargeable battery or to 0.55 times its nominal voltage for a non-rechargeable battery. The energizer is operated continuously for 168 h ( seven days ) at an ambient temperature of 15 f 2�C and then for 168 h ( seven days ) at an ambient temperature of 50 f 2'C. The output terminals are loaded with a noninductive resistor of 500 f 2.5 ohm during the first 84 h of each period of 168 h and the load is removed for the remainder of these periods. At the end of each of the periods of 168 h, the output characteristics are measured, as specified in 5.101,at the ambient temperature prescribed for the relevant period. The values measured tied in 5.101 andshall ivay by more than measured during the shall be within the limits specinot deviate in an unfavourable 10 percent from the values test of 5.101.

During and after each test, the temperature of the windings shall not exceed the values specified in 19.6 of IS 302-I and the appliance shall comply with the conditions specified in 19.106. In particular, live parts shall not be accessible to the test finger or the test pin, as specified in 8 of IS 302-l (1979). If a conductor of a printed circuit board becomes open-circuited, the appliance is considered to have withstood the particular test, provided all three of the following conditions are met: the material of the printed circuit board withstands the burning test; Any loosened conductor does not reduce the creepage distances or clearances between life parts and accessible metal parts below the values specified in 29 of IS 302- 1 ( 1979); The plains withstands the tests of 19.11.2 with the open circuit conductor bridge

-

NOTES 1 Unless it is necessary to replace components after any of the tests, the electric strength tests of 19.106 need only be carried out after the final tests on the electronics circuit. 2 In general, examination of the plains and its circuit diagram will reveal the fault conditions which have to be simulated, so that testing can be limited to those spaces which may be exdected to give the most unfavourable raaults. 3 In general, the tests take into account any failure which may arise from perturbations on the mains supply. However, where more than one component may b:. affected simultaneously, it may be necessary to carry out additional tests which are under consideration.

Durin,g the test, the energizer shall show no change impairing its further use, the sealing compound, if any, shall not flow out to such an extent that live parts are exposed and the energizer shall meet the requirements of8. 19 ABNORMAL OPERATION This clause of IS 302-I ( 1979 ) is applicable except as .. follows. 19.1 Modification instead of the indication of the subclauses applicable to the various types of appliances, the following applies: Energizers are subjected to the tests of 19.11,19.102, 19.103 and 19.104. Addition The energizer is mounted as in 11.2, except that the battery, where applicable, is fully charged. During the tests, fuses that are accessible to the user are short-circuited. 19.11 Replacement Compliance for evaluation of the for all circuits comply with the electronic circuits is checked by fault conditions specified in 19.11.2 or parts of circuits, unless they conditions specified in 19.11.1.

19.11.1 Fault conditions to specified in 19.11.2 are not applied to circuits or parts ofcircuits where both of the following conditions are met:

-

the electronic circuit is a low-power circuit as described below; the protection against electric shock, tire hazard mechanical hazard or dangerous malfunction in other parts of the appliance does not rely on the correct functioning of the electric circuit. ,

-

A low power circuit is determined as follows: The appliance is supplied at rated voltage and variable adjusted to its maximum resistance is connected between the point to be investigated and the opposite pole of the supply source. The resistance is then decreased until the power consumed by the resistor reaches a maximum. Points 9

If the safety of the appliance under any of the fault conditions depends on the operation of-a miniature fuse-link the test of 19.105 is made.

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) closest to the supply at which the maximum power delivered to this resistor does not exceed 15 W of 5-s are called low-power point.?The part of the circuit farther from the supply source than a low-power point is considered to be a low-power circuit.
NOTES I The measurements are made from only one pole of the supply source, preferably the one that gives the fewest low-power points. 2 When determining the low-power points, it is recommended to start with points close to the supply source. 3 The power consumed by the variable measured by a wattmeter. resistor is

supply from which the measurements were made, For simulation of the fault conditions, the appliance is operated under the conditions specified in 11 of IS 302-I but supplied at rated voltage. When any of the fault conditions are simulated, the duration of the test is: as specified in 11.7 of IS 302-I (I 979) but only for one operating cycle and only if the fault cannot be recognized by the user, for example, change in temperature; as specified in 11.7 of IS 302-l (1979), if ihe fault can be recognized by the user, for example, when the motor of a kitchen machine stops; Until steady conditions are established, for circuits continuously conn.ected to the supply mains, fqr example, stand-by circuits.

-

Components except the major switching device, directly related to the pulse interval timing of the major switching device where this is an electronic cpmponent, are exempt from the test of 19.11.2. 19.11.2 The following fault conditions are considered and, if necessary, applied one at a time. Consequential faults are taken into consideration:

-

in each case, the test is ended if interruption of the supply occurs within the appliance. Fault conditions(f) if applied to encapsulted and similar components if the circuit cannot be assessed by other methods. Positive temperature coefficient resistors (PTC's) are not short-circuited if they are used within their , manufacturer's declared specification. Additiona! Sub-elausti 19.101 Energizers are subjected to each of the following conditions in turn, while being supplied with the voltage specified in 11.5, including those associated with such other fault conditions that are an actual consequence of the condition chosen: The energizer is placed in its most unfavourable position even if it is not likely to be installed in this position in normal use; Parts intended for adjusting the energizer, other than those which are adjustable from the outside of the energizer without the aid of a tool, are adjusted to their most unfavourable position, even if these parts are not intended to be adjusted by the user, unless they are effectively sealed against further adjustment; The earthing conductor is removed from the earthing terminal of the fence circuit and connected to any other output terminal; The output terminals are short-circuited; Switches, relay-contacts and the like, which form part of the impulse device, are shortcircuited or open-circuited, whichever is the

a) Short circuit of creepage distances and
clearances between live parts of different potential, if these distances are less than the values specified in 29.1, unless the relevant part is adequately encapsulated;

W Open circuit at the terminals of any component;

c) short circuit of capacitors; 4 Short circuit of any two terminals of an electric component, other than integrated circuits. This fault condition is not applied between the two circuits of an optocoupler; Failure of triacs in the diode mode; and e>

9 Failure of an integrated circuit. In this case
the possible hazardous situations of the appliance are assessed to ensure that safety does not rely on the correct functioning or such a component. All possible output signals are considered under fault conditions within the integrated circuit. If it can be shown that a particular output signal is unlikely to occur, then the relevant fault is not considered. NOTES 1 Components such as thyristors and triacs subjected to fault conditions (b) and (d). 2 Microprocessors are tested as integrated circuit. are

-

In addition, each low-power circuit is short-circuited by connecting the low-power point to the pole of the 10

IS 302-2-76

( 1999 )

more unfavourable; Fuses that are accessible without the aid of tools, series spark gaps in the fence circuit, discharging valves and thermal relays are shortcircuited; Except for electronic circuits, any creepage distance or clearance between live parts of different potential which is less than 5 mm for the fence circuit, or 2 mm or less for other circuits, is short-circuited and any unlocked connection is loosened; The switching speed of an electronic component used as the major pulse switching device shall be varied in the range O.lHz to twice the rated frequency, in approximately a 1:2:5 progression sequence over three decades, by referencing the gate signal of this device to the voltage across it using an external independent control.

terminals having an indication of polarity are connected to the opposite polarity, unless such a connection is unlikely to occur in normal use. 19.105 If, for any of the fault conditions in 19.11.2, the safety of the appliance depends on the operation of a miniature fuse-link, the test is repeated but with the miniature fuse-link by an ammeter. If the current measured does not exceed 2. I times the rated current of the fuse-link the circuit is not considered to be adequately protected and the test is carried out with the fuse-link short-circuit. If the current measured is at least 2.75 times the rated current of the fuse-link, the circuit is considered to be adequately protected. If the current measured exceed 2.1 times the rated current of the fuse-link but does not exceed 2.75 times the rated current, the fuse-link is short-circuited and the test is carried out. for quick acting fuse-links, for the relevant period or for 30 min, whichever is the shorter; for time lag fuse-links, for the relevant period or for 2 min, whichever is the shorter.

-

-

NOTE - Details of a simple comparator circuit which has been found suitable for controlling the switc6ing speed of the major pulse-switching device are given in Annex AA.

-

19.102 Types A$ and D energizers are subjected to each ofthe following conditions in turn, while being supplied with the voltage specified in 1l.S:
-

1 In case of doubt, the maximum resistance of the fuse-link has to be taken into account when determining the current. 2 The verification whether the fuse-link acts as a protective device is based on the fusing characteristics, which also gives the information necessary to calculate the maximum resistance of the fuse-link. 3 Other fuses are considered to be intentionally parts in accordance with 19.1. weak

with the energizer connected for battery supply, terminals for the connection of the battery having an indication of polarity are connected to the opposite polarity, unless such a connection is unlikely to occur in normal use; with the energizer connected for mains operation, terminals for the connection of the battery supply are connected to the most unfavourable load, including a short-circuit.

-

19.103 Type B energizers connected for mains supply with battery charge operation are subjected to each ofthe following conditions in turn, while being supplied with the voltage specified in 11.5:
-

If, for any of the fault conditions, the impulse repetition is greater than 1 Hz and the safety of the energizer depends upon the operation of a non-selfresetting protective device incorporating an internal fuse, the test is carried out three times to ensu%that this fuse operates reliably and that internal parts are not damaged at the increased impulse repetition rate. 19.106 During the tests the appliance shall not emit flames, molten metal, poisonous or ignitable gas in hazardous amounts and temperature rises shall not exceed the values shown in table below: Part Walls, ceiling and floor of the test comer') Insulation of supply cord') Temperature rise K 150 I50 1.5 times the relevant value specified in

the terminals for the connection of the battery having an indication of polarity are connected to the opposite polarity, unless such a connection is unlikely to occur in normal use; the terminals for the connection of the battery supply are connected to the most unfavourable load, includjng a short-circuit.

-

19.104 Battery-operated energizers and type B energizers connected for battery supply are supplied with the voltage specified in 11.5. the supply II

Supplementary insulation and reinforced insulation

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) other than those of thermoplastic materiaW Table 1 of IS 302-I

(1979)Z'

`) For motor operated appliances these temperatures are not determined. I) This value is under consideration. `) There is no specific limit for supplementary insulation and reinforced insulation of thermoplastic material. However, the temperature rise has to be determined so that the test of 30.1 of IS 302-l (1979) can be carried out.

5 mm and allowed to fall freely. The test is repeated 20 times. This procedure is then repeated with the board placed on each of its other longitudinal edges in turn. After the test, the energizer shall show no damage within the meaning of this standard. 22 CONSTRUCTION This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 22.31 and 22.32 Modification The requirement applies only to mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains. 22.101 For mains-operated energizers and batteryoperated energizers suitable for connection to the mains, internal connections shall be so fixed or protected, and energizers shall be so designed that, even in the event of the loosening or breaking of wires, a conductive connection cannot be formed between the mains supply and the fence circuit, and no other hazardous conditions shall arise. The input winding and the output windings of transformers used to isolate the fence circuit from the supply circuit shall be separated by an insulating barrier, and the construction shall be such that there is no possibility of any connection between these windings, either directly or indirectly through other metal parts. In particular, precautions shall be taken to prevent displacement of input or output windings, or the turns thereof; undue displacement of parts of windings, or of internal wiring, in the event of a rupture of loosening of connections.

After the tests and when the appliance has cooled to approximately room temperature, enclosures shall not have deformed to such an extent that compliance with 8 is impaired and, if the appliance can still be operated, it shall comply with 20.2 of IS 302- 1 (1979). After the tests, the insulation other than that of class III appliances, when it has cooled down to approximately room temperature, shall withstand the electic strength test is 16.4 of IS 302-I (1979) the test voltage however being 1 000 V for basic insulation 2 750 V for supplementary insulation 3 750 V for reinforced insulation

During the tests the output characteristics shall be as specified in 5.101, except for the inpulse repetition rate. If the impulse repetition rate is greater than I .34 Hz, the discharge energy per second into a load consisting of a non-inductive resistor of 500 ohm shall not exceed 2.5 J/s for a period exceeding 3 min before the energizer is rendered inoperative by a non-self-resetting protective device. The temperature rises of the windings shall not exceed the values shown in 19.6 of IS 302-l (1979). 20 STABILITY AND MECHANICAL HAZARDS This clause of IS 302-I ( 1979 ) is not applicable. 21 MECHANKAL STRENGTH This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 21.101 The energizer shall withstand the effect of being dropped. Compliance is checked by the following test. The energizer is bolted centrally to a board 1 000 f 5 mm long by 225 f 5 mm wide and approximately 25 mm thick. The board is supported at each end on a rigid table by baulks of timber of such a size that the energizer is held clear of the table surface. One end of the board is lifted through a distance of 200 f 12

Compliance is checked by inspections and by the tests of the other clauses of this standard.
NOTES

1

Isolation between the mains and the fence circuit may be achieved by the incorporation of a double-wound transformer situated either in the'input circuit or the fence circuit. If such transformers are incorporated in both circuits, at least one of these transformers should provide the required degree of isolation. Circuits connected between the input terminals and the primary side of the transformer providing the required degree of isolation are considered to be connected to the mains, and circuits connected between the output terminals and the secondary side of this transformer are considered to belong to the fence circuit.

2

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 ) 3
Examples of constructions, which comply, with the requirements of this subclause for windingsare: windings on separate spools of adequate insulating material, rigidly tixed with respect to each other and to the core of the transformer; windings on a single spool with a partition wall, both of adequate insulating material, provided that the spool and partition wall are pressed or moulded in one piece, or that, in the case of a pushed-on partition wall, there is an intermediate sheath or covering over the joint between the spool and the partition wall; concentric windings provided that; on cheekless formers,

electric shock. Battery-operated energizers shall be so designed that the conductors for the connection of the fence and the earth electrode can be easily connected; it is possible to actuate switches and other controls, if this is necessary in normal use.

-

-

Compliance is checked by inspection. 22.105 Where conductor of the fence circuit pass through the enclosure, bus'hings of insulating material suitable for the relevant working voltage and for outdoor conditions shall be provided to allow the conductors to pass, unless the enclosure is of insulating material suitable for the relevant working voltage and for outdoor conditions. Compliance is checked by inspection.
NOTE - For mains-operated energizers and batteryoperated energizers suitable for connection to the mains. material complying with the test of 30.3 is considered to be suitable for the relevant working voltage and for outdoor conditions.

-

0 each layer of the winding is interleaved with adequate insulating material projecting beyond the end turns of each year, 0 one or more separate sheets of insulating material of adequate thickness are provided between the input winding and the output windings, and 0 the windings are impregnated with a hardbaked or other suitable material which fully penetrates the interstices and effectively seals off the end turns. 4 It is not to be expected that two, independent

fixings will become loose at the same time. 22.102

For mains-operated energizers and batteryoperated energizers suitable for connection to the mains, transformers in the fence circuit shall be placed in a separate compartment. This compartment shall not contain any part, which is, or can come, in contact with the mains, with the exception of the input winding of the transformer. The bushings referred to in 22.105 shall be in the wall of this compartment. Compliance is checked by inspection and by tests of the other clauses of this standard. 22.103 For metal-encased class II energizers, the output terminals shall be placed so that external, conductors connected to these terminals are not likely to come into contact with the enclosure. Compliance is checked by inspection. 22.104 Mains-operated energizers and batteryoperated energizers suitable for connection to the mains shall be so designed that -

22.106 For mains-operated energizers and batteryoperated energizers suitable for connection to the mains, any assembly gap in supplementary insulation shall not be co-incidental with any such gap in basic insulation, neither shall any such gap in reinforced insulation give straight access to live parts. Compliance is checked by inspection. 22.107 In types A, B and C energizers, terminals for the connection of the battery and other metal parts in a battery compartment which become accessible when replacing batteries, even with the aid of a tool, shall be insulated from live parts by double insulation or reinforced insulation. In type D energizers and battery-operated energizers, parts in a battery compartment which become accessible when replacing, even with the aid of a tool, shall not be live parts. Compliance is checked by inspection, measurement and by the tests specified for double insulation or reinforced insulation. 22.108 Battery-operated energizers and batteryoperated energizers suitable for connection to the mains shall be provided with means to prevent the user from being subjected to an electric shock due to the energizer output voltage, when connecting a battery to the energizer. Compliance is checked by inspection.

the conductors for the connection of the fence and the earth electrode can be easily connected; it is possible to actuate switches and other controls, necessary in normal use, after the energizer has been mounted and connected to the mains, without opening or removing any enclosure which provides protection against harmful ingress of water or unintended 13

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 )
NOTE -

Examples of

such means are: for the con-

a switch which isolate the terminals nection of the battery;

cord connecting an external battery or battery box with. an energizer, shall not be lighter than ordinary polyvinyl chloride sheathed cord; ordinary polychloroprene sheathed cord;

-

a control which enables the output voltage to be reduced to zero; insulated crocodile clips are similar devices. WIRING

-

23 INTERNAL

This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 23.7 Replacement For mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains, conductors identified by the colour combination green/ yellow shall not be used, Compliance is checked by inspection. 24 COMPONENTS This clause of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable. 25 SUPPLY CONNECTION AND EXTERNAL FLEXIBLE CABLE AND CORDS This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 25.1 Addition Type D energizers shall be provided with a nondetachable flexible cord with connecting means that are not suitable for connection to the mains, or an appliance inlet, having at least the same degree of protection against moisture as required for the energizer, that is not compatible with appliance couplers complying with the standard sheets of IS30lO(Part I): 1965andIS3010(Part2): lb65. Compliance is checked by inspection. 25.2 Modification Replace the table by the following table: Number of Conductors Maximum Overall Diameter mm Cable 2 25.4 Addition The flexible leads or flexible cord used to connect the battery in battery-operated energizers shall be assembled with the energizer by a type X attachment. 25.6 Replacement Supply cords, other than the flexible leads or flexible 14 13.0 Conduit 16.0

The ordinary polychloroprene sheathed cord shall be used where, for climatic reasons, the ordinary polyvinyl chloride sheath@ cord is not suitable. Compliance is checked by inspection. The conductors in flexible leads or flexible cords used to connect the battery in battery-operated energizers shall have a nominal cross-sectional area of nor less than 0.75 mm2. 25.8 Addition The requirement is not applicable to the flexible leads or flexible cord connecting external batteries or a battery box with an energizer. Additional Sub-clauses 25.101 In types A, B, C, D and battery-operated energizers, if the battery is placed in a separate box, the flexible lead or flexible cord connecting the box with the energizer is considered to be an interconnection cord. 25.102 Battery-operated energizers shall have suitable means for connection of the battery. If the type of battery is marked on the energizer, the means of connection shall be suitable for this type of battery. Compliance is checked by inspection. 26 TERMlNALSFOREXTERNALCONDUCTORS This clause of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable except as follows. 26.7 Addition The requirement does not apply to the energizer output terminals. 26.10 Addition The requirement does not apply to the energizer output terminals. 26.13 Addition Terminal devices in an energizer for the connection of the flexible leads or flexible cord with type X attachment connecting an external battery or battery box shall be so located or shielded that there is no risk of accidental connection between supply terminals.

IS 302-2-76 Additional 26.101 Sub-clauses

( 1999 )

This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979) is applicable. 29 CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES This clause of IS 302-l ( 1979) is applicable except as follows. 29.1 Addition The creepage distances and clearances are not applicable to battery-operated energizers, unless otherwise specified. Creepage distances and clearances between:
-

Output terminals shall be so designed or located that it is not possible to connect the fence or the earth electrode to the energizer, by means of a plug which is designed for connection to a socketoutlet for mains supply. Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 26.102 Output terminals shall be fixed so that they will not work loose when external conductors are connected or disconnected. Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test. 26.103 Devices for clamping the conductors connecting the fence or the earth electrode to the energizer shall not serve to fix any other component. Compliance is checked by inspection. 27 PROVISION FOR EARTHING This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is not applicable. 28 SCREWS AND CONNECTIONS
Table 103 Creepage

live parts of the fence circuit and other metal pa% metal enclosures and other nietal parts of the energizer, including metal foil wrapped around the supply cord inside inlet bushings, cord guards, cord anchorages and similar parts, shall not be less than those shown in table 103.

-

The creepage distances and clearances between metal enclosures and metal parts of the output terminals

Distances

and Clearances
Distance Clenrancezb
mm 15 25 25

Output Voltage')
( Peak Value )
Up to and including 5 000 V Over 5 000 V, up to and including 7 500V Over 7 500 V `) As measured in 5.104.

Creepage

mm 15 25 30

2, The clearances specified do not apply across a spark gap or similar device, which is necessary for the correct
functioning of the energizer.

shall be not less than 50 mm and 25 mm respectively. The creepage distances and clearances between the poles of the supply circuit in battery-operated energizers shall be not less than 2 mm, when the energizer is fitted which conductors as in normal use. 30 RESISTANCETOHEAT,FIREANDTRACKING This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is applicable except as follows. 30.3 Addition
NOTE Battery-operated energizers are subject to normal duty conditions. In mains-operated energizers and battery-operated energizers suitable for connection to the mains, switching devices with moving contacts other than manually op-

erated are regarded as being subjected to extra-severe duty conditions. In addition other parts of insulating material are also regarded as being subjected to extra severe duty conditions, unless these parts are so enclosed or located that pollution by moisture are dirt is unlikeI) to occur; in such a case. The requirements for severe duty conditions apply.

31 RESISTANCE TO RUSTING Replacement

The enclosure of metal-encased class II energizers shall be adequately protected against corrosion. Compliance is checked by the salt mist test described in IS 9000 (Part 11) : 1983, which is made on the energizer mounted in its normal position of use; the energizer is kept in the test chamber for 168 h ( seven days ). 15

IS 302-t-76 ( 1999 ) Before and after this test, enclosures provided with a coating are scratched by means of a hardened steel pin, the end of which has the form of a cone with a top angle of40 degree, its tip being rounded with a radius of 0.25 mm plus or minus 0.02 mm. The scratches are made by drawing the pin along the surface of the coaching at a speed of about 20mm/s, in the manner shown in Fig. 102. The pin is so loaded that the force exerted along its axis is 1ONplus or minus 0.5 N. Each time, five scratches are made at least 5 mm apart and at least 5 mm from the edges of the coating. After the test, the enclosure of the energizer shall show no sign of deterioration which could affect compliance with this standard and its coating, if any, shall not have loosened from the metal surface and shall not have been pierced. 32 RADIATION HAZARDS This clause of IS 302- 1 ( 1979 ) is applicable. 33 FINISH This clause of IS 302-I ( 1979 ) is not applicable. 101 TESTS 101.0 Categories of Tests The test specified in table 104 shall constitute the type tests and shall be carried out on one sample selected preferably at random from a regular production lot. Before commencement ofthe tests, the fence engergizer shall be visually examined and inspected for obvious visual defects in respect of components, parts and their assembly, constructions mechanical hazards, markings provision of suitable terminals for supply connections, earthing and the effectiveness of screws and connections. The external surface finish shall be even and free from finishing defects. 101.1 Criteria of Acceptance The sample shall successfully pass all the type tests for proving conformity with the requirements of the standard. If the sample fails in any of the type tests. the testing authority at its discretion, may call for fresh samples not exceeding twice the original number and

Table 104 Schedule of Type Tests (Clause 101.0)
St No.

Test
Protection against electric shock appliances

Clause Reference 8 9 IO

9
ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii) viii) ix) x) xi) xii) xiii) xiv) xv) xvi) xvii) xviii) xix) xx) xxi) xxii)

Starting of motor-operated Input Temperature Electrical rise

II I3 IS I6 I7 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32

insulation and leakage current at operating temperature

Moisture resistance Insulation Overload Abnormal resistance and electric strength (after humidity treatment) protection operation

Stability and mechanical hazards Mechanical Construction Internal wiring Components Cord grip and cord guard Terminals Provision for external conductors for earthing strength

Screws and connections Creepage distances and clearances Resistance to heat fire and tracking Resistance to rusting Radiation hazards

16

IS 302-2-76

( 1999 )

subject them again to all tests or to the test(s) in which failure(s) has occurred. No failure should be permitted in the repeat test(s). 101.2 Acceptance Tests The following shall constitute the acceptance tests:
Test Clasue Reference 8

101.3 Routine Test

The following shall constitute the routine tests:
Test Clause Reference

a) b)

Protection against electric shock High voltage

8 13.3.2 of IS 302-I (1979) 27

a) Protection against electric shock `4 Input cl Temperature rise 4 Electrical insulation and leakage current at operating temperature Moisture resistance Insulation resistance and electric strength (after humidity treatment) Provision for earthing

10 11 I3 15 16 27

c)

Provision for earthing

101.4 BIS Certification Marking The product may also be marked with the Standard Mark 101.4.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provision of Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details of conditions under which licence for the use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

NOTE - For the purpose of acceptance tests, the humidity treatment shall be done for 24 h while conducting the test for moisture resistance (15).

101.2.1 A recommended sampling procedure for acceptance tests is given in Appendix B of IS 302-l (1979).

ANNEX
Appendix A of IS 302-l (1979) is not applicable.

A

TABLES OF TYPE TEST

ANNEXB
SAMPLING PROCEDURE FOR ACCEPTANCE TESTS Appendix B of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable.

ANNEXC
ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS Appendix C of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable.

ANNEX
Appendix D of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable.

D

MEASUREMENTOFTEMPERATUREWlTHTHERMOMETERS

ANNEXE
ALTERNATIVE TESTS FOR PROTECTED MOTOR UNITS Appendix E of IS 302-l (1979) is not applicable. I7

IS 302-2-76

( 1999 )

ANNEX
Appendix F of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable.

F

IMPACT TEST APPARATUS

ANNEX
Appendix G of IS 302-I (1979) is not applicable.

G

THERMAL CONTROLS AND OVERLOAD RELEASES

ANNEX
Appendix H of IS 302-l (1979) is applicable.

H

MEASUREMENT OF CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES

ANNEX
Appendix J of IS 302-I (1979) is applicable.

J

TEST FOR FIRE RESISTING PROPERTIES

ANNEX
BNF JET TEST FOR DETERMINATION
Appendix K of IS 302-I (1979) is not applicable.

K

OF THICKNESS OF COPPER AND NICKEL PLATING

ANNEX
APPROXIMATE MEASUREMENT
Appendix L of IS 302-I (1979) is not applicable.

L

OF THICKNESS OF CHROMIUM ON NICKEL STEEL AND COPPER

18

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 )

Connection for mains operation
Me A

I I

Connection for battery operation

I
Ch 1+ 1 IG I I T

Twe C

S

F IG Z-

S

F IG Y

77

4"

77

+

S

Ch IG B.Ch

= = = =

supply mains battery charger circuit impulse generating circuit separate battery charger
battery

+
F

=
=

fence connection

FIG. 101 SCHEMATIC EXAMPLES OFTHEDIFFERENT TYPESOF BATTERY-OPERATED ENERGIZERS SUITABLE FOR CONNECTION TO THEMAINS

19

IS302-2-76(1999)
0
-----------_-------es

C

i

I

I
I I I

I

I
Dimotion of movement

The pin is in the plane ABCD, which is perpendicular

to the sample.

FIG. 102 SCRATCH TESTFORCOATED ENCLOSURES

20

IS 302-2-76( 1999)

Annex AA
( Note Under Clause 19.101) (

Informative )

CIRCUIT FOR THE INDEPENDENT CONTROL OF THE SWITCHIN GSPEEDOFTHEMAJOR PULSJMWITCHINGDEVICE A suitable circuit for external independent control of the switching speed of semiconductor devices used as the major pulse-switching device in the energizer, in accordance with the eighth dash item of 19.101, is shown in Fig. AA. 1. The-circuit is used to reference the gate signal of the major pulse-switching device to the voltage across this device so that it can be triggered at the same point in the charging cycle. The reference voltage should be of such a value that the comparator is adjustable over the whole range of the energizer charging voltage, thereby allowing the switching speed to be set at any desired frequency. The input impedance of the comparator circuit should be such that it does not influence the results of the test.

Charging voltage
Reference voltage

Pot = Switching speed adjustor Op = Comparator FIG. AA. 1 CIRCUIT FOR THE INDEPENDENT CONTROL OFTHE SWITCHING SPEED OFTHE MAJOR
PULSE-SWIT~HINO DEVKE

21

IS 302-2-76 ( 1999 )

ANNEX BB ( Foreword )
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS
IS No.

Title

302-I (1979) 8437(Pti 1) : 1993/IEC479-l(l984)

Safety of household and similar electrical appliances: Part I General requirements (j2fth revision) Guide on effects of current passing through human body : Part I General aspects (first revision) Guide on effects of current passing through human body : Part 2 Special aspects (first revision ) High voltage test techniques : Part 1 General definitions and test requirements (second revision) Methods of high voltage testing : Part 2 Test procedures V;rst revision) Appliance-connectors and appliance-inlets (non-reversible three pin type) : Part 1 Appliance connectors Appliance-connectors and appliance-inlets (non-reversible three pin type) : Part 2 Appliance inlet. Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items : Part 11 Salt mist test.

8437 ( Part 2 ) : 1993/IEC 479-2 ( 1987 ) 2071 (Part 1) : 1993/IECPub60-l ( 1989) 2071 (Part2): 1974 301O(Partl): 1965 3010( Part2) : 1965 9OOO(Partll): 1983

22

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory instifution establishedunder the Burkatr oflndian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, ,marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comment ,, Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such revie r;sindicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Us& of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or editionby referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions". This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ETD 32 ( 4054 ). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335'-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99; 337 85,61 337 86 26,$337 86 $2 ( 60 38 43 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 235,15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 I 8327891,8327892,

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. / Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARIDABqrD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing F'ress. Khwja, Ink,

