INA WAP IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


AT Ue STS ST Sh TAT CT SAT 
adant ilies was Tare) At cafeat 
WPT 79 Arat 


Methods of Sampling and Test 
(Physical and Chemical) for Water 
and Wastewater 


Part 79 Silver 


ICS 13.060.50 
© BIS 2023 
UR AA ST 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR MEM, 9 STR BE SHC AMT, ag fret - 110002 
‘ec’ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Water Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 79) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Water Quality Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


On an average, the silver being present in the crust of the earth is 0.08 ppm, in soils it is less than 0.01 ppm to 
0.5 ppm, in streams its around 0.3 ug/l, and in case of ground water it is less than 0.1 ug/l. Silver occurs naturally 
and in combination with the elements that are non-metallic such as horn silver (AgCI) and argentite (Ag2S). The 
ores of copper and lead may also yield considerable amount of silver. Silver is widely used in batteries, jewellery, 
silverware, mirrors and photography. In the seeding of clouds, silver iodide has been used and to a limited extent, 
silver oxide is used as a disinfectant for water. 


In acidic water, silver ion predominates and in case of water with high chloride, a series of complexes would be 
expected. Silver is non-essential in case of animals and also plants. Silver can cause argyria which is a permanent, 
blue gray discoloration of the skin and eyes which gives ghostly appearance. Concentrations being in the range of 
0.4 mg/l to 1 mg/l have caused pathological changes in the liver, kidneys and rats spleen. Toxic effects with fish 
present in fresh water habitat have been observed at concentrations as low as 0.17 ug/l. In case of freshwater 
aquatic life, total amount of recoverable silver should not exceed 1.2 mg/l. 


Under the general title ‘Method of Sampling and Test (Physical and Chemical) for Water and Wastewater’ 
IS 3025 has been published in several other parts. This part of IS 3025 covers four test methods for 
determination of silver in water and wastewater. 


In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from method no. 3111B, C, and 3113 B 
of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater 23" Edition 2017 published by American Public 
Health Association. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST (PHYSICAL AND 
CHEMICAL) FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER 


PART 79 SILVER 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 79) describes the following four 
methods for the determination of silver in water and 
wastewater: 


a) Direct air-acetylene flame method; 

b) Extraction/air-acetylene flame method; 

c) Electrothermal atomic absorption 
spectrometric method; and 

d) Inductively coupled plasma method. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publications, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 3025 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 2) : (Physical And Chemical) for water 

2019 and wastewater: Part 2 determination 
of selected elements by inductively 
coupled plasma optical emission 
spectrometry (ICP - OES) 


IS 3025 Methods of sampling and test 

(Part 65) : (Physical and Chemical) for water 

2022 and wastewater: Part 65 application 
of inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP - MS) — 
Determination of 62 elements 


IS 7022 Glossary of terms relating to 


(Part 1) ; water, sewage and industrial 
1973 effluents: Part 1 
IS 7022 Glossary of terms relating to 
(Part 2) ; Water, sewage and industrial 
1979 effluents: Part 2 


IS 17614 Water Quality — Sampling: Part 1 
(Part 1) : Guidance on the design of sampling 


2021 programmes and sampling 
techniques 

IS 17614 Water Quality — Sampling: Part 3 

(Part 3) : Preservation and handling of water 


2021 samples 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 7022 (Part 1) and IS 7022 (Part 2) shall 


apply. 
4 SAMPLING AND PRESERVATION 


Sampling and sample preservation shall be done 
as prescribed in IS 17614 (Part 1) and IS 17614 
(Part 3). 


5 DIRECT AIR-ACETYLENE FLAME 


METHOD 
5.1 Principle 


The silver content of the sample is determined by 
atomic absorption spectrophotometry. For dissolved 
silver, the filtered sample is directly aspirated to 
the atomizer. For total recoverable silver, a 
pre-treatment with HCl is carried out prior to 
aspiration of the sample. This method is applicable 
in the range from 0.1 mg/l to 4 mg/l of silver. 
However, the concentration range will vary with the 
sensitivity of the instrument used. 


5.2 Apparatus 


5.2.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrometer and 
Associated Equipment 


5.2.2 Use burner head as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 


5.2.3 Standard Volumetric Glassware 


5.3 Reagents 


5.3.1 Unless otherwise specified, only AR 
grade chemicals should be used for all the tests. 


5.3.2 Air, clean, dried and free from oil, water and 
other foreign substances. The source may be a 
compressor or commercially bottled gas. 


5.3.3 Acetylene, standard commercial grade. 


5.3.4 Silver-free distilled water should be used 
for preparing standards and reagent solution. 


5.3.5 Hydrochloric Acid (HCl), 1 percent, 10 
percent, 20 percent (all v/v), 1 + 5, 1 + 1, and 
concentrated. 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


5.3.6 Nitric Acid (HNOs), 2 percent (all v/v), 1 + 5, 
1 + 1, and concentrated. 


5.3.7 Stock Silver Solution 


Take 0.157 5 g of silver nitrate in 100 ml water. Now 
add 10 ml of concentrated nitric acid and make up 
the volume to 1 000 ml (1 ml = 100 ug of Ag). 


5.3.8 Standard Silver Solution 


Prepare a series of standard silver solutions in the 
optimum concentration range by appropriate 
dilutions of stock silver solution (5.3.7) with 
distilled water (5.3.4) containing 1.5 ml of 
concentrated nitric acid. 


5.4 Procedure 
5.4.2 Instrument Operation 


5.4.2.1 It is difficult to formulate instructions as 
applicable to every instrument, because of 
differences between makes and models of atomic 
absorptions spectrometers. See manufacturer’s 
operating manual. 


5.4.2.2 Install a hollow-cathode lamp for silver in 
the instrument and set the wavelength at 328.1 nm. 
Set the slit width as suggested by manufacturer for 
silver being measured. Turn on the instrument and 
apply current to hollow cathode lamp for 10 min to 
20 min to stabilize the energy source. After adjusting 
the wavelength, install burner head (5.2.2). Turn on 
the air (5.3.2) and adjust the flow rate as suggested 
by the manufacturer to give maximum sensitivity for 
silver being measured. Turn on acetylene (5.3.3) and 
adjust flow rate. Ignite the flame and let it stabilize 
for a few min. 


5.4.2.3 Aspirate a blank consisting of distilled water 
(5.4.4) containing 1.5 ml of concentrated nitric acid. 
Set zero the instrument. Aspirate the silver standard 
solution. Check the aspiration rate of nebulizer and 
adjust it to obtain maximum sensitivity. Obtain 
maximum response by adjusting burner position 
vertically and horizontally. Aspirate the blank and 
re-zero the instrument. Aspirate standard silver 
solution near middle of linear range. Prepare a fresh 
same standard and with a new hollow cathode lamp, 
record the absorbance of this standard. Check 
consistency of instrument setup and aging of 
hollow-cathode lamp and standard referring to these 
data on subsequent determinations of silver. 


5.4.2.4 The instrument is now ready to operate. At 
the end of analysis, first switch of acetylene than air. 


5.4.3 Standardization 


Prepare at least three standard silver solutions 
containing lower concentration 0.1 mg/l Ag to 


bracket the expected metal concentration of a 
sample. Prepare a reagent blank of 100 ml volume 
with distilled water (5.3.4) containing 1.5 ml of 
concentrated nitric acid (5.3.6). Aspirate the 
reagent blank and carry out zero adjustment. 
Aspirate blank and zero the instrument. Aspirate 
each standard solution in turn into the flame and 
record the absorbance readings. Most modern 
instruments are equipped with micro-processors 
and digital read-out which permit calibration in 
direct concentration terms. 


5.4.4 Analysis of Sample 


Rinse nebulizer by aspirating distilled water (5.4.4) 
containing 1.5 ml concentrated nitric acid per litre 
and zero instrument. Aspirate a sample and 
determine its absorbance. 


5.5 Calculation 


Prepare a calibration curve on linear graph paper by 
plotting absorbance reading versus their reading. 
Alternatively, read the concentration directly from 
the instrument read-out if the instrument is so 
equipped. If sample has been diluted, multiply by 
the appropriate dilution factor. 


6 EXTRACTION/AIR-ACETYLENE FLAME 
METHOD 


6.1 General 


The given method is suitable for the detection of low 
concentrations of silver in water and wastewater. 
This method uses ammonium pyrrolidine 
dithiocarbamate (APDC) as the chelating agent, 
followed by extraction into methyl isobutyl ketone 
after the aspiration into an air-acetylene flame. 


6.2 Apparatus 


6.2.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrometer and 
Associated Equipment 


6.2.2 Use burner head as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 


6.3 Reagents 


6.3.1 Unless otherwise specified, only AR grade 
chemicals should be used for all the tests. 


6.3.2 Air, clean, dried and free from oil, water and 
other foreign substances. The source may be a 
compressor or commercially bottled gas. 


6.3.3 Acetylene, standard commercial grade. 


6.3.4 Silver—free distilled water should be used for 
preparing standards and reagent solution. 


6.3.5 Methyl Isobutyl Ketone (MIBK), reagent 
grade. 


6.3.6 Nitric Acid, concentrated, ultrapure. 


6.3.7 Sodium Sulphate, anhydrous. 


6.3.8 Ammonium Pyrolidine  Dithiocarbamate 
Solution 


Dissolve 4 g of Ammonium pyrolidine 
dithiocarbamate in 100 ml water. If necessary 
purify the salt with an equal volume of MIBK. In a 
separating funnel, shake it for 30 sec. Withdraw a 
lower portion and discard MIBK layer. 


6.3.9 Water Saturated MIBK 


In a separating funnel, mix one part of purified 
MIBK with 1 part of water. Shake it off for 30 sec, 
than allow it to settle. Save MIBK layer and discard 
aqueous layer. 


6.3.10 Potassium Permanganate Solution, 5 percent 
(w/v), aqueous. 


6.4 Procedure 


6.4.1 Instrument Operation 


6.4.1.1 It is difficult to formulate instructions as 
applicable to every instrument, because of 
differences between makes and models of atomic 
absorptions spectrometers. See manufacturer’s 
operating manual. 


6.4.1.2 Install a hollow-cathode lamp for silver in 
the instrument and set the wavelength at 328.1 nm. 
Set the slit width as suggested by manufacturer for 
silver being measured. Turn on the instrument and 
apply current to hollow cathode lamp for 10 min to 
20 min to stabilize the energy source. After the 
adjustment of final position of the burner, aspirate 
the water-saturated MIBK solution into the flame 
and then gradually reduce the flow of the fuel until 
the flame is similar to the pre-aspiration of the 
solvent. 


6.4.2 Standardization 


A minimum of three concentrations of standard 
silver solutions (see 5.3.7) are required to be 
selected to bracket the expected silver concentration 
and to be, in the optimum range of concentration of 
the instrument, after extraction. The pH of 100 ml of 
a silver free water blank and 100 ml of standard is 
adjusted to a pH of 2 to 5 by addition of 1 N Nitric 
acid or 1 N sodium hydroxide, as required. 


NOTE — For Silver extraction the most optimal pH range 
is 2.3 + 0.2. 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


Each type of standard solution and blank needs to be 
transferred into 200 ml of volumetric flasks, 
followed by addition of 1 ml of ammonium 
pyrolidine dithiocarbamate solution to each of the 
flasks and shaken well to mix. Now add 
10 ml of MIBK to each of the flasks, followed by 
vigorous shaking, for about 30 sec. (The maximum 
volume ratio of sample to MIBK is 40). Let the 
content of every flask to settle and separate into 
organic and aqueous layers, then carefully add water 
down the side of each flask to bring the organic layer 
to the neck so that it is accessible to the aspirating 
tube. 


Set zero on the instrument at water-saturated MIBK 
blank. Now aspirate the organic extract into the 
flame directly and record the absorbance. 


Prepare a calibration curve of absorbance vs 
concentrations before extraction on a linear graph 


paper. 
6.4.3 Sample Analysis 


Prepare the sample in a similar way, as the 
standards. Aspirate water saturated MIBK to rinse 
the atomizer. Now aspirate the organic extract as 
treated above into the flame directly and record the 
absorbance. 


During the extraction, if any emulsion is formed at 
the interface of water-MIBK, add anhydrous sodium 
sulphate in order to obtain the homogeneous organic 
phase. In that case, add sodium sulphate needs to be 
added into all the blanks and standards. The silver 
need to be determined immediately after the 
extraction process in order to avoid the problems 
related to the instability of extracted complexes. 


7 ELECTROTHERMAL ATOMIC ABSORPTION 
SPECTROMETRIC METHOD 


7.1 General 


This method is recommended for the determination 
of micro quantities of like silver. This method is 
applicable in the range from 1 ug/l to 25 ug/l of 
silver. However, the concentration range will vary 
with the sensitivity of the instrument used. 


7.2 Apparatus 


7.2.1 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer, the 
instrument should have background correction 
capability. 


7.2.2 Graphite Furnace 


Make use of an electrically heated device with some 
electronic control circuitry that is designed to carry 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


a graphite tube or cup with a heating program which 
provides sufficient thermal energy in order to 
atomize silver. For fresh waters with low dissolved 
solids content furnace heat controllers having three 
heating steps are enough. Furnace controller having 
upto seven heating steps programmed individually 
are used for brines, salt waters and other complex 
matrices. Adjust the furnace inside the sample 
compartment of the spectrometer instead of the 
assembly of the conventional burner. Make use of 
argon as a purge gas in order to minimize the 
oxidation of the furnace tube and to prevent the 
metal oxides formation. Also, use platform bearing 
graphite tubes in order to minimize the interferences 
and to improve the sensitivity. 


7.2.3 Readout 


7.2.4 Membrane Filter Apparatus, all glass filtering 
device and membrane filters having a pore diameter 
of 0.45 um or smaller. 


7.2.5 Cooling Water Supply, tap water at 1 l/min to 
4 l/min to cool and use a recirculating cooling 
device. 


7.2.6 Sample Dispensers, pipets of microliter 
capacity (5 ul to 100 ul) or an automatic sampling 
device which is designed for the particular 
instrument. 


7.2.7 Source Lamps, a hollow - cathode lamp or an 
electrode discharge lamp. 


7.2.8 Vent, place a vent about 15 cm to 30 cm above 
the burner to remove fumes and vapors from flame. 


7.3 Reagents 


7.3.1 Hydrochloric Acid, 1+1 and concentrated. 


7.3.2 Nitric Acid, 1+1 and concentrated. 
7.3.3 Silver Free Water, see 6.3.4. 


7.3.4 Matrix Modifier Stock Solution 


7.3.4.1 Palladium nitrate, 4 000 mg Pd/1 


Dissolve 9.34 g of palladium nitrate monohydrate in 
water and dilute it to 1 000 ml. 


7.3.4.2 Citric acid, 4 percent 


Dissolve about 40 g of citric acid in water and dilute 
it to 1 000 ml. 


7.3.4.3 Magnesium nitrate, 10 000 mg Mg/l 


Dissolve about 10.5 g of magnesium nitrate 
hexahydrate in water and dilute it to 100 ml. 


NOTE — All the modifier solutions (see 7.3.4.1, 7.3.4.2, 
7.3.4.3) and can be prepared with the volumetric 
combinations of water and above solutions. In order to 
prepare the other matrix modifiers instructions by the 
manufacturer shall be followed. 


7.3.5 Chelating Resin, 100 to 200 mesh, purified by 
heating at 60 °C in 10 N sodium hydroxide for 24 h. 
Cool the resin and rinse 10 times each with 
alternating portions of 1 N hydrochloric acid, silver 
free water, 1 N sodium hydroxide, and silver free 
water. 


7.3.6 Stock Metal Solutions, see 5.3.7. 
7.3.8 Silver Free Sea Water (or Brine) 


Fill a 1.4 cm inner diameter (ID) x 20 cm 
boronsilicate glass column with long structure to 
within 2 cm of the top having purified chelating 
resin. Now elute it with successive 50 ml portions of 
1 N hydrochloric acid, 1 N sodium hydroxide, silver 
free water and silver free water at a rate of 5 ml/min 
just before its use. Pass the brine or salt water 
through the column at a rate of 5 ml/min so as to 
extract the trace metals present. Discard the initial 
10 bed volumes (300 ml) of eluate. 


7.4 Procedures 


7.4.1 Sample Pretreatment 


Pretreat all the samples before analysis. Wash all the 
volumetric glasswares with water and 1 + 1 Nitric 
acid. In order to avoid the contamination of the 
sample, perform the digestion procedures in a clean 
and dust free lab area in. For the silver determination 
no further pretreatment is required except addition 
of matrix modifier when necessary. 


7.4.2 Operation of the Instrument 


Align and mount the furnace device as per the 
instructions given in the manual provided by the 
manufacturer. Switch on the instrument and the data 
collection unit. After this, select an appropriate light 
source and then adjust it to the electrical setting as 
recommended. Now, select an appropriate 
wavelength of 328.1 nm and then select all the 
conditions as per the instructions given by the 
manufacturer. When the determination of elements 
is done at short wavelengths or when the samples 
have high level of soluble solids, background 
correction is highly required. 


Select an appropriate inert or shealth gas flow. In 
few cases, it is desirable that the flow of gas is 
interrupted during the process of atomization. Such 
type of interruption leads to high level of sensitivity 
by increasing the residence time of the atomic vapor 


in the optical path. Background absorption can also 
be increased by gas interruption and interference 
effects can be intensified, but these problems are 
usually eliminated by modern background 
correction methods. Make consideration of the 
advantages and disadvantages of the option for 
every matrix when the analytical conditions are 
optimized. 


In order to optimize the conditions of the graphite 
furnace, precisely adjust the temperature settings of 
the furnace so as to maximize the sensitivity and 
precision and to minimize the interferences. Follow 
the instructions by the manufacturer. 


Use the temperature for drying slightly above the 
solvent boiling point and provide sufficient time and 
temperature for the complete evaporation without 
spattering or boiling. 


Select the temperature for atomization by the 
determination of the lowest temperature thereby 
providing the maximum sensitivity without eroding 
the precision significantly. Optimize the system by 
a series of successive analysis at various 
temperatures of atomization using a standard 
solution having absorbance between 0.2 to 0.5. 


The temperature of charring must be high enough so 
as to maximize the volatization due to interfering 
matrix components yet too low to volatize the 
elements under interest. With the atomization and 
drying temperatures set to the optimum values, 
perform the analysis of the standard solution at a 
series of charring temperatures in increments 
increasing between 50 °C to 100 °C. When the 
optimal point of charring temperature is exceeded, 
there will be a drop in sensitivity significantly. Draw 
a plot of charring temperature versus the absorbance 
of the sample: the optimal charring temperature is 
the highest without any reduced sensitivity. Verify 
the optimization with any kind of major changes in 
the sample matrix. 


7.4.3 Calibration of the Instrument 


Prepare the standard solutions by diluting the silver 
stock solution (5.3.7) for calibration of the 
instrument. After every two weeks, prepare the 
standard solutions or even more frequently as 
required if the response indicates the degradation of 
the standard. A decrease in signal by more than 
10 percent requires investigation and indicates the 
need for the preparation of fresh standards. 


Prepare a blank and minimum of three calibration 
standards in the appropriate range of 1 ug/l to 
25 ug/l concentration for correlating the 
concentration of the silver and response of the 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


instrument. As closely as possible, match the matrix 
standard solutions to those of the samples. For brines 
or seawaters, make use of metal free matrix (7.3.8) 
as the standard solution is diluents. In addition to 
this, if needed, add the similar concentration of the 
matrix modifier to the standard solutions. 


Inject an appropriate portion of each standard 
solution, in the order of their increasing 
concentration. Now analyze each of the standard 
solution in duplicate so as to verify the precision of 
the matrix. 


On a linear graph paper, construct analytical curve 
by making a plot of the average peak absorbance or 
peak areas of the standard solution versus their 
concentration. Alternatively, also use the electronic 
instrument calibration in case the instrument is 
capable. 


7.4.4 Sample Analysis 


Carry out the analysis of all the samples except for 
those which are free of matrix interferences (based 
on recoveries of 85 percent to 115 percent for the 
concentration which is known) using standard 
addition methods. Carry out the analysis of all the 
samples at least in duplicate or till the results are 
reproducible. A variation of upto 10 percent is 
considered acceptable. 


7.4.4.1 Direct determination 


Inject a portion of pretreated measured sample in the 
graphite furnace. Take the same volume which was 
taken for the preparation of calibration curve. Add 
modifier immediately to the sample using automatic 
sampler and micropipette. Co-addition of it is also 
acceptable. For all samples and standards, use the 
similar volume and concentration of the modifier. 
Dry, char, and atomize as per the preset program. 
Repeat till the reproducible results are obtained. 


Compare the peak area or the average absorbance 
value to the calibration curve to determine silver 
concentration. Directly read the results in case the 
instrument is equipped with capability. If the 
concentration or the absorbance or the sample peak 
area of the sample is more than the concentration 
(absorbance) or peak area of the most concentrated 
standard solution, dilution of sample is 
recommended and results are to be reanalyzed. In 
case very high dilutions are needed, another method 
like flame AA and ICP can be more suitable. During 
the final calculation, high dilution can magnify 
the small errors. Keep the modifier concentration 
(if present in the solutions) or acid background 
constant. Dilute the sample in a blank solution of 
matrix modifiers and acid. 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


7.4.4.1.1 Calculation 
7.4.4.2 Method of standard addition 


The standard addition method is valid only if it falls 
in the calibration curve linear portion. Once the 
sensitivity of the instrument has been optimized for 
the element to be determined and linear range has 
been established, carry out the analysis of the 
sample. 


Into the furnace device, inject a measured value of 
sample. Dry, char or ash, atomize the samples as per 
the program that has been preset. Repeat the method 
till the reproducible results are obtained. Now, 
record the response of the instrument in 
concentration or absorbance as appropriate. Then 
add the known concentration of element to a 
separate sample portion so that the sample volume 
should not change significantly. Repeat the analysis. 


Add a known concentration (twice of what is used in 
the first addition), to a separate portion of the 
sample. Mix it well and after that again carryout the 
determination. 


NOTE — The steps followed should lead to the results in 
the linear range of the method. 


Plot the average absorbance or response of the 
instrument for the sample and the additions on the 
vertical axis against concentration of the element 


added on the horizontal one on a linear graph paper. 
Use zero as the concentration of the sample. Now, 
draw a straight line which connect the three points 
and then extrapolate it to the zero absorbance. The 
intercept on the horizontal axis is the negative of the 
concentration of the element in the sample. The 
concentration axis on the left of the origin should be 
the mirror image of the axis present on the right. 


It is acceptable in case some instruments perform 
and calculate the method of standard additions. 


7.4.4.2.1 Calculations 


Concentration of silver, ug/lI=CxF  ...(2) 


where 


C = concentration of metal as read directly from 
method of additions, in ug/l; and 
F =dilution factor 


8 INDUCTIVELY COUPLED 
SPECTROSCOPY 


PLASMA 


Silver can also be determined by inductively 
coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy with 
reference to procedure given in IS 3025 (Part 2). 
Likewise, inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectroscopy with reference to procedure given in 
IS 3025 (Part 65) can also be used for the 
determination of silver in water and wastewater. 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Water Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 36 


Organization 
Chief Scientist, EPTRI, Hyderabad 


Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Vijaywada 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 


Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Madras 


Envirocare Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Thane 


Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi 


Gujarat Pollution Control Board, Gandhinagar 


Haryana State Pollution Control Board 


Himachal Pradesh State Pollution Control Board, Govt 
of Himachal Pradesh 


Indian Agricultural Research Institute — Water 
Technology Centre, New Delhi 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indian Water Works Association 


Representative(s) 
SHRI N. RAVEENDHAR (Chairperson) 


SHRIMATI M. SREERANJANI 
SHRIMATI A. SRI SAMYUKTHA (Alternate) 


DR S. K. SAHU 
SHRI I. V. SARADHI (Alternate) 


DR (MRS) BABLY PRASAD 
DR ABHAY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. MISHRA 
SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


DR KAPIL K. NARULA 
DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


DR LIGY PHILIP 
DR S. MATHAVA KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PRITI AMRITKAR 
SHRI NILESH AMRITKAR (Alternate) 


Ms NITASHA DOGER 


DR D. N. VANSADIA 
SHRI K. B. VAGHELA (Alternate) 


SHRI JATINDER PAL SINGH 


DR T. B. SINGH 
ER PRAVEEN GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR KHAJANCHI LAL 
DR RAVINDER KAUR (Alternate) 


SHRI J. I. SEVAK 
DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY (Alternate I) 
DR N. D. GANGAL (Alternate ID 


DR SUNDERGOPAL SRIDHAR 
DR NIVEDITA SAHU (Alternate) 


DR S. C. BARMAN 
DR SATYAKAM PATNAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY CHARHATE 


IS 3025 (Part 79) : 2023 


Organization 


Karnataka State Pollution Control Board, Bengaluru 


Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest & Climate 
Change 


Ministry of Jal Shakti Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation 


National Environmental 
Institute, Nagpur 


Engineering Research 


National Institute of Oceanography, Vishakhapatnam 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Telangana State Pollution Control Board 
Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board 


In Personal Capacity (1221, Mahatma Gandhi Road, 
P. O. - Haridevpur, Kolkata - 700082) 


In Personal Capacity (S-168 A- Uppal Sothend, Sector 
49, Sohna Road, Gurugram - 122018) 


In Personal Capacity (H. No. 1-78/2/S/121/1, Sathi 
Reddy nagar colony, Boduppal, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, 500092) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR H. RUPADEVI 
DR GOURI GOLSANGI (Alternate) 


DR V. R. THAKUR 
SHRI S. C. KOLLUR (Alternate) 


DR SONU SINGH 


SHRI D. A. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR NOOR A. KHAN 
DR V. V. S. S. SARMA 
DR DURBAR RAY (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY PRAKASH 
SHRI HARIKRISHNA SURARAPU (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK NARAYAN SINGH 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR M. S. SATYANARAYANA RAO 
DR ARUNIMA BAJPAI 


SHRI SANJIB KUMAR GOSWAMI 


SHRI RAKESH MALHOTRA 


SHRI N. MURALI MOHAN 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING 


DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 36 (19127). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


