**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 12157 (1987) : Requirements for construction of work 
platform of powered industrial trucks (for maintenance 
purposes) [TED 22: Transport Tractors and Trailers] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 621-868-277-3 18:12157-1987 



( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 
Indian Standard 

REQUIREMENTS FOR 

CONSTRUCTION OF WORK PLATFORM OF POWERED 

INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS ( FOR MAINTENANCE PURPOSES ) 



1. Scope — Prescribes the requirements for work platforms intended as ancillary devices for 
occasional use in conjunction with forklift trucks for maintenance purpose. 

1.1 It neither pertain to medium or high-lift order picking trucks nor to permanently vehicle mounted 
elevating and rotating work platforms. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Work Platform— A platform designed for mounting on the elevating device of a high-lift fork 
truck for the purpose of providing a safe working place. 

2.2 Operator's Platform — It is that part of the truck from which the operator normally controls the 
truck. 

2.3 Supplementary Platform — A load-carrying platform accessible from the operator's platform designed 
for mounting on the elevating device of a high-lift order-picking truck, 

3. Requirements 

3,1 All work platforms shall have: 

a) a slip resistant floor surface; 

b) a toe plate having a minimum height of 100 mm^ 

c) provision to protect personnel, when on the work platform, from moving parts of the truck 
that represent a hazard; 

d) means to restrain and/or confine personnel on the work platform. The means shall be 
railings. However, where permitted by national regulations, chains, ropes and/or tethers 
may be used; and 

e) in-built stability of platform to withstand jerks, 

3.1.1 Railings 

3.1.1.1 A top railing shall be positioned not less than 900 mm measured from the upper surface of 
the railing to the floor of the platform. 

3.1.1.2 An intermediate rail shall be positioned approximately midway between the top of the toe 
plate and the underside of the top railing. 

3.1.1.3 The rails shall be able to withstand a concentrated, horizontal force of 900 N applied at 
the point of least resistance, without permanent deformation. 

3.1.1.4 If hinged or removable sections for access are provided, they shall be constructed in such 
a manner that proper positioning is readily accomplished and a secured condition is visibly discemable. 
Hinged sections shall open either upwards, inwards or sideways. 

3.1.2 Chains or ropes 

3.1.2.1 Chains or ropes shall meet the dimensional requirements of 3.1.1. 

3.1.3 Tether attachments, lanyards, safety belts and testing 

3.1.3.1 National regulations, where provided, shall apply. Where national regulations do not exist. 



Adopted 14 September 1987 



© Aprii 198$. BIS 



Gr 1 



BUREAU OF IMdiAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 12157-1987 

the following shall apply: 

a) The tether or lanyard shall be nylon rope (or equivalent stretch material). The tether or 
lanyard shall be of such length that the personnel attached has freedom of movement in 
the work area, but shall be limited to a maximum slack length of 15 m measured from the 
point of fixed attachment to the operator and shall be so arranged as not to cause a 
condition, where the operator (s) could trip on the tether or lanyard. 

b) The tether or lanyard shall be attached either to an overhead member of the platform at a 
point located above and near the center of the platform or any other suitable anchoring 
point. 

c) The safety belt used in conjunction with a tether or lanyard shall have a minimum width of 
44 mm. 

d) The complete tether or lanyard, safety belt, attachments and anchoring point(s) shall be 
capable of withstanding three consecutive drop tests of 115 kg falling through a height of 
1'8 m without failure or permanent deformation of any of the components. 

e) When conducting the test, the waistband of the belt shall support the test mass in the 
same manner as it would support a worker. 

3.2 Means shall be provided to firmly and rigidly attach the work platform to the fork arms or fork 
carriage of the truck so that the platform cannot move independently of the carriage. 

3.3 0\/erhead protection shall be provided as required by the operating conditions. 

3-4 The floor dimensions of the work platform shall neither exceed 2 times the rated load centre 
distance, measured parallel to the longitudinal centre plane of the truck, nor have a width greater than 
the width of the truck ( measured across the drive tyres ) plus 500 mm. 

3.5 The platform shall be centered laterally on the truck and shall be secured to the forks or carriage of 
the truck. 

4. Marking 

4.1 The following information shall be prominently indicated or marked on the work platform: 

a) Maximum load to be handled, and 

b) Mass of empty platform. 

4.2 The combined maximum load and mass of the platform shall not exceed one-third the capacity at 
the related load centre and maximum forklift height as indicated on the information plate of the truck 
on which the platform is used. 

5. Operating Rules and Practices for the User 

5.1 Passengers shall not ride on trucks except where specific provision is made to accommodate 
them. Riding by passengers on the elevating mechanism or attachments is not permitted, except under 
the following conditions. 

5.2 For a truck, other than a high-lift order-picker truck, when fitted with a work platform: 

a) the platform shall be secured to the lifting carriage and/or forks; 

b) when personnel are on a platform not equipped with elevating controls, the operator shall 
be in the operator's position on the truck; 

c) only the elevating controls on the platform shall be used when personnel are on a platform 
equipped with elevating controls; and 

d) the combined mass of the platform, load and personnel shall not exceed one-third the 
capacity at the related load centre and maximum fork-lift height as indicated on the 
Information plate of the truck on which the platform is used. 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard has been prepared with a view to lay down the requirements for work platforms 
intended as ancillary devices for occasional use in conjunctions with fork-lift trucks for maintenance 
purposes. While framing this standard, ISO/DP 8200 Powered industrial trucks— Work platform ( for 
maintenance purposes )~ Construction requirements' issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), was also consulted. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



