NAT HIAF IS 17335 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


qoi Aeaee NT Scala ATTATT uc 
frg fira ager cht graa ferenifaret 
SIT HAT 


Determination of Apparent Viscosity 
of Bituminous Binders at Elevated 
Temperature by Rotational 
Viscometer 


ICS 91.100.50, 93.080.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 3 


Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Bitumen, 
Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Product 
Division Council. 


Measurement of the non-Newtonian viscosity of a variety of bituminous material is important in various 
applications. Such measurements could be related to the determination of apparent viscosity of unmodified and 
modified binders at mixing and compaction temperatures, as well as at application temperature for bituminous 
emulsions and cutbacks. The non-newtonian viscosity can be measured at any given temperature by subjecting the 
sample to a shear rate sweep or steady-shear for a chosen torque level. This standard prefers viscosity measured 
using a chosen torque level. 


Considerable assistance has been drawn from ASTM D4402-15 'Standard test method for viscosity determination 
of asphalt at elevated temperatures using a rotational viscometer' and EN 13302 : 2010 *Bitumen and bituminous 
binders: Determination of dynamic viscosity of bituminous binder using a rotating spindle apparatus’ while 
formulating this standard. 


The Composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, 1f the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off , it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical 
value ( revised). 


IS 17335 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


DETERMINATION OF APPARENT VISCOSITY 
OF BITUMINOUS BINDERS AT ELEVATED 
TEMPERATURE BY ROTATIONAL 
VISCOMETER 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the method of test for 
measurement of apparent viscosity of modified and 
unmodified bituminous binders using a rotational 
viscometer and a temperature controlled thermal 
chamber for maintaining the test temperature. 


NOTES: 


1. In general, standard application temperatures are reported, 
although the dynamic viscosity can be measured at other 
temperatures, if required. Similarly, viscosity is generally 
reported at standard rates of shear, although additional 
measures can be taken at varying shear rates if required. 


2. In this standard, the phrase “bituminous binders” represents 
unmodified and modified bitumen, bituminous emulsions and 
cutbacks. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Newtonian Liquid — A liquid for which the rate of 
shear is proportional to the shearing stress. The constant 
ratio of the shearing stress to the rate of shear is the 
viscosity of the liquid. The viscosity of a newtonian 
liquid is therefore not dependent on its shear rate. If the 
ratio is not constant, the liquid is non-newtonian. Many 
liquids exhibit both newtonian and non-newtonian 
behaviour, depending on the shear rate or temperature, 
or both. 


2.2 Shear Rate — The measure of the speed at which 
the intermediate layers of the liquid move with respect 
to each other. Its SI unit is sec’. 


2.3 Shear Stress — The force per unit area required to 
produce the shearing action. Its SI unit is Pascal. 


2.4 Viscosity — The ratio between the applied shear 
stress and shear rate is called the viscosity. For a 
newtonian liquid, this ratio is constant. For a non- 
newtonian liquid, this depends on shear rate and hence, 
called as apparent viscosity. The SI unit of viscosity is 
the Pascal second (Pa:s). 


2.5 Form Factor — Specific factor or factors to be 
applied for the individual equipment in order to obtain 
the actual viscosity from the readings, mainly due to 
the geometry of the apparatus. 


3 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


The standard prescribes the method for measurement 
of apparent viscosity of bituminous binders using 
rotational viscometer. The torque on the apparatus- 
measuring geometry, rotating in a thermostatically 
controlled sample holder containing bituminous binders 
sample, is used to measure the relative resistance to 
rotation. The torque and speed are used to determine 
the viscosity of the bituminous binders. 

NOTE — Comparisons between non-newtonian viscosity 


values of bituminous binders should be made only with similar 
conditions of temperature, shear rate, and shear history. 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 Rotational Viscometer 


Capable of measuring the torque required to rotate the 
selected apparatus measuring geometry at a selected 
constant speed while submerged in bituminous 
binders at constant desired test temperature, and with 
the capability to convert the torque measurement to 
viscosity. 

NOTE — This calculation may need to be done manually for 

some instruments. 


4.1.1 In order to cover all types of unmodified and 
modified bitumen, bituminous emulsions and cutbacks, 
under the most usual test conditions, the rotational 
viscometer should have sample containers and rotating 
spindles allowing following capabilities: 


a) Range of shear rate : 1 s' to 200 s; and 


b) Range of dynamic viscosities : 10? Pass to 


10? Pa's 


4.1.2 The following two conditions are indication of 
correct measuring geometry and may be used in general 
or in case of rotating cylinders: 


a) Ratio of the radius : R/R, 7 1.1 (see Fig. 1); and 
b) Difference between the radius : R| — R, = 1 mm to 
6 mm. 
NOTE — The typical test temperatures are: 
a) For bituminous emulsions — 40°C; 
b) For cutbacks and fluxed bitumen — 60°C to 90°C; and 


c) For unmodified or modified bituminous binders — 90°C to 
180°C. 


IS 17335 : 2020 


1 Sample container 

2  Spindle 

3 Thickness of sample being measured 
4 Sample under test 

R4 Inner radius (spindle) 

Rə Inner radius (sample container 


Fic. 1 A TvPICAL ROTATIONAL VISCOMETER 


4.1.3 The rotational viscometer shall be calibrated 
annually using a certified reference newtonian fluid 
of known viscosity at various temperatures to be used 
during the test. The viscosity measured shall be within 
+ 2 percent of the certified value, or else a calibration 
constant (viscosity of the calibration fluid/viscosity 
indicated by the apparatus) must be determined and 
applied. 


4.2 Appropriate Spindle(s) 


A spindle, or set of spindles, appropriate for the 
equipment, that will allow, for the materials to be tested 
and each specific test condition, dynamic viscosities 
to be measured with an accuracy at least equal to 
+ 5 percent. 


NOTES: 


1. If achievable accuracy is not known from the information 
given by the manufacturer of the equipment, the spindles 
should be selected so as to obtain dynamic viscosity readings 
greater or equal to 20 percent of the spindle working range for 
the chosen test conditions. 


2. For low viscosity materials (typically, for viscosities below 
100 mPa.s), it may be difficult to fulfill these requirements 
with existing equipment. Lower accuracy is then permitted but 
needs to be documented while indicating, in the test report, 
the actually achieved level of accuracy or, if not known, the 
position of the reading with regard to the working range of the 
used spindle. 


4.3 Apparatus-Measuring Geometry 


The part of the equipment that is immersed in the 
bituminous binder sample, the dimensions of which 
are used, in conjunction with the rotational resisting 
torque, to calculate the apparent viscosity. 


NOTE — This geometry may be referred to the spindle, bob, 
inner concentric cylinder or vane. 


4.4 Sample Container 


Which allows the equipment to be used in coaxial mode 
and therefore enable the control of shear rate. 


4.5 Temperature-Controlled Thermal Chamber 


With least count 0.5?C and capable of maintaining the 
sample of bituminous binder at the test temperature 
between 90 and 210?C. 


4.5.1 The accuracy of the temperature reading and the 
temperature stability of the temperature controller are 
to be checked at least every six months by placing a 
bituminous binder or high flash point oil in the test 
chamber, and equilibrating to a temperature within 50°C 
of the temperature(s) to be used during the test. The 
sample temperature shall then be measured to within 
+ ]?C. If any temperature differential is indicated, the 
set point of the temperature controller shall be offset 
accordingly. 


4.6 Balance 
With least count 0.1 g. 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 Preparation of Test Sample 


The bulk binder sample shall be placed in an oven 
maintained at a temperature of about 80?C above the 
expected ring and ball softening point temperature or 
at a maximum of 200?C, whichever is the lower. Do 
not overfill or underfill the sample container, as the 
sample volume is critical to meet the system calibration 
conditions. The container shall be covered with a loose 
lid to protect it against oxidation. The test sample shall 
be fluid before transferring it to the sample container. 


5.2 Preheating 


5.2.1 Set the temperature control device to the desired 
test temperature. 


5.2.2 Connect the selected spindle to the rotating spindle 
viscometer and lower it into an empty sample container 
placed into the temperature control device. Wait until 
equilibrium temperature is obtained (about | h). If, for 
practical reasons, the spindle cannot be preheated, it 
can be connected at ambient temperature and lowered 
into the hot sample. Temperature equilibration time 
then needs to be extended accordingly. 


5.2.3 Additional sample containers may be preheated 
at the same temperature in a separate oven for 45 min. 


5.2.4 Remove the sample container from the 
temperature control device or the oven and add the 
volume of sample specified for the spindle to be used. 
Do not overfill or underfill the sample container, as the 
sample volume is critical to meet the system calibration 
conditions. Avoid incorporation of air bubbles into the 
samples. 


5.2.5 Place the loaded sample container into the 
temperature control device. Lower the spindle into 
the sample to the depth specified by the instrument 
manufacturer. 


5.2.6 Ensure the equipment is level by use of a 
levelling device (for example, spirit level). Allow the 
system to equilibrate at the test temperature. Allow the 
moveable part to rotate during the pre-heating time at 
a very low shear rate. Maintain the temperature during 
the test at within + 0.5°C up to 100°C and + 1.0°C 
above 100°C. 


5.2.7 Bring the bituminous binders to the desired 
temperature within 30 min and allow it to equilibrate at 
the desired test temperature for a minimum of 10 min 
before beginning the measurement. 


IS 17335 : 2020 


5.3 Measurement 


5.3.1 Start the motor rotation of the viscometer at a 
speed that will develop a resisting torque that is between 
10 and 98 percent of the full-scale instrument capacity. 
The desired shear rate is achieved with a precision of 
+ 10 percent. 


5.3.2 Maintain this speed and allow the sample to 
equilibrate for an additional 5 min. Temperature should 
not deviate more than +1°C during this conditioning 
period. Measure either the viscosity or the torque at 
1 min intervals for a total of three minutes. 


5.3.3 Record the torque, viscosity (where necessary, 
apply the form factor to calculate dynamic viscosity 
from the reading of the instrument), shear rate, and 
temperature. 


5.3.4 Repeat steps 5.3.1 to 5.3.3 for each test 
temperature required. 


NOTES: 


1. Reuse of sample is allowed for successive measurements at 
different temperature levels, as long as the total time for the hot 
sample does not exceed 4 h. 


2. If torque readings are above 98 percent of the instrument 
capacity at the lowest test temperature, decrease the speed of 
rotation of the apparatus-measuring geometry and continue 
with the test, or repeat with a smaller diameter geometry and 
the appropriate volume of sample. 


3. If the torque reading is below 10 percent of the instrument 
capacity at the highest test temperature, increase the speed 
of rotation of the apparatus geometry, or repeat with a larger 
diameter geometry and the appropriate volume of sample. 


6 CALCULATION 


Calculate the arithmetic average of the three readings 
taken at 1 min intervals, rounded to three significant 
figures. 


NOTE — If the instrument automatically averages the three 
readings, manual calculation is not needed. 


7 REPORT 


7.1 Report viscosity value with test temperature. 
Express the dynamic viscosity, in Pascal-second 
or milli-Pascal-second as the mean of two results, 
obtained on two separate samples. If the individual 
results differ by less than 10 percent, report the mean 
value of the two results. If the individual results differ 
by more than 10 percent of the mean value of the two 
results, the individual results and the mean value shall 
be reported. 


7.2 Report apparatus measuring geometry type and size, 
torque in milli-Nm or percent of instrument capacity, 
and speed in s or r/min. 


IS 17335 : 2020 


8 PRECISION 


The following criteria shall be used for judging the 
acceptability of any result (95 percent confidence 
level): 


8.1 Repeatability 


Duplicate values by the same operator using the same 
test equipment, in the shortest practical period of time 
shall be considered not equivalent if the difference in 


the two results, expressed as a percent of their mean, 
exceeds 3.5 percent. 


8.2 Reproducibility 


The values reported by each of two laboratories, 
representing the arithmetic average of duplicate 
determinations, shall be considered not equivalent if 
they differ by more than 14.5 percent. 


IS 17335 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), 
New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (BPCL), Mumbai 
Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department (CPWD), 
New Delhi 


G R Infra-Projects Ltd, Gurgaon 

GP Global Asphalt Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Indian Institute of Delhi (IIT Delhi) 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IIT Roorkee) 


National Rural Road Development Agency, 
New Delhi 


National Test House (NTH), Kolkata 
Personal Capacity 

Shell Bitumen India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
Airport Authority of India (AAI), Delhi 


Ashoka Buildcon Ltd, Nashik 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (BPCL), Kochi 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (BPCL) R&D, 
Mumbai 

Bitchem Asphalt Technologies, Meghalaya 

Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd (CPCL), Chennai 

CSIR North East Institute of Science & Technology 
(NEIST), Jorhat 

Dilip Buildcon Ltd, Bhopal 

Directorate of General Border Roads, Seema Sadak 
Bhawan, New Delhi 

Engineer-In-Chiefs Army HQ, New Delhi 


Highway Research Station, Chennai 


Hindalco Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SATISH CHANDRA (Chairman) 
Suri M. N. NAGABHUSHANA (Alternate I) 
Dn B. P. Baruan (Alternate IT) 


Suri M. K. SHEVADE 
Dr RAJANI LAKHANI 


SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 


SHRI U. C. GUPTA 

SHRI RAJESH KUMAR JAIN 

DR ARAVIND SWAMY 

DR SHAM SUNDAR RAVINDRANATH 


SHRI B. C. PRADHAN 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR 
Suni P. S. KANDHAL 
SHRI NILANJAN SARKER 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI SupnIO GosH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT PATIL 
SHRI DEVENDRA Marone (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR. T. 
Suri R. Rasu (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY BHARGAVA 
SMT SONAL MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANTA DUTTA 
Suri MuziBUR RAHMAN (Alternate) 


Dn S. Kumar 
SHRI H. RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr Suasui D. BARUAH 
Dn B. P. Baruan (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. KAMESWARA RAO 
Dn Anus K. C. (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI UMAKANT Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI R. JAYAPRASAD 
Suri O. P. Srivatava (Alternate) 


Ms R. GEETHA 
Suri T. S. SUNDAR (A/ternate) 


SHRI K. VENKATESH 
Suri HAnsHAD Panpit (Alternate) 


IS 17335 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 


Hindustan Colas Ltd, Mumbai Suri T. K. SUBHAASH 
Suri K. G. RANGANATHA (Alternate) 
Suri HarsHaD Panpit (Young Professional) 
SHRI K. VENKATESH (Young Professional) 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HP Green Suni B. Ravi 
R&D Center), Banglore Suri K. R. KrisHna (Alternate) 


Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun Dr MANO! SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI ANAND SINGH (Alternate) 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT Madras) Dr J. MURALI KRISHNAN 
Dn A. VEERARAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Refinery Division), SHRI S. M. UKEY 
New Delhi Suri S. B. Lankan (Alternate) 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, R&D Centre, Faridabad DR N. S. RAMAN 
Dn I. Devorra (Alternate I) 
SHRI DHANESH Kumar (Alternate II) 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi Suri S. K. NIRMAL 
Suri R. V. PATIL (Alternate) 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi SHRI VIVEKANAND 


SHRI ANIL KUMBHARE (Alternate I) 
SHRI SACHIN VINAYAK Zore (Alternate II) 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR 
SHRI VARUN AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


Nayara Energy Ltd, Mumbai SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR 
Suri DHIRAJ GONDALIA (Alternate) 
Om Infracon Pvt Ltd, Guwahati Suri A. N. Das 


SHRI DIGAMBAR DEKA (Young Professional) 
SaRI Mauisu Basas (Young Professional) 


OOMS Polymer Modified Bitumen Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon Suri B. R. TYAGI 
Suri PALASH Karnar (Alternate) 


Total Oil India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai DR PANKAJ KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI Gaurav GooNE (Alternate) 
Zydex Industries Ltd, Vadodara Dn Asay RANKA 


SHRI HIMANSHU AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
SHRI VISHAL SALVJA (Alternate IT) 


BIS Directorate General Suri V. K. Diunpt, Scientist ‘G’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Smt NisHA BURA 
Scientist ‘C’ (PCD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 06 (13633). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


