Indian Standard 


HAA Hier Alea am — 

Refen ara fear enm 

Sn AT aan sf frao 
( Vem FRIO ) 


Automotive Tyres — Selection 
and Inspection of Retreadable 
Tyre Casing 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 83.160.10 


© BIS 2018 


ARA Ies A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AR HAT, 9 Terme AHL AM, Ae fercit-110002 
Lm MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2018 Price Group 2 


Automotive Tyres, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee, TED 7 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Tyres, Tubes and Rims Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 2006. This standard has been revised to keep pace with the latest technological 
advancement in the field of selection and inspection of retreadable casing for automotive tyres. This standard has 
been revised after due consideration of the practices prevalent in the industry. Following are some of the salient 
features of this standard: 


a) Requirements of brand specific non destructive tester has been done away and process explained with 
addition of Shearography Analysis and recommended system added. 

b) Typographical errors have been corrected and appropriate words have been added to convey the correct 
meaning; and 

c) Acceptance criteria(s) of casing has been done away have been done away with. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15731 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE TYRES — SELECTION AND 
INSPECTION OF RETREADABLE TYRE CASING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the selection criteria and 
inspection methods of retreadable tyre casing, so that 
each casing that passes the selection and inspection 
process shall be acceptable for the process of retreading. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Casing — Casing is a worn tyre comprising carcass 
and remaining tread and sidewall material. 


2.2 Retreadable Casing — The casing suitable for 
retreading after inspection. 


2.3 Casing Distortion — A processing defect in which 
the natural shape ofthe tyre is deformed by constriction 
in the matrix during the retreading process. 


2.4 Corrosion — Degradation of steel reinforcement 
in the tyre. 


2.5 Chunking — Breaking away of pieces of rubber 
from the tread. 


2.6 Circumferential Breaks — A tyre injury running 
parallel to the bead. 


2.7 Circumferential Crack — Cracks in a tyre running 
parallel to the beads. Usually consists of cracks in the 
tread grooves. 


2.8 Cracking — Splitting in the tread grooves. 


2.9 Cracks — A parting with in the rubber tread that 
does not extend to or through the cord material. 


2.10 Creep — Slow change in the strain. 


2.11 Delamination — A smooth separation between 
layers of material. 


2.12 Deflation — The distortion of tyre from its normal 
shape. 


2.13 Carcass — Structure or skeleton of tyre. 


2.14 Green Tyre — A built tyre (new or retreadable) 
before being cured. 


2.15 Groove Cracking — Cracking which occurs at 
the bottom of tread groove. 


2.16 Injury (Injuries) — Any damage caused by the 
penetrating object or severe scuff or impact. 


2.17 Injury Size — The widest opening in the cord 
body after skiving and buffing. 


2.18 Nail Hole — A small puncture through a tyre made 
by a sharp object such as a nail or screw. 


2.19 Open Splice — A defect caused by failure of the 
rubber to knit together properly at the splice during 
cure. 


2.20 Overloading — Tyre overloading can be 
dangerous and is not recommended. However, note that 
tyre load capacity can be increased in certain cases by 
increased inflation or control to lower speeds. 


2.21 Ozone — A form of oxygen that accelerates aging 
and weathering in tyres. 


2.22 Ozone Checking — The formation of fine cracks 
in a rubber surface due to ozone in the environment. 


2.23 Penetration — Damage to a tyre caused by a 
piercing object not completely going through a casing. 


2.24 Ply — Layer of rubber coated parallel cords. 


2.25 Ply Separation — Parting of rubber compound 
between adjacent plies. 


2.26 Porosity — Tiny air pockets in the rubber caused 
by poor mould fit, insufficient rubber, or lack of 
pressure. 


2.27 Puncture Repair — An off-the-wheel repair of 
any injury caused by a penetrating object. The type 
of repair is determined by the size and depth of the 
injury. 

2.28 Radial Cracking — Cracking, usually in or near 
the sidewall area, resulting from the under inflation 
(Cracks are perpendicular to the bead). 


2.29 Ream — Clean any injury or hole prior to 
repairing. 


2.30 Retread Separation — Tread detachment from 
the tyre at the interface of the new tread and buffed 
surface. 


2.31 Retreadability — Ability ofthe tyre casing to be 
retreaded and provide acceptable performance. 


IS 15731 : 2018 


2.32 Retreaded Tyre — A casing to with a new tread 
has been affıxed to extend the usable life of the tyre. 


2.33 Run Flat — Tyre damage resulting from operation 
with low or no air pressure, some times identified by 
repetitive liner cracking or discolouration. 


2.34 Rust — Advanced stage of corrosion. 


2.35 Section Repair — Repairs made to a casing when 
any injury extends through the tread or sidewalls of 
the tyre. The damaged cord is removed and replaced 
by a repair unit. 


2.36 Separation — Pulling apart of plies (from each 
other), such as ply separation or tread separation (from 
plies). 


2.37 Shaping — Buffing a casing to a shape that 
properly fits the contour of a matrix cavity. 


2.38 Sidewall Separation — Separation of the rubber 
compounds and plies in the sidewall. 


2.39 Sizing — Measurement of to determine the 
proper mould fit. Usually a combination of bead-to- 
bead, cross-section and diameter of a circumference. 
Also referred to as mould fitment. 


2.40 Spot Repair — Replacement of rubber in an injury 
that penetrates less than 25 percent of the body plies. 


2.41 Torn Tread — Small pieces of tread torn off 
during extraction from mould in new or retreaded tyres. 


2.42 Tread Separation — Pulling away of tread from 
the tyre casing. 


2.43 Tread Tearing — Tearing away of a portion of 
the tread design. 


2.44 Turn-Up — Part ofthe body ply that wraps under 
the bead bundle and ends in the tyre sidewall. 


2.45 Weather Cracking — Fine cracks in the tyre 
sidewall surface caused by oxidation and other 
atmosphere effects. 


3 TEST METHODS 


3.1 Tyres are to be inspected on a mechanical spreader. 
These spreaders allow the inspector to visually examine 
each tyre internally and externally for defects and 
damage. 


3.1.1 In addition to properly functioning tyre spreaders, 
adequate lighting is necessary. The tyre inspection area, 
in general, shall be well lighted. The place where tyres 
are being inspected should have internal lighting of not 
less than 200 foot-candles. The recommended lighting 
is 300 foot-candles. A simple light meter can measure 
the effectiveness of the actual lighting. 


3.1.2 An industrial-tyre vacuum system is 


recommended to remove debris and water from inside 


atyre. 
3.2 Non-Destructive Testers 


The following devices may be used for non--destructive 
tyre inspections. 


3.3 Ultrasonic Scanner 


High frequency ultrasonic waves are passed through 
tyre casing and the attenuation is measured as the 
indication of defects/separation inside the casing. 


3.4 Nail Hole Detector 


The equipment generates high voltage electrical pulse 
which passes through the steel belted tires. Flashes with 
the sound ofa spark when the probe crossing the flawed 
areas. 


3.5 Inflation Tester 


This unit is designed for testing casings, The tester uses 
pressure to cause sidewall to show weaknesses and 
defects during inflation. The tyre inflated in three stages 
with pressure ranging from 1.4 to 8.3 bar, while the 
operator looks for any unusual humps, bulges, or 
irregularities in the sidewall. 


3.6 Shearography Analysis 


Shearography is a laser light based interferometric 
measurement method. Initially areference image of full 
field is gathered and stored. The interferogram is 
directly recorded by a CCD-video camera. The tire is 
then stressed under vacuum in an enclosed chamber 
and an additional image is gathered. The two images 
are superimposed. Where the images disagree 
(indication of change) this final composite image (IF) 
displays fringes. Evaluation software, determines ifthe 
casing contains hidden separations. 


3.7 Recommended System 


A combination of spreader with adequate lighting 
(visual inspection), nail hole detector and shearography 
analysis shall be the complete foolproof system for 
casing inspection. 


3.8 Casing Storage 


Tyres and moisture (water) are enemies, particularly if 
the moisture is inside the tyre or in injury moisture 
penetrates through casing, the inner-liner can cause 
havoc with the structure of a tyre body. Ifthe tyre is a 
steel radial truck tyre, moisture penetration can cause 
the steel cables to rust and corrode. This could weaken 
the strength of the steel cables and lead to premature 
failure. In the tyre fabric, moisture may cause weakness 
or separation between the plies. All tyres to be retreaded 


shall be moisture-free and stored in dry areas. These 
areas should protect the tyres from rain, fog, snow, ice, 
etc. Tyres should not be laced or thrown together in a 
haphazard fashion. This tends to distort steel belts and 
results in products that thump, bump, or have crooked 
treads. The best way to store tyres is to stack them flat 
in piles no higher than eight passenger and light truck, 
or medium truck tyres. 


4 INSPECTION 


4.1 Tyres should be inspected in dry and clean 
condition. A wet vacuum is to be used to remove water 
and then wipe the tyre dry. This should be done the day 
before the inspection to allow the casing to dry 
thoroughly. Tyre punctures, inner liner splits and other 
damages may go undetected in wet or dirty tyres. 


4.2 Causes for Rejection 
4.2.1 General Conditions 


a) Broken or loose cords beyond repair limits; 
b) Excessive cracking; 

c) Ply separation; 

d) Excessive tool damage; 

e) Non-repairable (open) liner splices; 

f) Run flat; 


g) Tubeless tyres with visible bond ply through 
the liner stock and splice opening; 


h) Badcable; 
j) Excessive or large liner blisters; and 
k) Previous repairs showing signs of failure or 
unreliability. 
4.2.2 Bead Conditions 


a) Bent, distorted, or broken beads; 

b) Excessive cracking or chafing area. In bias 
tyres, minor chafer fabric damage can be spot 
repaired; 

c) Tyres having turn-up separation; 

d) Cuts penetrating the wire that have caused rust 
and/ or separation; 

e) Deep cuts in the tyre body ply in the non- 
repairable bead area; 

f) Excessively loose liner at the bead toe; 

g) Note any deformations of the bead due to 
improper mounting or excessive wear; and 

h) When inspecting the tread area, mark with a 
crayon to indicate the starting point. 


IS 15731 : 2018 


4.2.3 Tread Conditions 


a) Damage requiring repairs to be placed too 
close together; 

b) Tyres with tread breaker, belt, or ply 
separation; 

c) Excessive wear, making buffing impossible for 
mould or precure retreading; 

d) Excessive rust in radial tyre belt package; 

e) Deepregrooving that excessively damages the 
belt; 

f) Cutting, tearing and chunking which cause 
excessive exposed belts; 

g) Tread injuries that fall outside the acceptable 
repair limits; 

h) Non-repairable cuts/penetrations and 
excessive rust 


4.2.4 Sidewall Conditions 


a) Side wall injuries that fall outside the 
acceptable repair limits; 


b) Separation or deep cracking in sidewall at the 
ply turn up. A very thorough inspection of the 
area ranging up to 25.4 mm outside the G-G 
(rim aligning) ring on the lower sidewall must 
be made. Expanding beads laterally with 
certain spreaders can show this separation; 

c) Wild wire through the tyre sidewall; 

d) Sidewall separations or broken wires 
appearing as bulges; 

e) Tyres having sidewall separations, bruise 
breaks, and bow outs; 


f) Circumferential or radial cracking due to 
flexing or deep branding; 


g) Non-repairable flow cracks; 

h) Tyres with weather cracking in sidewall/ 
shoulder areas as follows: 
1) Deeper than 2.4 mm not acceptable; 


2) 1.6 mm to 2.4 mm for trailer application 
only; and 
3) Up to 1.6 mm for trailer application. 


j) Tyres contaminated with oil and grease. 
4.2.5 Assorted Problems 


a) Pin hole in bead area, 
b Liner discoloration in shoulder region; and 
c) Porous liner. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards : Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 07 (10072). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


