NAT HIAF IS 3069 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


aade ATTA A Hater rR Vee}, 
Wetent ust EC JERI eb yreaTareit 


( FAU JTT ) 


Glossary of Terms, Symbols and 
Units Relating to Thermal 
Insulation Materials 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.27; 01.060; 27.220 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2020 Price Group 7 


Thermal Insulation Sectional Committee, CHD 27 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Thermal Insulation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


The thermal insulation industry in India has made considerable progress in recent years. Lately, with the expansion 
of domestic market and renewed thrust on the front of energy conservation, an added fillip has been provided to the 
industry for rapid growth. This glossary is, therefore, being brought out to meet the growing need for unambiguous 
exchange of commercial and scientific information within the industry, and to inculcate an increasing scientific 
bias in the use of terms, indigenous and foreign, which are current in the thermal insulation trade. The use of this 
standard over the years will help to eliminate the ambiguity and confusion arising from different interpretation of 
terms used in thermal insulation trade and industry. 


This standard was first published in 1965 and subsequently revised in 1994. On the basis of the experience gained 
since then, the definitions in this revision have been presented under four sections, with section IV being a new 
addition to the standard: 


Section I Thermal insulation materials and products 

Section II Thermal insulation properties and 

Section III Heat transfer conditions and associated properties of materials 
Section IV Other associated terms 


Technical terms and units of measurements regarding thermal insulating materials, in the temperature 
range 200?C to 1 000?C, have been precisely defined in the manner they are applicable to the relevant Indian 
Standards. Some definitions have been further clarified by giving mathematical expressions, while mathematical 
symbols have been mentioned for some others. 


These symbols shall be used as a standard practice. Special care has been taken to avoid multiplicity of units. 
Further, the units specified in this standard have been selected on the basis of experimental aspects so that the units 
are commensurate with the magnitude of test results normally obtained. 


The definitions given are based on the following guiding principles: 


a) Terms ending in ‘-ivity’ designate properties which do not depend on size or shape of the component. 
They are specific physical properties of the material of which the component is composed. On the other 
hand, the corresponding terms ending in ‘-ance’ stand for the property of that particular component and 
take proper account of the size and shape as well as the specific physical properties of the component. 


b) The words ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ refer to relatively higher or lower temperatures, when the conditions of two or 
more surfaces or articles are compared. 


c) The terms given refer only to homogeneous and uniform materials (and components large enough for the 
irregularities to be considered as negligible) under steady state of heat flow. It is assumed that dimensions 
of the component are large as compared with those of their constituent particles. Materials made of 
several components which cannot be treated as homogeneous and uniform form the point of view of heat 
flow have been referred to as structures. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS, SYMBOLS AND UNITS 
RELATED TO THERMAL INSULATION MATERIALS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard defines the terms, abbreviations, 
symbols and units associated with thermal insulations. 
It also covers the products, components and applications 
related to thermal insulation industry. 

NOTE — Some of the terms used here may have a different 


meaning when used in context of other industries or 
applications. 


1.2 The definitions have been presented under four 
sections as follows: 


Section I — Thermal insulation materials 
and products 

Section II — Thermal insulation properties 

Section III — Heat transfer conditions 
and associated properties of 
materials 

Section IV — Other associated terms 

2 DEFINITIONS OF TERMS 


SECTION | THERMAL INSULATION 
MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS 


A 
Adhesive 


A substance used to bond materials by surface 
attachment. 


Aerogel 


Asynthetic porous material derived from a gel, in which 
the liquid component of the gel has been replaced with 
a gas resulting in a solid of extremely low density and 
thermal conductivity. 


Air Space 
Space between surfaces containing air. 
Aluminium Foil 


Aluminium metal in the form of a thin metal strip rolled 
or unrolled. 


Alumino Silicate Fibre 


The fibres produced from a melt of alumina and silica. 


Annular Space (Annulus) 

Itis the ring shaped space located between two circular 
objects, for example, between a penetrating item and 
the surrounding opening. 

Anti-abrasive Coating 

A layer of material applied to surfaces to prevent 
abrasion and provide cushioning. 

Anti-sweat 

Any application that prevents condensation of vapour. 
Appearance Covering 

Materials used to improve the aesthetics of the finished 
insulation. 

Asbestos Abatement 

A procedure for the removal, enclosure or encapsulation 


of asbestos containing materials from buildings or 
areas. 


Asbestos Fibre 


The name given to a number of naturally occurring 
mineral silicates which possess a crystalline structure 
and which may be separated into fibres (fine filaments). 

NOTE — Asbestos fibres are not to be used in the manufacture 


of thermal insulating products as their health hazards are well 
known. 


All Service Jacket (ASJ) 


A vapour retarder typically composed of white kraft 
paper bonded to aluminum foil and reinforced with a 
fiberglass scrim. 


Asphalt Cut-Back 


A petroleum asphalt coating with mineral solvents used 
as vapour-retarder mastic. 


Asphalt Emulsion 


A colloidal dispersion of petroleum asphalt coating 
with water used as breather mastic. 


B 
Backing Insulation 


Insulation material which is shielded from excessive 
temperature and/or abrasive condition by a more heat 
resistant and/or protective material. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Band/Strap 


A long, narrow flexible metal, plastic or fabric material 
used to strap and secure insulation or outer cover/jacket 
in place. 


Batt 
A portion of a mat in the form of a rectangular piece 


generally between 1 m and 3 m in length and usually 
supplied flat or folded. 


Binder 


An additive normally consisting of an adhesive to make 
possible the forming of fibrous or powder type material 
into desired forms or shapes. 


Blanket Insulation 


A relatively flat and flexible insulation in coherent sheet 
form furnished in units of substantial area. 


Blanket insulation Metal-mesh 


Blanket insulation covered by flexible metal- mesh 
facings attached on one or both sides. 


Block Insulation (Billet) 


Rigid insulation performed into rectangular cross 
section with thickness not significantly smaller than the 
other dimensions. 

NOTE — Some industries may define a large block as a billet. 
Blowing Wool 
Fibrous insulation material subdivided into granules or 
pellets for an application or installation by pneumatic 
equipment. 
Blown Insulation 


Loose fill insulation which has been applied or installed 
using pneumatic equipment. 


Board (Slab or Sheet Insulation) 


A rigid insulation product of rectangular shape with or 
without a facing with the thickness significantly smaller 
than the other dimensions. 

NOTE — As compared with slabs, boards are usually thinner 


and may also be in tapered form. 
Bonded Insulation 
Insulation with a suitable binder made available in 
desired preformed shape. 
Breather Coating 
A weather barrier coating design to prevent water (rain, 
snow, sleet, spillage, wash, water, etc.) from entering 
the insulation system, while still allowing the escape 
of small quantities of water vapour resulting from heat 
applied to the moisture entrapped in the insulation. 


C 
Calcium Silicates 


Insulation comprising hydrated calcium silicate with 
fibres incorporated as a reinforcing agent. 


Carbon Fibre 


Organic fibers that have been carbonized but not 
thermally stabilized and consist essentially of carbon. 


Cellular Concrete 


Concrete containing a substantial number of small air 
cells. 


Cellular Elastomeric 


Insulation composed principally of natural or synthetic 
elastomers, or both, processed to form flexible semi 
rigid, or rigid foam which has a predominantly closed- 
cell structure. 


Cellular Glass 


Insulation composed of glass, processed to form rigid 
foam, having a predominantly closed cell structure. 


Cellular Material 


A material having many cells (either open or closed or 
both) dispersed throughout its volume. 


Cellular Plastic 


A generic term for plastic material of which the density 
is reduced by presence of numerous small cavities 
(cells), interconnecting or not, dispersed throughout 
the mass. 


Cellular Polystyrene 


Insulation composed principally of polymerized 
styrene resin, processed to form rigid foam having a 
predominately closed cell structure. 


Cellular Polyurethane 


Insulation composed principally of the catalyzed 
reaction product of polyisocyanate and polyhydroxy 
compounds, processed usually with fluorocarbon gas 
to form a rigid foam having a predominately closed- 
cell structure. 


Cellulosic Fibre 


Insulation composed principally of cellulose fibres 
usually derived from paper, paperboard stock or wood, 
with or without binders. 


Cellulosic (Cellulose) Insulation 


Cellulose fibre derived from paper, paperboard stock or 
wood, with or without binders. 


Cement Finishing 


A mixture of dry fibrous or powdery materials or 
both, that, when fixed with water, develops a plastic 
consistency and, when dried in place forms a relatively 
hard, protective surface. 


Cement Insulating 


A mixture of dry granular, flaky, fibrous or powdery 
materials that when mixed with water develops a 
plastic consistency, and when dried in place forms a 
coherent covering that affords substantial resistance to 
heat transmission 


Ceramic Fibre 


The fibrous inorganic insulation materials consisting of 
metallic oxides which may be of silica and alumina or a 
mixture of silica and other metallic oxides. 


Cladding 


Rigid or semi-rigid preformed sheet material that 
provides mechanical and/or environmental protection 
or a decorative finish to thermal insulation. Cladding 
does not necessarily have to provide a water-proof 
condition but is instead a control element which may 
only serve to safely direct water or wind in order to 
control run-off and prevent infiltration into the building 
structure. 


Cladding-jacketing 

Jacketing installed over insulation. 

Closed Cell Foam 

A material comprised predominantly of individual non- 
interconnecting cellular voids. 

Coating 

A liquid or semi liquid material that dries or cures to 
form a protective finish, suitable for application to 


thermal insulation or other surfaces in thickness of 30 
mils (0.76mm) or less, per coat. 


Cold Insulation 


This refers to an assembly of components, which 
reduces heat gain to the cold medium and components 
may include insulating materials, supports, load bearing 
construction, vapour barrier, and outer covering. 


Composite Insulation 
Multi layer insulation in which each layer of insulation 


has a property different from that of the neighbouring 
layer. 


Composite Insulation Product 


Product made from two or major layers of insulation, in 
which each layer of insulation is bonded to the adjacent 
layers. 


NOTE — Individual layer may be of the same or of a different 
material. 


Composite Panel 

Panel made from two or more different materials 
deriving its performance from a combination of the 
properties of the individual materials, for example, 
metal, plywood, particle board and insulation material. 


Composite Thermal Insulation System 


Insulation system in which the components are joined 
or bonded to each other without any air spaces. 


Cork 


Protective layer of the cork oak tree which can be 
periodically removed from its trunk and branches to 
provide the raw material for cork products. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Cork Board 


Preformed insulation materials composed of granulated 
cork bonded by heating under pressure, with or without 
added adhesive. 


Coverage 


The area or yield provided by a package of loose 
fill insulation when applied in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instruction to achieve a declared 
thermal performance. 


Covering Capacity (for Insulating Cement) 
Dry — The area covered to a specified dry thickness 
by a specified amount of dry cement when mixed with 


the specified amount of water moulded and dried to 
constant weight and specified thickness. 


Wet — The area covered to a specified wet thickness 
by a specified amount of dry cement when mixed with 
the specified amount of water and moulded to specific 
thickness. 


Cryogenic Insulation 


Insulation applied to process surfaces of extremely 
low-temperature, usually lower than -150°C. 


D 
Declared Thickness 


The thickness declared by the manufacturer as that 
which will provide the declared thermal properties. 


Declared Value 


Value declared by a manufacturer, which is derived 
from measured values under specified conditions and 
rules. 

Diatomaceous Brick 

Fired insulating brick composed mainly of the skeleton 
of diatoms (cellular siliceous particles of microscopic 
size). 

Diatomaceous Silica 

Insulation composed principally of diatomaceous earth 


with or without binders and which usually contains 
reinforcing fibres. 


E 
Economic Thickness 


The thickness of insulation at which the sum of the 
installed cost and heat loss over a defined time is 
minimum. 


Elastomeric 


A closed-cell foam insulation containing elastomers 
that provide the property of high elasticity. 


Expanded Clay 


Light weight granular material having an internal 
cellular structure formed by expanding a clay mineral 
by heat. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Expanded Polystyrene 


Rigid cellular plastic insulation material manufactured 
by moulding beads of expandable polystyrene or one of 
its copolymers and that has a substantially closed-cell 
structure, filled with air. 


Expanded Polyvinyl Chloride 


Rigid or semi-rigid cellular plastic insulation material 
based on vinyl chloride polymers expanded to form 
a cellular structure consisting substantially of closed 
cells. 


Expanded Perlite Board (EPB) 


Rigid insulation board manufactured from expanded 
perlite reinforcing fibres and binding agents. 


Extruded Polystyrene Foam (XPS) 


Rigid cellular plastics insulation material expanded and 
extruded with or without a skin from polystyrene or one 
of its copolymers and that has a closed cell structure. 


External Thermal Insulation Composite System 
(ETICS) 


System of factory made products delivered as a kit 
from the manufacturer and applied on site. 
NOTES 


1 It is comprised of all the following components specifically 
designed for a use with the substrate. 


2 An adhesive or mechanical fixing device. 
3 A thermal insulation product. 


4 One or more layers of base coat where at least one layer 
contains reinforcement. 


5 An additional reinforcement, where appropriate. 


6 A finishing material which can include a decorative coat. 
External Wall Insulation System (EWIS) 


An external wall insulation system (or EWIS) is a 
thermally insulated, protective, decorative exterior 
cladding system which consists of expanded 
polystyrene, mineral wool polyurethane foam, together 
with a reinforced cement based, mineral or synthetic 
finish plaster. 


F 

Facing 

A protective or decorative or functional surface applied 
as the outermost layer of an insulating system. 

Felt 


A flexible or semi rigid sheet of non-woven fibres 
held together by mechanical means without the use of 
binders, adhesives or conforming media. 


Fibrous Insulations 


Insulation composed of naturally occurring or 
manufactured fibres. 


Finishing Cement 


Insulating cement applied as the outermost layer 
of insulating system for protective, decorative, or 
functional purpose. 


Flexible Insulation 


Insulation material which is not rigid and can easily 
drape or take the shape of the surface on which it is 
applied. 


Foamed Slag Aggregate 

Furnace slag treated to produce light-weight aggregate. 
Foamed Slab Concrete 

Insulating concrete with foamed slab as aggregate. 
Foamed-in-Place Insulation 


Insulation material sprayed or injected in a foamed 
liquid state which then sets into a rigid insulating 
material. 


Flexible elastomeric foam (FEF) 


Closed cell flexible foam made of natural or synthetic 
rubber or a mixture of the two and containing other 
polymers and other chemicals that may be modified by 
organic or inorganic additives. 


G 
Glass Fibre 


A mineral fibre material produced predominantly from 
molten glass. 


Glass Wool 


Wool produced from glass fibre with or without binder 
/ resin, in various shapes, forms and sizes with or 
without facing. 


Granulated Cork 
Cork, ground or milled into granules or small particles. 
Granulated Wool 


Fibrous material processed mechanically to give 
modulated or granulated wool. 


H 
High Vacuum Insulation 


A sealed space from which the air has been removed to 
produce a low pressure. 


Hot Face Insulation 


Insulation which is exposed directly to hot gases or hot 
surface. 


I 
Insulating Brick 


A brick that contains a high volume ratio of air cells to 
solid matrix. 


Insulating Castable Refractory 


Insulating concrete containing a suitably graded 
insulating refractory aggregate. 


Insulating Cement (Industrial) 


A mixture of dry fibrous and powdery materials that, 
when mixed with water, develops a plastic consistency 
and when dried in place, forms a relatively hard material 
to protect insulation. 


Insulating Concrete 


Concrete, containing a substantial percentage by 
volume of lightweight aggregate. 


Concrete made cellular by aeration or foaming and may 
be cured by autoclaving. 


Insulating Jacket 


An insulation assembly enclosed in fabric, film, paper 
or thin metal designed to fit a particular shape. 


Insulating Plaster — Plaster containing a light-weight 
aggregate 

Insulating Rope 

Rope composed of mineral fibre loosely braided with 
yarn or metal wire. 

In-situ Thermal Insulation Product 

Thermal insulation product produced or taking its final 
form at the site of application and that achieves its 
properties after installation 

Injected Urea Formaldehyde Foam 

Cellular urea formaldehyde plastics insulation product 
which is foamed in-situ insulation 

Insulating Tape 

Thin, narrow strip of insulation material with or without 
adhesive backing, supplied in rolls. 

J 

Jacket 

A form of facing applied over insulation. 


NOTE — It may integral with the insulation, or field applied 
using sheet materials. 


L 

Lacing Wire 

Light gauge metallic wire, single, or multi-strand, used 
for lacing together adjacent edges of mattresses or of 


metal coverings or for securing insulating materials to 
substantially flat surface. 


Lags 


Performed rigid materials for longitudinal application 
to cylindrical equipment larger than those for which 
pipe insulation is available. 


These are of three types: 


a) Plain lags have a rectangular cross section 
designed for use on cylindrical vessel of such a 
diameter that the lags conform sufficiently close 
to the surface. 


b 


wm 


Bevelled lags are similar to plain lags are beveled 
lags with curved faces to fit the surface of a 
cylindrical vessel. 


c 


— 


Radiused and beveled lags are beveled lags with 
curved faces to fit the surface of a cylindrical 
vessel. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Lamella Product 


Mineral wool insulation in which the general orientation 
of the fibres has been rearranged to be perpendicular to 
the major surfaces. 

Light weight Aggregate 

Aggregate of porous granules. 

Light Weight Concrete 

(see Insulating Concrete) 

Loose Fill Insulation 

Granules, nodules, power or similar forms of material 
designed to be installed by hand pouring or blowing by 
pneumatic equipment. 

Loose Wool 

Fibrous insulation in loose form normally with 


out a binder or pre coated with a binder for special 
application. 


M 
Magnesia 


Insulation composed principally of basic magnesium 
carbonate which incorporates fibre as a reinforcing 
agent. 

Man Made Mineral Fibre 


Inorganic fibre manufactured from molten rock, slag, 
glass, metal oxides or clays. 


Mastic 


A material of relatively viscous consistency that 
dries or cures to form a protective finish, suitable for 
application of thermal insulation in thicknesses greater 
than 30 (0.76mm) mils per coat. 


Mat 

Flexible fibrous insulation supplied in the form of rolls 
or batts, which may be faced but not enclosed. 
Mattress 


A flexible product comprising an insulating material 
faced on one or both sides or totally enclosed with 
fabric film, paper, wire, netting or expanded metal or 
similar covering stitched to the insulating material. 


Metal Mesh Blanket 


Blanket insulation covered by flexible metal mesh 
facing attached on one both sides. 


Micro Porous Silica 


Silica powder in the form of porous particles, the pores 
having dimension comparable with the mean free path 
of the molecules of air at atmospheric pressure. It may 
optionally contain a powder /opacifiers which reduces 
heat transfer by radiation. 


Mill Board 
A tough flexible board made from cellulosic fibre. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Mineral Fibre 


Insulation composed principally of fibres normally 
manufactured from rock, slag or glass. 


Mineral Wool 


Wool produced from mineral fibre with or without 
binder/resin, in various shapes, forms and sizes with or 
without facing. 


Mitred Joint 


Pipe insulation section cut to fit around elbows, bend 
or fitting. 


Multi Layered Insulation 


Combination of two or more layers of a specific 
insulation material. 


P 
Perlite Insulation 


Natural siliceous ore expanded by heat to form a 
cellular structure. 


Perlite Plaster 
Plaster containing expanded perlite aggregates. 
Phenolic Foam 


A rigid phenol formaldehyde cellular material 
produced from the condensation products of phenols 
and formaldehyde, such as resoles and novolacs, 
together with hardners and other additives for example, 
surfactants, blowing agents, fillers, etc. 


Pipe Insulation 


A preformed rigid or flexible product in the shape of 
an annular cylinder or flat flexible product for a pipe 
circumference. 


Pneumatic Application 
A method using air to insall loose insulation. 
Polyethylene Foam 


A foamed plastics material based on polymers, derived 
mainly from ethylene and having a substantially open 
cell structure. 


Polyisocyanurate Foam 


A foamed plastics material with substantially closed 
cell structure based on polymers in which the repeated 
structural units in the chains are mainly of the 
isocyanurate type. 


Polystyrene Plastic Foam 


A rigid cellular plastics material that has been expanded 
from polystyrene or its copolymers. 


These materials are divided into two types: 


a) Board, expanded from expandable polystyrene 
beads, which is moulded to shape or cut from 
continuously or discontinuously produced block; 
and 


b) Board, produced by the continuous extrusion 
process, either with or without natural surface 
skins. 


Polyurethane Foam 


Arigid cellular plastics material based on polyurethanes 
or urethane/isocyanurate polymers. 


Poured Application 
A manual method to install loose fill insulation. 
Poured Wool 


A granulated fibrous material for manual application or 
pouring. 

Pre Coated Fibre 

Fibrous insulation in loose form, pre coated with a 
binder, enabling application like spraying, toweling, 
etc. 

Preformed Insulation 

Insulation fabricated in such a manner that at least one 
surface of the insulation conforms to the shape of the 
surface to be insulated. 

Polyester Fibre Insulation 

Man made fibres insulation made from polyester fibres, 
with or without the addition of adhesive binders applied 
during the manufacturing process. 

Prefabricated Ware 

Pieces cut, abraded or otherwise formed from a board 
or block of insulation material, for example, elbows, 
T-pieces, etc. 

Q 

Quilt 

A mattress, faced on one or both sides or totally 


enclosed with fabric, film or paper, stitched or stapled 
at suitable centres. 


R 
Radiation Shield 


A product generally in sheet form, of low emissivity, 
used to restrict the transmission of radiant heat. 


Reflective Insulation 


Insulation depending for its performance upon 
reduction of radiant heat transfer across air spaces by 
use of one or more surface of high reflectance and low 
emittance. 


Refractory Insulation Brick 


A fired insulating brick which will withstand high 
temperature, normally over | 100°C. 


Rigid Insulation 


Insulating material which retains its manufactured 
shape unless constrained to do otherwise. 


Rock-wool 


Mineral wool produced predominantly from molten 
naturally occurring igneous rocks with or without 
binder/resin, in various shapes, forms and sizes with or 
without facing. 


Roll 


Mat supplied in the form of spirally wound cylindrical 
packages. 


Rubber Expanded 


Cellular rubber having closed cells and made from a 
solid rubber compound (TC-45). 


S 

Sheet Insulation 
See slab insulation. 
Shot 


A solid particle of rock, slag or glass which has not 
been fiberized. 


Slab Insulation 


A rigid insulation product of rectangular shape with 
or without a facing, with the thickness significantly 
smaller than the other dimension. 


Slag Wool 


A mineral wool processed predominantly from molten 
slag with or without binder /resin, in various shapes, 
forms and sizes, with or without facing. 


Slotted Slab 

An insulation with a deep saw cut channel of triangular 
or wedge shaped cross section so that it can be spplied 
to, a curved surface. 

Spray Applied Polyurethane Foam 


A rigid cellular plastics material which is formed in 
place by the catalyzed reaction of polyisocyanurate 
and polyhydroxyl compounds expanded with a 
chlorofluorocarbon. 


Sprayed Insulation 

A coating of insulating material applied to a surface by 
spraying. 

Sandwich Panel 


Rigid construction comprised of an insulating material 
faced on both sides with a sheet material, for example, 
metal. 


T 
Thermal Insulation 


A product which is intended to reduce heat transfer 
through the structure against which or in which it is 
installed. Numerical limits can be set only when the 
specific application is defined. 


Thermal Insulation System 


Assembly of two or more component at least one of 
which is an insulation material or product. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


NOTE — The performance ofthe system is the performance of 
the total combined assembly. 


U 

Unbounded Insulation 
Insulation without binder. 
Urea Formaldehyde Foam 


A foamed plastics material with a sustainably open 
cell structure based on an amino resin made by the 
polycondensation of urea with formaldehyde. 


V 

Vacuum Insulatuion 

A sealed evacuated space. 
Vacuum Jacket 


A vacuum insulation product in the form of a shell or 
jacket. 


Vacuum Powder Insulation 
Powder which has been sealed in an evacuated space. 
Vacuum Reflective Insulation 


Reflective surfaces contained in a sealed evacuated 
space. 


Vermiculite Insulation 


A product that results from expanding or exfoliating a 
natural micaceous mineral by heating. 


Water Vapour Barrier 
Layer intended to prevent water vapour transfer 
Water Vapour Retarded (Barrier) 


A material for system that adequately impedes the 
transmission of water vapour under specified condition. 


Wood Fibre Board 


Natural wood fibre with or without the addition of 
bonding agent compressed to form a board, 


Wood Wool Slab 


Wood wool compressed and bonded with an inorganic 
cementing agent. 


Wool 


A random mass of any type of fibres having wooly 
consistency. 


SECTION Il THERMAL 
INSULATION PROPERTIES 


A 
Absorptance 


The ratio of the radiant flux absorbed by a body to that 
incident upon it. 


Absorption 


Tranformation of radiant energy to a different form of 
energy by interaction with matter. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Absoptivity 


The ratio of thermal radiation absorbed by a surface to 
that which is received by the surface. It varies with the 
wave length of the radiation and therefore it depends on 
the quality of radiation. 


Atmospheric Temperature 


The temperature of the ambient air measured in the 
shade. 


B 
Blackbody 


The ideal prefact emitter and absorber of thermal 
radiation. It emits radiant energy at each wavelength 
at the maximum rate possible as a consequence of its 
temperature and absorbs all incident radiance. 


C 
Conductance, Film 


The time rate of heat flow from a unit area of a surface 

to its surrounding included by a unit temperature 

difference between the surface and the environment. 
NOTE — When the environment is a fluid (liquid or gas), it 
makes conductance also dependent upon the nature of fluid 


motion past the surface (laminar or turbulent) and the surface 
roughness (W/m?K). 


Conductance, Thermal (C) 


The time rate of heat flow through a unit area of a body 
included by a unit temperature difference between the 
body surface (W/m?K). 


NOTES 


1 The average temperature of a surface is the area weighted 
mean temperature of that surface. 

2 When the defined surface ofa mass type thermal insulation are 
not of equal areas, as in the case of thermal transmission in two 
radial directions or are not of uniform separation(thickness), an 
appropriate mean value for area and thickness must be given. 
3 When other modes of heat transfer are present in addition 
to conduction, the apparent or effective thermal conductivity 
is obtained by multiplying the thermal conductance by the 
average thickness. 

4 For the case where there is air passage through the body, 
the effective thermal conductance must include details of the 
pressure difference across the body. For a material or assembly 
where radiant energy opacity or transparency affects the nature 
of heat transfer, the optical properties must be given. 

5 Total and areal thermal conductance are often used as 
synonyms for thermal conductance. 


Conductivity, Thermal 


The time rate of heat flow through unit thickness 
of an infinite slab of a homogeneous material in a 
direction perpendicular to the surface included by unit 
temperature difference (W/mK) (mW/m.K) or (mW/ 
cm?C) 

NOTES 


1 For time practical purpose, the lateral extent of a slab is 
considered to be definite when heat flow laterally is less than 
twice of the transverse flow. 


2 A body is considered homogeneous when the above property 
is found by measurement to be independent of sample 
dimension. 

3 The property must be identified with both specific mean 
temperature as it varies with temperature, direction. and 
orientation of thermal transmission, as some bodies are not 
isotropic with respect to the thermal conductivity. 

4 For many thermal insulation materials thermal transmission 
occurs by a combination of different modes of heat transfer, 
and the measured property should be referred to as an effective 
or apparent thermal conductivity for the specific condition of 
test (sample thickness and orientation, environment, applied 
load, environmental pressure and temperature difference.) 


Convection Coefficient (Film Coefficient ) (f ) 


The quantity of heat transferred by convection in 
unit time to or from unit area of a surface divided by 
the temperature difference b/w the surface and the 
surrounding air or other fluid (W/m?K). 


B =fA(O-0) 
e c s m 
NOTE — The quantity of heat transferred will depend on 


several factors, such as the velocity of the air or other fluid, the 
temperature and the roughness of the surface. 


D 
Diffusivity, Thermal (a) 


Thermal conductivity divided by heat capacity per unit 
volume. It is a characteristic property of the material 
and is used in considering temperature distribution 
when thermal equilibrium is not established (m?/s). 


E 
Effective Ambient Temperature 


For structure surrounding by air the effective anbient 
temperature is a suitably weighted mean radiant 
temperature of the surrounding (K, °C) for a fluid 
opaque to radiation, the effective ambient temperature 
is the same as the surrounding fluid temperature. 

NOTE — Significant difference might be obtained depending 


on the method of measurement, which should be specified for 
particular application. 


Emissivity ( E ) 
The emissivity of a surface for thermal radiation si the 
ratio the radiation from unit area of the surface to the 


radiation from unit area of a full radiator (black-body 
for which E =1) at the same temperature. 


Emittance (€) 


The ratio of the radiant flux emitted by a specimen to 
that emitted by a black body at the same temperature 
and under the same condition. 


Emittance, Directional [E (0, &)] 


The ratio of the radiance from the surface in a 
particular to the radiance from a blackbody at the same 
temperature under the same conditions. 


Emittance, Hemispherical (€, or E€, ) 


The average directional emittance over a hemispherical 
envelope covering a surface 


Emittance, Spectral [€A or € (A, 0, 4] 


An emittaance based on the radiant energy emitted 
per unit wave length interval (monochromatic radiant 
energy). 


NOTE — Where necessary to avoid confusion, emittance 
should be designed by subscript, for example, €,4, End, €0A, 
€, , etc. For most engineering purpose, the hemispherical total 


ht? 
emittance €, suffices. 


Emittance, Total [€ or € (t)] 


An emittance that is an integrated average over all 
wavelengths of radiant energy emitted. 


G 
Greybody 


A body having the same spectral emittance at all 
wavelengths. 


H 


Heat Capacity per Unit Mass (c) or (Specific Heat 
Capacity) 
The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 
unit mass by one degree (J/kg K). 

NOTE — The relevant conditions, such as temperature range 


and pressure, under which this quantity is measured should be 
specified. 


Heat Capacity per Unit Volume (h) 


The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of 
unit volume by one degree (J/m?K). 


NOTE — This is equivalent to the heat capacity per unit mass 
of the material multiplied by its bulk density. 


R 
Radiance 


The rate of radiant emission per unit solid angle and 
per unit projected area of a source in a stated angular 
direction (usually the normal). 


NOTE — The term intensity of radiation is often used as a 
synonym for radiance. 


Radiant Flux Density 


The rate of radiant energy emitted from unit area of 
surface in all radial directions of the overspreading 
hemisphere. 


Radiation Coefficient 


The net quantity of heat radiated in unit time from unit 
area of a surface divided by the temperature difference 
b/w t radiating surface and the surrounding with which 
it is exchanging radiation (W/m?K). 


q.— fA (8, E 0.) 


NOTE — The radiation coefficient is a function of the 
temperature, emissivity and configuration of the surface and of 
the surrounding. 


Radiation Constant (c E) 


The quantity of heat radiated in unit time from unit 
area of the surface divided by the fourth power of the 
absolute temperature T of the surface. This applies 


IS 3069 : 2020 


only to a surface for which the emitted radiation 
is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute 
temperature (Stefan's Law). The radiation constant is 
defined by (W/m?K?) 


q, 7 o EAT* 


NOTE — The net heat gained or lost by radiation is 
the difference between the heat radiated by the body 
and that received by it through radiation from the 
surrounding. When the surrounding are black; or are 
infinitely distant, the net gain or loss of heat by radiation 
is given approximately by: 


q,- 6 EA (T/ - T7) 
Reference Temperature 


A temperature selected for use as the basis for physical 
property measurement and expression of data for those 
materials for which the physical properties change with 
temperature. 


Reflectance 


The fraction of the radiation incident on a surface that 
is reflected from the surface. 


NOTES 
1 For an opaque surface, the sum of the reflectance and the 
absortance is unity at equilibrium. 


2 Absorptances and reflectance are of various types, as are 
emittances. For most engineering purpose, the hemispherical 
total emittance will suffice. Further, the terms absorptivity and 
reflectively, like emissivity, are restricted to materials having 
opaque, optically flat surfaces. 


Reflectivity 


The reflectivity of a surface for thermal radiation is the 
ratio of the amount of radiation reflected to that which 
is incident on the surface. 
NOTE — The reflectivity depends on the radiation and this 
should, therefore be stated. In particulars solar reflectivity for 


a given surface usually differ in value from reflectivity for 
radiation at lower temperature. 


Resistance, Thermal 


The mean temperature difference at equilibrium b/w 
two defined surface of material or a construction that 
induced a unit heat flow rate through unit surface area 
(m?K/W). 

NOTES 

1 Thermal resistance and thermal conductance are reciprocals. 


2 See Notes 1 and 2 under conductance thermal for insulation 
applied to cylinders thermal resistance is expected in terms of 
unit linear length of the insulation. 

3 For the case where there is air passage through the body, 
the effective resistance should include details of pressure 
difference through the body. For a materials or assembly where 
radiant energy opacity or transparence affects the nature of heat 
transfer, the optical properties should be given. 


Resistivity, Thermal 
The temperature difference b/w the parallel surface of 


infinite slab ofa homogeneous material ofunit thickness 
when a unit thermal transmission is maintained in unit 


IS 3069 : 2020 


time through a unit surface area by conduction only ina 
direction perpendicular to the surface (m.K/W) 


NOTES 
1 Thermal resistivity and thermal conductivity are reciprocals. 
2 See Notes 1,2,3, and 4 under conductivity thermal. 


S 
Shape Factor (S) 


The shape factor of a structure is defined by the 
equation: 
q = KS (8., = 0.) 


NOTE — This quantity is useful in comparing structure of 
similar but not simple geometric form. 


The shape factors for some common forms of bodies 
are given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Common Shape Factors 


Body Shape Remarks 
Factors (S) 

Plane slab of area A A/L By definition of 
and thickness ‘L’ conductivity 
Tube or hollow 2.73 h/log,, Theoretical value 
cylinder length (X/Y) (assuming no end losses) 
External and internal 2nh/0.303 - 
radii X and Y log (X/Y) 
Hollow sphere, 4n XY / Theoretical value 
external and internal (X-Y) 
radii X and Y 
Rectangular box A/L+2.16 Based on experiment 
of uniform ; wall [(X+Y+Z) A= internal area 
thickness 'L' internal *1L] 
dimensions X, Y = 2(KY+YZ+ZX) 


and Z where each is 
greater than 1/5 


Soaking Heat 


Atest condition under which the specimen is completely 
immersed in atmosphere maintained at a controlled 
temperature. 


Solar Absorptivity (A) 


The ratio of the amount of solar radiation absorbed to 
that which is incident on the surface. 


A=(l-r) 


NOTE — For long wave length (low temperature) thermal 
radiation from bodies near room temperature, the absorptivity 
is equal to the emissivity. 


Specific Heat Capacity 
See heat capacity per unit mass (c) 
Surface Coefficient (f) 


Thermal transmission per unit area to or from a surface 
in contact with air or other fluid due to convection 
conduction and radiation, divided by the difference 
between the temperature of the surface and the effective 
ambient temperature in steady state conditions W/m?K. 


NOTE — The value of the surface coefficient depends on 
many factors, such as the movement of air or other fluid, the 


10 


roughness and emissivity of the surface and the temperature 
and nature of the surrounding. 


Surface Resistance ( 1/f) 
The reciprocal of surface coefficient ( m"K/W). 
Surface Temperature 


Temperature of a surface of an insulation product, 
facing, coating or insulation component. 


Service Temperature Range 


Temperature range between the maximum service 
temperature and the minimum service temperature. 


T 
Thermal Insulation 


A material or assembly of material used to provide 
resistance to heat flow. 


Thermal Insulation System 


Applied or installed thermal insulation complete with 
accessories vapour retarder and facing required. 


Thermal Transmittance (U) 


The thermal transmission through unit area of a given 
structure divided by the difference b/w the effective 
ambient temperature on either side of the structure in 
steady state conditions (W/m2K) 


NOTES 
1 If the structure is not a simple slab, it is necessary to state 
where the area is measured. 


2 Transmittance differs from conductance because the 
temperature difference is measured between different positions. 
For conductance the temperature difference is that between the 
faces. For transmittance it is that between the effective ambient 
temperatures on either side of the structure. Thus, the thermal 
transmittance (U) of a structure involves both the thermal 
conductance and the surface coefficients of the structure. 


Total Thermal Resistance ( 1/U) 


The sum of the surface resistance and the thermal 
resistance of the structure itself (m?K/W). 


NOTE — For a compound structure with plane and 
parallel faces, for example, a wall 


VU = V/f, + L/A, * L/A,3 


Transference, Thermal 


The steady state heat flow from or to a body through 
applied thermal insulation and to or from the external 
surrounding by conduction convection and radiation. 
It is expressed as the time rate of heat flow per unit 
temperature difference b/w the body surface and the 
external surrounding, 


Transmission, Heat 
The quantity of heat flowing through unit area due to 
all modes of heat transfer induced by the prevailing 
condition. 

NOTE — Heat transfer may be by solid conductance, mass 


transfer, gas conduction, convection and radiation, either 
separately or in any combination. 


SECTION Ill HEAT TRANSFER 
CONDITION AND ASSOCIATED 
PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS 


a) HEAT TRANSFER CONDITION 
H 
Heat Transfer 


Transmission of energy by thermal conduction thermal 
convection and thermal radiation or a combination of 
these. 


N 
Non-steady State 


Condition for which relevant parameters vary with 
time. 


Periodic State 


Non-steady state in which values of the relevant 
parameters repeat themselves at regular time intervals 
independent of initial conditions. 


S 
Steady State 


Condition for which all relevant parameters do not vary 
with time. 


T 
Transient State 


Non-steady state in which values of the relevant 
parameters evolve from an initial state asymptotically 
to either or periodic state. 


b) GENERAL PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS 
AND TERMS 


A 
Air Permeability 


The fluid permeability of a material where air is the 
given fluid. 


Anisotropic Medium 


Medium in which relevant properties are a function of 
direction. 


Apparent Density under Specified Load 


The density of a fibrous or other loose material under 
specified load. 


Area Coefficient of Heat Loss 


Heat flow rate from the building divided by the area 
and the difference of temperature between the internal 
and external environment : 


o 


F, = 
© AAT 


B 
Bulk Density 


Refer to apparent density of powders, aggregates and 


11 


IS 3069 : 2020 


substances measured by allowing them to settle after a 
specified mechanical agitation ( kg/m’). 

C 

Compressibility 

The relation between deformation and applied 
mechanical pressure on a material. 

Compressive Strength or Crushing Strength 

The capacity of a material to withstand mechanical 
pressure up to the point of fracture, and in the case 
of materials which do not fail by shattering, the 


compressive strength may be deduced arbitrarily from 
a load deformation curve. 


D 
Degree Kelvin (K) 
The unit of temperature measurement on the 


international temperature scale (K = n°C + 273.15) 
OR, 


The abbreviation used internationally for indicating 
temperature interval or difference on the international 
temperature scale. 


Dewpoint Temperature 


The temperature at which condensation of water vapour 
in a space begins for a given state of humidity and 
pressure. Alternatively, the temperature corresponding 
to saturation (100 percent relative humidity) for a given 
absolute humidity at constant pressure (K or ?C). 


H 
Heterogeneous Medium 


Medium in which relevant properties are a function 
of the position within the medium itself due to the 
presence of dissimilar constituents. 


Homogeneous Medium 


Medium in which relevant properties are not a function 
of the position within the medium itself but may 
be a function of such parameters as time, direction, 
temperature , etc. 


The mass of water vapour per unit volume (kg/m?) 
Humidity Relative 


The ratio of the mole fraction of water vapour present 
in the air to the mole fraction of water vapour present 
in saturated air at the same temperature and barometric 
pressure. Approximately, it equals the ratio of the 
partial pressure or density of the water vapour in the air 
to the saturation pressure or density respectively, at the 
same temperature (percent). 


I 
Isothermal Region 


A region is said to be at isothermal temperature when 
every point in that surface is at the same temperature 


IS 3069 : 2020 


L 
Limiting Temperature 


Highest or lowest temperature that an insulation 
material or product can reach without failure occurring. 


Linear Thermal Resistance 


Temperature difference divided by the linear density of 
heat flow rate in the steady state condition: 


qı 


NOTE — This assumes the definition of two reference 
temperature, T, and T,, and the length along which the linear 
density of heat flow rate is uniform. 
If within the system either T, or T, is not the temperature 
of a solid surface, but that of a fluid, a reference 
temperature must be defined in each specific case (with 
reference to free or forced convection and radiation 
from surrounding surface etc.). 


When quoting values of linear thermal resistance T, 
and T, must be stated. 


M 
Mass Density (p) 
Mass divided by volume. 


NOTES 


1 For porous materials one can identify the density of the solid 
materials and the bulk density and for granular materials also 
the density of the grains. 


2 The symbol of density is p and the unit is kilograms per cubic 
metre (kg/m). 
Maximum Service Temperature 


The temperature at which the thermal insulation 
installed at the max recommended thickness will 
continue to perform without degradation of necessary 
properties or creation of hazards. 


Medium Granular Loose Fill 


Medium comprising a continuous gas phase with solid 
incoherent inclusion, the shape of which does not have 
a predominant dimension. 


Medium Isotropic 


Medium in which relevant properties are not a function 
of direction but may be a function of the position within 
the medium, time, temperature etc. 


O 

Operating Temperature 

Temperature at which plant or equipment normally 
operates. 

P 

Perm 


It refers to the mass rate of water vapour flow of one 
grain per hour, through a square foot of a material or 
construction, induced by a vapour pressure gradient 


12 


of one inch of mercury between two surfaces or in 
equivalent units (1 perm=57.2* 10°!" kg/s.m?.Pa.). 
Porosity (€) 

Total volume of the voids (both open and closed) 


within a porous medium divided by the total volume 
of the medium. 


NOTE — Porosity can either be the total porosity defined 
by the expression € = 1 - (p/p,) where, (p) is the apparent of 
the solid matrix or the apparent porosity determined by some 
experimental method. 


Porosity Local 


The porosity at any point within a body when the 
volume of an element enclosing the point is small with 
respect to the entire body but large enough to evaluate 
a meaningful average. 


Porous Medium 


Medium which is heterogeneous due to the presence of 
finely divided solid phase and voids. 


Porous Medium, Cellular 


Medium comprising a continuous solid phase 
containing cavities interconnected in such a way that 
the gaseous phase is also continuous. 


Porous Medium, Fibrous 


Medium comprising a continuous gas phase with solid 
inclusions having length as a predominant dimension. 


Porous Medium, Homogeneous 


Medium in which the porosity is independent of the 
point where the value is computed. 


Porous Medium, Interconnected 


Medium comprising a continuous solid phase 
containing cavities interconnected in such a way that 
the gaseous phase is also continuous. 


R 
Resilience 


The ability of the material to recover its original 
dimensions after having been subjected to deformation. 


Resistance, Abrasion 


The ability to withstand scuffing, scratching, rubbing or 
wind scouring. 


Resistance, Freeze-Thaw 


Resistance to cycles of freezing and thawing that could 
affect application appearance or performance. 


S 
Specific Volume (Insulating Cements) 


The volume in cubic metres of one tone of cement in 
powder form. 


NOTE — This term is applicable only to insulating elements 
and not to fibrous materials. 


Specific Weight (Granular and Powdered Materials) 


The mass of the material in tones required to completely 
fill up one cubic metre of space after thoroughly 
agitating in a container in a specified manner. The size 
and the shape of the container as well as its details are 
also specified. 


Stable Medium 

Medium in which relevant properties are not a function 
of time, but may be a function of coordinates, direction, 
temperature, etc. 

Strength, Transverse (or Flexural ) 


The breaking load applied normal to the neutral axis of 
a beam (kPa). 


T 
Tensile Strength 


The capacity of the material to withstand tension up to 
the point of fracture (kPa). 


Thermal Effusivity 


Square root of the product of thermal conductivity, 
density and specific heat capacity: 


b-4J Apc 
NOTES 
1 For fluids, the appropriate specific heat capacity is e. 


2 This property is relevant to the non-steady state. It may be 
measured or calculated from separately measured quantities 
by the above formula. Among others, thermal effusivity 
accounts for the response of a surface temperature to a change 
of the density of heat flow rate at the surface, the lower the 
thermal effusivity of the material the more sensitive the surface 
temperature is to change of heat flow at the surface. 


V 
Volume Coefficient of Heat Loss 


Heat flow rate from the building divided by the volume 
and by the difference of temperature between the 
internal and external environment: 


ERN 
V.AT 


NOTE — The heat flow rate may optionally include the 

contribution of heat transmission through the building envelop, 

ventilation, solar radiation etc. The volume V, shall be defined. 
The use of volume coefficient of heat loss assume a 
conventional definition of internal temperature, external 
temperature, volume and the different contribution 
resulting in the heat flow rate 


W 
Water Vapour Diffusion 


The process by which water vapour spreads or moves 
through permeable materials caused by the difference 
in water vapour pressure (m/s). 


Water Vapour Permeability 


The time rate of water vapour transmission through 
unit area of a flat material of unit thickness induced by 


13 


IS 3069 : 2020 


unit vapour pressure difference between two specific 
surfaces under specified temperature and humidity 
conditions (kg/m.s.Pa). 


NOTE — Permeance is a performance evaluation and not a 
property of the material. 


Water Vapour Pressure 


The pressure of water vapour at a given temperature, 
also the component of atmospheric pressure contributed 
by the presence of water vapour (P ). 


Water Vapour Resistance 


The steady vapour presence difference that induces 
unit time rate of vapour flow through unit area of a 
flat homogeneous body under specific condition of 
temperature and relative humidity at each surface 
(m?.s.Pa/kg) 


NOTE — Vapour resistance is the reciprocal of vapour 
permeance. It is the arithmetic product of the resistivity and 
thickness. 


Water Vapour Resistivity 


The steady vapour presence difference that induces 
unit time rate of vapour flow through unit area and unit 
thickness of a flat material ( or construction that acts 
like a homogeneous body) homogeneous body) under 
specific condition of temperature and relative humidity 
at each surface (m.s.Pa/kg) 
NOTE — Vapour resistivity is the reciprocal of vapour 
permeability. 
Water Vapour Transmission Rate 


The steady water vapour flow in unit time through unit 
area of a body, normal to specific parallel surface under 
specific condition temperature and humidity at each 
surface (kg/s). 


Wetting and Adhesion Surface 


The mutual affinity of and bonding finish and the 
surface to which it is applied. 


SECTION IV OTHER 
ASSOCIATED TERMS 


Audit Test 


Test(s) usually performed by or on behalf of a 
certification body to confirm that a product continues to 
confirm to the requirements of the respective standard 
and to provide information to assess the effectiveness 
of the factory production control. 


Assessment of Factory Production Control 


Action by an approved body demonstrating that the 
factory production control is in conformity with the 
requirement, based on initial inspection of the factory 
and the factory production control and continuous 
surveillance of it. 


Building 


Man made structure intended to provide a controlled 
environment or shelter. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Building Equipment 


System incorporated in a permanent manner in 
construction works, forming part of the heating, cooling 
and ventilation installation of those works. 


Cold Piping 
Piping in which the fluids being transported are at a 


lower temperature than the ambient, for example, cold 
water, refrigerants, brine. 


Combustible 
Able to catch fire and burn easily. 
Compatible Materials 


Two or more substances that can be mixed or used 
together without separating, reacting, or adversely 
affecting each other. 


Condensate 
The liquid formed by condensation of a vapour. 
Curved Board 


Arigid product of which one cross section is rectangular 
and the second has the form of an arc of an annulus of 
internal diameter usually exceeding | metre. 


Certification of Conformity 


Action by an approved certification body demonstrating 
adequate confidence that a product is in conformity 
with the relevant product standard. 


Dew Point Temperature 


It is the temperature at which air is saturated with water 
vapour and below which condensation occurs. 


Duct 


It refers to a passageway made of sheet metal or other 
suitable material used for conveying air and other gas. 


Exhaust Duct 


A duct carrying air from a conditioned space to the 
outdoors. 


Expansion Bend 

It is specially formed bends to accommodate the 
expansion of pipes. 

Expansion Joint 


An arrangement of a joint to permit movement, to 
relieve stresses caused by expansion of contraction. 


Factory Production Control 


Permanent internal control of production exercised 
either by the manufacturer or by his agent under the 
responsibility of the manufacturer himself. 
NOTE — Factory production control comprises of operational 
techniques and all measures necessary to regulate and maintain 
the conformity of the product to the requirement of the relevant 
product standards. 


14 


Initial Type Test 


Tests performed on a product prior to commencing 
normal production to prove that the product is capable 
of confirming to the relevant requirement of standards 


Laminate 


Combination of two or more materials that are bonded 
together during manufacturing to produce a single item 
or product. 


Limiting Temperature 


Highest or lowest temperature that an insulation 
material or product can reach without failure. 


Level 


Given value, which is the upper or lower limit of a 
requirement. 


Manufacturer’s Routine Test 


Test performed by the manufacturer at specified 
intervals to ensure that the product conform to the 
relevant requirement of the standards. 


Nominal Thickness 


The thickness used for reference purposes in specifying 
tolerances. 


Nominal Value 
Value of a property used to characterize the product. 
Production Batch 


Definite quantity of some commodity manufactured or 
produced under conditions that are presumed uniform. 


Reference Value 


Value of a product property determined for specific 
conditions of use in accordance with agreed rules. 


Sample 


Item(s) taken from a production batch and intended 
to provide information on the production batch and 
possibly to serve as a basis for a decision on the 
production batch or the process which produced it. 


Sample Size 
Procedure used to draw or constitute a sample. 
Sampling Unit 


For the purpose of sampling, an item taken from the 
production batch. 


Test Specimen 


Single item within a sample or part of an item used for 
a test. 


Type Test 


Tests performed at certain intervals to prove that 
a product is capable of confirming to the relevant 
requirement of a standard. 


IS 3069 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Thermal Insulation sectional committee, CHD 27 


Organization 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
Armacell India, Mumbai 


Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Secunderabad 
Berger Paints India Itd. 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Trichy 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 
CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology, Chennai 


Confederation of Indian Industry 


Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Faridabad 

Indian Green Building Council, Noida 

In personal capacity 

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (R & D Centre), Faridabad 
Institute of Technology, Nirma University, Gujarat 


Jamshedpur Mineralwool Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd 
Lloyd Insulation (I) Ltd, New Delhi 
MECON Ltd, Ranchi 


Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 
Minwool Rock Fibres Ltd, Hyderabad 


National Dairy Development Board, New Delhi 


National Fire Safety College 
National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Newkem Products Corporation 


15 


Representative(s) 
Dr N. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Chairman) 


SHRI SHADAB AHMED 
SHRI SUDARSHAN K. S. (Alternate) 


Suri N. P. S. SHINH 
Mapan Gopat (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRMALYA KUMAR 
SHRI BARUN SANKI (Alternate) 


Suri Ray D. K. 
Suri N. SELVARAJ (Alternate I) 
SHRI BHASKAR SUNDRIYAL (Alternate II) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Dr ASHOK KUMAR 
Dr TasisH ALAM (Alternate) 


AWAITED 


Dr K. P. BHUVANA 
SHRI N KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate) 


AWAITED 


Suri N. C. TIWARI 
Suri S. K. Jan (Alternate) 


MonHD ISMAEEL 
SHRI PRASENJIT SAHA (Alternate) 


Suri A. KArocH 
NOMINATION AWAITED 
Suni P. P. LAHIRI 
NOMINATION A WAITED 
Dn Vikas J. LAKHERA 


MAYANK SHRIVASTAVA 
KisALAv Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. Mitra 
SHRI JITENDRA Kumar JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. MISHRA 
SHRI AsHISH KuMAR BAIRAGI (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Suri R. K. BADRUKA 
SHRI CHAITANYA BADRUKA (Alternate) 


SHRI AsiT BARAN GHOSH 
SHRI V. E. E. SUNDAR (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 
NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI NIMISH V. SURA 
SHRI NorMAN D'souza (Alternate) 


IS 3069 : 2020 


Organization 
NGP Industries Ltd 


National Thermal Power Corporation 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 


Owens Corning 
PIBCO Ltd, New Delhi 


Polybond Projects Pvt Ltd 

Project & Development India Ltd, Sindri 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Research Designs and Standards Organisation, 
Lucknow 


Rockwool India Pvt. Ltd 


Roxul Rockwool Technical Insulation (I) Pvt Ltd, 
Bengaluru 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Tata Consulting Engineers Ltd, Chennai 


Directorate General, BIS 


Representative(s) 

Suri T. R. N. MURTHY 

SHRI VATSAL VARDHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI SUDARSHAN CHAKRABARTI 

SHRI RAKESH Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI ATUL BHANDAKKAR 

SHRI DEVENDRA KUMAR JAn (Alternate) 
SHRI NILESH SONAWANE 
Dr Punir KUMAR 

SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 
SHRI UMESH CHITLANGIA 

SHRI RAHUL CHITLANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. CHAKRABORTI 
Suri D. Masi (Alternate) 


Dr U. K Swaroop 

SHRI RASHMI PALANDE (Alternate) 
Suri P. K. BALA 

Suri S. R. Suisopia (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIL KUMAR MISHRA 

SHRI MARK WESTERMAYER (Alternate) 
SHRI DEBAPRATIM DINDA 

SHRI VINAY PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 
Dr GEETA SESHADRI 

Dn D S CnuarTERIEE (Alternate) 
Suri V. SREENIVASAN 

Suri R. V. SESHAGIRI (Alternate) 


Suri U. K. Das, Scientist ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-Officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SACHIN S. MENON 
ScieNrTIST ‘B’, CHD, BIS 


16 


(Continued from second cover) 


In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following: 


ISO 7345 : 1987 Thermal insulation — Physical quantities and definitions 

ISO 9251 : 1987 Thermal insulation — Heat transfer conditions and properties of materials — 
Vocabulary 

ISO 9229 : 2007 Thermal insulation — Vocabulary 

ISO 9346 : 2007 Hygrothermal performance of buildings and building materials — Physical 
quantities for mass transfer — Vocabulary 

ASTM C168-17 Standard terminology relating to thermal insulation 

BS 3533 : 1981 Glossary of thermal insulations 


Should any difference exist between the definitions in this glossary and those in the standards for the individual 
materials, the latter shall prevail. 


The composition of the technical Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 27 (12400). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


