***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 1559-3 (1982) : Methods of Chemical Analysis of 
Ferrosilicon, Part III: Determination of Sulphur [MTD 5: 
Ferro Alloys] 



.^^llli^=ac^^fc^ll f fm^>N:>;»gaTCAaiiTgs 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:%^>^ift^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1559 f Part Itr ) . 1982 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Ifmiau Standard 

METHODS OF 
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF FERROSILICON 

PART Jll DETERMlNATfON OF SULPHUR 

(First Revision) 



UDC Myi5782-19e : 543845 




INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK KHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAM ZAFAil MARG 

NEW DELHI MlSm. 



5^ 



r, 3 ^/^'^ 1^'^ 



IS : 1559 ( Part III ) - 1982 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF 
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF FERROSILICON 

PART 111 DETERMINATION OF SULPHUR 

{ First Revision ) 

Methods of Chemical Analysis Sectional Committee, SMDG 2 

Chairman Representing 

Dr R. K. Dutta Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel 

Plant ), Durgapur 

Members 

Shui G. M. Afpa Rao Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant ), 

Bhilai 
Shri R. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Bhattacharjee Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri M. K. Ghakravorty ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. M. Bhtjchar National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri S. N. Bohider Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Shri B. Mahapatra ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Chakka Indian Metals & Ferro Alloys Ltd, Koraput 

Dr M. M. Ghakbaborty Indian Iron and Steel Go Ltd, Burnpur 

Shri M. S. Ghatterjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. W. Ghawathe India Government Mint ( Ministry of Finance ), 

Bombay 
Ghemist & MetaliIjUruist, Ministry of Railways 
South Gewtral Railway, 
Secundbrabad 

Assistant Director ( Met ), 
RDSO, Ghittaranjan ( Alternate ) 
Chief Ghemist The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Assistant Ghie?' Ghemist ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. N. Chowdhury Geological Survey of India, Calcutta 

Saiti B. N. Bhattacharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. P. DubeY National Test House, Calcutta 

Dr B. G. Dutta Bharat Aluminium Company Ltd, New Delhi 

Shut K. P. Mukherjkk ( Alternate ) 

f Continnea on bage 2 ) 



(g) Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 1559 ( Part III ) - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. N. Honavar Italab Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi J. C. Dey ( Alternale I ) 

Shut J. P. Patel ( Alternate II ) 
Shri D. P. Jain ' Saru Smelting Pvt Ltd, Meerut 

Shbi D. N. Ghakraborty { Alternate ) 
Shbi G. L. Jethvvani Hindustan -Zinc Ltd, Udaipur 

Shbi V. B. Khanna Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shbi M. P. Ghowdhaby ( Alternate ) 
Db L. P. Pandey National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi B. N. Prasad Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant ), 

Bokaro 
Dr J. R A jab am Essen & Go, Bangalore 

Shri K. Ramakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Ramamoorthy Bharat Heavy Electrlcals Ltd, Tiruchchirappalli 

Shri M. B. Unni ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. Sangamkswara Rao Ferro Alloys Corporation Ltd, Shriseramnagar 

Shri G. Raja Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Sen Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Calcutta 
Shri U. C. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. D. Sharma Hindustan Copper Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr B. C. Sinha Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute 

( GSIR ), Calcutta 
Shbi R. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Dr p. Subramanian Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri B. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Db Gh. Venkateswarlu Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Dr G. S. p. Iyer ( Alternate I ) 
Shri P. Mubugaiyan ( Alternate II ) 
Shbi G. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri O. N. Dasgupta 

Deputy Director ( Met ), ISI 



IS : 1559 ( Part HI ) - 1982 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF 
CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF FERROSILICON 

PART III DETERMINATION OF SULPHUR 

{ First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III ) ( First Revision ) was adopted 
by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 January 1982, after the draft 
finalized by the Methods of Chemical Analysis Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 IS : 1559-1961* which covers chemical analysis of different ferro- 
alloys, namely, ferrosilicon, ferrochromium, ferromanganese and 
speigeleisen, silicomanganese, ferromolybdenum, ferrophosphorus, 
ferrotitanium, ferrovanadium and ferrotungsten, Vv'as first published in 
1961. While reviewing this standard, the Sectional Committee felt that the 
standard should be revised to cover ferrosilicon and methods of analysis 
of other ferro-alloys should be covered in separate standards. During 
preparation of the revision of IS : 1559-1961*, it was felt convenient to 
cover methods of chemical analysis of ferrosilicon in different parts of 
the standard which on publication would supersede Section I ferrosilicon 
of IS : 1559-1961*, The committee also decided to rewrite the m.ethods 
taking into consideration the latest composition specified in IS : 1110- 
198r|. Though calcium and manganese are not specified in IS : 1110- 
198lf, the determination of these elements are covered in this standard 
because these are generally required from the viewpoint of determining 
interference of analysis in methods for determining other elements in 
ferrosilicon due to presence of these elements. Moreover the determina- 
tion of these elements may be required for comprehensive analysis of 
ferrosilicon. This part covers the determination of sulphur. The other 
parts cover as follows: 

Part I Determination of silicon 

Part II Determination of carbon 



♦Methods of chemira] analysis of ferro-alloys, 
t Specification for ferrosilicon { third revision ). 



IS I 1559 (Part III) -1982 

Part IV Determination of phosphorus 

Part V Determination of aluminium 

Part VI Determination of calcium 

Part VII Determination of manganese 

0,3 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part III ) covers the determination of sulphur 
( up to 0'050 percent ) in ferrosilicon. 

2. SAMPLING 

2.1 It shall be drawn and prepared in accordance with IS : 1472-19771. 

3. QTUALITY OF REAGENTS 

3.1 Unless otherwise specified, pure chemicals and distilled water ( see 
IS : 1070-19771 ) shall be employed in the tests. 

Note — 'Pare chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
affect the results of analysis. 

4. DETERMINATION OF SULPHUR BY THE GRAVIMETRIC 
METHOD 

4.1 Outline of the Method — The sample is dissolved in nitric and 
hydrofluoric acids and the solution is finally brought into hydrochloric 
acid medium. From the solution, sulphur is precipitated as barium 
sulphate, which is filtered, washed, ignited and weighed. 

4.2 Reagents 

4.2.1 Concentrated Nitric Acid — rd = 1*42 (conforming to IS : 264- 
1976§ ). 

4.2.2 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — rd = 1*16 ( conforming to IS : 265- 
197611 ). 

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

fMethods of sampling ferro-alloys, for determination of chemical composition {first 
revision ). 

^Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 
§Specification"for nitric acid ( second revision ). 
^Specification for hydrochloric acid ( second revision ). 



IS ; 1559 ( Part III ) - lff82 

4.2.3 Hydrofluoric Acid — 40 percent {vjv ), 
4.2*4 Sodium Carbonate — Solid ( AR ). 

4.2.5 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — 1:99 ( v/v ). 

4.2.6 Zinc — 99*9 percent purity. 

4.2.7 Barium Chloride Solution — 10 percent ( m/y ). 

4*2.8 Acid Wash Solution — Dilute 5 ml of concentrated hydrochloric 
acid with water to I 000 ml and add one gram of barium chloride. 

4.3 Procedure 

4.3.1 Place 5 g af diied sample into a 600-ml tall from beaker, add 
30 ml of concentrated nitric acid and 30 ml of concentrated hydrochloric 
acid. Add hydrofluoric acid dropwise until the vigorous reaction has 
subsided. Evaporate to dryness. Add a further 30 ml of concentrated 
hydrochloric acid, evaporate to dryness, and repeat this operation for 
two more times. 

• 4.3.2 Finally extract the dried mass in about 10 ml of dilute hydro- 
chloric acid and warm gently until all the salts are dissolved. Add 0*5 g 
of sodium carbonate, dilute to about 50 ml with hot water and filter 
through a pulp pad into a 400-ml beaker, washing with dilute hydro- 
chloric acid. The volume of the filtrate at this stage should be about 
150 ml. 

4.3.3 Add 0*5 g of zinc till the solution is colourless. Filter, wash and 
add to the filtrate above 20 ml of barium chloride solution. Digest on a 
steam bath for one hour. Allow to stand overnight. Filter on a pad 
transferring the entire precipitate from the beaker to the pad wrth dilute 
acid wash solution. Wash the pad alternately with the acid wash and 
distilled water until free from iron salts. Finally wash with distilled water 
until free from chlorides. 

4.3.4 Transfer the pad and precipitate to a platinum or porcelain 
crucible. Dry and ignite at a low temperature until carbonaceous matter 
has been removed and finally ignite to constant mass at 900 to 950^*0. 
Cool in a desiccator and weigh. 

4.3.5 Garry out a blank determination following the same procedure 
and using the same quantity of all reagents. 



IS 1 1559 ( Fart III ) - 1982 

4.4 Calculation 

c , u . {A ^B) X 13-74 
Sulphur, percent » ^ U 

where 

A « mass in g of barium sulphate obtained, 

B — mass in g of barium sulphate in the blank, and 

C ■=■ mass in g of the sample taken. 



