IS 12448 ( Part 3 ) : 1989 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND MEASURING METHODS EOR ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
PART 3 CURRENT-CARRYING CAPACITY TESTS

UDC

621'38'038 : 621'316.54 : 621'3'014'144

@ BIS 1989

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Jury 1989

Price Group 2

Electromechanical

Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 7

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 23 March 1989, after the draft finalized by the Electromechanical Components for Electronic Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The object of this standard ( Part 3 ) is to lay down uniform methods of tests for measuring temperature rise and assessing current-carrying capacity of electromechanical components. This standard ( Part 3 ) is based, without any technical change, on IEC Pub 512-3 ( 1976 ) `Electromechanical components for electronic equipment : Basic testing procedures and measuring methods Part 3 Current-carrying capacity tests', issued by the International Electrotechnical commission ( IEC )`. In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 12448 ( Part 3 ) : 1989

lndian Standard

BASIC TESTING PROCEDURES AND MEASURING METHODS FOR ELECTROMECHANICAL COMPONENTS FOR ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT
PART 3 CURRENT-CARRYING CAPACITY TESTS

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers test methods for measuring temperature rise and assessing current-carrying capacity of electromechanical components. 2 TEST 5a: TEMPERATURE RISE 2.1 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the ability of a component to carry continuously its specified current without exceeding a specified temperature rise. 2.2 Preparation of the Specimen The specimen shall be fitted with temperaturesensing device( s ), wired with a minimum length of 500 mm of the specified size wire, and mounted as specified in the detail specification.
NOTE - Care shall be taken to protect the specimen under test from draughts or other artiAcia1 cooling.

e) ac or dc current, f) Temperature rise ( preferred 30 and 40" C ), g) Ambient temperature, and values are 20,

h) Any deviation from standard test method. 3 TEST 5b: CURRENT-TEMPERATURE DERATING 3.1 General The object of this test is to detail a standard test method to assess the current-carrying capacity of electromechanical components. 3.2 General Conditions ;;.,`, Determining the Current-Currying Capacity The current-carrying capacity is limited by the thermal properties of the materials which are used for the contacts and terminals as well as by the insulating materials. Therefore, it is a function of the self-generated heat and the ambient temperature within which a device is operating. Using the measuring method given in 3.4, the temperature of a measuring point tb ( approximately the hottest spot ) of the component and the temparature in the immediate environment tu of the component are measured at various currents. The difference between the two temperatures is the self-heating or rise created by the current flow. This may be expressed as:
fb -

2.3 Test Method A specified test current shall be applied to each contact of the specimen for a period of 5 h. Ambient temperature after the test. 2.4 Requirements a) Every contact of the specimen must be capable of carrying the specified test current for a period of 5 h without exceeding the specified temperature rise. 2.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specifkation, the following details shall be specified: shall be recorded before and

tu=

ai

4 Location

and sensitivity sensing device( s ),

of temperature-

b) Wire size,
c) Wiring of specimen and type of termination,

4 Mounting of specimen,
1

The relation between the current, the temperature rise and the ambient temperature of the component is represented by a curve as shown in Fig. 1. Unless otherwise specified, the temperature rise is based upon the mean current of three specimens. The mean value derived from the measured values of these three specimens serves as the basic curve. At least three points of the basic curve shall be established.

IS 12448 ( Part 3 ) : 1989

The permissible upper-limit temperature of the materials employed is plotted as a vertical line on the graphs shown in Fig. 1 and 2, with current I as the ordinate and the temperature t as the abscissa. The temperature rise At ( mean value of three specimens ), determined at current In, is deducted: From this, the maximum permissible ambient temperature tu for the load current I, is obtained since the sum of the ambient temperature t, and the temperature rise At must not exceed the upper temperature limit of the material. 3.2.2 Derating Curve A derating curve, derived from the basic curve ( see Fig. 2 ) determined in accordance with 3.2.1, shall be specified in the relevant detail specification. This curve takes into account variations in specimens as well as errors in temperature measurements in the measuring equipment.

The derating factor is justified because the currentcarrying capacity may be limited further by external factors, for example, the size of the wire and unequal distribution of the loaded circuits. If these factors result in a current-carrying capacity other than that which may be expected due to thermal limitations, then a revised value shall apply.
the case that all NOTE - In practice, it is usually terminals are not loaded simultaneously with the maximum permissible current. In many cases, the individual terminals can carry several times the derated current indicated by the derating curve when less than 20 percent of the total complement is used. For these cases, general rules cannot be established and the limits shall be determined for the individual case. It is recommended that the method described in this standard be used accordingly in these cases.

.O

t u.3

t

u2.

t

Ul

AMBIENT

TEMPERATURE-

FIG. 1

EXAMPLEOF A CURRENT-CARRYINGCAPACITY CURVE

BASE CURVE WPPER CURRENT LIMIT SET BY EXTERNAL FACTORS,og THE WIRE SECTION WHICH

FIG. 2

EXAMPLEOF A DERATING CURVE

IS 12448 ( Part 3 ) : 1989
3.2.3 Application of the &rent-Carrying Curve Capacity

The derating curve determined in accordance with 3.2.2 represents the official current-carrying capacity curve as defined by this standard. Since it gives the maximum permissible current as a function of the ambient temperature, it is truly a derating curve. The cross-hatched area shown in Fig. 2 indicates the permissible operating range.
NOTE - If the detail specification specifies currentcarrying capacity data, then the current-carrying curve given in this standard shall be cited. If values in tabular form are preferred, they should coincide with the current-carrying capacity curve.

to be expected or according to the size of the termination. In order to reduce external heat dissipation to a minimum, at least 25 cm of the connecting wires shall be within the measuring enclosure. In the case of multipole specimens, all contacts shall be wired in series with wire the same size as the connecting wires. These links shall be 25 cm in length.
NOTES 1 In the case of specimens with moving care shall be taken that the contacts disturbed by the connecting wires. 2 A. mated specimen. connector set is considered contacts, are not a single

3.3 Details of the Test
3.3.1 Measuring Apparatus

The measurement shall be carried out in air as undisturbed as possible. Therefore, the specimen shall be mounted in an enclosure which protects the immediate environment from external movements of air. The enclosure should be made of a non-reflective material. The sides of the enclosure may be movable to accommodate different specimen sizes. The sides shall not be closer than 20 cm from the edges of the specimen. The enclosure is not required to have a lid. The specimen is arranged in the enclosure in a horizontal attitude 5 cm above the bottom of the enclosure and at least 15 cm below the top and equidistant from the sides. As nearly as possible, the specimen shall be in free suspension. If this is not possible, a thermal insulating material with a thermal conductivity of < 2 W/mK may be used provided that not more than 20 percent of the surface of the specimen is in contact with the insulating material. The specimen shall be connected with wires of suitable cross-section for the maximum current

3 When the specimen is a free connector with a cable attached, at least 25 cm of the cable shall be contained within the measuring enclosure. The series connection of the contacts shall be made through the attached cables at a distance of 25 cm from the specimen.

3.3.2 Details of Temperature Measurement The temperature is measured with two temperature probes. The probe leads pass through insulation walls of the measuring apparatus. The measuring point for measuring the ambient temperature shall be located in a horizontal plane passing through the axis of the specimen. It shall be located 5 cm from the mid-point of the edge of the longest side of the specimen. The measuring point for measuring the temperature of the specimen shall be stated in the detail specification.
NOTE -The temperature probes could be thin thermocouples, for example, nichrome/nickel wire with a diameter < 0.3 mm. If thermocouples with the same tvoe of calibration curve are used for both they may be connected in temperature probes, opposition in the measuring circuit. In this case, the temperature rise A t is measured directly (see Fig. 3 1. However. I* should be monitored to ensure that it `does not exceed the upper temperature limit of the materials.

MEASURING --------

ENCLOSURE 1 ._

REGULATED CURRENT UNIT SUPPLY

FIG. 3

MEASURING APPARATUS ARRANGEMENT 3

IS 12448 ( Part 3 ) : 1989 3.4 Method of Measurement The specimen is arranged in the measuring enclosure as described in 3.3.1 and its terminals are connected to a regulated power supply through an ammeter. The loading current may be ac or dc and when ac current is used, the rms value applies. The current shall be maintained for a period not to exceed 1 h, or until thermal stability is achieved, at each of the selected current Ievels. 3.5 Details to be Specified When this test is required by the detail specification, the following"details shall be specified: a) Preparation of the specimen; b) Type and size of cable/wire bundle to be used; c) Measuring point for specimen temperature; d) Upper temperature limit; e) Number of specimens, if other than three; and f) Any deviation from the standard test method.

___.._.. _._..._ ~. _~~~ / Standard Mark

_____~. .__-. -------

--.`

---^

-.-.

--

_----

_-_____

~___

__,

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

/

j !

I 8

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. NO part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes. type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of issued from time to time. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BlS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Dot : No. LTDC 7 ( 1089 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters :

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Central Offices : : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur NEW DELHJ 110002

Marg, New Delhi

1lCK%! Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Shah Zafar

Marg

331 01 31 331 13 75 Maniktola 36 24 99 160036 /2 3 16 1843 41

Eastern Northern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus,

IV Cross Road,

MADRAS

600113

141 24 42 (41 25 19 141 29 56 6 32 92 95

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Marol,

Andheri

( East )

Branches

BANGALORE. : AHMADABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. TRIVANDRUM.

BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA.

Printed at Printwell Printers,

Delhi, India

