.'

.

IS 2050:1991
( Reaffirmed 1997 )

/ (vein ~MVJI) L

??FsTqrl

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS ~,&ELATING To FOOTWEAR ( First Revision )
UDC 001'4 : 685'3

ED BIS 1991

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

October 199 I

Price

Group 1'3

Footwear Sectional Committee, CHD 019

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Footwear Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. The Indian Footwear Industry has made considerable progress in the recent years. Lately with the expansion of export market, adequate support and incentive by the Government of India to the footwear industry has been provided for its rapid growth. However, the footwear industry essentially remains a cottage and small-scale industry, with only a few large-scale organized units of production. In order to facilitate unambiguous exchange of commercial and scientific information within the industry and to promote an increasing usage of scientific terms, indigenous and foreign, which are current in footwear trade, the work of standardization of terminology was considered imperative. It is hoped that this glossary of terms will help to fill this void in the footwear trade, in general and indigenous footwear industry, in particular. In the preparion of this standard, care has been taken to include most of the indigenous terms in common parlance in the Indian footwear trade, together with the synonyms and more common terms in vogue. This glossary of terms, however, limits itself strictly to terms related to footwear in general. General, chemical and other terms pertaining to properietary and patented items in usage have not been included. Terms which may be used in the footwear industry but convey commonly accepted dictionary meanings have also been excluded. Sixteen sketches of traditional basic designs of footwear are given in Annex A. Annex B includes a detailed sketch of leather safety boot and shoe in order to illustrate the various components of a boot or shoe. Sketches of important shoe makers handtools are given in Annex C. This standard does not include footwear machinery items, but includes certain important machine operations as are practised in medium and small-scale industries in the country. In the preparation of this standard, useful assistance has been derived from the following publications: AS 2210 : 1980 Specification for safety footwear, published by the Australian Standards Institution; Dictionary of Leather Technology, Fourth Edition, Tanners, Council of America; KORN (J), Edition 1000, Boot and Shoe Production, Sir Issac Pitmann and Sons Limited, London: THORNTON (JH), Edition 1958, Text Book of Footwear Manufacture, The National Trade Press Limited, London; and WOODROFFE (D), Encyclopaedia of Leather Trade, published in the Leather Trades Review, London, between 1951 and 1955. This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical definitions of terms and it may not necessarily include all the legal implications of the terms.

IS 2050 : 1991

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO FOOTWEAR ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard covers terms and their definitions used

and crevices so producing the appearance of old and well cared for leather.
Applique- A strip or design fixed on to a footwear for

in the Indian footwear industry. 2 TERMINOLOGY

decorative purpose.
Apres Ski- A man's or woman's fur-lined and water

A
Abrading- The roughening up of the over margin

proof boot.
Apron Front Shoe - A combination of the basic

of the lasted-upper.
Abrasion Resistance - The ability of a footwear

material to withstand wear due to abrasion.
Abrasives - Materials, such as emery paper, emery

Derby and Moccasin designs. The difference lies in the front (that is, in the vamp); which has a separate apron laid on or underlaid and which is at times onepiece with the tongue. The design is also known as the `Ski Design'.
Arch - The long framework of the foot extending

cloth, red flint and carborundum used for scouring or buffing soles, heels, etc, of footwear. Roughness of the surface of the abrasives is denoted by grits.
Accelerator- A substance added to a rubber mix to

from the heel to the toes. Archbrace - A bandage of webbing or leather designed to support arch. Arch of the Foot- A bridge made up by the bones of the foot, mainly to support the body weight.
Arch Spring- The upward curve of the arch of a last

accelerate the process of vulcanisation and in other ways to improve the bottom of footwear.
Acme Backer- Plain weave cotton cloth coated on

one side with thermoplastic gutta percha or with rubber and wax used for backing uppers.
Acrobatic Shoe- Shoe made with extra light uppers

or footwear.
Arch Support- Stiffening effect given on the inside

and soles for acrobatic works. Adhesion - A molecular attraction exerted between the surfaces of bodies in contact.
Ammunition Roots - Ankle-high sturdy boots of

waist of a footwear to give support to the arch of the foot. Wide steel shanks ribbed double or triple lengthwise and ribbed across as well are provided to support the arch in the high class shoes, ammunition boots and corrective footwear to give stiffening effect.
Arctic Roots - A type of Over boot originally made

Derby type with six eyelets, full tongue made by riveted, screwed and stitched method for heavy duty purposes. These are also known as Ankle Boots.
Ankle Bone - See `Astragalus Bone'. Ankle Roots- See `Ammunition Boots'. Ankle-Girth Measure - The girth measurement of

from buffalo hide with grain side in and with buckles to keep feet dry and comfortable in cold and wet climate. Subsequently rubber has been used for the manufacture of arctic Over boots without any change in the basic pattern. Artlflclal Grain- A grain appearance given to a flesh split by pigment with or without embossing on footwear upper.
Assembling Tack- A tack having a round parallel

the leg joint above the ankle.
Anotomkbeel - Inner side extended forward on

the shape of "S".
Anterior Arch - The arch of the foot between the

phalanges and the matatarsal bone which extends across the ball of the foot from the outside edge of the first matatarsal to the outside edge of the fifth matatarsal. This is also known as `Metatarsal Arch'.
Antique Finish or Dressing- A dressing applied to

an upper and immediately removed except in edges 1

shank made from wire with a square pyramid point, used in the assembling operation. This type of tack is driven through the upper material at the top of the back seam. The head of the tack is very similar to that of the welted tack. The fine point and shank are provided to leave a mark as small as possible on the upper. Assembly Room - Area in which the closed uppers, the reinforcing components, the bottom components

Is 2050 : 1991 and the lasts are held and matched up into sets for the insisting room as required.
Assembling Upper - Inserting of the prepared comBagged Edge- A method of joining and finishing of the quarter top edge all round the ankle so that the seam joining the lining with the quarters is about 5 mm below the folded edge of the quarter.

ponents, such as toe-puff, stiffener and side lining, in the respective positions. The term also refers to the tacking of the upper to the last at the counter point prior to being lasted.
Astragalus Bone- A bone of the human foot located

Bal- Front laced footwear in which the quarters meet at the vamp unstitched over the quarters at the front of the throat.
Ballerina- A low cut, light weight, practically flat-

in the tarsus group of bones. Also known as `Ankle Bone' or `Talus Bone'.
Athlete's Foot - A kind of foot infection due to

heeled, new-cut type shoe used by women and constructed by direct method of attachment. It has a similarity with ballet dance shoes.
Ballet Shoe- A type of shoe used for dancing made of cloth (sometimes of satin) with heavily blocked toes. They are generally made by the turn shoe method and are very light and flexible.

ringworm, which softens and peels the skin between the toes, and on the sole of the foot causing irritation.
Attaching - Attachment of the upper and bottom

parts using one of the various methods of attachments.
Awl- A sharp-pointed tool with a small round handle,

Ball Girth Measurement- The circumference of the foot around the middle of the big and small toe joints. Ball Line- A line drawn across the widest portion of a foot or last.
Ball Point - A point where the first metatarsal bone

generally known as `Pricking Awl' which is used by the upper leather clickers to make the prick holes for the convenience of the upper closer. or A sharp flat pointed tool used in the outsole stitching machine, similar in shape to the outsole stitching machine needle and which has no hook for taking up the thread. The purpose of this awl is to first pierce the outsole and make it easier for the sewing needle to go through the outsole while sewing.

meets the phalanges or big toe This point is prominently visible on the inside of the foot just adjacent to the big toe.
Ball Point of Last- A point on the last where pitch line meets the baseline. Ball Position - See `Inside Foot Joint Position'. Balmoral- A type of gents' boots or shoes having a closed front-laced ankle. It is characterized by the vamp wine extended to either side, to form a golosh.

B
Backer- A fabric material used to give reinforcement and plumpness in order to reduce stretch in thin leathers like glace kid, calf, lizard, etc.

Backing- Laminating a piece of fabric to leather or other component of a footwear by adhesive.
Backing Cloth - Cloth usually of thin and loose

Bar Shoes - A slipper type of shoes with a bar running over the instep from the inside quarter to outside quarter where it is either fastened with a button or a buckle. Baseball Shoes- Pumps shoes usually machine sewn, light and healless, with special sharp metallic reinforcement on the heel and ball of the soles. Base of Bone - The lower end of the oscalcis (or calcaneum) bone which is also know as heel bone. This is the largest and strongest bone in the tarsus group and is used mainly for transmitting the weight of the body to the ground.
Basic Cutting Area - The area which includes pattern area and the unavoidable waste. The pattern area is the space required by the patterns individually. The area between the pattern which cannot be avoided when patterns are laid out together is termed as unavoidable waste. Basic Shoe Designs - There are sixteen recognized

character treated with a solution of gutta percha pasted on the outside section of the upper to increase its strength and durability.
Back Splitting - Reduction of sole substance at the

heel, seat and waist, mainly done for Louis Heel construction.
Back Stay- Material like taffeta used for reinforce-

ment at the top of the back seam and down the facing. A small oblong stay piece cut out of the material is held in position while stitching the lining with the upper.
Back Strap - Strap of leather which joins the two

quarters at the back of the boot or shoe to give added strength to the back seam.
Back Tacking- An operation in upper assembly for

tacking the lower end of the upper on the insole, before feeding it to the machine for pulling over by machine.
2

basic shoe designs, namely, (a) Balmoral, (b) Blucher/Derby, (c) Boot, (d) Brogue, (e) D'orsay, (f) Ghellic, (g) Gore, (h) Jodhpur, (i) Moccasin/Casual, (k) Mbnk, (m) Mule, (n) Oxford, (p) Pump, (q) Sandal, (r) Fringe/Shawl, and (s) Strap (see Annex A)

IS 2050 : 1991 Bask Shoe Types- Footwear are universally classi-

fied mainly into four types, namely, (a) Sandal, (b) Moccasin, (c) Moccasin and Sandal combination, and (d) Proper shoe (a modified moccasin and sandal).
Basket Weave - A style of weave done in leather

Bias Bindings - Fabric bindings cut diagonally as a continuous 45O spiral from a circular woven cloth. The bias or diagonal structure facilitates binding on all types of curves. Bifurcated Heel Pins - Round parallel shank pins used for attaching heels, made from screw wire which are without heads or points, but whose. ends are bifurcated to increase their holding power.

upper. Beach Sandals - Simple sandals for seaside used usually of rubber or plastic.
Beaded Edge - Forming a neat edge by turning

inside the skived or unskived edge of a section of the upper.
Beading - The turning in of a skived. or unskived

Binding- a) The treatment of an edge at top line of insole by the use of a fabric or leather strip, stitched and turned in bv different methods. b) Covering the edges of insoles of ladies footwear with a strip of leather or fabric.
Bit Knife- A knife used to even up the inside edge of welt and middle sole in order to get the edge uniform in substance. The cutting part of this knife a continuation of the tool itself. Blake Sewn Construction - A method of construction in which there is direct attachment of upper to sole. In this method, the upper is lasted to the insole with tacks, staple or thread and the sole is then attached by vertical chain or by locks stitches. In case of hand method the attachment is made by lock stitches only. Blind Eyelet- Where the surface of the eyelet is not

edge of an upper section. Sometimes the skived edge is turned over a cotton tape to give a pleasing appearance and more strength at the edges.
Bead on Sole Edge - The tiny ridge or bead which will be found on finished sole edge of shoe either on one or both sides. The ridges on the welt and on the sole edges are respectively known as welt bead and sole bead.

Bedding Sole - Fixing sole in its proper position so as to conform to the bottom shape of the last in mellow condition. Bed Lasting- An operation by which upper at the toe and seat is wiped to proper position on the insole and kept in position by cement, wire or tacks. Beech Wood- A hard slightly reddish-brown wood obtained from Fugus sylvutica L., fam. Fegacea suitable for last making. This wood does not split and is free from knots. Beeswax- An insect wax prepared from the honeycombs of either wild or domesticated bees after the removal of honey. Bellows Tongue- A broad folding tongue stitched to the quarter at each side. Belly- The underside of a hide or skin between fore and hind legs. Belly Size - Those shoe sixes that are commonly in demand. Benching - Operation of giving final faking and fiddling to the shoes, after having passed through all the finishing operations, for any slight imperfection I either in upper or bottom.
Bespoke Shoes - Shoes made to order.

apparent on the outside of the footwear.
Blind Eyeletting- A method of setting eyelets to the shoe upper in such a way that the eyelet heads show on the outside but the barrels do not penetrate the lining; the clenching being done on the reverse side of the upper material or on a reinforcing tape. The lining covers the clenched barrel and so protects the socks or stocking. Biinding Sole - The portion in which soles are temporarily attached with the help of nails and are driven through the last margin of upper and insole. They do not penetrate the sole right through and thus give an appearance of blind attachment. Blocked Toe - The toe of a footwear without any

opening at the toe.
Block Fitting Upper- A method fitting the upper,

in which sections of the upper are placed over a wooden block, similar in shape to the last and positioned to assume a shape relative to the final shape of the shoe.
Block Forme - A method of forme cutting where a whole cut paper forme is first folded to the last and then adhesive strips of paper are pasted all over the last in a systematic manner. The folds are removed gradually while doing so. Finally, this is cut along the feather edge all around and the blocked top position, known as block forme, is separated from the last. Block Insole - See `Insole Blocking'.

Bevelling- Reducing the substance of certain components of the shoe bottom by skiving, such as sole waist bevelling insole seat bevelling, welt bevelling piece sole bevelling, and graft sole bevelling. Bevel Waist - The sole edge of any welted shoe is bevelled at the waist to give an appearance of a single sole or a lighter sole. `Ihe outersole channel is placed further away from the edge so that the levelling operation may not damage the stitches. 3

Blocked - Leather preshaped by the moulding operation.

IS 2050 : 1991 B&her Bal- A modified Blucher Shoe in which the vamp is stitched overlapping the quarter. Blucher Shoe - Shoe patterned after a half boot that is an open throat lace shoe (Derby type). Boot - A name given to any shoe reaching above the ankle or still higher. Bootee - A type of boot with warm lining, usually Boxer Top - Used to describe elastic, plain or

covered with leather or synthetic when used around collar of a shoe or boot.
Bracing- Sewing the upper temporarily to the insole shoulder, before the lasting rivets are removed to hold the upper in Position firmly for welt sewing. Braiding- The production of ribbon-like or cordlike textures by inter-lacing of threads or narrow strips of leather for decorative purposes. Each strand in braid follows a path of ita own either from side to side (for flat braid) or round and round (for tabular braid). Brannock - A foot size measuring device with a

worn by women and children in cold weather. A knitted fabric foot covering for infants is also known as bootee.
Bottom - Bottom face of a footwear sole which

extends from toe to heel breast.
Bootline- A short casual boot that hita the ankle and usually is worn with stretched paints. Bottom Filler - The material used to fill up the cavity formed by the lasted over margin of the upper and insole. Bottom Finishing Shoe - The finishing room aperations, such as trimming, scouring, inking, and polishing, in order to improve the appearance of the finished, shoe. Bottoming- The attachment of the lasted footwear

sliding gauge to measure fitting.
Break- The wrinkling of leather in the fore part of the shoes caused by flexing in-walking. Breasting- Trimming or cutting down the front or the breast of the heel with either a power-driven, suitably shaped descending knife or by hand knife.

Breast Scouring of Heel- Smoothening the breast of the heel by scouring.
Brocades- Made of cotton, silk or rayon or metallic covering, with additional silk weft threads of gold or silver included to give a pattern, usually backed with cotton cloth, for fancy type of footwear. BreganL A heavy work shoe with pegged or nail sole construction. Brogue - A balamoral type of low cut laced heavy soled shoe, sometimes trimmed with pinking perforations and stitching.

to the sole by direct or indirect method of construction.
Bottom Levelling - Levelling either on machine under high pressure or by hand using sleeking sticks to give the bottom a good shape and remove all bumpiness after the soles are stitched and channelclosed. Bottom Manipulation - Clicking or cutting of

bottom componeets.
Bottom Stock or Rough Stuff - A collective name

Brogue Shoe- A balamoral type of shoe with perforations and gimpings on the upper. Buckles- A kind of metallic fitting used in footwear for fastening straps and for decorative purposes.
Buckram- A stiff fabric laminated or otherwise used

given to various bottom components used in footwear construction, such as outer sole, insole, welt, heel lifts, and heel top pieces.
Bow - A decorative accessory for women's shoes sometimes on the vamp or sometimes at the ends of the laces. Boxing- The final operation in which the shoes are packed in boxes in pairs, ready to go out of the factory.

for backing light upper leathers specially at the flesh sides.
Buffmg- Removing a thin layer from the grain side of the sole or insole by use of abrasive to give it a finer look or to allow the penetration of colour and prevent cracking.

Box Toe - A stiffener used to maintain and reinforce the shape of the shoe toe, preserve the toeroom allowed within the shoe, and to protect the wearer's toes from blows. Rigid box toes are made of leather, thermoplastic resin-impregnated fibre, solvent-softened plastic-impregnated fibre, and watersoftened starch-impregnated buckram. Flexible box toes are made of thermoplastic cork combination with fabric backing, and plastic laminates placed between fabric sheets. Soft box toes a're made of rubberized felt or fabric. Metal box toes are used in some safety footwears. 4

Built Heel- Complete heel composed of lifts, special lifts, top piece, slugged, compressed and breasted, and made to the required height. Bunching- Term applied to the action of the bottom filling shifting from its own place and bunching or depositing ,at different places forming humps and causing annoyance to the wearer. Bunion - An inflamatory swelling of the bursa over the metatarso-phalangeal joint of the great toe caused by undue pressure and friction being brought upon that particular portion of the foot. Bunking- Putting a fancy pattern oathe sole edge of the shoe b&tom by means of an adjustable heated tool

IS 2050 : 1991

which usually runs over the channel to hide any fault in chamtelling or channel laying and to improve the appearance of the footwear bottom. Bunking Wheel- An appliance having a wheel used for giving embossed decoration on the edge of a gummed or damped finished sole. A patterned impression is produced in a series of short straight strokes or any other design.
Burned Sole- When leather is heated above llO"C,

Canvas Boots - Boots of canvas upper and rubber bottom in which unvulcanized rubber sole is directly attached with the upper and then vulcanized. Canvas Lining- A plain weave heavy cotton cloth, used for lining of heavy shoes, usually combed and waterproofed. Canvas Shoes - Shoes of canvas upper and rubber bottom in which the unvulcanized rubber sole is directly attached to the upper by vulcanizing. Cap - An attached or imitation cap with a central peak and curved on either side, somtimes perforated. Carriage Boot - A loosely made boot of leather or

it becomes brittle and breaks off. Burnished Edge, Upper - The treatment of a specially skived edge given to cheap quality footwear by a special machine in which the fibres on the edges are burnt to give a slightly curled appearance and to give a false folded edge. Burnishing - Polishing to secure a bright glossy finish.
Burnishing Heels - The application and impregnation of wax into the heel by the use of heated implements .

fabric often fur trimmed and intended to be worn in winter by women being clipped over the ordinary shoes or slippers. Commonly worn over evening slippers.
Camauba Wax - A hard, pale yellow or brown commercial wax obtained as an exudation from leaves of the wax palm Coperniciu cerifera Mart., fam. Palmae. Due to its high melting point long lasting gloss it is generally used for footwear polishes in conjunction with other waxes. Cartons - Standard sized cardboard boxes in which the footwear are packed before being despatched from the factory. Caster Shape - Shape of outer soles and insoles so designed as to contain within their area sufficient space to enable other shapes to be c.:.i from them. Casual Footwear - Any footwear of light construction, suitable for informal or casual wear which is easy to slip on without any fastening device. Cavalier Boot- Men's boot made of soft upper stock, ankle high usually with two inch folded collar, crimped or molded front.

Butted Seam - Seam produced by joining two cornportents, edge to edge, by zig-zig seam.
Butt Jointed Sole - A three quarter sole with toung-

ing at the heel end, used with fitted heels, the semi louis or cuban type.
Buttons - Fittings used for fastening and for decorative purposes.

C
Cack- A smallest-soled shoe without heel and soft upper (size l-5) for infants. Calcaneum- The largest bone in the human foot and one of the bones of the tarsus group which is situated at a distance of the foot length measured from the back. The body weight is transmitted to the ground to a large extent through this bone. California Slip-lasted Construction- In this method the upper is stitched on to the sock lining which in turn is stitched to the heel and platform cover. A last is then forced into the cavity so formed. The wedge heel and the platform are stuck to the socklining into position and their edges are covered. Finally, the sole is attached by cementing. Calf Measurement - Girth measurement at the calf

Celnstlc Toe-Puff- A hard toe-puff made of raised cotton cloth, either single or double, impregnated with cellulose and available either in sheet form or in pieces out to the shape of the puff. Softening of toe-puff in solvent before insertion and quick lasting of the shoe after insertion is necessary.
Celluloid Eyelets - Eyelets having brass as their base with their head covered with a heavy coating of viscous celluloid solution. Celluloid Toe-Puff - Layers of fabric impreg-

of the leg.
California Process- See California Slip-lasted Con-

struction.
Calking Machine- An appliance to depress or shape the inner sole to make it conform to the shape. Callous - A spot of thickened and toughened skin

nated with cellulose solution kept in moist condition in air-tight containers. This puff requires no skiving along the cap-edge, the effect of skiving being produced by stepping the layers of fabrics when they are stuck together. Softening of the puff is not required before insertion but quick lasting is essential.
Cement- A general term applied to adhesive materi-

als in footwear industry.
Cementing- Application of cement on roughened or scoured portion of the footwear by brush or machine.

formed as a result of pressure and friction on the sole, heel and side of the foot, later develops into a corn.

IS 2050 : 1991 Cemented Construction - A method of footwear constructioit, in which the upper may be secured to the insole with thread, tacks, staples or cement (adhesive.material) and then the sole is attached to upper and insole by cement under pressure.

Chiropody - Branch of service or science dealing with professional care and treatment of the foot.
Chrome Sole - Sole of chrome tanned leather strongest and lightest, slippery, porous and has a rough edge.

Cemented Shoes - Shoes manufactured by cemented method.
Cement Lasting - Lasting of footwear uppers using

Church- A device to measure the foot size and fitting number. Chukka Boots- See `Jodhpur Boots'. Circles - A small horsed shoe shape oval or round tubelet of steel, to be drawn into the heels of shoes to prevent undue wear. Circular Vamp- A vamp so cut as to join the quarter in a seam on each side of the shoe, running down to the shank. Clarks Children Foot Gauge - A fitting board used for measuring children's feet. The length is measured by one sliding block and the ball girth by a tape on the other sliding block. The board is so designed that both the feet can be measured on it without reversing the board. Claw Foot - A deformity of the foot in which the inner longitudinal arch is accentuated, and the toes are drawn up and curled. Clearance pulls - Careful pulls given for clearing feather edges in lining, stiffeners, toe caps, etc, prior to fastening with tacks during lasting. Clicking- Cutting the footwear components out of upper leather or other materials with the help of templates or clicking dies. Clicklng~Board - Board of suitable timber blocks, plastics, rubber, zinc sheet, glass or any other suitable material, used for clicking of uppers. Clicking Dies - See `Clicking Knife, Press'. Clicking Knife, Hand- A knife having a wooden or plastic handle with a metallic sleeve which is tightened by screwing the handle holding the blade, known as extension blade. Clicking Knife, Press - A knife made out of high speed steel to the exact shape of the component to be cut, used for clicking by machine. Climbing Boot- A strong, warm and waterproof boot with nails fitted at the bottom and round the edge of the sole with a special type of staples. The fitting of the boot should not be loose but should be roomy enough to allow free functioning of the circulation of blood to prevent frost-bite. Clip- Describes a shoe or a boot which fits tightly on the last round the top line. Clipper - Same as Boxer Top. Consumables - Same as Findings. Closed Seam - Joining two components of upper by a seam along the edge, then opening out and
6

adhesive.
Chain Stitch- A type of stitch, made by one thread

only. The view resembles lock stitches but the under side gives the appearance of a chain. It is characterized by the fact that the entire thread may be pulled when one stitch is cut or broken. ChanneIIing- The production of a groove or channel in the leather in which the stitching is laid while attaching the soles and other parts. Channelling Insole - In the welted insoles two parallel hinged panels are cut or a single panel is cut on the flesh side between leather substance either alround or from one side of the breast of the heel to the other round the edge to enable welt sewing. A single open channel is also cut on the grain side or the insole for single sole construction to enable the stitches to be embedded in the channel. Channel Laying- Closing the channel lip after sole stitching by applying cement to the channel or otherwise and rubbing the lip down. Channelling Soles- Making a slanting cut along the edge or cutting on an open groove at an angle along the edge of the sole on the grain side. The sole stitches are concealed or bedded in this channel to avoid wear with or without lip being closed. Channel Lip - The portion of the leather, which is raised up after cutting to open the channel either in the insole or sole. Channel Opening- An operation to raise the lip of the channel after cutting to facilitate sewing. Chappal - Sandals without back straps but with cross-over straps on the forepart referred to as chappals (see also Sandal). Charme Wood - A light coloured, close textured hardwood, free `from knots, obtained from charme used in the construction of wooden lasts (also known as French wood or Hornbeam) Carpinus caroliniana Walt., fam. Betulaceae. Chauffeurs Foot- A vocational disorder of the forepart of the foot. Chilblain - An inflamation of the foot following freezing or continuous exposure to extreme cold. Chiropodist- One who is engaged in the practice of chiropody or podiatry, a service of foot care professionally administered.

IS 2050 : 1991

flattening. A fabric or leather strip is attached on the top of the seam on which two rows of stitches are made on either side of the seam.
Clog- A heavy soled very low cut boot or shoe with

Combination Last- A last some part of which varies from the usual standard measurement. Combination Metbod of Cutting Leather- Method

wooden or cork soles and used for wet ground. CR&g- Assembling the components of the upper by stitching of other fastening method.
Closing Hammer- A metal tool like a hammer head

of cutting leather where components of more than one size or design and shape are cut at a time from a side of skin, with a view to utilizing leather to the maximum without affecting the quality.
Combined Fabric, Lining- A fabric lining for vamp attached to swansdown or flannelette with latex or paste.

without a handle used for folding of parts of footwear by hand.
Closed Stick Assembly - An assembly made by the

application of adhesive to a single workpiece or both workpieces to result forthwith in a joint, suitable for the porous material which is capable of evaporating off the solvent.
Clubfoot- Clubfoot also called talipes is a deformity of the foot. The word talipes is derived from two latin word, tails meaning `ankle and pes meaning `foot'. There are four types of clubfoot depending on the position in which the foot is held, that is, talipes equinus - the persons walks on the toe, talipes calcaneous - the person walks on the heel, talipes varus - the persons walks on the outside of the foot, and talipes valgus- the persons walks on the inner side of the foot.

Combined Shanks- Shanks prepared by combination of steel and fibreboard or wood and fibreboard. The steel or wood provides rigidity and the board acts as a filler.
Common Sense Heel- Low flat heel. Comfort Shoe- Soft, flexible, low heeled easy shoes

for women. Compo- A proprietory name for the original modem process of cementing sole and upper together with pyroxylin cement.
Component Splitting - Operation of reducing the thickness of the footwear components by passing the individual components through a splitting machine having a flat or band type knife.

Cobler - A mender or maker of footwear. Coblers Seam - A seam made by stitching through and through the pieces being laid so that the edges are even. Code Marking- Blind sizes as used in footwear.
Cold Setting Filler - Cold process bottom filler consisting of granulated cork, asbestos, leather or wood fibres or combination of these, bonded together with rubber or cellulose solution. The filler gets hardened on evaporation of the solvent with application of external heat or pressure..

Composite Last- Same as Combination Last. Composite Method- Riveted, stitched and screwed method of construction used for heavy boots. Composition Sole - Rubber based with i. _ Jients mixed to lighten or fortify mass of sports footwear. Conditioning of the Upper - Softening the upper with heat and moisture to facilitate lasting operation. Concealed Wedge- The wedge heel covered in the normal way and stuck to the previously covered through platform. Conforming of Soles- The operation of shaping the sole before applying it to the footwear, so that it can conform to lasts that carry a high heel or have a rounded waist. Congress Gaiter- An ankle high shoe with leather or cloth top adjusted to the ankle by a gusset or rubber. Continental Heel- A slender type of heel generally with a curved breast line but usually with less curve in the back line than the Louis heel. It has a lip which extends partly under the shank of the shoe and usually ranges in height from 50 to 70 mm. The breast of the heel is vertically straight. Straight front high heel with slightly shaped back to give smart and modem tough-look. Convalescent Boot - A counterless boot used to permit early ambulation following injury or surgery.
Copper Toe- A copper boxing or lip used to protect the toe in the children shoes.

Collor- A narrow stitched-on strip of leather around the outside of the top of the boot or shoe for omamental effect. Colonial - A low shoe for women wear, having a tongue outside with an ornamental buckle across over the waist. Colour I$arklng- In `this method the lasting edges of the sectional parts are painted with definite colour to indicate the sizes. This method is also used in the identification of lasts by colouring the top projected portion of the last with definite colour to indicate the size.
Comb- The section of the last corresponding to the forepart of the foot immediately beneath the ankle. Shoe lasts are much thinner at this part than that of the foot and the hollowness in the comb assists in enabling the shoe quarters to grip the foot properly. Combat Boot- A special type of boot with high heel and eyelets up to the highest point worn now-a-days by wrestlers and originally by Roman warriors.

7

IS 205Q : 1991 Cordwainer- The very first trade guild started in the Crepe Fabric - A plain weave silk or rayon fabric

year 1087. Cordurcy - A complex weave weft pile fabric made of cotton with ribs running the length of the material, used for uppers of sandals and casual shoes. Cork, Processed - Waste cork granulated and bonded together with suitable adhesive under heat and pressure to produce required block or sheet used for a bottom components in footwear. Corns, Hard - A small deep-rooted horny formation usually formed on the toes due to constant friction or pressure at a particular point by using tight or ill fitting boots or shoes..
Corrective Footwear - Specially made footwear for

used for sandal and ladies shoe upper. Hard twisted yarns are used in the weft which by shrinking give pebbled appearance to the cloth. Creedmore- A cheap, heavy boot or shoe for men, blucher cut with bellows tongue. Crepe Rubber Sole - A rubber sheet of varrying thickness used as outer sole. The sheet is produced by coagulation of latex and passed between a series of steel rollers, roughly scored on the face which imparts a pattern to the rubber which is called crepe. Cresol- A heavy work boot or shoe of the congress type having rubber gorings in the boots/shoes.
Cricket Roots- Strong ankle boots having a low heel made out of either white leather or canvas, either by machine sewn or welted method. Crimping- To make folds or pleats in the whole-cut upper to facilitate lasting in Moccasin type of slippers.

defective foot to overcome abnormalities in the foot.
Corruguting Waist - Adorning the waist of certain classes of footwear by a heated dual knife from waist to heel-breast at an angle of approximately 300 producing a series of parallel lines.

Counter- A piece of stiffening material which passes around the heel of the boot/shoe to support the outer leather. In orthopaedic shoes the counter is extended forward in the innerside. In heavy and industrial boots/ shoes for miners, furnacemen and steel workers, metal counters are used on the outside of the boot and shoe. It may also mean a small piece of lining material stitched inside the boot and shoe at the back to retain the small stiffener specially in the unlined boot and shoe. One upper portion of the boot and shoe back is also known as counter.
Counter Pocket- In unlined shoes a leather piece is

Crowning - A name given to a type of decorative emboss mark similar to bunking across the middle of the sole joining the two joints. Sometimes it is put just below the breast of the heel.
Crow Wheel - An indented metal wheel used for crowing.

Cuban Heel- A straight fronted medium or high heel used mainly on women's shoes and cowboy boots and some men's fashion shoes. The height varies normally from 35 to 54 mm. Cubold- A bone resembling a cube and located in the tarsus group. Cuff- A strip of leather wider than a collar sewed around the top of a shoe and boot.
Cuniifoms- Three wedge shaped bones located in the tarsus group. Cupped Sole- Applied to the depressions in the sole caused by the ball of the foot in wearing. Curtain Crepe Welted Construction- This method is same as `Goodyear welted method' except that a strip of plain or corrugated crepe rubber of required width instead of a welt is sewn to the insole and upper. The crepe sole is stuck and trimmed and then the crepe rubber is turned back on to the sole and stuck to its edge.

stitched at the back to conceal the stiffener or counter which forms a pocket.
Counter Point - A point on the back line of the last

at a distance of one-fifth of the standard last length from the bottom edge of the last. It may be lowered according to the changes in fashion. Coupling Heel- Fitting snugly the heel to the convex seat of the sole.of the shoe by making the cup of the heel concave in many ways. Court Shoes- Low cut vamp lightweight pump type shoes either with low or high heels. Originally the upper was in one piece. Covered Wedge- The wedge heel stuck to the sock lining and covered with a wrapper which has been previously stitched with sock lining. Cow Boy Boots- Long boots with high tops and high heels worn by western cow boy's, now known as Dude Ranch Novelty shoe. Crease on Setting Iron- Either one or two creases on either side of the bed of edge setting iron which help in producing the bead in the finished sole edge. These creases produce tiny ridges on either edge of the sole or on one edge producing a bead on the trimmed sole edge. 8

Curttie- Men's low straight oxford shoe with silk tie. Also applied to women's two or three eyelet ties usually on Blucher pattern. .
Cushion Sole - A padded inner side. Cushion Insole - A term generally used for insole covered with synthetic or natural foam or sponge sheet or felt and then both the units covered with leather or other materials to give a cushioning effect to the footduring wear.

IS 2050 : 1991
Custom Made -

Made by hand to the customers'

The effect of these wrinkles is to cause the toe of

special order. Custom Toe-t'This designation intended to refer to a toe and last of standard type. Cutlau Nails - Nails in lengths from 5 to 16 mm having rectangular head and shank, the headtapering down into the shank, used to attach as well as to reinforce top pieces and soles.
Cut Off Vamp- A vamp which is cut off at the tip (/* `and stitched. i Cut Out- One or more pie&s cut out of upper of a boot and shoe for style effects. ; Cu't Soles - Soles cut ready for selling in different sizes and sha+ with different thicknesses. Cut Stock- The ready cut components of footwears for further used in closing or making room. Cut Tacks- Tacks used in machine construction of footwear resembling hand tacks, made either with sharp or blunt points.

the forme to be twisted across the front of the last resulting in a dead forme when finally cut. -Upper- Producing a fancy effect on upper by punching, stitching or gimping. Decorative - In general, denotes a section or treatment which has no real utility value in the footwear but is only intended for decoration.
Del-Mac Cemented Constructkm - A method of

construction of footwear in which no insole is used. The sole serves the purpose of both sole and insole. The sole is split all round the edges to a width of about 20 mm. The upper is lasted to the flesh split and the sole grain split is attached with cement. The sole is cut to the size of the insole of the last with a little allowance for finishing. Delwelt System- A system of construction similar to the Del-Mac construction with the use of a skeleton insole. This insole is channelled on its underside and attached by horizontil chain stitch to a welt. The insole has a canvas reinforcement and a full length sock is inserted. Denalllng - Removal of nails used for temporary attachment of insoles with last.
Deportment - An assembly of articles which have,

Cutting ,Area - The final area obtained from the pattern area of footwear after a number of additions or coefficients have been made for to allow for the number of pieces, their shape and interlocking ptoperties, quality of leather, size of skin and other factors.
Cutting Soles, Direct - A system by which entire material is brought beneath the press and cut direct into parts. This system requires duplication of knives and press with larger cutting areas. Cutting Soles from Ranges- A system in which the leather is first divided into small strips or ranges before being brought to the press to be cut into soles. In this system parts dan be cut in pairs with a single knife.

from the commercial point of view, certain features in common for making footwear. Derby Shoe - An open throat, laced shoe with a tongue, cut in one piece with the vamp or separa;_ly. The quarter lies over the vamp.
Desmodur- An isocynate mixed in trichloroethylene solvent, used with adhesives to speed up drying time and self curing and to increase bond strength.

D
Damps Down Eottom - A type of transparent wax

finish containing some fillers and binders which is generally given to the sole of good colour, used on better grades of footwears. This finish is also know as natural finish.
Dancers Foot - A painful condition of the large toe

Dextrine Adhesive - Adhesive prepared from dextrine in water which has good tack and bond strength. It is used for toe puff and counter cementing and bottom tilling. It dries brittle and therefore cannot be used for upper. Direct Attachment of Sole - A method of attach-

ment in which the upper and the insole are directly joined to the sole by stitching, riveting, pegging or screwing.
Direct Cutting of Bottom - An operation of cutting

joint.
Dancing Shoes- Low cut, laced, light footwearwith

flexible soles used for dancing.
Dancing Slipper - General name applied to various types of low cuts used for dancing including low cut laced shoes used by dancers. Dauber- A small brush used to apply polish to shoe

the bottom stock of a particular ready shape from the bend or side which may not be convenient for units producing various shapes simultaneously. Direct Moulded Construction- A process involving the use of presses, where by rubber soling compound
in the unvulcanized condition is pressed and cured on to the leather or canvas upper previously lasted to the insole. Moulding and vulcanization of rubber compound and adhesion to the upper are carried out simultaneously.

or boot.
Dead Forme - A term used in footwear designing

and pattern cutting. While cutting inside or outside forme with the help of a full piece of paper, a number of wrinkles occur particularly at the joint line.
9

Direct Moulded Sole - The upper and sole of the
footwear are formed and sole is cut to the desired

IS 2050 : 1991 shape. A mould is placed around the sole and thermostatically controlled heat softens sole and compound. Pressure applied then forces the sole into the desired shape. Chemical changes taking place in the sole result in the vulcanization of the sole with the upper material for a firm bond. This method is most popular with sports shoes/boots and heavy shoes/boots.
Direct Vulcanization - The process of `curing' a

Drag Knife - A cutting tool used for cutting sole edge. It has a concave blade and a projection or guard to protect the upper from being cut away. Dressing - Cleaning and polishing footwear with liquid/paste polishes and creams.
Dressing of Upper - Treatment given to footwear uppers before they are finally packed. It consists of checking of evenness of the shade of footwear uppers and giving a final coat of the footwear-dressing.

rubber compound (originally in soft unvulcanized condition) under high pressure to the lasted upper of the footwear. Metal moulds produce the shape required for the complete bottom.
Direct Vulcanized Shoe - See `Direct Moulded

Construction'.
Dompedro- A heavy buckle shoe.

Dress Shoe - Oxford type, black shoe without toecaps used for evening wear. It is now used for any shoe which is not casual, sport or work shoe or slipper.
Driving File - An old, cast off, flat file used for

Dorsum - The top of the foot, that is, the upper surface of the foot. Doped Finish - A finish given to the uppers having fancy colours at the stage of shoe finishing, This is a coat of pigment with proper binder which is applied to the shoe upper matching with the colour of the upper.
Dorsal.Muscle- The muscles of the dorsal surface of the foot which helps the extensor longus digitorum to extend the four inner toes and tends to draw them in the outward direction. D'Orsay- A pump shoes, cut low on both sides, the curves extending downward towards the centre of the shank and meeting in a broad V-shape. Double Dect Welt - A kind of welt prepared by

driving nails and rivets, taking out the feather edge and flattening the pleats of uppers on insole. It is better than a hammer as'it has a flat surface.
Dry-Stick Assembly - A method by which an adhesive is applied to both the surfaces of the work pieces which are then left open until the solvent is evaporated. The two adhesive coated surfaces are then brought togehter and pressed, when due to autoadhesion or dry tack of the adhesive film, an adhesive strength is obtained immediately which approximates to the final strength. This state does not occur for a long time in the close assembly method.

Dutchman - A wedge inserted between the lifts of the heels or between insole and outsole to throw the foot inward or outward, used to correct posture.
Dutch Heel- Wide base, slanting straight to narrower

spliting the edge of the welt and then doubling the grain upward to form a bead. A mw of stitches is then run through the bead to give the effect of double welt on finished shoe.
Double Eyeletting - In this method of ,eyeletting

top lift.

E
Edge Burnkbing- See `Burnished Edge'. Edge Seating- See `Burnished Edge'. Edge Setting- Finishing the edges of the soles with polish applied under. heavy pressure by rubbing or ironing the edges with or without wax to give a fine uniform finish and gloss and impart water proofness.

heavy duty footwear, two operations are performed. In the first operation, one large eyelet is inserted from inside the upper through the lining and the outside material and clenched on the surface, then in the second operation another eyelet of smaller diameter barrel is inserted from the outside and clenched with the head of the first eyelet so that the head of the second covers completely the clench of the first eyelet. Double Guarded Forepart Iron - An edge iron with guard on both sides.
Dowie Slipper Construction - A method of foot-

Edge Tie - A one eyelet tie for women, stitched close at the throat and having a small pointed tongue. Edge Treatment- Giving different treatments to the edge of the upper components, ,and to the edge of the soles and heels during the manufacturing processes, such as skiving, gimping, binding and edge trimming. Edge Trimming- Shaping the edges of the soles by trimmers to obtain required shape of edges (fudge edge, bevelled edge, round edge, square edge, extension edge, etc).
Edging- Removing the sharp edges of the leather in a variety of ways, such as brushing and ironing.

wear constnlction in which the upper is laid over the last before which a string is passed through the lasting edge of the upper and when drawn tightly, moulds the upper to the last. At this stage the sole is attached. This type of footwear requires very soft upper. The construction is very flexible. Drafting- A process in which the initial stretch of the upper is taken out to give an approximate shape of the last prior to actual lasting. This consists of a series of pulls taken in different directions. 10

Elntiicized- Shoes with upper surface of stretchable leather or fabric backed with flexible yam woven fabric.

IS 2050 : 1991 English Channel- A channel which is generally cut on the soles a few millimetres away-from the edge approximately at an angle of 4S" to facilitate the stitching. Elastic Stocking - A surgical appliance made of Eyeletting- Fastening eyelets to the footwear upper. Eyelet Tab- A reinforcement placed at the front of

the quarters of boots/shoes to give added strength to eyelets or lace holes.

rubber fabric.
Eiastomee - Various macromolecular materials

F
Fabric Blade - A bevelled point blade used in the

which have rubber like properties and are used for footwear bottoms.
Embossing- A method of printing or raising up ornamentation qn a surface by heat and pressure. English Foot - Mode with a side seam in the foot. English Last - Last with long recede toe and low

adjustable clicking knife for cutting of fabric lining. This blade is normally about 115 mm long. One end of this blade is sharpened to give a straight but sloping cutting edge of about 32 mm.
Facing- The portion of the quarter which carries the

eyelets, for lacing which can be either whole-cut with the quarter or joined.
Facing Materials - The pieces of material used between the upper and the lining at the face of the quarters (where eyelets are fitted) to strengthened and to increase the holding power of eyelets on the upper. Facing Rows- Decorative stitching which is put parallel to the row of eyelets or sometimes in other decorative manner. Faille Lining- An attractive plain weave fabric with

heel.
English Welt - A mock welt. Everett- A type of men's slipper low in the back but

coming up over the waist in front to the instep.
Escape Boot- Flying boots, fleece lined for warmth

which in addition have a sharpnel-proof leg lining consisting of loose layers of silk. The leg part of the boot catt be cut off leaving a normal Oxford shoe enabling the baled-out airmen to escape more easily from enemy territory without recognition.
Evening Shoes - Shoes usually made of patent

a close rayon warp and thick cotton weft. The backof this is covered with elastic material. This is generally used as reinforcement for very soft leather like suede.
Fair Stitching - Stitching applied around the sole

leather by the turn shoe method of construction. For gents, evening shoes are Oxford type with laces of light construction. For ladies, these are light shoes made of fabric, gold or silver kid upper or sandals made by cemented method.
Evening Soles and Insoles- Levelling of the bottom

showing on the upperside to imitate welt.
Fair Stitched Construction - In this method, first

insole, upper and the middle sole are sewn together and then the sole is stitched to the projected edge of the middle sole.
Fake Bottom- A kind of black waxy finish generally

components to uniform thickness by splitting a layer from the flesh side.
Everest Boot - Boots of light weight, high thermal

insulation and strength; with correct fitting for climbing high altitudes. These have a provision to take easily detachable crampons for use on ice to put on and take off. These boots are modified form of boots used for Everest expedition in 1953.
Exhaustive Cutting Leathem - A method by which

applied by hand to the bottom of footwear at the stage of bottom finishing over the buffed surface of the sole to give a shine on polishing.
Fakes - Water emulsified waxes to produce oil-inwater dispersions which may be of a thin creamy nature or in the form of thick paste. False Welt - A strip of leather or any other suitable

the leather unit is cut for full utilization of area.
Extensors - The muscles of the top of the foot, the

material stitched or stuck along with extended edge of the sole iesembling a welt.
Faust Slipper- A light weight shoe with V shaped

contraction of which raises the toe upwards the knee.
Extension Edge - An extra wide edge.

cuts at sidesinstead of U shape and no goring. Feather- Edge of the bottom of a last a11 around. Featherod- An edge thinned down to create minimum resistance or obstruction. Feather Edge - Thin edge in turned or cemented footwear.
Feathering Insole- Bevelling of the flesh side edge of the insole either all around or only at the seat to facilitate moulding of the upper over the insole. Felt - A sheet made of fibres of wool hair, fur, etc,

Extosls- A bony cut growth from the surface of a bone.
Eyelets - An annular ring of metal or other material

with a barrel for inserting in footwear upper to provide a durable ring for lacing. Regular eyelets are driven-in from the outside of the upper. Blind eyelets are cdncealed on the inner side of the upper, leaving the lace hole with a raw edge on theoutside. The head may be of different shapes; that is hexagonal, triangular or square. 11

matted together and rolled flat.

IS 2030 : 1991 Felt Sole -I Soles compounded from felt and rubber

latex to be used as outer soles for light indoor footwear. Fibre Board- Board made out of materials based on leather fibres or alphacellulose fibres or a combination of leather and alphacellulose fibrea that are generally used for insoles and counters.
Fibula- One of the two calf bones on the outer side

Fitted Heels - Wooden heels used in ladies' footwear. They are not placed on the top of the sole seat as is usually done but the sole is cut away to make room for the heel to be fitted so that the breast of the wooden heel fits the cut edge and the outer edge of the heel rests directly upon the leather edge of the heel. Fitting of Foot - The ball measurement of the foot

of the leg. The lower end of this bone makes up the outer ankle bone.
Fiddle Shanks - High arched steel shanks suitable

in relation to the size of the foot is denoted by the term fitting. These can be split up into any number, but ten have been considered sufficient which may be denoted by letters or by numbers. The difference between the fittings is 64 mm.
Fittings - Measurements of girths of the last in relation to the lengths which may be split into any number but ten have been considered sufficient. These fittings can either denoted by A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, XH and l/2 or by numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, etc. The difference between the fittings is 6.4 mm. Fitting Up- A term applied to the gathering together of the bottoming components according to the instruction slip. Fitting Stool - A low slanting topped stool upon which the footwear salesman sits when trying with a footwear; it has a ledge to rest the foot of the customer while adjusting the footwear.

for high heeled ladies' footwear. These are made from about 12.5 mm wide steel and are full width for about half the distance from the heel-end; then narrowing it to about 8 mm at the waist and forepart. The shank has a V-shaped cut at the seat end having a tack hold at each end.
Fiddle Waist- A method of finishing the waist of the shoe bottom in two colours. Fiddle waists are made with wax, and hand finish stains and the forepart is finished in a lighter shade of the same preparation, usually of cream colour. The line separating the forepart from the waist may be straight, concave, convex or at times resembling a fish tail. A part of the waist is sometimes coloured like upper to give a light appearance to the shoe. Fille - A finely ribbed fabric used in women's shoe

uppers
Filler- A composition of cork or felt or rubber or spur

Flange Heel - A heel made with a flare towards the "top lift" or bottom of the heel as the footwear stands when worn.
Flange Joint of the Sole and Piece Sole - A method

glass or substance made of sawdust or felt gunny to fill the gap space between sole and insole caused due to lasting operation.
Finding - A general term applied to articles which

of joining piece sole with graft sole. For this purpose the ends of the components to be joined are bevelled at the same angle so thit a perfect joint is possible.
Flanging Upper- Turning out the edge of the upper

incidental or accessory to the manufacturer such as laces, trimm, polishes, dressings, creams, waxes, cements, rubber heels, buckles, shanks, heel plaktes, shoe horns, shoe brushes, insoles, etc.
Finders Sole bather - Sole leather general1.y used

kept as lasting allowance, instead of turning it in, in lasting operation for Veldtschoen method.
Flannel - A raised cotton cloth used for inner

linning of shoes.
Flap Setting- An operation by which the leather sole edge covering the heel seat and breast area (Louis heel) is set. , Flap Splitting- Dividing the sole for Louis heel at the seat to allow a part to go up the heel and the rest under the heel. Flap Sticking- Sticking up or attaching the flap to the breast and top of the heel (Louis heel construction) with the help of glue or any other suitable adhesive. Flap Trimming- An operation by which the split

by the repairers. It is usually hard and firm in nature and less wear resistant.
Finger Foxed - Having a pieced quarter so cut that

the heel foxing extends forward to the throat in a narrow strip below the quarter.
Finger Stitching - Stitching which reinforces the

lapped quarter of a shoe or boot.
Finishing Footwear - The fined operation per-

formed on footwear after constructional work has been completed to improve quality of the footwear by making the edge resistant to water and by improving its appearance.
Finishing Last - Specially made last on which footwear are generally finished. This last is made in two parts hinged together with half size shorter and half fitting less than the lasting last. The last is rounded more in the heel seat portion.

sole edge of heel breast area and seat area (Louis heel) is trimmed.
Flat Binding- A kind of edge binding done in one operation. Special stitching machine turns the binding in U shape and then stitches through, The up+ may be lined orunlined.

12

IS 2050 : 1991 Flat Flttlng- Positioning of section to section of the upper on a flat base prior to stitching.
Flat Foot - H&an foot in which the arch or the arches specially the internal metatarsal arch have either been broken due to some reason or have not been developed as in normal foot.

occupational footwear, orthopaedic and surgical footwear meant for the use of babies, children, ladies or gents. Footwear Components - Any fabricated or semifabricated component made of various kinds of materials or combination of materials such as leather, canvas, textiles, wood and synthetics for use in the manufacture of the footwear.
Force Lasted Construction - See `California Step-

Flats or Flatties - A general term for shoe styles with low wedge heels.
Flattened Foot- A term foot once normal but fallen

down through changes in position of ones.
Flat Last - A last with little arch or toe spring Flexibility - The ease with which the bottom or upper components of a footwear can be bent. This is one of the requisite properties of a footwear component which facilitates to the easy bending of footwear components along with foot movement during walking.

lasted'.
Force Lasting- Operation of forcing the last in the upper is called force lasting. Thus in certain construction where the insoles are stitched together with the upper, the last is to be forced in for the subsequent operations in the making department. Forepart- The front portion of the footwear which

may either refer to upper or the sole or shoe-last. Forepart Cutter- Type of disk-shaped knives with cutting blades around the circumference mounted at the end of a spindle revolving at a high speed, employed to trim the forepart of the footwear. There are various types of these cutters to give different types of edges.
Forme- The word `forme' is derived from the French word for last but the term in footwear trade is used in pattern cutting to signify the shape that is produced to represent the area of one side of a last. There are, therefore, hvo formes, one for the inside and one for the outside. From these formes the standard can be prepared. Forme Cutting- The cutting of the forme on a flate

Flexors - The muscles of the sole of the foot, the contraction of which brings the foot in a line with the leg. Flight Boots - Fleece linked boots usually with a zipper closure worn by pilots and flight crews. Floating Edge Finish of Sole - Finishing of sole edge by which the under edge of the sole remains more projected than the top edge. Flying Boots - Boots used by airmen. These boots are light, flexible, waterproof and capable of withstanding rough service. These are made with woolled sheep skin upper with a belt fitted at the top of the foot. These boots are fitted with zip fastener and may be opened to the full length of the legs enabling easy putting on and off of the boots in a minimum time.
Folded Edge- The edge of a skived upper which has

surface. Foundry Boots- These are protective boots modified to serve the particular purpose. The principal variation in this boot is the fitting of toe easy exit fasteners instead of eyelets, thus enabling the boot to be taken off quickly in the event of accident while handling molten metals. This footwear has also clog type wooden soles. Foxing- A piece of leather forming the lower part of the quarter of a boot and shoe. A rubber strip of 10 to 20 mm width placed around the bottom, over sole and upper of a rubber boot/shoe or canvas boot/shoe for waterproofness and then vulcanized. It is a sort of reinforcement concealing the joint of the upper and sole.
Foxing Strip- An external cover strip used to protect the sole and sole edge of the upper. Freak Last- A last, wide, almost straight across toe,

been turned over to give a neat finish.
Folding Skive - The skive done to facilitate folding

or turning-in of an edge of upper leather. This is made usually on twice the width to be folded, plus about one millimetre to cover the thickness of the material. Football .Boots - Boots made of thick leather, unlined and are either machine sewn or rivetted. They have no heels and the soles are covered with leather studs arranged in various patterns on the soles and heels to give the wearer a firm grip on the ground.
Foot Form - A name for last or footwear made in close conformity to the natural outline of the foot. Foot Hold- A low rubber over shoe having no heel

but adjusted by a light heel strap.
Footwear - Any form of footwear made of various

having the same width as at ball of foot.
French Binding- Treatment given to the edge of the uppers in certain cases, where a strip of binding material is stitched to the upper grain to grain, very close to the edge and then pulled up over the top of the upper and down again on the other side of the upper, where it is

kinds of materials or combination of materials like leather, canvas, rubber, textiles, wood synthetics to protect the foot from cold, heat, thorns, hazards, etc, and to serve as a costume in the form of sandal, shoe or boot. These shall include walking shoes, dress shoes, occasional footwear, sports footwear, 13

Is 2050 : 1991

sandwitched between the upper and lining, showing a pipe of the binding material all along the edge.
French Curves- Various model curves moulded in

sets in celluloid used to obtain satisfactory curves in drawing and deaigni~.of patterns.
French Foot- Made with a single seam in the centre

methods, one of them being to fix a spring within the gap portion of the two parts which would break at the point where they are hinged to facilitate last slipping or forced lasting.
Gauged Edge - A type of gimp having a series of round wedge shaped pieces on the edge of the upper components. Gauged Lift- A kind of seat lift, prepared by gaug-

of the sole.
French Heel - A heel which is similar to Louis heel

made by wood covered with leather.
Frontier Pattern of Chaplis - This pattern of footwear was originally evolved bythe North West Frontier Province (Pakistan) tribes as a sound, strong, cheap and hard-wearing footwear particularly suited to the rigorous task involved in climbing rocks and hills. Fudge Edge - An edge stitched very close to the

ing out an area in the centre of the lift and thereby reducing the centre of the breast of the lift.
Gemming Insoles - Reinforcing the insole of light

substance, unsuitable for welted work in a variety of ways with a special canvas either all over or over the channel lips of the insole.
Geometric Forme - Forme produced by applying

geometrical method.
Geometric Grading- This is a method of grading of pattern in which geometrical principles are involved. Getting off- See `Benching'. Ghillie- Bqll type shoe with slotted front lace. Shoes having a slashed over tongue covering the lace stay. Gibson - A name given to Derby shoes for ladies with three big eyelets, but now-a-days four or five eyelets are also used.

upper and trimmed closed.
Fudge Edge Work- A variation of McKay work.

All details as to the manufacture of this shoe are similar to McKay shoe, the only difference is that in fudge edge work, a `middle' has to be inserted between the lasted upper and outer sole. `Ihe shoe made by this method is often called a double-sole shoe.
Fudge Wheel - A rolling wheel is fixed in between

two clamps which will mark the impression on the edge of the soles as a decoration.
Full Sock- A piece of leather or fabric pasted or

kept on the insole of the shoe to cover any grindery and stitching inside the shoe. Sometimes full sock is also provided for better appearance.
Full Sole- The whole cut sole used for costly foot-

Gimped Edge - A kind of edge treatment of upper done by punching the raw edge of the upper so as to form an angle or semi-circle. Gimping is sometimes done in the edge of sock lining of fancy shoes and sandles.
Girth - The distance round the foot, for example, at

wear.
Full Vamp - A vamp that extends forward full size

the joints.
Glue Paste- A cheap and effective adhesive used for labelling and Louis heel attaching. Glue and gelatine are both derived from the skins and bones of animals.

and is lasted under instead of being cut off and sewed to the tip on the under side.
Full Welt- Welt of full length, that is of such a length

to run all round the sole-edge. G
Gabardine - A closely woven fabric of particular boot or shoe surface value in wear and appearance. Gaiter - A separate ankle covering an over covering

Golf Disks - Small rubber or metal inserts placed in the bottom of golf boot or shoes to prevent slipping. Golfers Foot - A temporary disorder with strain at outer side of leg.
Golf Shoe- A kind of sport shoe with or without hob

nails used by golf players.
Galosh- An over shoe or boot usually of rubber and

for the foot adjuster with buttons and attached with a buckle and strap.
Gallon Binding- See `French Binding'. Gaping Quartels - The quarter tops at the sides, at

also with a type of vamp having its wings extended along either side.
Goodyear Welted Construction- A very flexible method of boot or shoe construction in which the insole and the upper are sewn to the welt which in turn is stitched to the sole. No seam is visible inside the boot or shoe.

times due to various resorts do not fit snugly to the last after lasting and eventually do not fit the foot causing inconvenience to the wearer. The reasons for this are many but are mostly due to improper lasting.
Gap Spring Lasts - Wooden lasts are generally

Gore Shoe - A shoe with elasticized side or front; Goring- A strong kind of rubberised fabric used in style footwears. 14

made in two separate blocks, namely, the forepart and the back. These two sections are fixed in variety of

IS 2050 : 1991 Grading Patterns - This is to produce patterns of differen; sixes and fittings, proportionately from a model either by machine or by a hand tool. Gruff Sole - A term referring to three quarter length sole, which may be either straight or curved graft. Grecian Slipper - A slipper with a separate counter which can either be whole cut or in two pieces with a plain vamp. Grinderies (Metallic) - Metallic auxiliaries, such as eyelets; nails, tacks, rivets, heel tips, toe tips, screws, etc, used in footwear construction are grouped under the name grinderies. Groove Channel- A type of open channel where an open groove in the shape of `U' is cut in the sole at a uniform distance along the edge to allow the stitches to bed in it. This is generally done on hard or thick leather, rubber, plastic nitric or resin soles. Groover - A small cutting tool, used in making grooves on soles. Gun Boots- These are knee high waterproof rubber boots generally used in chemical factories to protect the feet against injurious chemicals, and also against rain water. Gun Spray- An item of kit resembling the shape of a revolver which enables the footwear upper finisher to spray the dressing uniformly all over the footwear. The gun operates under compressed air pressure, the pressure and the range of the spray can be adjusted to suit the requirement. Gusset- A side piece or insert of rubber webbing in the side of a congress shoe. Gypsy Seam - A seam running from throat , straight down the front of a boot or shoe to the toe, making a vamp. Hammer Toe- The toe that is contracted or buckled up in the middle which resembles a hammer in form and is called a hammer toe. This is caused by wearing short or narrow shoe. Hand Lasting- Lasting of footwear by hand method. Hand Made Footwear- A name given to the process of hand made footwear of any construction,*generally applicable to welted method of construction. Hand Tacks - These are used for insole tacking, assembling, jointing, comer tacking and cobbling operation done by hand method. These are not used in machine. The tacks are produced by cut tack method with heads somewhat thicken than the machine cut tacks and with a fine sharp point which enables the user to push them far enough into the material by light finger pressure. Hand Welting- Attaching of welts with stitches by hand. Hassock Heel - Descriptively rounded heel. Head of the Base - The upper end of a bone of the foot. Heel - The seat part of the footwear bottom sometimes attached separately and sometimes an integral part of the sole. It may be of leather, rubber, wood, plastics (like PVC, polyurethane, etc), nitrile, masonite board, particle board, etc, and may be of various types givenunder their non names, namely, Spanish, Louis, Wedge, etc. The heel tip/top lift is an integral part of the heel. Heel Attaching- Fixing the heel to the seat of the footwear permanently. Heel Ball - Fakes, prepared from wax with other ingredients, used for polishing sole and heel edge and bottom of footwear. Heel Base - The part of the heel next to the sole usually made concaved, to fit the seat of the sole. Heel Bone - See `Base of Bone'. Heel Breast - The front edge of the heel facing towards the toe. Heel Breasting- Removing the surplus material from the heel breast by cutting. Heel Brace- A metal brace or frame to the outside of a footwear to keep the heel straight. Heel Building - Process of attaching several lifts having a rand or skeleton lift at the base according to required thickness. Heels of inside attachment have their top pieces attached by slugging wire or nails. Heel Girth Measurement - The girth measurement around the tip of the back of the heel and the middle of the curve of the foot (where the leg joints with the foot). Heel Grip- A name given to a counterpiece of either suede or sheep skin with flesh side out inserted at the 15

H
Half Bellows - A full length tongue attached to the vamp and all the way up on both sides of the quarters. Half Double Sole - An out sole composed of one full sole to heel with a slip sole above it. Half Sock- A piece of leather or suitable material to cover the inner sole partly. This particular type covers the seat and waist but terminates at the joint. Half Soles - Soles of half length, extended usually about 12 mm below the joint line, used by repairers. HPllux Regidus- This is a condition in which the big toe joint is enlarged, and movement in it is very limited or absent. The toe itself is not deflected from its normal position, as in hallux valgus. Hallux Valgus - Hallux valgus is a displacement or buckling of the bones of the first metatarso-Phalangeal joint with the great toe being displaced towards the other toes and the head of the first metatersal bone being forced inward. This is also known as bunion.

IS 2050,: 1991 back of the quarter where this serves as a counter lining and does not allow the foot to slip out of the footwear while walking and due to its rough surface, holds back the sock from moving.
Heel Heigbt- The thickness of the heel in relation to Hob Cutter- Extra large sized cutters having sixteen

the toe spring. It is determined by the style of the last. The correct heel height is that which gives from 6 mm to 8 mm toe spring for normal walking shoes.
Heel Iron - A hand tool used for heel ironing. Heel Ironing- See `Burnishing Heel'. Heel of the Footwear - Support placed under the

cutting blades around the circumference creases and are used for trimming low heel, like those of children's footwear. These are also used by footwear repairers for their trilgmiag machines for cutting the forepart where no creases are required like in new footwear.
Hob Nails - Nails similar to protector studs with

heads of varying styles, like bullet, Victoria, pyramid, star and Irish used to reinforce soles and heels of heavy boots and shoes.
Hockey Boot- A machine sewn boot., made of leather.

quarter to ensure that the footwear lies correctly. The seat part of the footwear bottom, sometimes attached separately and sometimes as an integral part of the sole. It may be of leather, rubber, wood or any synthetic mateiial. They are of various types given under their own names, like Spanish, Louis, Wedge etc.
Heel Pad - A pad of leather, felt, rag, etc, placed in the heel of the footwear inside and covering the insole at the point where the heel of the foot rests. Heel Lifts- Layers of material used for intermediate

But usual kind of hockey boot is of canvas possibly with leather reinforcements and with a sole of moulded vulcanized flexible rubber, cleated and grooved to provide a firm grip on the ground.
Hoisting Method - An operation in hand lasting where the seat portion of the upper is raised about 15 mm from seat towards the counter point prior to taking the first pull at the toe. This helps in giving a tight top line to the footwear. Hold Fast - A ridge formed at the insole edge all round or up to the heel breast to which the welt is sewn. It is formed by cutting two channel with the help.of an insole ranging knife and the difference between them is normally 4.75 mm. Horn - The shoe horn used to facilitate slipping on low cut shoes. Hot Blasting- Giving some form of heat treatment to the leather upper to smooth out any wrinkles and to tighten up the grain surface of the leather. Horsing- Placing of upper on last in a proper position

heel building.
Heel fins - Nails, grooved or spiralled specially for attaching heels of boots and shoes. Heel Plate- Steel plate made to the size of the heel

in U-shape having four to six nail holes for attaching it to the heel.
Heel Scouring - Shaping and smoothening out the

edge or surface of the heel with abrasive. Heel Seat - The portion of the boot or shoe bottom where the heel is fitted. Heel Shave - A tool just like a spoke shave with holding device and a blade in the middle. The blade may be flat or convex to fit the shape of the heel.
Heel Sock- See `Seat Sock'. Heel Stay - A pasted lining placed in the heels of

for lasting.
Hot Melts- Thermoplastic adhesive of polyamide or polyester. Polyamide and polyester hot melts are generally used for lasting. Hot Puffs - A type of puffs made of heavy woven cotton cloth impregnated with a molten mixture of rosin and wax. It is hard in nature and requires softening after its insertion by heat. Huarache Sandal - A hand braided leather sandal without a counter and with the upper laced to the sole. Hunters Boots - See `Jungle Boots'. Hunting Boot - A laced boot made with belows tongue and blucher cut with water proof sole. Hyperidrosis - Excessive sweating of the foot.

Oxford or other low cut shoes to prevent the shoe from slipping at the heel.
Heel Tip- A reinforcement of metal, rubber or plastic

fixed to the back outside edge of a heel top piece to give increased wear resistance at this point during walking.
Heel Trimming - Removing the surplus material

around the heel edge and to shape_ it.
Held Together Closing Upper- A system of closing of upper in which the machinist positions section to section to the mark provided and stitches along while maintaining the fit by holding the sections firmly. Himalayan Boots - See `Everest Boots'. Hinged Lasts - Lasts made in two parts, hinged together for easy insertion and withdrawal of it from the footwear.

I
Ice Creeper- A metallic device attached to a boot or shoe for use in ice water. Illusion Heel - A low tapering heel .which makes a low healebshoe look-more elegant. 16

IS 2050 : 1991
Indirect Attachment (Sole) - A method of attach-

ment in which both the units (insole and,sole) are. indepen$entlyrttached to a third part, the welt which comes between them.
Indoor Turns - See `Turn Shoes'. 1~ IXW Slipper- Slipper for indoor use. Infant Sizes- A size range starting from size 0 in the

Insole - a) A piece of leather or any other suitable substitute material being an exact replica to the shape of the bottom of the last to which the upper, sole, welt, etc, are attached directly or indirectly.

b) The part of the soling on which the foot rests either directly or separated by a loose insole.
Insole Blocking - The insoles of the hand welted

English scale running up to size 6 which generally covers the children up to the age of four.
Ingrown Nail - The curling in of the toe nails of the

human foot (mostly big toe), due to friction caused by wearing short tight fitting footwear and stockings.
Iqjection Moulding - A method of construction in which PVC is injected to the sole cavity to form the sole of a footwear with an upper, or a process in which the footwear as such is moulded by injection. Iqjection Moulded Sole- A variation of the direct

footwear are generally blocked at the bottom of the last to take out the extra stretch out of the leather prior to the commencement of lasting. The operation consists of taking a rectangular piece of sole leather large enough to cover the bottom of the last and mellowing the same. It is then placed and secured temporarily to the bottom of the last with several rivets at important places. Insole Channelling- See ` Channelling Insole'. Insole of the Last - The bottom of the last is called the insole of the last. Insole of a Shoe - A component of the shoe bottom resting at the bottom of the last which holds the upper and the sole firmly in position. This is also known as foundation of the shoe. Insole Slashing - Making the insole of machinesewn, cemented or other types of constructions, more flexible. The operation consists of putting of a few rows of slashes across the forepart of the insole. These slashes are hardly one millimetre deep.
Insole Tack- A round parallel shank with a square pyramid point, used to tack insoles to lasts having metal plates. Instep- The front part of the arch of the foot.

moulded sole, a process in which the footwear upper and insole assembly are placed in a mould with the desired shape of the out sole, the out sole material is then formed by injection moulding into die.
Inked Bottom - A name given to the operation of a

particular type of bottom finishing. In this case a quick drying black pigment is applied to the already buffed sole and is then polished on the machine or by hand.
Inner Longitudinal Arch- An arch extending length-

wise of the foot from the inside bottom of the back part of the oscalcis to the head of the first metatarsal, on the inside edge of the bottom of the foot. It acts as a shock absorber.
Inseam- A seam in the welted footwear which holds

the welt with the upper and the inner sole. This seam is the most important seam in a welted footwear and is not visible in the finished footwear.
Inseam Trimming- Cutting of the surplus material

Instep Girth Measure- The girth measurement of a last or foot taken at the middle of the waist through the instep point. Instep Position of Foot - A point on the top of the foot just above the arch which is distinguished by its bony prominence.
Innerlining- An additional lining, usually of cotton drill between the vamp lining and vamp of the footwear to aid in preserving the shape during wear.

(of upper and welt) above the seam produced by welt sewing.
Inside Attachment of Heel- This is an operation, in which, the nails are driven through the insole and sole seat from inside to the heel. This method requires withdrawal of last first. Then the nails are driven from inside of the footwear into the heel, complete with slugged top piece.

Interlaced - A sheet made by interlacing strips of leather or other material and used for making the whole or part of an upper of footwear. Interlining- A material used between the footwear upper and the limting to increase softness and plumpness of the upper materials. Internal Wedge- The wedge heel inserted and stuck in the finished footwear. The heel is then covered with a soft rubber pad; this needs a special last having wood where the heel would normally fit.
Inverted Machine - A pulling over machine where the operator has a full view of the footwear while the pulling over is done.

Inside Foot Joint Position - In a normal foot it is at five-seventh of the length of the foot measured from the back, located at the inside of the foot where the first metatarsal bone meets the big toe. Inside Fonne- The copy of the inside area of last on a flat surface.
Inside Joint of Last- A point located at two-third of the standard last length measured from the back at the .' inside of the last.

17

IS 2050 : 1991 Invisible Sole - When a half sole is spliced or bev-

elled to show no edge at point of union.
Invisible Eyeletting- A method of setting eyelets

in footwear upper, in which the eyelets are inserted through from inside and clenched on the lining only (or sometimes taking the reinforcement tape next to lining). In the finished footwear all that is visible is a small punched hole outside and the head of the eyelet rests on the lining inside. Iron - A measurement for the thickness of leather. One iron is equal to 0.53 mm approximately. Ironing Out - A finishing process of footwears by electrically heated iron. Ironing, Upper- See `Hot Blasting'.

Kolhapurl Sandal Chappal- A footwear which is a traditional type of chappal made of vegetable tanned, undyed leather by the crafts man of Sanghli and Kolhapur districts of Maharashtra and Belgaum district of the Kamataka. The upper part of the sandal chappal shall have the unlined perforated instep strap fitted with plaited laces (Beni) or zari laces and decoratives such as leather studs (Goondy), buds (Mirchipan) and the like, and the toe strap and toe link (Mota Beni). The bottom part shall have top sole, sole and heel. Sole and top sole are pasted together by mud, putting old canvas inside to fill the gap and stitched together with leather thongs. The instep strap is fitted in between the car (kan) on the top sole and its lining at waists by means of chain stitch with leather thong or the instep strap is fitted directly between in-sole and top sole at waists.
Knock-on-Louis - This is also termed as `MockLouis'. The width of the breast line of the heel and shape of the seat are carefully located to the size of the heel to the attached, chopped away at either side, and fitted clean to the width of the heel. The vertical seam must secure the sole at the heel comers firmly so that they fit snugly. This mode of working is chiefly carried out from the point of utility and appearance on the preparation and attachments of the sole, the channelling and sewing.

J
Jackboot - A heavy all leather boot with crimped front. Janklng- A process for separating stitches on sole by a metal wheel, known as jank wheel. This is applied on stitched-in groove or stitched-aloft work. Jank Wheel - A metal tool used for janking.
Jigger- A tool used to beat the feather line of lasted

footwear to get a clear feather line. The tool is fitted to the pounding machine inthe case of machine-made footwear. Jockey Boot- Closed front, knee high boots with no fold-over at the top. A high straight top boot for children usually with cuff or collar of different leather. Jodhpur Boots- A type of boot in which the quarters cover the ankles. The quarter is kept secured by a sharp buckling behind the ankle not more than three eyelets. This is also known as CHUKKA boots.
Joint Girth Measurement - See `Ball Girth

Korean Boot- These boots were designed for the war in Korea to withstand the extreme cold-wet climates of the country. These are knee-high all rubber boots constructed on the vapour-barrier principle of built-in insulation to provide protection against cold and moisture.

L
Lace Stay- A strip of leather applied on the front of

a laced boot or shoe to strengthen and reinforce the eyelets or eyelet holes.
Lace Hook- Small hooks inserted like eyelets into boot/shoe facings to hold the lace for fastening. Lacing Hook- A tool used to lace the eyelet holes

Measurement'. Joint Line - See `Ball Line'. Juliet - A boundoir or house slipper for women, loose fitting and with high front and back having goring at the sides.
Jungle Boots - These are ankel high rubber soled

quickly. Laminated Leather Board - See `Leather Layer Board'. Lnpstone - An iron plate which the cobbler holds in his lap and upon which he beats soles in order to give them a counted shape or on which he pounds down seams or folded edges with flat faced hammer.
Lap Iron- A small slab of iron approximately of the same shape as a half sole, held in the workers' lap to serve as a kind of anvil on which the leather can be hammered. Lapped Seam - A seam produced by laying one part

boots made of waterproof canvas upper, intended for use in muddy/slushy terrains of tropical jungles. They were originally designed for the war in Burma and were intended also as a protection against leaches.

K
Kabuli Sandal - A modified type of frontier CHAPLIS with one or two vamp pieces. It may be of open or closed toe type with a back strap for fastening the foot. Kapsi- Traditional type of chappal made of vegetable tanned undyed or stained leather by the crafts man of Sanghli, Kolhapur and Bengaum districts. Keg Heel - Heel with rounded breast and back. 18

over another and stitching together.
Larrigan- A knee-high leg moccasion or boot made

with moccasin sole having wedge heeled sole on the out side and used by lumber man in the snow.

IS 2050 : 1991 Last - The wooden or metal or synthetic former mould over which the footwear is constructed which gives the footwear, its shape in accordance with the volume of the foot. The last is reproduction of the approximate shape of human foot.
Last Girth Scale - The amount of increase and decrease in girth measurement of a last in relation to its increase and decrease in sizes and fittings. Lasting- Moulding the upper to the exact shape of

Levelllng of Sole - After the operation of channel closing on the stitched soles the forepart and the waist of the sole is smoothened to the shape of the last and levelled with the help of either levelling feet roller under pressure or with a wooden sleeking stick to improve the appearance of the bottom.
Lifts- Pieces of leather or any other suitable material

cut in the shape of the heel from which the heel is built. Ligaments - Strong tough fibrous bands which extend between the bones and hold the one hundred thirty seven joints of the foot in a firm position.
Llght Weight Veldtscboen- This is a combination of

the last by a series of pulls and to attach it to the insole by thread, tacks or staples or cement permanently.
Lasting Allowance - The allowance provided at the

free edge of the upper to enable the uppers to be lasted properly* Lasting Jack- An iron stand fitted with a last peg on which the last with the upper is placed during lasting.
Lasting Pincers- A hand tool, more or less like a pair of pliers generally used by the shoe-maker with the difference that this has curved jaws and the inner surface of this is cut with deep serrations so that this might grip the material tightly. This also has a hammer head just behind the jaw which is used for tacking and other operations. Lasting Tacks - Tacks made of mild steel used for

European veldtschoen and welt stitches down, a combination which flat lasts the inner upper and lasts the outer upper outward. It is therefore, a flat lasted stitch down combination. Linen Thread- The thread obtained from the bast of flax (linum) plant. The thread is very strong, reasonably elastic, rot-proof and smooth. It is used mainly for bottom stitching.
Lln~ of Tightness- It denotes the direction in which

the leather is tighter. A leather is usually more tight in the direction of its length.
Lining- The inside material used under the upper.

lasting of footwear.
Last Slipping - Removing the last from the finished

or ready footwear. Latex Cement - Adhesives or cements produced by mixing latex with chemicals to prevent putrefaction and to increase bonding power of the latex. They are used in footwear industry for different types of adhesions. Lay Out - An arrangement of different components of leather or fabric in a systematic manner to minimize wastes. Leather Boards - Boards made out of scrap leather pulp and some binder mixed together and then pressed into sheets of varying thicknesses, that are generally used for insoles and stiffeners.
Leather Layer Boards - Boards made out of thin splits of leather cemented together and processed with gums, resins, rubber solution, glue, etc. They are used for insoles and stiffeners of footwear.

These are generally cut to the same shape of upper, giving certain allowances. These are named after the components, for example, vamp lining, tongue lining and quarter lining. Vamp linings are generally taken out of fabric whereas the others from the tanned goat, sheep or calf skins or splits.
Littleway Construction- A method of construction

similar to machine-sewn method. The only difference is that no lasting tacks are used. Lasting is done by littleway staples driven in with the points curving inwards leaving the inside of the insole free from any marks of grindery. The stitch is a lock-stitch instead of a chain-stitch. Lock-Stitch - A Stich made by two threads, a top thread and a bottom thread, to form a knot in the middle of the material to be stitched. Lock-Stitch Through Sewn Welt Construction- A variation of wel.ted construction used for producing cheaper grade footwear. In this method, the upper is lasted with littleway staples to the insoles. Then a lock-stitch seam unites the insole, upper and the welt. Finally, the sole is attached by look-stitch with the welt. Loose Insole- Piece of skin, fabric or any thin matcrial, cut to the shape of the insole and stuck to this to give a better appearance to the footwear. If this only covers the rear section of the insole, it is called a heel piece of half-insole. Loose Lined Closing- See `Closing on the Round Method'. Louis Heel- A slender type of heel with curved back line and with a lip extending partly under the, shank of

Leg Boot - A boot which extends some distance above the ankle, without lacing. Legging - A straped or laced covering for the leg extending from the ankle to the knee. A puttee legging is formed from a spirally wrapped strip of cloth. Leisure Shoes - Shoes of simple style and comfort, intended wear.
Len@h Scale - A method of specifying standard

length of feet or lasts generally adopted in the footwear trade. There are various methods like English, American, Paris Points, etc.

IS 2050 : 1991 footwear, resulting in a curved breast which is covered by a thin layer of sole leather during footwear making process. Range in height is from 50 to 75 mm. Louis Sole- Full sole, the heel end of which is split into two layers one of which, after tounging goes into the cup of the heel and the outer layer goes up over the brease. Low Cut- Varieties like slipper pump, oxford, sandal, step in, colonial, etc, know as low cut. the fixed upright stick. Then the sliding stick is moved to touch the big toe and the roading is taken from the stick. Medallion- The perforated pattern punched onto the tip of men's and women's oxford shoe. Metal Bound Patterns - Cardboard upper component patterns are bound along the edges with brass or steel strips for durability and better cutting. Machines are used for binding the 5 mm wide strips which are at first formed into U-shape to enable them to fit the edge of the pattern. Metal Last- A last made of metal, such as iron or aluminium, generally used for rivetted construction of footwear. Metullic Channelling - A special type of channelling where a horizontal cut, parallel to the surface of footwear, is made. It is shallow and flat and facilitates hiding of the screws or wide rivet heads. Metallic Threads - These are either gold or silver coated wire or those made by rolling metal wires into fine filaments which are incorporated with other types of yarns in fabrics or braids. Metatarsal Arch - See `Anterior Arch'. Metatarsal Bones - Long shaft like bones of the human foot, which function as levers or propellers in pushing the body weight forward as the foot rolls on the ball. They are five in number and are located between the tarsus and the phalanges group. Micro-Cellular Rubber Soles - A sponge rubber sole in which the pores are extremely small. It is made from resin rubbers by incorporating a blowing agent which at the temperature of vulcanization decomposes and so produces the sponge effect. This has cushioning effect and is hardwearing. Micro Tacks - Tacks used for lasting footwear having light uppers and insoled. These are made with their heads smaller in diameter and with very sharp fine points. When clenched no marks are visible on the insoles. Military Heel- Straighter than cuban heel and not so high. Midsoles - Soles cut to the shape of the outsoles and used between the outsoles and insoles to increase the thickness of the soles. Miners' Boots - An ankle high boot similar to ;:rmy boot with six or seven eyelets, having soles either of rubber or leather. Steel toe-cap is fitted externally or internally to protect the toes from injury (see Annex B). Mdassin - Originally invented by natives of North America. The original moccasin was made of a very soft leather and was a close fitting footwear with the upper and sole of one piece gathered into a circular vamp at the top. It was then brought to Europe and has been since adopted in the modem worlh with various modifications. 20

M
Machine-Sewn Method of Construction - See `Blake-Sown Method of Construction'. Maid's Size- A range of sizes which are meant for teenaged girls. The range is from size two to five. Making- A term used to describe lasting and other associated process. Making Lasts- Lasts on which footwear is usually made. Making Operations - Footwear manufacturing operations from lasting onwards where the various bottoming operations are carried out. Making Room - Alternate name given to the construction department in certain sections of the footwear trade. Male Slippers - Slippers generally used for indoor wear having only a vamp and sole and with or without heel. Maple Wood- Acer Saccharimum L., Fam Aceraceac: a white wood with fine grain of close texture.; when finished, it has silky appearance. This wood is used for making lasts due to its suitable qualities and cheapness. March Foot - A painful swelling of the forepart of the foot. Marking - The printing or stamping of sizes and other details on the linmng of the footwear. Mark Up- The term for difference between cost and selling price of a footwear. McKay Sewn Construction - A type of footwear construction in which the upper is tack stapled or cemented lasted and the outsole is attached by a chain - stitched seam. The stitches are concealed by a channel in the out sole and passed through the out sole, insole, lining and upper. Meanforme - The average forme made by dividing the difference between the inside and outside forme. Measuring Stick - A wooden or plastic stick inscribed with English sizes on one side and inches on the other with two upright sticks about 50 mm high on both the ends of the stick one and fixed the other sliding. This stick is used for measuring foot sizes, the foot being placed on the stick with the heel touching

IS 2050 : 1991 Moccasin Shoes - Shoes having inserted circular tongue attached to one piece.vamp (basic type). The vampe+nds under the foot andits upper edges are attached. to the apron covering the top of the foot. There is, therefore, no insole. Mock Welt - A single sole footwear construction having a strip of leather stitched around the leather edge of the upper with the sole to give it an appearance of welted footwear. Mock-Welt Construction - See `Machine-Sewn Construction'. Mogul- A large footwear eyelet. Monk Shoe - Shoe of three pieces of upper with a side buckle. This is one of the basic shoe designs. See also `Alpine Shoes'. Motor Cycle Boots - Calf high boots worn while riding motor cycles. The waist of the sole is reinforced with a metal plate. Moulded Constructio\- See `Direct Moulded Construction'. Moulding' Soles - Shaping the soles in mellow condition, so as to conform to the bottom of the footwear. Mukluk- Footwear for dry and cold climates. Mukluk leather is usually made from deer, elk, and similar skins; but during World War II kips were also used. It is tanned in white with formaldehyde, alum, or syntans. It is very permeable to water vapour and retains its flexibility at low temperatures. Mules- High heel slipper with no counter or quarter. This is one of the basic footwear designs. Mulling - Mulling is to bring the upper in such a condition artificially that it will last easily and will not break, by using heat in addition to moisture. Multi Laces Sandal- Traditional type of chappal made of vegetable tanned undyed or stained leather by the craftsmen of Sangli, Kolhapur and Belgaum districts. It is known as `Gooma Beni Chappal'. Multi-Fittings - A modification in orthodox fitting scale. This method involves 10 to 11 different fittings, ranging from 4A to 4E. In this method the orthodox grade of 6.4 mm for fittings and 8.5* mm for sizes is retained for the middle sizes (C.D.E.) but'for larger and smaller sizes the length increases and decreases by 1 mm and the girth by 4.7 mm. Munda Shoes - This is pump type, heavy duty footwear made of unlined zug grain or russet leather generally galloon bound and with heel tip and toe tip at the bottom. This type of shoe is generally used by forest guards and constables. This is made by riveted and welted method.
l Rationalized metric conversion value of one-third inch to millimetres.

Munson- A shoe designed by Munson after an intensive study of feet and shoes. Micrometer- A dial gauge with calibration in millimetres and fractions thereof used to measure the thickness of leather and its cut components. Mount Batten- One piece rubber sole and heel unit designed by Lord Mountbatten for millitary use. Heel height is 34 mm and sole edge is 10 mm thick.

N
Nailed Process- A method of construction of men's heavy work shoes in which the upper is lasted to the insole with tacks that clench against the metal bottom of the last. The insole and outsole, previously stitched together, are further reinforced by nails. Napoleon Boot - A leg boot designed by Napoleon, originally used for soldiers having a high wave top. Napoleon Top Sole - An extra sole so bevalled in from the edge as to be invisible from above. Nature Form Shoe - A shoe which is made on a special last having its inside fotepart particularly straight and with a wide joint. This shoe gives a look nearing the true shape of the foot. Needle Eye - This is the hole at the thin end of the needle through which the thread passes before forming a loop. Needle Grooves - Each sewing needle has two grooves on the shank, namely, the long groove and the short groove. The object of this long groove is to bury the thread within its long groove while the needle is piercing the material, reducing undue friction on the thread. The short groove is generally on the otherside of the long groove in the vicinity of the needle eye and plays an important role in the formation of the loop. Needle Point - The function of the needle point is to puncture and pierce through the material and make a way for the thread to pass through and form a loop. The points on the needles, therefore, vary to meet the requirements of different materials. The main type of points are round point suitable for fabric, narrow wedge point suitable for thin and medium leather, reverse spear point or cross point suitable for work where protected seams are required. Needle Size- Needles used in sewing machines are generally available in various sizes which generally run to about 30. The sizes which are generally used in the footwear industry are from 12 to 22 depending upon the type of material to be stitched. Neoprene Soles - The soles of footwear made from polychloroprene rubber which resembles natural rubber. Net Pattern - A pattern having no allowance. Neumkeag- A circular disk slightly dome-shaped and covered with abrasive paper mounted at the end 21

Is 2050 : 1991 of a revolving spindle generally fixed to the finishing machines. Nippers - Long necked pliers used to cut nails or pegs lasting tacks, etc, from the inside of the footwear. One handle of the nipper has a slit to remove loose nail.
Norvic - A device to measure the size and fittings of women's foot.

Oscillating Edge Setter- A machine used for sole edge setting in the finishing operation having an oscillating setter which moves backward and forward.
Outer Longitudinal Arch - An arch extending

lengthwise of the foot from the outside edge of the bottom of the oscalcis to the head of the fifth metatarsal and located on the outside edge of the bottom of the foot.
Outside Heel Attachment - A method of attaching heels to the lasted footwear. In this method the nails for attaching heels are driven fromoutside going from heel to the insole. Outside Foot Joint or Ball Position- A joint located at the outside of the foot below the inside foot joint at a distance of approximately one-tenth of the footlength.

Norwegian- A slipper type of stepin for men, women and children usually having moccasin effect on vamp with wide band across the waist of the foot. Notch- V-shape cut provided in the underlay and cut parts of upper components to facilitate lasting as well as identification. Nullifier- A shoe with high vamp and quarter dropping low at the side and having a `U' shaped rubber goring inserted for housewear. Nurses Shoe- Comfortable, medium or low heeled white shoes.

Outside Forme - The copy of the outside area of a last on a flat surface. Outsides- An alternate term for the upper cut components excluding the lining. Outsole - The bottom component of the sole of the footwear which comes in direct contact with the ground while walking or with the heel. Over Boots - See `Over Shoes'.
Over Gaiter- A cloth anklet extending down over the footwear to the vamp.

0
Oblique Trimming Lining- Cutting the lining at an angle less than 90 degrees. Occupational Footwear - Footwear used by men engaged in performing their day-to-day jobs. Different types of footwear are for different types of work, as army boots, officers' boots and shoes, miners' boots, police boots and factory workers' boots and shoes.
Offals- Portions trimmed from hides including head,

shoulders, belly, butt and tail. One-Bar Shoes- A bar shoe having one bar in front of the ankle for fastening. Opaque Flnished Bottom - Bottom finished with pigments in order to cover up any defect.
Open Heel - No counter or material at heel other than a sling of leather or material to heel of the footwear.

Over Shoes - Type of loose shoes which are generally worn over the shoes to protect the expensive footwear during outdoor use. These are made mostly out of rubber but at times of fabric and other fancy materials also. Oxford Shoes- An open throat lace shoe with three or more eyelets. A low cut shoe having any form of vamp, first used in Oxford 300 years ago.

P
Pat - It is a combination type of footwear with rubber sole and leather upper extended up to a height between ankle and knee. It is suitable for rough use and generally used by the hunters, lumberers, etc.

OpenShank-A style in faminine footweas whet&t the bridge of the shank is open - the upper being cut away to reveal the arch of the foot.
Open-Stick Assembly - See `Dry-Stick Assembly'. Open Stitched Seam - See `Closed Seam'. Open Toe - A tipless shoe with opening shaped and

Paddling- Flexible elements situated at various points intended to protect the user against impact or improve the level of comfort. Painted Bottom - A term given to a particular type of bottom finishing which is carried out with a suitable pigment finish which has a good covering power. The finish is generally used for cheaper grades of footwear where inferior quality soles are used. Painted on Plastic Puff- A hardening liquid painted on the reverse side of the leather (upper) to stiffen it, instead of using toe puff. Its popularity is for the unlined footwear.
Panel Trimming - In ladies' footwear where some

bound or stitched to reveal toe or toes.
Opera Slipper- Dress slipper for women. Ornamentation of Upper of Shoe - Producing a

fancy effect on the body of the shoe uppers by punching, stitching or other means. Orthopaedic Footwear- See `Corrective Footwear'. 22

fancy designs have been provided for, they have to be

IS 2050 : 1991 closed with full lining to avoid any distortion of the designing effect on lasting. These linings are trimmed on a special machine known as panel trimmer having an oscillating knife. This is performed at the finishing stage.
Panning Up- Hammering down the edges of leathers in the heel during hand finishing with the wedge shaped end of the hammer to close them thoroughly and make the heel solid. Parrallel Row Stitcher or Twin Needle Machine - A type of sewing machine having two PerforaJing: Ornamenting of the uppers by means of series of holes of various shapes and sizes. Perforating Upper - An operation used for

ornamenting footwear uppers by means of series of holes of varying $&apes. This gives a pleasant appearance to the upper. Permeability to Air and Water Vapour- The ability of the footwear material to pass air and water through its pores, essential from the point of view of foot health. Piece Soles- Small pieces of sole leather joined with three-quarter soles to make full length soles. A three quarter sole, when the sole piece is united it becomes in effect a full sole. The seat piece is cut from comparitively inferior material.
Pimple Markers - A type of design marker which

needles which make two parallel rows of stitches. The machine may have a flat bed or a post bed and the space between the needles is variable. Parallel row stitcher may also make four rows of stitches.
Parallel Rule - This is a tool for hand grading of patterns. It consists of two parrallel graduated scales joined b; two metal strips at two different points. Paring Heel- Removing the surplus materials around the heel edge with the aid of a knife. This is also known as `Heel Trimming'. Paris Bin$ng- See `French Binding'. Paris Point - The size unit used in the Continent is the Paris Point. The size scale begins at 0 cm and continues without a break up to the largest size with an increase of 6.7 mm Per size normally; the girth scale is 5 mm between sizes and 1.7 mm across the tread. Pattern - Sheets of metals or paper boards or any synthetic material shaped to the outline to which the upper/bottom components are cut.

employs a zinc pattern of the particular component to be marked on which the design has been raised in a series of closely spaced pimples.
Piped Seam - A seam produced in the same way as the welted seam. The only difference is that instead of a single piece of material a prepared folded piping is inserted between the two outside sections in such a way that the folded edge is in extact Position relative to the seam. Pitch- The correct heel height arrived at by elevating the seat end of the last from a horizontal surface so that the last is standing on its tread line. In general practice, is that higher the pitch, wider and shorter is the forepart and narrower the waist and the seat. Pitch of Last- Pitch of last is defined as the distance between the horizontal surface and the seat of the last where the seat is raised from a horizontal surface to its correct height so that the last is standing at its tread line. Piping- A strip of leather, fabric or plastic, folded

Pattern Allowance - Allowances generally kept in patterns of upper and bottom of footwear to meet various requirements.
Pattern Area - The actual area covered by the pat-

terns.
Pattern Cutter- After the designing of a particular design of a footwear the sectional and lining patterns are cut, graded and made by a person known in the trade as `pattern cutter'. Pattern Grading - Reducing or increasing the pat-

over itself, stuck and then inserted between two pieces being stitched together.
Plain Edge Sole- A narrow, closely hugging edge in

the footwear.
Plastic Lasts - Lasts made of synthetic high poly-

terns proportionately to suit ever size from a standard pattern. This can either be done by hand or machine.
Peep Toe- Same as `Open Toe'.

mers. They do not deform due to adverse climatic conditions.
Plated Lasts - Lasts having metal plate at the . ..

oortom.

Peep-Toe Shoes - A type of shoe having a small opening which reveals the toes. Usually ladies shoes and sandals are made in this way. Peg- Made of wood or fibre; has neither head nor bur. The gripping action is made by the roughness of the sides of the pegs used for attaching sole.
Pegged Method of Con&&on - A method of

Platform in Shoe - The piece of material used i n shoes between the soles and the insoles is known as platform. These are usually hard felt, cork (natural or processed), hard sponge rubber and rubberized cork. The object is to increase the thickness of the soles. Plug- Apron front of a moccasin shoe. Pneumatic Feet - Pneumatic feet are forms made out of moulded shell-rubber representing different last shapes. Footwear are given treatment to regain shape at the time of finishing which is known as 23

construction in which the sole is attached by pegs instead of rivets, screws, thread or cement.

Is20!50:1991
treeing. This operation may be done by inserting forms to replace the lasts in the footwear .and the subsequent operations are then performed. The pneumatic feet are generally slightly smaller in size. It is inserted in the footwear and inflated supporting the upper which helps the footwear to regain its original shape. Pointed Toe - Pointed shape of the toe portion of the footwear or the last.
Polyamides- A polymer used for the manufacture of promeric uppers, toe puffs and adhesives. Polyesters - A polymer used for the manufacture of promeric uppers and adhesives. Polychbroprene Cement - Adhesive prepared by Proportional Compass - A type of compass having two long and'short legs with an adjustable nut generally used for up grading or down grading of patterns. Protective Toe-cap - Strong shell, incorporated

during manufacture in the toe of the footwear, generally between the upper and its lining, in order to protect the toes from danger of crushing. Protector Studs - Round shank nails having a large diameter flat head, patterned with serrations. These are used in a sole immediately behind a toe plate or in a heel inside the heel plate. The head remains on top and the stud is driven into the sole or heel. Pulling Over - Initial moulding of footwear upper on lasts by 3 to 5 tacks to the insole by mechanical means, prior to final lasting. Pump- A low cut slipper. Pump Edge Finish of Shoe - For pump edge finish the sole is trimmed very close to the feather of the last, that is, there is very little margin in the sole beyond the feather of the last. Punching- The operation of making holes in upper components, either as decorative perforations or for eyeletting. Putting into Colour- Dyeing or inking the edge of the sole and heel after they have been properly trimmed and scoured. PVC (Polyvinyl Chloride) - A polymer used for the manufacture of upper, lining, sole and heel. It is a thermoplastic compound which has outstanding resistance to water, alcohol acids and alkalies. PVC Moulded Soles- Soles of footwear from polyvinyl chloride previously moulded or shaped to fit the contour of the lasted footwear bottom correctly without having to be forced in shape. PVC Soles- Synthetic soling materials made of polyvinyl chloride. Pyroxylin Cement - Pyroxylin cement has nitrocellulose as its base. The cement is mainly used for attaching leather sole, Louis heel, breast flaps, sticking cellulose puffs and counters and cement lasting with upright tacks.

neoprene with magnesium oxide, anti oxidant zinc and oxide dissolved in solvent toluene.
Polyethylene - Low density polyethylene used for the manufacture of insoles and toe puffs and high density polyethylene used for the manufacture of footwear lasts.

Polypropylene- A polymer used for the manufacture of heels and promeric uppers. Polystyrene- A polymer used for the manufacture of heels, toe puffs, stiffeners, etc. Polyurethane - A polymer used for the manufacture of soles, foam lining, heel, top piece, promeric uppers and adhesives.
Polyurethane Cement - Adhesive prepared by synthetic elastomer in methyl ethyl ketone.

Pounding- Flattening the creases which occur during lasting of uppers and also bringing out a clean feather edge with the help of pounding machine.
Precision Grade- A modification of size and fitting

scale to overcome the difficulty of shoe-fitting. The grading of lasts by this scale is made as follows: Length increase between sizes Joint girth increase between sizes 8.5 mm 3.8 mm

Joint girth increase between fittings 8.9 mm
Prefinish Sole - Sole which is finished by trimming, etc, before it is attached with the footwear. Prelasted Upper- A upper with insole and with or

Q
Quartels - The sections of the upper which cover the heel and connect vamp of the footwear. It is sometimes joined at the back by a back strip.

without shank which has been put on a last and then the last is taken out. Prick Holes - Holes or marks produced by a sharp pointed awl into the leather or fabric wherever desired to facilitate the operation of upper closing.
Pricking Awl - A hand tool of steel having a sharp point at one end and a small round handle at the other end. The overall length of this is generally 100 to 125 mm. See also `Awl'.

Quarter Lining- The materials used as linings of the quarters of footwear.
Quarter Reforming - An operation by which quarter tops of footwear are given a final shape atthe finishing stage. The operation consists of shrinking and pressing the top edge ofthe quarter lining under' the top edge of the upper, turning or lslling inwards the top edge of the shoe along the lining and finally

24

IS 2050 : 1991 ironing or shrinking out any fullness in material,. under thermostatic control. Quarter Tip - A piece of rubber or metal in semicircular shape which is attached to the built heel at the back of centre towards the outside where maximum pressure and strain is exerted while walking. footwear the last has to be slipped off prior to the sole stitching and then slipper back, that is, relasted, to enable the remaining operations to be completed. Relative Quality - A term generally used in the clicking department where the quality of leather from portion to portion is defined in terms of relative quality. Relative Substance - A term generally used in clicking department to describe the thickness of the leather from portion to portion of the same side or skin. Resin Rubber Soles - Footwear sole made of synthetic rubber. These are made almost in the same manner as that of vulcanized natural rubber soles the difference being in the nature of some ingredients. They look like leather soles. They are hard wearing, easily processed and readily stuck on, but they have a tendency to spread in wear. They are completely impermeable and it is difficult to finish them. Restricted Grading - Certain components in the upper may not need the increase or decrease for different sizes due to the reason that alternatively it may look ugly or may bring in some difficulty, for example, one bar shoe if the bar width is not restricted, different sizes of buckles would be needed for different sizes of shoes. Ribbed Insoles - Insoles (usually of lighter substance and not suitable for welted work) prepared for welted work by attaching preformed fabric ribs to the edge of the insoles with cement in a variety of ways. The welt is sewn to the rib. Rib Knife - A knife used in press clicking method having ribs at the sides. This reduces the probability of the knife slipping from the hand and saves the finger being cut off. Riding Root - Generally a knee high boot. The Jodhpur type is a short boot just extending above the ankle with securing strap buckling behind the ankle. Both are welted for flexibility, but they need not be heavy, because soles are not subjected to much wear. Riding Root Last - This last is straight at the back and has pronounced thickening at the instep. The toe spring is very little. Right and Left Patterns - Component patterns which are cut to. fit the two odd lasts individually. This gives a better fit of the upper on the last, a greater economy and also increases the wearer's comfort. Rise - The difference between the joint and instep girth measurement. River Driving Shoes - Shoes for lumberman with sharp spiked soles. Riser of the Heel - Rectilinear or lesser concave curving towards the front section of the footwear. Riveted Construction - A method of footwear construction in which the sole is secured to the upper and insole with rivets instead of thread, screws or pegs. 25

R
Race Way- A small column with a groove for either eyelets or tacks to pass through in a continuous stream in single column with its head upwards. The eyelets or the tacks are fed in a metal container at the top of this metal race way and with the help of a revolving brush, these are swept into the race way. Such race ways are quite common in the automatic eyeletting machine, Cons01 lasting machine, toe and heel seat lasting machine, etc. Radial Tool - A tool used for hand grading. It is a right angled triangle with a height equal to the length of the pattern and base of 8.5 mm. In order to avoid moving the triangle for each size to be graded, it is usual to mark on the base as many marks, each 8.5 mm apart, as the number of sizes required. Rambi-; An tempered steel chisel, sharpened at the edge to skive off rough or loose portion or unwanted portion from leather. Rand - A piece of leather curved in the shape of a horse shoe and fitting around the top of the heel. The inner edges are shaved thin and this hollow helps to form a rounded heel seat. Randed Sole- An extension edge sole randed on the edge for stouter appearance. Rand Lii- A narrow strip of leather skived at the inner edge used at the seat for coupling. Ranging- Cutting a large piece of hide into small suitable pieces. Rasp - A rough file used in smoothing out the heel and soles of footwear in hand method. . Respstick- A flat stick having two sides pasted with rough and fine emery and another fitted up with pads and covered with a strip of leather flesh side out. This is used by the upper clickers to sharpen and keep their knives in sharp condition for trimming. Raw Eyelets - Eyelets which are mearely holes through the lace stay, without the visible annular metal ring. Recede - Term applies to toes of shoes or last which are drawn sharply towards the toe, so that the top of the toe `recedes' and is comparitively narrow and pointed rather than blunt in outline. Red Flint - A kind of abrasive used in the footwear trade for scouring. Relasting- putting the last again after havingperformed certain operations, for example, in single sole

IS 2050 : 1991 Rivets- Grinderies made of brass or steel wire, hav-

ing flat round head with spear shape points and parallel shank.
Roman Sandal - A sandal with the front composed

S
Sabot - A wooden shoe carved in one piece from a block of wood. It is largely used as an electrical safety shoe. Saddle Seam- A seam made by stitching through the pieces being laid so that the edges are even, instead of being lapped. Safety Roots - See "Miner's Boots". Safety Footwear- Work footwear with special constructions to safeguards the feet ankles from injury namely fitted with metal toe cap.

entirely of straps from the throat of the vamp to the top.
Rolling - An operation intended for levelling the

substance by pressing down the high spots and also to solidify the fibres and increase its resistance to abrasive wear, equivalent for hammering the leather. The components requiring this effect are passed through two rollers moving in the same direction, pressure of which can be regulated as desired.
Romeo Slipper - A men's slipper of felt with high backed quarter and high front and slashed low at the side.

Rope Sole- Hemp or fibre braids coiled in the shape of a sale, fastened together with thread or adhesive.
Rope Stitched - Having a heavy corded stitching as in the edges of soles or elsewhere chiefly for omamental effect. Roughing Soles - Opening the fibres of the compo-

Safety Shoe- Shoe with a high or low upper, which shall always have a protective metal toe-cap and may have various reinforcements such as an elastic layer between the upper and the lining, penetration resistant sole, non-slip soling, etc, and shall be intended to protect the foot against the risk of accident by crushing, impact, possible penetration, falling, etc (see Annex B). Sample Size - `It is customary in footwear trade to reckon one particular size as sample size in each size range to facilitate arui standardize in working, for example, for gents' size 7, for ladies' size 4, and for boys' and girls' size 13, and so on. Sailor Tie - A name commonly applied to a two eyelet low cut shoe tied with ribbon lace. Sandal - An open type of footwear having an upper part not oovering the entire foot. The upper part of sandal consists of one or more components such as strap, vamp and the like and the same are aligned and assembled together by various methods. The bottom part of the sandal consists of a number of components such as insole, sole, heel and the like and the same are aligned and assembled together by various methods. The assembled upper part shall be attached to the assembled bottom part by various methods. Scoring Insoles- This is to provide a prominent mark on the insole, at a distance of about one-fourth of the length of the insole from the heel end. It serves as a guide for welt sewer to commence and finish welt sewing accurately. Scotch Edge - A wide extension edge either welt or imitation.
Screw Fastened - Having the sole attached to the upper with screw nails as in industrial or heavy work footwears. Stuffer - A light slipper.

nents to be cemented for attaching with help of wire brush for better penetration of cement.
Rough Rounding - Shearing of any surplus sole

material round the edges prior to the sole stitching operation. This operation can be done on machine also which are known as rough rounding machines after the name of the operation. Rough Stock- See `Bottom Stock'. Round Point Needles - A needle which is not to be recommended for leather working. It is mainly designed for stitching fabrics. It penetrates the leather and enlarges the hole without cutting it. While sewing fabrics it does not cut the fibres but'penetrates into them by pushing apart. Rounding Soles, Insoles and Heels - Giving the components their exact shape by cutting off the surplus material around by knife. Rugby Roots - Boots similar in design to football boot but their construction is by machine-sewn method.
Runner- A section included in a bottom of footwear assembly to give added thickness sometimes with a covered or decorated edge. Running In - The stitching together of the upper

and lining at the quarter top edge. Both of them individually completed comprise the `running in' operation.
Running Shoes - Shoes without heel made on turn

shoes construction having a very thin flexible sole and a few spikes at the forepart to enable the rumter to have a better grip on the ground.
Russian Boot - A peculiar cut of a calf high boot of

Scouring Soles and Heels- Giving a smooth surface to footwear bottom and heel edge with the help of various kinds of abrasives.
Screwed and Stitched Con&uction - Same as the screwed method, the only difference is that before screwing, the sole is stitched to the projected edge of the middle sole. This method is used for heavy boots. 26

a style value with leather top or cuff possibly with tassels in front.

IS 2050 : 1991 Screwed Construction- A method of footwear construction in which the middle sole is riveted to the insole through the upper. Then the sole, insole, middle sole and upper are united by screwing. This method is used for heavy boots. Sewn and .Riveted Construction - Method of

construction where the uppers are tack lasted and the sole is sewn.
Sewn and Stitched Footwear - A method of construction of footwear. In this method the upper is lasted to the insole with tacks as for machine sewn work. Then the sole and the middle sole or the sole and a rand together are attached to the upper and insole by sewing. Finally the sole is attached by lockstitch in the same channel with projected portion of the middle sole or rand, that is, there are two rows of stitching in the same channel. Shank- A piece of material, such as steel, wood or

Screw Wire - The threaded matellic wire (steel or brass) used in screwing boots and shoes.
Seam Rubbing - Flattening by rubbing down the seams of the closed seam when opened up, to prevent the ridge formed by the seamhurting the wearer and making it easier for the closing operations. Seams- Seams are joints made by stitches which join

together two or more components of footwear. There are various types of seams which are defined under specific terms.
Seat - The area of the footwear under wearer's heel. Seat Flanging - Turning the lasting edge of the

fibre-board, inserted between the sole and the insole, extending from the heel seat up to a point behind the ball line. This is used to stiffen the waist portion of the shoe so that it can support the arch of the foot.
Shawl Tongue- A fringed tongue to hold down over instep and conceal the eyelets of the footwear. Shoe - A footwear having an outer covering for the

footwear upper at the seat outward, for being attached to the sole generally in the Veldtschoen construction.
Seat Lasting- Lasting the seat of the footwear after

toe lasting.
Seat Level Lasting- A method of lasting in which the upper is put in level with the seat of the last. Seat Lifts- Lifts used at the heel for coupling of heels

and soles.
Seat Nailing- Nailing or riveting seat portion of the sole in the seat of the footwear after the attachment of the sole. Seat of the Shoe - The portion of the shoe at the back where the heel is fixed. Seat Pioughing - Removing the surplus material

entire feet not coming much above the ankle. It is built up or assembled on a last or appropriate mould to the required shape, size and fitting. The upper part of the shoe consists of number of components such as vamp, quarters, counter, etc, and the same are aligned and assembled together by various methods. The bottom part of the shoe consists of number of components, such as insole, sole, heel, etc, and the same are aligded and assembled together by various methods. The assembled upper part and bottom part are attached to each other by various methods.
Shoe Bilk - Same as `Tapered Nail'. Shoe Armours - All the metallic reinforcements attached to the shoe, such as hob nails, toe plates, heel plates, toe steel, etc, caps. Shoe Bills - See `Tapered Nail'. Shoe Forms - Light weight forms made of plastic conform to the shape of the last.

around the heel seat by the ploughing knife.
Seat Shaping - A process by machine to remove

lasting pleats and wrinkles to obtain correct shaping of seat.
Seat Socks - Sock linings covering only the seat portion of the insoles of footwear, generally used in welted and cemented type of construction. Seat Up Lasting- A method of lasting the upper in which the upper is first tacked over the seat of the last, instead of tacking at the toe end. Seat Wheeling- Decorating the heel seat of footwear with a heated metal wheel at its upper edge. Sectional Patterns - Individual patterns of the

Shoe Last- Shoe lasts are made very thin along the sides which allows the quarters of shoes made on them to fit closely round the ankle. The back curve of shoe last is more pronounced than that of boot last. These lasts are made flatter on the outside waist and are made hollow at the vamp.
Shoe Pat - A heavy one piece rubber shoe to

which is attached a leather or canvas upper.
Shoe Room - The department where the shoes are given some final treatments after manufacture, such as stamping, socking, cleaning and polishing,

upper components.
Self Heading Pins - Pins having square pyramid point with a plain shanks but no head, usually of lengths between 47 to 63 mm and used for attaching high heels.

Shoe Tree- A thing used for treeing feet. It may be of old wooden making last type or the modem pneumatic feet. The shoe is held on it during dressing operations; it is so made that it canbe withdrawn from the shoe without disturbing the freshly treated upper.
Shore Durometer - An instrument, with calibrated dial where the scale runs 0 to 100 degree used to measure the hardness of rubber.

Serge - A twilled woollen cloth used for shoe topping. 27

IS 2050 : 1991
Side Laced - A shoe laced down over the ankle on

Skuffer- A specially stitch down shoe. Sleeking Stick- A wooden tool about 30.5 cm long similar to a wooden ruler with a sharp segment cut away from the centre portion leaving a flat side with perpendicular shoulders at each end. This is generally used for levelling the footwear bottom after channel closing.
Slipper- Footwear which has no method of fastening being merely slipped on the foot and intended for indoor use.

either the inner or outer side instead of in front.
Side Lasting - Lasting the sides of footwear after

pulling over.
Side Lining- A stiffened fabric lining generally put at the sides on vamp in between the lining and the upper to give it additional strength and better appearance. Silbou-welt Construction- This method is the same

as welted method up to bottom filing. The welt required for this method is lighter and narrower. The sole is attached by cement.
Silked Seam - See `Open Stitched Seam'. Single Sole Construction - See `Blake-sewn Con-

Slipped Foxed - Made with whole vamp. Slide - A footwear ornament described as buckle without the tongue. Slip Beading- A kind of edge treatment of upper. A prepared folded fabric tape or a leather strip is placed under the outside section of the upper to protrude slightly from the edge and stitched over the upper with lining. Slip Boot - Extra high rubber boots for fishing.
Slip Lasted Construction - A process of footwear

struction'.
Sizes of Shoe Last and Fout - The length of the shoe last and foot is expressed in sizes. A certain size denotes a certain length. Size Stick- A ruler or foot measurement having a

fixed upright standard (see also `Measuring Stick').
Size Thpe - A measuring tape used by the footwear makers. The tape is graduated in 3 mm (intervals) and has the English size scale marked on the reverse side. Skating Boots- Leather lined boots coming half way up to the calf and laced and eyeletted from a low-cut throat. The long tongue is usually lined with either shearling or with sponge rubber to provide warmth and padding against the tight lacing necessary to give a good fit at the ankle. The stiffeners extend along the arch of the foot on the inside to provide additional support. These are flexible and may either be welted or machine-sewn. Skeleton Seat Lift- A variety of leather 1itt.s of `U

making where the last is slipped or forced into a prefitted sewed upper (see also `California Method of Construction'). Slip Sole or Slip Tap- A half sole running from toe to shank between the regular outsole and the welt or insole. Slipper Last- A last made equal or slightly larger in dimensions than the foot. The back must not be so curved as that of court shoe last. The bottom must be more rounded transversely and the waist must be straighter than that of a shoe last. The toe spring must be generous and pitch must be very little.
Slitting- An operation in forme cutting in which two pieces of paper are traced out with a suitable margin over the approximate forme of the last. After fixing the paper on to the last a few slits or cuts are made in the paper at the acute concave curves to allow the paper to lie flat on the last. Slugging Top Pieces or Heels - Attaching the top piece on the built or wooden heels by different types of wire known as slugging wire. The length of the wire can be adjusted in the machine according to requirement. Slugging Wire - The wire used for slugging. This

shape skived at the inner edge. These are used in building the leather heels to get better coupling of the heel with the heel seat. Ski Boots- Boots similar to climbing boots but these are not nailed and have stout over covers of leather which fasten round them so that the ski straps can fit firmly and without chafing. These also keep snow away from the foot.
Skived - An area reduced in substance, generally where an overlap of two pieces of leather are jointed such as tongue to vamp junction; used also to minimize discomfort or manufacturing difficulties such as at the fold top line of the footwear. Skiviug - Reducing thicknesses of an edge of the

may either be of soft steel or brass and obtained in a variety of cross-sectional shapes, square, circular, triangular, etc, and available in coils. Sneakers- Rubber soled canvas shoes. SouR Stone - A soft, chalky clay used to dust inside footwear also known as talc.
Sock- The lining material which cover partially or completely the insole of footwear.

leather component by slicing off a tapering section, for evenness and ease in seaming.
Skiving Stiffeners and Puffs - Reducing thickness

of the stiffeners and puffs at the edges by slicing off a tapering section to minimize difficulties in lasting them and to prevent them in becoming visible through the upper.
28

Socking- Inserting the sock lining inob the footwear and pasting the same to the insole.

IS 2050 : 1991

Soft Toe - A toe made without apparent stiffening. Soles- TIrebottom pieces of any variety of footwear which are-in contact with the ground. Sole Adhesion Tester - A non-destructive tester used to assess the bond strength of sole to upper of a shoe. Sole Attaching- Fixing of outsole of a footwear to the upper permanently by stitching, riveting, screwing, pegging or cementing. Sole Laying- See `Sole Bedding'.
Sole Putting- Fixing of outsole of canvas or rubber

Sprung Forme - In the slotted method of `forme' cutting the slots tend to open down the front of the last and the effect of this is to twist the toe of the `forme' away from the front of the last and when the toe returns to its normal position the result is a spring forme. Spring Heel - Low heel with a slip inserted between outsole and heel seat.

Standards - A standard is a pattern representing the design of any type of footwear on suitable last together with an allowance for the attachment of the `upper to the bottom. The sectional patterns are
prepared on the basis of this standard. Standardization of Patterns - To avoid the cost on patterns while making a wide variety of footwear under one roof, the patterns are standardized by adopting some common patterns for a number of designs like quarter patterns, back strap patterns and tongues. Standard Length of Last- The term standard length of the last is the standard length of a particular size of the last, for instance the standard length of size 5 gents last is 254 mm; whereas the length by the tape may be 254 mm or slightly more or less. Standard Screw Shoes- The lasting tacks are driven away in and clinched against the steel bottom of the last. Staple Lasting- Lasting the upper to the insole by staples. Staple Welted Construction - A method of con-

footwears by cementing and pressing. Sole Stitching- Sewing sole by stitching. Solid Celluloid Head Eyelets- Best quality eyelets, having the brass shaped heads specially to take a moulding of solid celluloid to give either a round or flat effect on the head.
Southern Tie - A two eyelet ribbon tie. Spats- Short for spatter dashes- an English term for cloth gaiters.

Spectator Pump- A classic womens pump style, usually in medium to high heel heights and with an over layed tip and foxing.
Spanish Heel- A high heel with a fairly straight side

and small top piece. It may or may not have a Louis heel front.
Spike Heel- Heel with narrow heel lifts. Spliced Heel - A heel of double thickness.

struction of footwear in which the upper is lasted to the insole by tacks and then the welt is attached to the upper and insole with staples and a suitable thread which passes through the staples.
Steel Protective Toe Caps - Caps made of tern: pered steel to the required shape of the last, used at the toe of the safety footwear. They may be placed either between the upper and the lining or may be attached externally over the upper of the footwear by means of upward flanges. It forms an in-built integral part of the safety footwear and is intended to protect the toe of the user. Step In - Footwear for women having higher frontspace than pump with no visible method of fastening. Stiffeners- A preshaped stiffening material inserted between the outside and the lining or attached to the quarters if the footwear is unlined. Stitches- Stitches can be made by the hand stitching awl or by machine in various forms mainly chain stitch, lock stitch, saddle stitch, etc:

Spicca Delmac - Name of a process of cementing a single sole shoe whereby an island centre is cut from the outersole thus making temporary insole - later united to outersole.
Split Backed Boards - These are made by pasting

leather splits layer by layer and pressing the same. Generally used for cheap quality footwear insoles, heels, etc.
Split Lifts- Split lifts are formed by taking a mellow

rectangular strip and splitting it diagonally forming two-tapered strips which are then nailed to the seat portions of the footwear prior to the fixing of heel to enable the heel to have a better fit. Splitting - Dividing an upper or bottom component into two or more parts by cutting it through its thickness parallel to the surface.
Spray Dressing- Upper dressing by spray gun or jet blown to the footwear.

a) Chain Stitch - The chain stitch is generally

Sporta Shoes - Most sport shoes are made by turn method with very thin soles and no heel lifts. These are light and flexible. Spring- The amount of variation from a straight or horizontal line at a toe of a footwear or in the arch. 29

made with a single thread giving an appearance of the chain at the bottom and the whole seam can be pulled open by pulling one end of the thread;

b) Lock Stitch- The lock stitch is formed by two
threads known as upper thread and bottom

Is2050:1991
thread locked and pulled to keep the lock in the middle of the materials; and c) Saddle Stitch- Saddle stitch is formed by the use of two needles or bristles attached to two ends of the same thread and needles are passed through the same holes in opposite direction to form a cross seam. This is also known as bristle stitching.
Stitching Channel- This tw. of channel is cut by

a-

it cleaner and more flexible to minimize the risk of grain cracking in wear.
Surgical Footwear - Footwear used to overcome

and correct abnormalities in the foot.
Swansdown- A pile fabric produced from yam, spun

from cotton waste used for linings of slippers and interlinings of footwear.
Swing- The curvature of the outer edge of the sole

keeping the knife in a slanting position approximately at an angle of 45O in accordance with the stitching line at an equal distance from the sole edge from the grain side. The depth of the channel is usually one-third of the thickness of the sole.
Stitch Down - The footwear in which the upper is

of a shoe.

T
Tabs - The front part of the quarters on derby

lacing boots or shoes which carries the eyelets and covers the tongue.
Tacked Work- See `Blake Sewn Construction'. Talus Bone - See `Astragalus Bone'. Tape - A narrow strip of fabric included in the

turned outward on the sole and stitchedstraight through.
Stitch Gauge - A scale employed on measuring the

number of stitches on a footwear to a given unit of length.
Stitchdown Construction- A method fundamentally

the same as the Veldtschoen method, except that a through sole is always included.
Stitch Marking - Providing necessary marks on

folded edge of quarters of boots/shoes or other section of upper in order to strengthen it and prevent stretching.
Tapered Nail - These are headless and pointless

uppers for ornamentation by stitching and perforating. This is necessary to enable the operators to perform their work accurately.
Stitch Separating - Separating stitches showing on the welt with an indent at right angles to the upper. This is used for decorative purposes. It also tightens the stitches. Stogie - A heavy pegged work shoe of the Borgan

nails cut from steel sheets. One end of the nail is of square section and the other end is tapered to a thin end. Rough edges of the nails have the holding power.
Taping - Fixing a narrow tape around the ankle

curve of the quarter either before or after folding to avoid distortion of the quarter during lasting. Tassel - A decorative accessory for women's footwear sometimes on the vamp or sometimes at the ends of the laces. Tempering Soles - Soaking of soles in water to a particular degree in order to soften them to facilitate moulding, chanelling and stitching.
Tension Spring- A spring mounted on sewing machine to regulate and adjust the tension of the upper thread. Textlle Uppers - Footwear uppers made of fabrics Thermal Conductivity of a Footwear Material The case with which a footwear material transmits

type. Storm Boot - Au extra high cut shoe for women coming well above the ankle. Storm Rubber- A rubber over shoe having an extra high front and simple outlines. Storm Welt- A kind of prepared welt which has the ability to prevent the ingress of water into the footwear; hence its name `Storm Welt' or `Weather Welt'. There are many variations of this welt as `double dect', `notched', `plain bead', etc. Strained Foot - A weakened foot on weight bearing. Street Shoes - Low cut shoes suitable for street use. Stuck Heels - Heels attached by cement, which cannot be satisfactorily attached otherwise.
Stuck on Shoes - Shoes having their soles attached by cement adhesive. Style- Usually a particular design of footwear avail-

heat. Thermo-Cementing - This operation is done by machine. This eliminates the need for previous cementing as a separate operation. A roll of thermoplastic adhesive is fed to the machine.and is activated and fed to the point of work. Both cementing and folding are done simultaneously.
Thermoplastic - A soft plastic when heated and

recover its stiffness on cooling, used as certain type of stiffeners. Thermoplastic Granular Mixture - A type of bottom filler based on granulated cork bonded with resin which softens under heat. 30

able in a variety of sizes, fittings and colours.
Surface Scouriug of Soles and Insoles - Removing

a thin layer from the grain side of the leather, leaving

IS 2050 : 1991

,

Thomas Wedge - A leather lift placed transversely

under the ball of a footwear.
Thread Lasting- Lasting the upper with the inSole

Top LlR- The last bottom piece applied in making the heel of a footwear. Butt portion of sole leather or synthetic material are generally used as top lift. Top Facing - A binding or lining which is served around the inner part of the upper of footwear at the top. Top Layer- Outer section of the upper. Top Piece of Heel - A heel lift which comes in direct contact with the ground while walking. Tracing- Process to ascertain the consumable area of a leather for a footwear, in order to find out its acceptable cost. Transverse Arch - The arch which lies crosswise between the metatarsus group and tarsus group is called the transverse arch.
Traumatic Flat Foot - Flattened foot due to injury. Tread- The floor surface of the sole of a footwear.

with thread by sewing the upper edge on the flesh of the insole instead of doing the operation by tacks, generally used for single sole or cemented construction. ThroughSole-The piece of soling material equal to the size of the sole used between the outsole and insole. Tie Shoe- Low Laced Oxford Shoe.
Tight Seam - See `Closed Seam'. Tip- An extra piece covering the toe of the foot-

wear separate from the vamp and lasted under with it. Toe Bands - A strap of leather or other material usually i;l;ed over the forepart of the sole to cover toes. Toe Box- See `Toe Puff'. Toe Cap - The portion of the upper which covers the toe-end of the foot, extending from the vamp up to the toe-end. Toe Case- See `Toe Puff'. Toe of the Footwear - Front end of the footwear which covers and protects the toes of the foot. Toe Plate - A half-moon shaped steel plate whichis attached at the toe-end of soles of boots and shoes from outside, by means of nails. Toe plate prevents wear of sole at the toe. It is generally used in the occupational footwear. Toe Puff - The piece of material inserted usually between the upper and the lining at the toe-end in order to stiffen that portion and thereby to maintain the shape of the toe of the footwear. Toe Spring- This is defined as the elevation of the toe-end of the last from a horizontal surface when the seat is raised to its correct height so that the last stands on its thread line.
Tongue - A piece of upper leather placed below the

Tread Lhe - A line drawn obliquely across the widest part at the bottom of the last between the fullness of the outside and inside joints.
Tree- Same as shoe tree.

Trench Foot - A painful condition of foot.
Treeing- Placing the footwear on a foot tree and to

carry out the operation of hot blasting.
Trimming Allowance - The allowance which is

generally allowed around the components for trimming during the manufacturing processes.
Trimming Heels and Soles - Cutting away the sur-

plus material around the sole and heel edge. Tripodal Bearing Points of Foot - The three points of the human foot, heel bone, the head of the fifth metatarsal, and the head of the first metatarsal through which the body weight is mainly transmitted. Turning in Edge - See `Beaded Edge'. Turn Construction - A method of footwear construction in which the upper and the sole are sewn together having the wrong side out with a horizontal chain-stitch (in hand method by lock-stitch). The last is then removed and footwear is turned. Turn Shoes - A single sole, flexible shoe in which the sole and upper are stitched together with a horizontal chain-stitch having wrong side out on the last. It is then turned inside out. Twill Fabric- A fabric with a diagonal line. Threads interlace in the ratio 2 : 2 (one warp thread crosses over two weft threads and under two). Twin Needle Machine-See `Parallel Row Stitches'.

facings and eyelets to prevent the direct contact of the foot with the laces. Tongue may be a separate piece or one with the vamp.
" Tongue Pad - A small cushioned pad fitted to the

inner side of the tongue for a comfort.
Tongueing Louis Heels - The Louis heel soles are split to a certain length at the seat. The flesh portion of this is then inserted in the tvngueing machine where the machine takes off the remaining portion of the split seat, leaving a tongue shaped piece which provides a reinforcement under the heel. Top - General term to all parts of the upper of a

U
Under Edge of Trimming- A machine operation in which both stitching and trimming oflining are. ac-

footwear. .. 31

I!3 2050 : 1991 ccnplishd simultaneously. lhe trimmer cuts the lining

very close to the stitching while the lining is not visible from the outside of the upper. Under &dge Trimming of Lining- In this method the lining of the upper is cut very close to the stitching with the object of producing a neat appearance with the lining being invisible. Under Rdge Trimming of Sole - Trimming sole edge having the top edge floated and the bottom edge under. Underlay Allowance - The allownce generally provided for one component over which another component is placed. The allowance is generally 8 nmrto 12nmr.
Unishank Assembly- This operation is usually done

leather uppers after proper cleaning at the stage of finishing. Upper Flanging- `Doming out the lasting edge of the upper instead of turning it in. Upper Prepuratkm - Carrying out various operations on an upper of footwear before or between actual stitching processes.

V
Vamp - The section of boot or shoe upper which covers the foot at the joint area, lying between the toe cap and quarter. It is subjected to maximum flexing while walking. Vamp Curve- The curvature at the vamp throat and the wings. Vamping- Stitching the vamp with the quarters. Vamp Stay - A piece of material cemented on the centre of the throat of the vamp that is at the junction of facing and the vamp to give strength at this vital point. Veld Assembly Tack- The tack only differs from welt tack at the point. Instead of the spear shape, a square pyramid point is provided. The tack is driven into the last by the operator to hold the forward draft in the Veldtschoen assembling operation. Veldtsehoen Last - This last has a slight bevel along the feather. This facilitates better making as the upper can be pressed into the cavity so formed . The seat portion has a plate attached to it in certain cases.
Veldtscboen Construction - There are many variations in this method. The simplest type of Veldts&en footwear requires only two parts, the upper and the outer sole. In this method the lasting edge of the upper is turned out instead of turning in and stuck to the sole with cement. The two units are then secured permanently by lock-stitch all round. A rand is often stitched above the upper with the sole.

more suitable by machines and the use of unishank is to achieve the solidity of the heel seat of the insold and helps to eliminate the breaking of the sole at the front of the heel. In this operation the waist and the seat and the reinforcement are coated with cement first. Then the insole is placed in position and the shank holder holds the steel shank in position. The waist reinforcement is laid over the shank. The mould is positioned over the waist and seat. The insole, shank and the reinforcement are pressed together to form a single unit.
Unit Sole - a) Single polymer unit consisting of

bottom sole and heel. b) Single leather unit consisting of bottom sole, heel, heel-lift and toe-lift. Upper- Upper section of the footwear to cloths and protect the top of the foot (as opposed to the soling) which comprises the top section, its lining and reinforcements and accessories. The upper may be either very high or high or very low. Upper Cleaners - Agents employed for cleaning footwear uppers soiled during manufacturing process for removing dirt, paste, wax, etc. Upper Closing- Joining the various sections of the upper usually with lining by single, double or multiple rows of stitching. Upper Closing on the Flat Construction- A method of closing of upper on the flat base in which the upper and the lining are not closed separately. Upper Closing on the Loose Lined ConstntctlonSee `Upper Closing on the Round Method'. Upper Closing on the Round Method- A method of closing upper for easy lasting, in which the upper is closed in a rounded or natural shape by closing the outside and closing the lining as two separate units. The two units are then joined by one or more rows of stitches at the top. Upper Dressing - Finishes of various nature like water or spirit based shellac dressing and was emulsions which are applied on the finished footwear 32

Veld-Welt Construction - A combination of Veldtschoen and welted method. In this method the lining is attached to the insole shoulder with staples and the outside of the upper is turned outwards. Then the welt is sewn to the lining and insole. A through sole is stuck to the bottom and then the outside of the upper is stuck to the welt with cement. Finally a lockstitch seam unites the upper, welt, through-sole and the outsole together.
Velvet - Warp pile silk fabrics used for slipper up-

pers. Nylon velvet is used for footwear uppers.
Velvet Bottom - A dry finish used on very high grade light footwear bottoms. This involves considerable hand labour to produce a napped surface and the application of a dry finishing powder to give it a velvety appearance.

Velveteen- A weft pile fabric, made oPcotton, used for slipper and sandal upper.

IS 2050 : 1991
Vertical Trimming of LMng- A method of cutting Welt Butting- Skiving away the ends of the welt to

lining materials exactly perpendicular to the surface of the material.
Vulcanizing - A chemical process used to melt,

meet the skived edge of the seat lift.
Welted Construction - See "Goodyear Welted

Method of Construction'.
Welt Ilough- A tool used for cutting the lip of welts or middle soks to bring uniformity to the sole edge. This tool has a blade fitted at the end of the tool. Welted Seam - A seam produced by inserting another substance of the same material between the two outside sections of the footwear upper to be stitched, so as to protect the stitches when opened out. The portion of the welt left outside is ploughed out and stained. Welted Veldtschoen - See `Veldtschoen Method of

mould to attach rubber/plastic polyurethane sole to the lasted upper by heat and pressure in a closed
cavity. Vulcanized Footwear - Footwear to which non-

vulcanized rubber soling compound is attached by heat and pressure.

W
Waist - The smallest part of that portion of the foot

which lies between the instep and the ball.
Waist Line of the Last - The line drawn across the

Construction'.
Welt Tacks - Welt tacks are used in pulling over

narrowest portion of the bottom of last.
Waist of the Last- The narrowest portion of the last

at the middle.
Waist Reducing- This is to reduce the edge thick-

ness of the sole or insole at the waist by bringing the edge down to the level of the surface of the sole or insole at the edge. The object of the operation is to produce a iight rounded waist, a very desirable feature of ladies' shoe with higher heel.
Waist Trimming- Trimming of footwear sole waist after sole stitching is generally done on a waist trimmer attachment in the trimming machine which consists of a small circular cutter much smaller than the forepart cutter which can be either round or square. Wall Last - A definite ridge or square edge to the

machine and to another the bracing wire during the manufacture of goodyear welted footwear. These tacks have round parallel shank with head little smaller but thicker and with a fillet connecting it to the shank which provides strength between the head and shank in tack-pulling operation. The tacks are spear pointed.
Welt Wheeling - Similar effect as is produced by stitch separating is produced on the welt by welt wheeling but the stitches on the welt are not visible as they are buried in the welt. Wet Stick Assembly- See ` Closed Stick Assembly'.

forepart to increase for comfort and fashion.
Water-Tight Tongues - Generally, in certain types

Wheeling - A finish to the top of the edges of a footwear by corrugated wheel used to imitate statching.
Wheeling Foxing - Wheeling by metal wheeler

of ankle boots for water-tight purposes, the tongues are cut whole from soft leather and are blocked : twa wings of this being stitched with the quarter facing and the bottom with the vamp.
Wave Top - A double curved cut of a footwear top

along the edge of the side foxing in a neat straight line.
Whole-Cut Shoe - The shoe which has its upper made of a single piece of material. Whole-Cut Vamp- Vamp cut in one piece, that is the toe cap is not separated from the vamp. Whole Golosh Pattern- The vamp pattern of a boot

or boot, highest in `%ont. Wedge Heel -A heel extending from the back of the footwear to the ball of the footwear. The sole of the footwear follows the contour of the wedge heel making a flat treading surface from the tip of the footwear to the back of the footwear.
Wellington Boots - Knee high rubber boots with

cut in one piece with the counter extending up to the back and separately from the leg portion.
Width- Same as Girth, that is, a word coding for

varying width of sole having various designs of cleats to minimize slipping and sometimes lined with swansdown or a warmer woollen lining. These are generally used during the rainy weather.
Welt- A special strip of leather with one edge on the grain side bevelled and a groove on the flesh side for the welt stitches. It is attached to the insole and upper around the outer edge of the footwear and to which the outsole is attached afterwards. Welt Beating- Flattening the welt at a right angle to

measuring footwear girth.
Wing Cap - An attached or imitation cap with a

central peak and curve either side sometimes perforated.
Wooden Horse- A wooden frame of triangular form

having four legs and a back having slope edges. This is provided in the upper clicking department for temporary storage of leather intended for cutting.
Woode? Pegged - Having a sole attached by wooden pegs extending through the outside, upper and insole as in coarse books and work footwears.

the upper. 33

Is 2050 : 1991

Wooden Shoes- Usually made by carving and hollowing out a block of soft wood to fit the foot. Worked Eyelet- A lace hole finished with stitching like a button hole. Work Shoes- Heavy shoes or stoutly built shoes for hard usage of worker&

Z
Zig-Zagged Seam - A seam in which the pieces of footwear are placed edge to edge and joined by a seam passing side to side across the edges. Zip Fastener- A kind of metallic or polymer slide fastener, with two rows of teeth fastened to the edge of two tapes and with a sliding runner at the ccntre for closing and opening. Zipper Front- The front of a boot having zip fastening arrangement for easy fastening and unfastening instead of lacing.

X
X-Ray Foot Fitter- A machine that shows a fluroscopic view of the foot in the show.

`;

IS 2050 : 1991

ANNEX A ( Foreword )
BASIC SHOE DESIGN

F I G. 1 BALMORAL

F I G. 5 D ' O R S A Y

F I G. 2 BLUCHER/DERBY

F I G. 6 G H B L L I C

F I G. 3 B O O T

F I G . 7 GO R E

F I G. 4 B R O G U E 35

F I G. 8 J O D H P U R

IS 2050:1991

FIG. 13 PUMP F I G. 9 M~~XXSIN
OR

CASUAL

F IG. 14 SANDAL FIG. 10 M ONK

F IG. 11 MU L B

F I G. 16 S TRAP

36

Iis 2050 : 1991

ANNEX B ( Foreword )
DETAILED PARTS O`F SAFETY BOOTS AND SHOES

FULL BELLOWS

I

\

\

CAP

LTOE TIP

SOT T,P

BOTTOM VIEW NOTE - This illustration is diagrammatic only and is not intended to illustrate the details of design. F I G. 17 LEATHER SAFETY B OOTS WITH L EATHER S O L E
y BACK STRAF' /-QUARTER LINING

I

BOTTOM VIEW
NOTE - This illustration is diagrammatic only and is not intended to illustrate the details of design. F I G. 18 LEATHER S AFETY S HOES WITH L EATHER SOLB 37

IS 2050: 1991

ANNEX C ( Foreword )
SHOE MAKERS HAND TOOLS

A Cool to give decorative treatment to sole edges in the finishing department.
Used for measuring thickness, inside and outside diameter of materials, etc. F IG. 19 M ICROMETER

F I G. 24 FUDGE W H E E L

Used to mark the decorative stiches for the guidance of the stitchers. F I G. 25 S TITCH M A R K E R

various allowances of patterns.

Used in the designing departtnent for measuring F I G. 20 SPRING D I V I D E R S A tool to give a decorative serrated marking at the top of the heel. F I G. 26 SEAT W HEELING T O O L Used for measuring foot length, shoe size, height,

ClC.

F I G. 21 M EASURING T A P E Used on the welt of the sole stitching. The wheels can be changed to suit the sizes of stitches. F I G. 27 S TITCH S E PA R A T I N G WHEH

Used for giving a decorative edge treatment to socks, especially for ladies' footwear; can also be used for giving similar decorative edge treatments for footwear uppers.

Generally used for cutting and extracting nails like
heel nails.

F IG. 22 INDENTING S CISSORS

F I G. 28 C UTTING N I P P E R S

A number of punch nipples of various sizes are fitted to this plier. These nipples can be revolved and brought in position whenever necessaay. F I G. 23 REVOLVING P U N C H

Used for cutting and extracting nails from inside the shoe where it is not possible lo extract them easily. FI G. 29 M ANCHESTER N I P P E R S

38

IS 2050 : 1991

Used in the making department after the soles have been stitched for levelling the bottom of the soles, when shoes are made by hand made process. The ends of the stick are also made use of for flattening the soles edges. F I G. 30 S L E E K I N G STICK

Used for cutting American channel on the soles. The distance from the edge of the sole and the depth of

the channel can be adjusted. F I G. 37 C H A N N E L L I N G T O O L

Used, specially by the lasters and welt sewers in the hand made welted shoe manufacturer for pulling out the lasting insoles. F I G. 31 N AIL P U L L E R

Once the channel has been cut, this tool is used for opening the channel properly to facilitate the stitching of soles. F I G. 38 C H A N N E L O P E N E R

Used at various stages in the shoe manufacture for cutting sole leather. F I G. 39 P A R I N G K N I F E Used in the finishing department! for melting and spreading the-heel ball on theiheel edges;and soles. F I G. 32 H E E L IRON

Used in the finishing department for setting the sole edges. Various sizes of iron are available to suit the thickness of sole.

Used by the closing room workers for trimming thread ends, cutting slots and for other similar works.
F I G.

40 S C I S S O R S

Used in feathering the top edge of the heels. F I G. 34 W E L T K N I F E &ed in the closing room for trimming of lining specially at the vamp and quarter joint. F I G. 41 BE N T S C I S S O R S Used for welted and staple welted shoes for separating the stitches after out-sole stitching. F I G. 35 ST I T C H S E P A R A T I N G T O O L

c

F I G. 33 E D G E S E T T I N G I R O N

Used ill the shot trade for cutting nails and nail

heads.
F I G. 3 6 C U T T I N G PLiERS

Generally used for cutting leather of heavy type. F I G. 42 C U T T I N G K N I F E

39

IS 2050 : 1991

Used for hammering the punches wherever hand punches are usea.

F IG. 43 W OODEN M ALLET ( RUBBERIZED )

Generally used in the lasting department to measure the lenaths and heights of various components after lasting.-

FIG. 49 ADJUSTABLE W ING C OMPASS

Used for cutting of upper and lining leather in the clicking department. FJG. 44 C LICKING K NIFE
Us-xl for trimming all types of the heels.

F I G. 50 HEEL S EAT T RIMMING K NIFE

Generally used to sharpen the knives by the clickers in the clicking department.

Generally used in the upper closing department for beading of uppers.

F I G. 45 SHARPENING S TONE

WITH

HANDLE FOG. 51 FO L D I N G H A M M E R

Used for sharpening various kinds of knives used in the shoe manufacture. F I G. 46 S HARPENING S TONE ( RECI ANGULAR T YPE )
A general purpose hammer used in the shoe trade.

F I G. 52 S HOE HAMSTER

Generally used by the clickers to mark the various positions on the upper components.

Used for lasting of uppers of footwear. F I G. 53 LASTING P INCERS ( HEAVY T YPE )

F I G. 47 PRICKING A W L

Used for roughing of soles for cement construction. F I G. 48 ROUGHING T O O L 40

Used for lasting uppers made of medium type of leather. Generally used for all types of civilian footwear.

F I G. 54 LASTING P INCERS ( M EDIUM T Y P E)

1991

Used occasionally at certain places where bent pincers do not give results. F I G. 55 L ASTING PIN&RS ( STRAIGHT T YPE > Used for measuring the thickness of sole leather; cut components of heavy nature. F I G. 62 TH I C K N E S S G AUGE ( SL O T T E D T YPE )

/ Used for extracting pins like pannel pins and heel F I G. 56 NAIL P ULLER ( COMB T Y P E H EAVY D UTY ) \ Used for same purpose as thickness gauges ( slotted type 1. F I G. 63 TH I C K N E S S G AUGE ( V TYPE )

nails.

Used for Pulling out lasting nails and tacks. F I G. 57 NAIL P ULLER ( LIGHT T YPE )

Used specially in ranging :of sole leather. This is also used by the making department. F I G. 58 SHOE K N I F E Used for measuring thickness of upper and lining leather. Used in the making and lasting department. F I G. 59 M CKAY K N I F E F I G. 64 LEATHER T HICKNESS M EASURING G AUGE

Used for lasting of veldtschoen uppers. F IG. 60 V ELDTSCHOEN L ASTING P INCERS

Used for the same purpose as thickness gauge ( slotted type ). Used for lasting of heavy uppers at the inside waist. F I G. 61 B ULLDOG P I N C E R S F I G. 65 THICKNESS G A U G E ( CIRCULAR S LOTTED T YPE )

41

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder.

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureati of Ittdian Stattdurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

Revision of Indian Standards
Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference :

Doe : No. CHD 019 ( 9112 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication
Amend No. Data of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ' Headquarters: Maoak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C. I. T. Campur, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol; Andheri (East ) BOMBAY 400093

Telegrams : Manaksanstha
( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

37 86 62
53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATOKE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JA .lPUR. KANPUR. PATNA: SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

