mrmw  wrw 

Indian  Standard 


IS  875  (Fart  3)  :  2015 


siaRf  3^r  TfroRmf  % 
c^(^Rcrg?f  3^0— tHrt  Trfw 

wr  3 


Part  3  Wind  Loads 

(  Third  Revision  ) 


ICS  91.100.10 


©  BIS  2015 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
iTPTop  sjcR,  9  ^TTT  "FFf,  ^  feff-1 10002 

MANAK  BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI-110002 
www.bis.ora.in www.standardsbis.in 

A  P  f  1 1  2  0 1  5  MAX.  RETAIL  PRICE  Price  Group  14 

“  gfcLQWiL  TAXES 


Structural  Safety  Sectional  Committee,  CED  37 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Part  3)  (Third  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  the  Structural  Safety  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering  Division 
Council. 

A  building  has  to  perform  many  functions  satisfactorily.  Amongst  these  functions  are  the  utility  of  the  building 
for  the  intended  use  and  occupancy,  structural  safety,  fire  safety  and  compliance  with  hygienic,  sanitation, 
ventilation  and  daylight  standards.  The  design  of  the  building  is  dependent  upon  the  minimum  requirements 
prescribed  for  each  one  of  the  above  functions.  The  minimum  requirements  pertaining  to  the  structural  safety  of 
buildings  are  being  covered  in  loading  codes  by  way  of  laying  down  minimum  design  loads,  which  have  to  be 
assumed  for  dead  loads,  imposed  loads,  wind  loads  and  other  external  loads,  the  structure  would  be  required  to 
bear.  Strict  conformity  to  loading  standards,  it  is  hoped,  will  not  only  ensures  the  structural  safety  of  the  buildings 
and  structures  which  are  being  designed  and  constructed  in  the  country  and  thereby  reduce  loss  of  life  and 
property  caused  by  unsafe  structures,  but  also  eliminates  the  wastage  caused  by  assuming  unnecessarily  heavy 
loadings  without  proper  assessment. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1957  for  the  guidance  of  civil  engineers,  designers  and  architects  associated 
with  the  planning  and  design  of  buildings.  It  included  the  provisions  for  the  basic  design  loads  (dead  loads,  live 
loads,  wind  loads  and  seismic  loads)  to  be  assumed  in  the  design  of  the  buildings.Tn  its  first  revision  in  1964,  the 
wind  pressure  provisions  were  modified  on  the  basis  of  studies  of  wind  phenomenon  and  its  effect  on  structures, 
undertaken  by  the  special  Committee  in  consultation  with  the  Indian  Meteorological  Department.  In  addition  to 
this,  new  clauses  on  wind  loads  for  butterfly  type  structures  were  included;  wind  pressure  coefficients  for  sheeted 
roofs,  both  covered  and  sloping  were  modified;  seismic  load  provisions  were  deleted  (separate  code  having  been 
prepared)  and  metric  system  of  weights  and  measurements  was  adopted. 

With  the  increased  adoption  of  this  standard,  a  number  of  comments  were  received  on  provision  of  live  loads 
adopted  for  different  occupancies.  Subsequently  the  Committee  recommended  the  formulation  of  this  standard 
in  the  following  five  parts,  during  the  second  revision  of  IS  875  in  1987: 

Part  1  Dead  loads 
Part  2  Imposed  loads 
Part  3  Wind  loads 

Part  4  Snow  loads 

Part  5  Special  loads  and  load  combinations 

This  standard  (Part  3)  deals  with  wind  loads  to  be  considered  when  designing  buildings,  structures  and  components 
thereof. 

In  this  current  revision,  the  Committee  recommends  the  following  modifications/inclusions  by  taking  into  account 
the  recent  improvements  that  have  been  made  in  the  wind  engineering  descriptive,  through  R  &  D  efforts  nationally 
and  internationally: 

a)  Aerodynamic  roughness  heights  for  individual  terrain  categories  have  been  explicitly  included,  and  are 
used  to  derive  turbulence  intensity  and  mean  hourly  wind  speed  profiles. 

b)  The  previous  classification  of  structures  into  B  and  C  classes  has  been  deleted  and  accordingly  the 
modification  factor,  k2  is  renamed  as  terrain  roughness  and  height  factor. 

c)  The  values  of  k2  factor  corresponding  to  previous  class  A  type  structure  only,  are  retained  in  this  standard. 

d)  An  additional  modification  factor,  termed  as  importance  factor  has  been  included  for  cyclonic  regions. 

e)  Simple  empirical  expressions  have  been  suggested  for  height  variations  of  hourly  mean  wind  speed  and 
also  turbulence  intensity  in  different  terrains. 


( Continued  on  third  cover) 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


GIIGIT 


lEH 

(LADAKH) 


SRINAGAR 


kyelang 

(LAHUL  AND  SPlTl, 


^  AMRITSAR 

.V  FIRQZPUn 

/  • 

*  CHANDIGARH 

BATHINOA  c 


gopeshwar 

(CHAMOLI) 
ALMORA  / 


/  * - r- 

/  GANGANAG/ 


•  HISAR 
ROHTAK 


ALONG  (SUNG) 


JAISALMER 


AGRA 


LUCKNOW 


GWALIOR 

SHIVPURI 


KOTA 


AURANGABAD 


palanpur 

(BANASKANTHA) 

mchesana 


(SANTHAL  PAR( 
DHANBAO  %J 


Gandhinagar 

AHmADABAD-* 


^NDRANAG/ 


8HOPAL 


AMBIKAPUR 

(SURGUjA) 


JABALPUR 


VADODARA 


BHAVNAG 


SETUL 


SEONI 


RAURKEU® 


SURAT 


NEW  MOORE  ISLAND 
K  -  (INDIA) 


AMRAVATl 


NAGPUR 


DIU  (DAMAN  AND 
DIU  i _ „ 


AKOLA 


YAVATMAL 


I  bhawanipatn> 

r*^(KALA  HANOI) 


AURANGABAD 


NASIK 


NANDED 


ahmadnagar 


XHHaTRAPUR 
V  (GAN JAM) 


MUMBAI 


JAGDALPUR  f 
(BASTAR)  9  VORAPUT 


DUNE 


warangal 


VISHAKHAPATNAM 


HYDERABAD 


KOLHAPUR 


MACHILIPATNAM, 
y  (KRISHNA)  / 


KURNOOL 


BELLARV 


W  ONGOLE 
(PRAKASAM) 


KARWAR 
(UTTAR  KANNAD) 


anantapur 


guddapah' 


nellore 


CHITTOOR 


BANGALORE 


MANGALORE 
l(DAKSHIN  KANNAD) 


CHENNAI 


DHARMAPUR! 


PONDICHERRY 


TtRUCHCHIRAPPALU  i 
N.  KARAIKAL 


TRlCHUf 


COCHIN 


MADURAI 


IDUKKi, 


RAMESWARAM 


QUILON 


TUT  I  COR  IN 


MAP  OF  INDIA 

SHOWING 

BASIC  WIND  SPEED 


ARABIAN 

SEA 


BASIC  WIND  SPEED 
IN  m/s 


COLOUR 

SCHEME 


PORT  BLAIR 


KAVARATTl 


ANDAMAN  SEA 


Seal*  MFQQO.OOO  or  I  cm  to  llOfcm. 
KriOTlr*  id*  »s  o  f  in  m*  MO  4 


thiruvanthapuram 


M3  met 


MINICOY 

ISLAND 


KANNIYAKUMARJ 

I  A 


INDIRA  POINT 


Based  upon  Survey  of  India  Outline  Map  printed  in  1993. 


©  Government  of  India  Copyright,  2005 


The  territorial  waters  of  India  extend  into  the  sea  to  a  distance  of  twelve  nautical  miles  measured  from  the  appropriate  base  line. 

The  boundary  of  Meghalaya  shown  on  this  map  is  as  interpreted  from  the  North-Eastern  Areas  (Reorganisation)  Act,  1971 ,  but  has  yet  to  be  verified. 

Responsibility  for  correctness  of  internal  details  shown  on  the  map  rests  with  the  publisher. 

The  state  boundaries  between  Uttaranchal  &  Uttar  Pradesh,  Bihar  &  Jharkhand  and  Chhatisgarh  &  Madhya  Pradesh  have  not  been  verified  by  Governments  concerned. 


Fig.  1  Basic  Wind  Speed  in  m/s  (Based  on  50-Years  Return  Period) 


height  of  any  object  surrounding  the  structure 
is  less  than  1.5m.  The  equivalent  aerodynamic 
roughness  height,  (z01)  for  this  terrain  is  0.002 
m.  Typically  this  category  represents  open 
sea-costs  and  flat  plains  without  trees. 


b)  Category2-  Open  terrain  with  well  scattered 
obstructions  having  heights  generally  between 
1.5  m  and  10  m.  The  equivalent  aerodynamic 
roughness  height,  (z02)  for  this  terrain  is 
0.02  m. 


6 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


Indian  Standard 

DESIGN  LOADS  (OTHER  THAN  EARTHQUAKE) 
FOR  BUILDINGS  AND  STRUCTURES  —  CODE 

OF  PRACTICE 

PART  3  WIND  LOADS 

(  Third  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  (Part  3)  specifies  wind  forces  and 
their  effects  (static  and  dynamic)  that  should  be  taken 
into  account  when  designing  buildings,  structures  and 
components  thereof. 

1.2  Wind  speeds  vary  randomly  both  in  time  and  space 
and  hence  assessment  of  wind  loads  and  response 
predictions  are  very  important  in  the  design  of  several 
buildings  and  structures.  A  large  majority  of  structures 
met  with  in  practice  do  not  however,  suffer  wind 
induced  oscillations  and  generally  do  not  require  to  be 
examined  for  the  dynamic  effects  of  wind.  For  such 
normal,  short  and  heavy  structures,  estimation  of  loads 
using  static  wind  analysis  has  proved  to  be  satisfactory. 
The  details  of  this  method  involving  important  wind 
characteristics  such  as  the  basic  wind  speeds,  terrain 
categories,  modification  factors,  wind  pressure  and 
force  coefficients,  etc,  are  given  in  6  and  7. 

1.3  Nevertheless,  there  are  various  types  of  structures 
or  their  components  such  as  some  tall  buildings, 
chimneys,  latticed  towers,  cooling  towers,  transmission 
towers,  guyed  masts,  communication  towers,  long  span 
bridges,  partially  or  completely  solid  faced  antenna 
dish,  etc,  which  require  investigation  of  wind  induced 
oscillations.  The  influence  of  dynamic  velocity 
fluctuations  on  the  along  wind  loads  (drag  loads)  for 
these  structures  shall  be  determined  using  Gust  Factor 
Method,  included  in  10.  A  method  for  calculation  of 
across  wind  response  of  tall  buildings  and  towers  is 
included  in  10,3. 

1.4  This  standard  also  applies  to  buildings  or  other 
structures  during  erection/construction  and  the  same 
shall  be  considered  carefully  during  various  stages  of 
erection/construction.  In  locations  where  the  strongest 
winds  and  icing  may  occur  simultaneously,  loads  on 
structural  members,  cables  and  ropes  shall  be 
calculated  by  assuming  an  ice  covering  based  on 
climatic  and  local  experience. 

1.5  In  the  design  of  special  structures,  such  as 
chimneys,  overhead  transmission  line  towers,  etc, 


specific  requirements  as  specified  in  the  respective 
Codes  shall  be  adopted  in  conjunction  with  the 
provisions  of  this  Code  as  far  as  they  are  applicable. 
Some  of  the  Indian  Standards  available  for  the  design 
of  special  structures  are: 

IS  No.  Title 

4998  :  2015  Criteria  for  design  of  reinforced 
concrete  chimneys  :  Part  1 
Assessment  of  loads  (third  revision) 
(under  print) 

6533  Codfc  of  practice  for  design  and 

construction  of  steel  chimneys 
(Part  1) :  1989  Mechanical  aspects 

(Part  2) :  1989  Structural  aspects 

5613  (Part  2/  Code  of  practice  for  design, 
Sec  1) :  1985  installation  and  maintenance  of 
overhead  power  lines  :  Part  2  Lines 
above  1 1  kV,  and  up  to  and  including 
220  kV,  Section  1  Design 

802  (Part  1  /  Code  of  practice  for  use  of  structural 
Sec  1) :  201*  steel  in  overhead  transmission  line 
towers:  Part  1  Materials,  Loads  and 
permissible  stresses,  Section  1 
Materials  and  Loads  ( fourth  revision) 
(under  print) 

11504:  1985  Criteria  for  structural  design  of 
reinforced  concrete  natural  draught 
cooling  towers 

14732  :  2000  Guidelines  for  the  evaluation  of  the 
response  of  occupants  of  fixed 
structures,  especially  buildings  and 
off-shore  structures,  to  low- 
frequency  horizontal  motion  (0.063 
to  1  Hz) 

NOTES 

1  This  standard  does  not  apply  to  buildings  or  structures  with 
unconventional  shapes,  unusual  locations,  and  abnormal 
environmental  conditions  that  have  not  been  covered  in  this 
Code.  Special  investigations  are  necessary  in  such  cases  to 
establish  wind  loads  and  their  effects.  Wind  tunnel  studies  may 
also  be  required  in  such  situations. 

2  In  the  case  of  tall  structures  with  unsymmetrical  geometry, 
the  designs  may  have  to  be  checked  for  torsional  effects  due  to 
wind  pressure. 


1 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


2  REFERENCES 

The  following  standard  contains  provisions,  which 
through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of 
this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  edition 
indicated  was  valid.  Ail  standards  are  subject  to 
revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 
standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility 
of  applying  the  most  recent  edition  of  the  standard 
indicated. 

IS  No.  Title 

15498  :  2004  Guidelines  for  improving  the 
cyclonic  resistance  of  low  rise  houses 
and  other  buildings/structures 

3  NOTATIONS 

3.1  The  following  notations  shall  be  followed  unless 
otherwise  specified  in  relevant  clauses.  Notations  have 
been  defined  in  the  text  at  their  first  appearance.  A  few 
of  the  notations  have  more  than  one  definition,  having 
been  used  for  denoting  different  variables: 

A  =  surface  area  of  a  structure  or  part  of  a 
structure; 

Ae  =  effective  frontal  area; 

Az  =s  the  effective  frontal  area  of  the  building  at 
height  z; 

b  -  breadth  of  a  structure  or  structural  member 
normal  to  the  wind  stream  in  the  horizontal 
plane; 

Bs  =  background  factor; 

Cd  =  drag  coefficient; 

Cfd>  =  force  coefficient; 

Cfa  =  normal  force  coefficient; 

Cft  =  transverse  force  coefficient; 

Cf'  =  frictional  drag  coefficient; 

Cp  =  pressure  coefficient; 

Cpe  =  external  pressure  coefficient; 

Cpi  =  internal  pressure  coefficient; 

Cfs  =  cross-wind  force  spectrum  coefficient; 

Cf  z  =  drag  force  coefficient  of  the  building 
corresponding  to  the  area  Az; 

C  =  coefficient,  which  depends  on  0S,  used  in  the 
evaluation  of  k3  factor; 

d  =  depth  of  a  structure  or  structural  member 
parallel  to  wind  stream  in  the  horizontal 
plane; 

dw  =  wake  width; 

D  =  diameter  of  cylinder  or  sphere; 

E  =  wind  energy  factor; 

F2  =  along  wind  load  on  the  building/structure  at 
any  height  z; 


F  -  force  normal  to  the  surface; 

/a  =  first  mode  natural  frequency  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  along  wind  direction  in  Hz; 
fc  =  first  mode  natural  frequency  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  across  wind  direction  in  Hz; 
f%  =  vortex  shedding  frequency; 

Fn  =  normal  force; 

Ft  -  transverse  force; 

Ff  =  frictional  force; 

G  =  gust  factor; 

gR  =  peak  factor  for  resonant  response; 
gv  =  peak  factor  for  upwind  velocity  fluctuations; 
h  =  height  of  structure  above  mean  ground  level; 

hx  =  height  of  development  of  a  velocity  profile 
at  a  distance  x  down  wind  from  a  change  in 
terrain  category; 

Hs  =  height  factor  for  resonant  response; 

H  =  height  above  mean  ground  level  on  the 
topography  feature; 

I  =  turbulence  intensity; 

7hi  =  turbulence  intensity  at  height  h  in  terrain 
category  i; 

4 a  =  turbulence  intensity  at  height  z  in  terrain 
category  f; 

IF  =  interference  factor; 
k  =  mode  shape  power  exponent; 
kvkv  -  wind  speed  modification  factors; 
k3,k4 

kv  =  hourly  mean  wind  speed  factor; 

K  =  force  coefficient  multiplication  factor  for 
individual  members  of  finite  length; 

K.d  =  area  averaging  factor; 

Kc  =  combination  factor; 

Ka  =  wind  directionality  factor; 

/  =  length  of  the  member  or  larger  horizontal 
dimension  of  a  building; 

L  =  actual  length  of  upwind  slope; 

Ls  =  effective  length  of  upwind  slope; 

Lh  =  integral  turbulence  length  scale  at  the  height 

h\ 

m0  =  average  mass  per  unit  height  of  the  structure; 
Afa  =  design  peak  along  wind  base  bending 
moment; 

Mc  =  design  peak  across  wind  base  bending 
moment; 

N  =  effective  reduced  frequency; 
pA  =  design  wind  pressure; 


2 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


pz  =  design  wind  pressure  at  heights; 

pi  =  design  hourly  mean  wind  pressure 
corresponding  to  ; 

pt  =  external  pressure; 

Pi  =  internal  pressure; 

r  -  roughness  factor  which  is  twice  the 
longitudinal  turbulence  intensity  at  height  h; 

Rs  =  Reynolds  number; 

s  -  level  on  a  building/structure  for  the 
evaluation  of  along  wind  load  effects; 

s0  =  factor,  which  depends  on  H  and  X,  used  for 
the  evaluation  of  kj  factor; 

St  =  strouhal  number; 

S  -  size  reduction  factor; 

Vb  =  regional  basic  wind  speed; 

Vz  *  design  wind  speed  at  height  z; 

Vd  =  design  hourly  mean  wind  speed; 

=  design  hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height  z; 

Vjjn  =  hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height  z; 

w  =  lesser  horizontal  dimension  of  a  building, 
or  a  structural  member; 

w'  =  bay  width  in  multi-bay  building; 

£  =  peak  acceleration  at  the  top  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  along  wind  direction,  in  m/s2; 

x  =  distance  down  wind  from  a  change  in  terrain 
category; 

X  =  distance  from  the  summit  or  crest  of 
topography  feature  relative  to  the  effective 
length,  Le; 

y  =  peak  acceleration  at  the  top  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  across  wind  direction; 

z  =  a  height  or  distance  above  the  ground; 

Zo,i  =  aerodynamic  roughness  height  for  i‘h 
terrain; 

Z  *  effective  height  of  the  topography  feature; 

a  =  inclination  of  the  roof  to  the  horizontal; 

P  ”  damping  coefficient  of  the  building/ 
structure; 

ti  =  shielding  factor; 

<S>  =  factor  to  account  for  the  second  order 
turbulence  intensity; 

<X>  =  solidity  ratio; 

<De  =  effective  solidity  ratio; 
a  =  average  height  of  the  surface  roughness; 

9,  -  upwind  slope  of  the  topography  feature  in 
the  wind  direction;  and 

0  =  wind  angle  from  a  given  axis. 


4  TERMINOLOGY 

For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following 
definitions  shall  apply. 

4.1  Angle  of  Attack — An  angle  between  the  direction 
of  wind  and  a  reference  axis  of  the  structure. 

4.2  Breadth  —  It  means  horizontal  dimension  of  the 
building  measured  normal  to  the  direction  of  wind. 

NOTE  —  Breadth  and  depth  are  dimensions  measured  in 
relation  to  the  direction  of  wind,  whereas  length  and  width  are 
dimensions  related  to  the  plan. 

4  J  Depth  —  It  means  the  horizontal  dimension  of 
the  building  measured  in  the  direction  of  the  wind. 

4.4  Developed  Height  —  It  is  the  height  of  upward 
penetration  of  the  velocity  profile  in  a  new  terrain.  At 
large  fetch  lengths,  such  penetration  reaches  the 
gradient  height,  above  which  the  wind  speed  may  be 
taken  to  be  constant.  At  lesser  fetch  lengths,  a  velocity 
profile  of  a  smaller  height  but  similar  to  that  of  the 
fully  developed  profile  of  that  terrain  category  has  to 
be  taken,  with  the  additional  provision  that  the  velocity 
at  the  top  of  this  shorter  profile  equal  to  that  of  the  un¬ 
penetrated  earlier  velocity  profile  at  that  height. 

4.5  Effective  Frontal  Area  —  The  projected  area  of 
the  structure  normal  to  the  direction  of  wind. 

4.6  Element  of  Surface  Area  —  The  area  of  surface 
over  which  the  pressure  coefficient  is  taken  to  be 
constant. 

4.7  Force  Coefficient  —  A  non-dimensional 
coefficient  such  that  the  total  wind  force  on  a  body  is 
the  product  of  the  force  coefficient,  the  dynamic 
pressure  of  the  incident  design  wind  speed  and  the 
reference  area  over  which  the  force  is  required. 

NOTE  —  When  the  force  is  in  the  direction  of  the  incident 
wind,  the  non-dimensional  coefficient  will  be  called  as  ‘drag 
coefficient’.  When  the  force  is  perpendicular  to  the  direction 
of  incident  wind,  the  non-dimensional  coefficient  will  be  called 
as  ‘lift  coefficient’. 

4.8  Ground  Roughness  —  The  nature  of  the  earth’s 
surface  as  influenced  by  small  scale  obstructions  such 
as  trees  and  buildings  (as  distinct  from  topography)  is 
called  ground  roughness. 

4.9  Gust — A  positive  or  negative  departure  of  wind 
speed  from  its  mean  value,  lasting  for  not  more  than, 
say,  2  min  over  a  specified  interval  of  time. 

4.10  Peak  Gust — A  peak  gust  or  peak  gust  speed  is 
the  wind  speed  associated  with  the  maximum 
amplitude. 

4.11  Fetch  Length  —  It  is  the  distance  measured 
along  the  wind  from  a  boundary  at  which  a  change  in 
the  type  of  terrain  occurs.  When  the  changes  in  terrain 
types  are  encountered  (such  as,  the  boundary  of  a  town 


3 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


or  city,  forest,  etc),  the  wind  profile  changes  in 
character  but  such  changes  are  gradual  and  start  at 
ground  level,  spreading  or  penetrating  upwards  with 
increasing  fetch  length. 

4.12  Gradient  Height  —  It  is  the  height  above  the 
mean  ground  level  at  which  the  gradient  wind  blows 
as  a  result  of  balance  among  pressure  gradient  force, 
coriolis  force  and  centrifugal  force.  For  the  purpose  of 
this  Code,  the  gradient  height  is  taken  as  the  height 
above  the  mean  ground  level,  above  which  the  variation 
of  wind  speed  with  height  need  not  be  considered. 

4.13  High  Rise  Building  (Tali  Building)  —  A 
building  with  a  height  more  than  or  equal  to  50  m  or 
having  a  height  to  smaller  dimension  more  than  6. 

4.14  Low  Rise  Building  —  A  building  having  its 
height  less  than  20  m. 

4.15  Mean  Ground  Level  —  The  mean  ground  level 
is  the  average  horizontal  plane  of  the  area  enclosed  by 
the  boundaries  of  the  structure. 

4.16  Pressure  Coefficient  —  It  is  the  ratio  of  the 
difference  between  the  pressure  acting  at  a  point  on 
the  surface  and  the  static  pressure  of  the  incident  wind 
to  the  design  wind  pressure,  where  the  static  and  design 
wind  pressures  are  determined  at  the  height  of  the  point 
considered  after  taking  into  account  the  geographical 
location,  terrain  conditions  and  shielding  effect.  The 
pressure  coefficient  is  also  equal  to  [l-(  Fp/Fz)2j,  where 
Fp  is  the  actual  wind  speed  at  any  point  on  the  structure 
at  a  height  corresponding  to  that  of  Fz. 

NOTE  —  Positive  sign  of  the  pressure  coefficient  indicates 
pressure  acting  towards  the  surface  and  negative  sign  indicates 
pressure  acting  away  from  the  surface. 

4.17  Return  Period  —  It  is  the  number  of  years, 
reciprocal  of  which  gives  the  probability  of  extreme 
wind  exceeding  a  given  wind  speed  in  anyone  year. 

4.18  Shielding  Effect  —  Shielding  effect  or  shielding 
refers  to  the  condition  where  wind  has  to  pass  along 
some  structure^)  or  structural  element(s)  located  on 
the  upstream  wind  side,  before  meeting  the  structure 
or  structural  element  under  consideration.  A  factor 
called  ‘shielding  factor1  is  used  to  account  for  such 
effects  in  estimating  the  force  on  the  shielded  structures. 

4.19  Suction  —  It  means  pressure  less  than  the 
atmospheric  (static)  pressure  and  is  taken  to  act  away 
from  the  surface. 

4.20  Solidity  Ratio  —  It  is  equal  to  the  effective  area 
(projected  area  of  all  the  individual  elements)  of  a 
frame  normal  to  the  wind  direction  divided  by  the  area 
enclosed  by  the  boundary  of  the  frame  normal  to  the 
wind  direction. 

NOTE —  Solidity  ratio  is  to  be  calculated  for  individual  frames. 


4.21  Terrain  Category  —  It  means  the  characteristics 
of  the  surface  irregularities  of  an  area  which  arise  from 
natural  or  constructed  features.  The  categories  are 
numbered  in  increasing  order  of  roughness. 

4.22  Topography  —  The  nature  of  the  earth’s  surface 
as  influenced  by  the  hill  and  valley  configurations. 

4.23  Velocity  Profile — The  variation  of  the  horizontal 
component  of  the  atmospheric  wind  speed  at  different 
heights  above  the  mean  ground  level  is  termed  as 
velocity  profile. 

5  GENERAL 

5.1  Wind  is  air  in  motion  relative  to  the  surface  of  the 
earth.  The  primary  cause  of  wind  is  traced  to  earth’s 
rotation  and  differences  in  terrestrial  radiation.  The 
radiation  effects  are  primarily  responsible  for 
convection  either  upwards  or  downwards.  The  wind 
generally  blows  horizontal  to  the  ground  at  high  wind 
speeds.  Since  vertical  components  of  atmospheric 
motion  are  relatively  small,  the  term  ‘wind’  denotes 
almost  exclusively  the  horizontal  wind;  vertical  winds 
are  always  identified  as  such.  The  wind  speeds  are 
assessed  with  the  aid  of  anemometers  or  anemographs 
which  are  installed  at  meteorological  observatories  at 
heights  generally  varying  from  10  to  30  m  above 
ground. 

5.2  Very  strong  winds  (more  than  80  kmph)  are 
generally  associated  with  cyclonic  storms, 
thunderstorms,  dust  storms  or  vigorous  monsoons.  A 
feature  of  the  cyclonic  storms  over  the  Indian  area  is 
that  they  rapidly  weaken  after  crossing  the  coasts  and 
move  as  depressions/lows  inland.  The  influence  of  a 
severe  storm  after  striking  the  coast  does  not;  in  general 
exceed  about  60  km,  though  sometimes,  it  may  extend 
even  up  to  120  km.  Very  short  duration  hurricanes  of 
very  high  wind  speeds  called  Kal  Baisaki  or  Norwesters 
occur  fairly  frequently  during  summer  months  over 
North  East  India. 

5.3  The  wind  speeds  recorded  at  any  locality  are 
extremely  variable  and  in  addition  to  steady  wind  at 
any  time,  there  are  effects  of  gusts  which  may  last  for 
a  few  seconds.  These  gusts  cause  increase  in  air 
pressure  but  their  effect  on  stability  of  the  building  may 
not  be  so  important;  often,  gusts  affect  only  part  of  the 
building  and  the  increased  local  pressures  may  be  more 
than  balanced  by  a  momentary  reduction  in  the  pressure 
elsewhere.  Because  of  the  inertia  of  the  building,  short 
period  gusts  may  not  cause  any  appreciable  increase 
in  stress  in  main  components  of  the  building  although 
the  walls,  roof  sheeting  and  individual  cladding  units 
(glass  panels)  and  their  supporting  members  such  as 
purlins,  sheeting  rails  and  glazing  bars  may  be  more 
seriously  affected.  Gusts  can  also  be  extremely 
important  for  design  of  structures  with  high  slenderness 


4 


IS  875  (Fast  3) :  2015 


ratios. 

5.4  The  liability  of  a  building  to  high  wind  pressures 
depends  not  only  upon  the  geographical  location  and 
proximity  of  other  obstructions  to  air  flow  but  also  upon 
the  characteristics  of  the  structure  itself. 

5.5  The  effect  of  wind  on  the  structure  as  a  whole  is 
determined  by  the  combined  action  of  external  and 
internal  pressures  acting  upon  it.  In  all  cases,  the 
calculated  wind  loads  act  normal  to  the  surface  to  which 
they  apply. 

5.6  The  stability  calculations  as  a  whole  shall  be  done 
considering  the  combined  effect,  as  well  as  separate 
effects  of  imposed  loads  and  wind  loads  on  vertical 
surfaces,  roofs  and  other  part  of  the  building  above 
general  roof  level. 

5.7  Buildings  shall  also  be  designed  with  due  attention 
to  the  effects  of  wind  on  the  comfort  of  people  inside 
and  outside  the  buildings. 

6  WIND  SPEED 

6.1  Nature  of  Wind  in  Atmosphere 

In  general,  wind  speed  in  the  atmospheric  boundary 
layer  increases  with  height  from  zero  at  ground  level 
to  maximum  at  a  height  called  the  gradient  height. 
There  is  usually  a  slight  change  in  direction  (Ekman 
effect)  but  this  is  ignored  in  this  standard.  The 
variation  with  height  depends  primarily  on  the  terrain 
conditions.  However,  the  wind  speed  at  any  height 
never  remains  constant  and  it  has  been  found 
convenient  to  resolve  its  instantaneous  magnitude  into 
an  average  or  mean  value  and  a  fluctuating  component 
around  this  average  value.  The  average  value  depends 
on  the  average  time  employed  in  analyzing  the 
meteorological  data  and  this  averaging  time  varies 
from  few  seconds  to  several  minutes.  The  magnitude 
of  fluctuating  component  of  the  wind  speed  which  is 
called  gust,  depends  on  the  averaging  time.  In  general, 
smaller  the  averaging  interval,  more  is  the  magnitude 
of  the  gust  speed. 

6.2  BASIC  WIND  SPEED 

Figure  I  gives  basic  wind  speed  map  of  India,  as 
applicable  to  10  m  height  above  mean  ground  level 
for  different  zones  of  the  country.  Basic  wind  speed  is 
based  on  peak  gust  velocity  averaged  over  a  short  time 
interval  of  about  3  s  and  corresponds  to  mean  heights 
above  ground  level  in  an  open  terrain  (Category  2). 
Basic  wind  speeds  presented  in  Fig.  1  have  been 
worked  out  for  a  50  year  return  period.  Basic  wind 
speed  for  some  important  cities/towns  is  also  given  in 
Annex  A. 


6.3  Design  Wind  Speed  (Vz) 

The  basic  wind  speed  (Fb)  for  any  site  shall  be  obtained 
from  Fig.  1  and  shall  be  modified  to  include  the 
following  effects  to  get  design  wind  speed,  Vz  at  any 
height  z,  for  the  chosen  structure: 

a)  Risk  level, 

b)  Terrain  roughness  and  height  of  structure, 

c)  Local  topography,  and 

d)  Importance  factor  for  the  cyclonic  region. 

It  can  be  mathematically  expressed  as  follows: 
where 

Vz  -  design  wind  speed  at  height  z,  in  m/s; 
kx  =  probability  factor  (risk  coefficient)  ( see 

63.1) ; 

t,  =  terrain  roughness  and  height  factor  ( see 

63.2) ; 

k3  -  topography  factor  (see  633);  and 

k4  =  importance  factor  for  the  cyclonic  region 
(see  63.4), 

NOTE  —  Wind  speed  may  be  taken  as  constant  up  to  a  height 
of  10  m.  However,  pressures  for  buildings  less  than  10  m  high 
may  be  reduced  by  20  percent  for  evaluating  stability  and 
design  of  the  framing. 

63.1  Risk  Coefficient  (kx  Factor)  —  Figure  1  gives 
basic  wind  speeds  for  terrain  Category  2  as  applicable 
at  10  m  above  ground  level  based  on  50  years  mean 
return  period.  The  suggested  life  period  to  be  assumed 
in  design  and  the  corresponding  kx  factors  for  different 
class  of  structures  for  the  purpose  of  design  are  given 
in  Table  1.  In  the  design  of  buildings  and  structures,  a 
regional  basic  wind  speed  having  a  mean  return  period 
of  50  years  shall  be  used  except  as  specified  in  the 
note  of  Table  !. 

63.2  Terrain ,  Height  Factor  (k2  Factor) 

63.23  Terrain 

Selection  of  terrain  categories  shall  be  made  with  due 
regard  to  the  effect  of  obstructions  which  constitute 
the  ground  surface  roughness.  The  terrain  category 
used  in  the  design  of  a  structure  may  vary  depending 
on  the  direction  of  wind  under  consideration.  Wherever 
sufficient  meteorological  information  is  available  about 
the  nature  of  wind  direction,  the  orientation  of  any 
building  or  structure  may  be  suitably  planned. 

Terrain  in  which  a  specific  structure  stands  shall  be 
assessed  as  being  one  of  the  following  terrain 
categories: 

a)  Category  1  —  Exposed  open  terrain  with  few 
or  no  obstructions  and  in  which  the  average 


5 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2815 


This  is  the  criterion  for  measurement  of 
regional  basic  wind  speeds  and  represents 
airfields,  open  park  lands  and  undeveloped 
sparsely  built-up  outskirts  of  towns  and 
suburbs.  Open  land  adjacent  to  sea  coast  may 
also  be  classified  as  Category  2  due  to 
roughness  of  large  sea  waves  at  high  winds, 

c)  Category  3  —  Terrain  with  numerous  closely 
spaced  obstructions  having  the  size  of 


buildings/structures  up  to  10  min  height  with 
or  without  a  few  isolated  tall  structures.  The 
equivalent  aerodynamic  roughness  height, 
(z0s)  for  this  terrain  is  0.2  m. 

This  category  represents  well  wooded  areas, 
and  shrubs,  towns  and  industrial  areas  full  or 
partially  developed. 

It  is  likely  that  the,  next  higher  category  than 
this  will  not  exist  in  most  design  situations 


Table  1  Risk  Coefficients  for  Different  Classes  of  Structures  In  Different  Wind  Speed  Zones 

(Clause  6.3. S  ) 


SI 

No. 

Class  of  Structure 

Mean  Probable 
Life  of 

Structure  in  Years 

kx  Factor  for  Basic  Wind  Speed 
m/s 

_ _ _ 

33 

39 

44  47 

- - ^ 

50  55 

(I) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6)  (7) 

(8)  (9) 

i) 

All  general  buildings  and  structures 

50 

1.0 

i.o 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

«) 

Temporary  sheds,  structures  such  as  those  used  during 
construction  operations  (for  example,  formwork  and  false 
work),  structures  during  construction  stages  and  boundary 
walls 

5 

0.82 

0.76 

0.73 

0.71 

0.70 

0.67 

hi) 

Buildings  and  structures  presenting  a  low  degree  of  hazard 
to  life  and  property  in  the  event  of  failure,  such  as  isolated 
towers  in  wooded  areas,  farm  buildings  other  than 
residential  buildings 

25 

0.94 

0.92 

0.91 

0.90 

0.90 

0.89 

iv) 

Important  buildings  and  structures  such  as  hospitals 
communication  buildings/towers,  power  plant  structures 

100 

1.05 

1.06 

1.07 

1.07 

1.08 

1.08 

NOTE  —  The  factor  kx  is  based  on  statistical  concepts  which  take  into  account  the  degree  of  reliability  required  and  period  of  time  in 
years  during  which  these  will  be  exposed  to  wind,  that  is,  life  of  the  structure.  Whatever  wind  speed  is  adopted  for  design  purposes, 
there  is  always  a  probability  (however  small)  that  it  may  exceed  in  a  storm  of  exceptional  violence;  more  the  period  of  years  over 
which  there  is  exposure  to  the  wind,  more  is  the  probabil ity.  Larger  return  periods  ranging  from  100  to  1  000  years  (implying  lower 
risk  level)  in  association  with  larger  periods  of  exposure  may  have  to  be  selected  for  exceptionally  important  structures,  such  as, 
nuclear  power  reactors  and  satellite  communication  towers.  Equation  given  below  may  be  used  in  such  cases  to  estimate  k,  factors  for 
different  periods  of  exposure  and  chosen  probability  of  exceedance  (risk  level).  The  probability  level  of  0.63  is  normally  considered 
sufficient  for  design  of  buildings  and  structures  against  wind  effects  and  the  values  of  k,  corresponding  to  this  risk  level  are  given 
above. 


-^SO.O.63 


A-B 


A+4B 


where 

N  *  mean  probable  design  life  of  structure  in  years; 

PK  risk  level  in  N  consecutive  years  (probability  that  the  design  wind  speed  is  exceeded  at  least  once  in  N  successive  years), 
nominal  value  =  0.63; 

extreme  wind  speed  for  given  values  of  N  and  PN;  and 
X50063  *  extreme  wind  speed  for  N  -  50  years  and  P#  ~  0.63 
A  and  B  have  the  following  values  for  different  basic  wind  speed  zones: 


Zone 

A* 

B* 

m/s 

m/s 

m/s 

33 

23.1  (83.2) 

2.6  (9.2) 

39 

23.3  (84.0) 

3.9(14.0) 

44 

24.4  (88.0) 

5  0  (IS  O) 

47 

24.4  (88.0) 

5.7  (20.5) 

50 

24.7(88.8) 

6.3  (22.8) 

55 

25.2  (90.8) 

7.6  (27.3) 

*  Values  of  A  and  B,  in  kmph,  are  given  in  bracket. 


7 


IS  875  (Part  3);  2015 


and  that  selection  of  a  more  severe  category 
will  be  deliberate. 

d)  Category  4  —  Terrain  with  numerous  large 
high  closely  spaced  obstructions.  The 
equivalent  aerodynamic  roughness  height, 
(z04)  for  this  terrain  is  2.0  m. 

This  category'  represents  large  city  centers,  generally 
with  obstructions  above  25  m  and  well  developed 
industrial  complexes. 

6.3 .2.2  Variation  of  wind  speed  with  height  in  different 
terrains  (k2  factor) 

Table  2  gives  multiplying  factors  (kj)  by  which  the  basic 
wind  speed  given  in  Fig.  1  shall  be  multiplied  to  obtain 
the  wind  speed  at  different  heights,  in  each  terrain 
category. 

Table  2  Factors  to  Obtain  Design  Wind  Speed 
Variation  with  Height  in  Different  Terrains 

{Clause  6.3. 2.2) 


Si  Height  Terrain  and  Height  Multiplier  (&2) 
No.  2 


(1) 

m 

(2) 

•r* 

Terrain 
Category  I 

(3) 

_ 

Terrain 
Category  2 

(4) 

Terrain 
Category  3 

(5) 

1 1  >> 

Terrain 
Category  4 

(6) 

») 

10 

1.05 

1. 00 

0.91 

0.80 

ii) 

15 

1.09 

1.05 

0.97 

0.80 

hi) 

20 

1.12 

1.07 

1.01 

0.80 

iv) 

30 

1.15 

1.12 

1.06 

0.97 

V) 

50 

1.20 

1.17 

1.12 

1.10 

vi) 

100 

1.26 

1.24 

1.20 

1.20 

vii) 

150 

1.30 

1.28 

1.24 

1.24 

viiO 

200 

1.32 

1.30 

1.27 

1.27 

ix) 

250 

1.34 

1.32 

1.29 

1.28 

x) 

300 

1.35 

1.34 

1.31 

1.30 

xi) 

350 

1.35 

1.35 

1.32 

1.31 

xii) 

400 

1.35 

1.35 

1.34 

1.32 

xiii) 

450 

1.35 

1.35 

1.35 

1.33 

X!V) 

500 

1.35 

1.35 

1.35 

1.34 

NOTE  —  For  intermediate  values  of  height  z  in  a  given  terrain 
category,  use  linear  interpolation. 


63.2.3  Terrain  categories  in  relation  to  the  direction 
of  wind 

The  terrain  category  used  in  the  design  of  a  structure 
may  vary  depending  on  the  direction  of  wind  under 
consideration.  Where  sufficient  meteorological 
information  is  available,  the  basic  wind  speed  may  be 
varied  for  specific  wind  direction. 

63.2.4  Changes  in  terrain  categories 

The  velocity  profile  for  a  given  terrain  category  does 
not  develop  to  full  height  immediately  with  the 
commencement  of  that  terrain  category  but  develop 


gradually  to  height  (hx)  which  increases  with  the  fetch 
or  upwind  distance  (jc). 

a)  Fetch  and  developed  height  relationship  — 
The  relation  between  the  developed  height 
(hx)  and  the  fetch  (jc)  for  wind-flow  over  each 
of  the  four  terrain  categories  may  be  taken  as 
given  in  Table  3. 

b)  For  structures  of  heights  more  than  the 
developed  height  (hx)  in  Table  3,  the  velocity 
profile  may  be  determined  in  accordance  with 
the  following: 

1)  The  less  or  least  rough  terrain,  or 

2)  The  method  described  in  Annex  B. 

Table  3  Fetch  and  Developed  Height  Relationship 
( Clause  63.2.4 ) 


SI 

Fetch 

Developed  Height,  /j. 

No. 

(x) 

km 

m 

Terrain 

Terrain 

Terrain 

Terrain 

Category  1 

Category  2  Category  3  Category' 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

i) 

0.2 

12 

20 

35 

60 

ii) 

0.5 

20 

30 

35 

95 

iii) 

1 

25 

.  45 

80 

130 

iv) 

2 

35 

65 

no 

190 

v) 

5 

60 

100 

170 

300 

vi) 

10 

80 

140 

250 

450 

vii) 

20 

120 

200 

350 

500 

viii) 

50 

180 

300 

400 

500 

633  Topography  (1%  Factor) 

The  basic  wind  speed  Vb  given  in  Fig.  1  takes  into 
account  the  general  level  of  site  above  sea  level.  This 
does  not  allow  for  local  topographic  features  such  as 
hills,  valleys,  cliffs,  escarpments,  or  ridges  which  can 
significantly  affect  wind  speed  in  their  vicinity.  The 
effect  of  topography  is  to  accelerate  wind  near  the 
summits  of  hills  or  crests  of  cliffs,  escarpments  or 
ridges  and  decelerate  the  wind  in  valleys  or  near  the 
foot  of  cliffs,  steep  escarpments,  or  ridges. 

633.1  The  effect  of  topography  shall  be  significant  at 
a  site  when  the  upwind  slope  (8)  is  more  than  about 
3°,  and  below  that,  the  value  of  kj  may  be  taken  to  be 
equal  to  1 .0.  The  value  of  k3  is  confined  in  the  range  of 
1.0  to  1.36  for  slopes  more  than  3°.  A  method  of 
evaluating  the  value  of  ^  for  values  more  than  1.0  is 
given  in  Annex  C.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  value  of  1% 
varies  with  height  above  ground  level,  at  a  maximum 
near  the  ground,  and  reducing  to  1.0  at  higher  levels. 

63.4  Importance  Factor  for  Cyclonic  Region  (kj 

The  east  coast  of  India  is  relatively  more  vulnerable 
for  occurrences  of  severe  cyclones.  On  the  west  coast, 
Gujarat  is  vulnerable  for  severe  cyclones.  Studies  of 


8 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


wind  speed  and  damage  to  buildings  and  structures 
point  to  the  fact  that  the  speeds  given  in  the  basic  wind 
speed  map  are  often  exceeded  during  the  cyclones.  The 
effect  of  cyclonic  storms  is  largely  felt  in  a  belt  of 
approximately  60  km  width  at  the  coast.  In  order  to 
ensure  better  safety  of  structures  in  this  region  (60  km 
wide  on  the  east  coast  as  well  as  on  the  Gujarat  Coast), 
the  following  values  of  k4  (as  recommended  in  IS 
15498)  are  stipulated  as  applicable  according  to  the 
importance  of  the  structure: 

Structures  of  post-cyclone  importance  for 
emergency  services  (such  as  cyclone  shelters, 
hospitals,  schools,  communication  towers,  etc) 
Industrial  structures 
All  other  structures 

6.4  Hourly  Mean  Wind  Speed 

The  hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height  z,  for  different 
terrains  can  be  obtained  as 

V =  &2,i 

where 


K 

1.30 


1.15 

1.00 


ku  =  hourly  mean  wind  speed  factor  for  terrain 
category  1 


=  0.1423 


0.0706 


The  design  hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height  z  can  be 
obtained  as: 


VzA  = 

=  Vbkjki&kt 


6.5  Turbulence  Intensity 

The  turbulence  intensity  variations  with  height  for 
different  terrains  can  be  obtained  using  the  relations 
given  below: 


a)  Terrain  category  1 

4,  =0.3507- 0.0535  log10 

b)  Terrain  category  2 

c)  Terrain  category  3 

d)  Terrain  category  4 

4  =0.466  -  0. 135  8  log,, 


(  z' 


6.6  OffShore  Wind  Velocity 

Cyclonic  storms  form  far  away  from  the  sea  coast  and 
gradually  reduce  in  speed  as  they  approach  the  sea 
coast  Cyclonic  storms  generally  extend  up  to  about 
60  km  inland  after  striking  the  coast  Their  effect  on 
land  is  already  reflected  in  basic  wind  speeds  specified 
in  Fig.  1.  The  influence  of  wind  speed  off  the  coast  up 
to  a  distance  of  about  200  km  may  be  taken  as  1.15 
times  the  value  on  the  nearest  coast  in  the  absence  of 
any  definite  wind  data.  The  factor  1.15  shall  be  used 
in  addition  to  k4, 

7  WIND  PRESSURES  AND  FORCES  ON 
BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES 

7.1  General 

The  wind  load  on  a  building  shall  be  calculated  for: 

a)  Building  as  a  whole, 

b)  Individual  structural  elements  as  roofs  and 
walls,  and 

c)  Individual  cladding  units  including  glazing 
and  their  fixings. 

7.2  Design  Wind  Pressure 

The  wind  pressure  at  any  height  above  mean  ground 
level  shall  be  obtained  by  the  following  relationship 
between  wind  pressure  and  wind  speed: 

Pz  =  0.6  V* 
where 

p2  =  wind  pressure  at  height  z,  in  N/m2;  and 
Vz  -  design  wind  speed  at  height  z,  in  m/s. 

The  design  wind  pressure  pd  can  be  obtained  as. 

Pi  “  KiKKcPz 
where 

Kd  =  wind  directionality  factor, 

K&  ~  area  averaging  factor,  and 
Ke  -  combination  factor  (see  7.33.13). 

The  value  of  pd,  however  shall  not  be  taken  as  less 
than  0.70  pr 

NOTES 

1  The  coefficient  0.6  (in  SI  units)  in  hie  above  formula  depends 
on  a  number  of  factors  and  mainly  on  the  atmospheric  pressure 
and  air  temperature.  The  value  chosen  corresponds  to  the 
average  Indian  atmospheric  conditions. 

2  Kt  should  be  taken  as  1.0  when  considering  local  pressure 
coefficients. 

7.2.1  Wind  Directionality  Factor,  Kd 

Considering  the  randomness  in  the  directionality  of 
wind  and  recognizing  the  fact  that  pressure  or  force 
coefficients  are  determined  for  specific  wind  directions, 
it  is  specified  that  for  buildings,  solid  signs,  open  signs. 


9 


IS  STS  (Fart  3)  :  2015 


lattice  frameworks,  and  trussed  towers  (triangular, 
square,  rectangular)  a  factor  of  0.90  may  be  used  on 
the  design  wind  pressure.  For  circular  or  near-circular 
forms  this  factor  may  be  taken  as  1.0. 

For  the  cyclone  affected  regions  also  the  factor  Kd  shall 
be  taken  as  1.0. 

7,2.2  Area  Averaging  Factor,  Ka 

Pressure  coefficients  given  in  7,3  are  a  result  of 
averaging  the  measured  pressure  values  over  a  given 
area.  As  the  area  becomes  larger,  the  correlation  of 
measured  values  decrease  and  vice-versa.  The  decrease 
in  pressures  due  to  larger  areas  may  be  taken  into 
account  as  given  in  Table  4. 

Table  4  Area  Averaging  Factor  (KJ 
(Clause  7.2,2) 


SI  No. 

Tributary  Area  (A) 

Area  Averaging  Factor 

m2 

(mr 

0) 

(2) 

(3) 

0 

<10 

1.0 

it) 

25 

0.9 

iii) 

£100 

0.8 

*  linear  interpolation  for  intermediate  values  of  a  is  permitted. 


7.2.2. 1  Tributary  area 

a)  Overall  structure  —  For  evaluating  loads  on 
frames  the  tributary  area  shall  be  taken  as  the 
centre  to  centre  distances  between  frames 
multiplied  by  the  individual  panel  dimension 
in  the  other  direction  together  with  overall 
pressure  coefficients. 

b)  Individual  elements  —  For  beam  type 
elements,  purlins,  etc,  the  tributary  area  shall 
be  taken  as  effective  span  multiplied  by 
spacing.  The  effective  span  is  the  actual  span 
for  mid  span  and  cantilever  load  effects;  and 
half  the  sum  of  adjacent  spans  for  support 
moments  and  reactions. 

For  plate  type  elements,  the  area  of  individual  plates 
between  supports  is  taken  as  the  tributary  area. 

For  glass  cladding,  individual  pane  area  of  glass  is  the 
tributary  area. 

73  Press ti re  Coefficients 

The  pressure  coefficients  are  always  given  for  a 
particular  surface  or  part  of  the  surface  of  a  building. 
The  wind  load  acting  normal  to  a  surface  is  obtained 
by  multiplying  the  area  of  that  surface  or  its  appropriate 
portion  by  the  pressure  coefficient  (Cp)  and  the  design 
wind  pressure  at  the  height  of  the  surface  from  the 
ground.  The  average  values  of  these  pressure 
coefficients  for  some  building  shapes  are  given  in  73.2 
and  733. 


Average  values  of  pressure  coefficients  are  given  for 
critical  wind  directions  in  one  or  more  quadrants.  In 
order  to  determine  the  maximum  wind  load  on  the 
building,  the  total  load  should  be  calculated  for  each 
of  the  critical  directions  shown  from  all  quadrants. 
Where  considerable  variation  of  pressure  occurs  over 
a  surface,  it  has  been  sub-divided  and  mean  pressure 
coefficients  given  for  each  of  its  several  parts. 

In  addition,  areas  of  high  local  suction  (negative 
pressure  concentration)  frequently  occurring  near  the 
edges  of  walls  and  roofs  are  separately  shown. 
Coefficients  for  the  local  effects  should  only  be  used 
for  calculation  of  forces  on  these  local  areas  affecting 
roof  sheeting,  glass  panels,  and  individual  cladding 
units  including  their  fixtures.  They  should  not  be  used 
for  calculating  force  on  entire  structural  elements  such 
as  roof,  wails  or  structure  as  a  whole. 

NOTES 

t  The  pressure  coefficients  given  in  different  tables  have  been 
obtained  mainly  from  measurements  on  models  in  wind  tunnels, 
and  the  great  majority  of  data  available  has  been  obtained  in 
conditions  of  relatively  smooth  flow.  Where  sufficient  field 
data  exists  as  in  the  case  of  rectangular  buildings,  values  have 
been  obtained  to  allow  for  turbulent  flow. 

2  In  recent  years,  wall  glazing  and  cladding  design  has  been  a 
source  of  major  concern.  Although  of  less  consequence  than 
the  collapse  of  main  structures,  damage  to  glass  can  be 
hazardous  and  cause  considerable  financial  losses. 

3  For  pressure  coefficients  for  structures  not  covered  here, 
reference  may  be  made  to  specialist  literature  on  the  subject 
or  advice  may  be  sought  from  specialists  in  the  subject. 

73.1  Wind  Load  on  Individual  Members 

When  calculating  the  wind  load  on  individual  structural 
elements  such  as  roofs  and  walls,  and  individual 
cladding  units  and  their  fittings,  it  is  essential  to  take 
account  of  the  pressure  difference  between  opposite 
faces  of  such  elements  or  units.  For  clad  structures,  it 
is,  therefore,  necessary  to  know  the  internal  pressure 
as  well  as  the  external  pressure.  Then  the  wind  load,  F, 
acting  in  a  direction  normal  to  the  individual  structural 
element  or  cladding  unit  is: 

F  =  (C^CJApd 

where 

Cpe  “  external  pressure  coefficient, 

Cpi  =  internal  pressure  coefficient, 

A  =  surface  area  of  structural  element  or 
cladding  unit,  and 

pd  =  design  wind  pressure. 

NOTES 

1  If  the  surface  design  pressure  varies  with  height,  the  surface 
areas  of  the  structural  element  may  be  sub-divided  so  that  the 
specified  pressures  are  taken  over  appropriate  areas. 

2  Positive  wind  load  indicates  the  force  acting  towards  the 
structural  element  and  negative  away  from  it. 


10 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


7.3.2  Internal  Pressure  Coefficients 

Internal  air  pressure  in  a  building  depends  upon  the 
degree  of  permeability  of  cladding  to  the  flow  of  air. 
The  internal  air  pressure  may  be  positive  or  negative 
depending  on  the  direction  of  flow  of  air  in  relation  to 
openings  in  the  buildings. 

7.3.2. 1  In  the  case  of  buildings  where  the  claddings 
permit  the  flow  of  air  with  openings  not  more  than 
about  5  percent  of  the  wall  area  but  where  there  are  no 
large  openings,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  possibility 
of  the  interna!  pressure  being  positive  or  negative.  Two 
design  conditions  shall  be  examined,  one  with  an 
internal  pressure  coefficient  of  +0.2  and  another  with 
an  internal  pressure  coefficient  of -0.2. 

The  internal  pressure  coefficient  is  algebraically  added 
to  the  external  pressure  coefficient  and  the  analysis 
which  indicates  greater  distress  of  the  member  shall 
be  adopted.  In  most  situations  a  simple  inspection  of 
the  sign  of  external  pressure  will  at  once  indicate  the 
proper  sign  of  the  internal  pressure  coefficient  to  be 
taken  for  design. 

NOTE  —  The  term  normal  permeability  relates  to  the  flow  of 
air  commonly  afforded  by  claddings  not  only  through  open 
windows  and  doors,  but  also  through  the  slits  round  the  closed 
windows  and  doors  and  through  chimneys,  ventilators  and 
through  the  joints  between  roof  coverings,  the  total  open  area 
being  less  than  5  percent  of  area  of  the  wails  having  the 
openings. 

73.2.2  Buildings  with  medium  and  large  openings 

Buildings  with  medium  and  large  openings  may  also 
exhibit  either  positive  or  negative  internal  pressure 
depending  upon  the  direction  of  wind.  Buildings  with 
medium  openings  between  about  5  and  20  percent  of 
wall  area  shall  be  examined  for  an  internal  pressure 
coefficient  of  +0.5  and  later  with  an  internal  pressure 
coefficient  of  ~0.5,  and  the  analysis  which  produces 
greater  distress  of  the  member  shall  be  adopted. 
Buildings  with  large  openings,  that  is,  openings  larger 
than  20  percent  of  the  wall  area  shall  be  examined  once 
with  an  internal  pressure  coefficient  of +0.7  and  again 
with  an  interna!  pressure  coefficient  of  -0.7,  and  the 
analysis  which  produces  greater  distress  of  the  member 
shall  be  adopted. 

Buildings  with  one  open  side  or  opening  exceeding  20 
percent  of  wall  area  may  be  assumed  to  be  subjected 
to  internal  positive  pressure  or  suction  similar  to  those 
of  buildings  with  large  openings.  A  few  examples  of 
buildings  with  one  side  openings  are  shown  in  Fig.  2 
indicating  values  of  internal  pressure  coefficients  with 
respect  to  the  direction  of  wind. 

733  External  Pressure  Coefficients 

733.1  Walls 

The  average  external  pressure  coefficient  for  the  walls 


of  clad  buildings  of  rectangular  plan  shall  be  as  given 
in  Table  5.  In  addition,  local  pressure  concentration 
coefficients  are  also  given. 

7.33.2  Pitched,  hipped  and  mono  slope  roofs  of  clad 
buildings 

The  average  external  pressure  coefficients  and  pressure 
concentration  coefficients  for  pitched  roofs  of 
rectangular  dad  building  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  6. 
Where  no  pressure  concentration  coefficients  are  given, 
the  average  coefficients  shall  apply.  The  pressure 
coefficients  on  the  under-side  of  any  overhanging  roof 
shall  be  taken  in  accordance  with  733.5. 

For  mono  slope  roofs  of  rectangular  clad  buildings, 
the  average  pressure  coefficient  and  pressure 
concentration  coefficient  for  mono  slope  (lean-to)  roofs 
of  rectangular  clad  buildings  shall  be  as  given  in 
Table  7. 

NOTES 

1  The  pressure  concentration  shall  be  assumed  to  act  outward 
(suction  pressure)  a it  the  ridges,  eaves,  cornices  and  90°  comers 
of  roofs. 

2  The  pressure  concentration  shall  not  be  included  with  the 
net  externa!  pressure  when  computing  overall  load. 

3  For  hipped  roofs,  pressure  coefficients  (including  local 
values)  may  be  taken  on  all  the  four  slopes,  as  appropriate 
from  Table  6,  and  be  reduced  by  20  percent  for  the  hip  slope. 

7,333  Canopy  roofs  with  (1/4  <  hi w  <  1  and  1  < 
Lfw  <  3) 

The  pressure  coefficients  are  given  in  Tables  8  and  9 
separately  for  mono-pitch  and  double  pitch  canopy  roofs 
such  as  open-air  parking  garages,  shelter  areas,  outdoor 
areas,  railway  platforms,  stadia  and  theatres.  The 
coefficients  take  into  account  of  the  combined  effect  of 
the  wind  exerted  on  and  under  the  roof  for  ail  wind 
directions;  the  resultant  is  to  be  taken  normal  to  the 
canopy.  Where  the  local  coefficients  overlap,  the  greater 
of  the  two  given  values  should  be  taken.  However,  the 
effect  of  partial  closures  of  one  side  and  or  both  sides, 
such  as  those  due  to  trains,  buses  and  stored  materials 
shall  be  foreseen  and  taken  into  account. 

The  solidity  ratio  f  is  equal  to  the  area  of  obstructions 
under  the  canopy  divided  by  the  gross  area  under  the 
canopy,  both  areas  normal  to  the  wind  direction,  f-0 
represents  a  canopy  with  no  obstructions  underneath, 
f  =  1  represents  the  canopy  fully  blocked  with  contents 
to  the  downwind  eaves.  Values  of  Cp  for  intermediate 
solidities  may  be  linearly  interpolated  between  these 
two  extremes,  and  apply  upwind  of  the  position  of 
maximum  blockage  only.  For  downwind  of  the  position 
of  maximum  blockage,  the  coefficients  for  f-  0  may 
be  used. 

In  addition  to  the  forces  due  to  the  pressures  normal  to 
the  canopy,  there  will  be  horizontal  loads  on  the  canopy 


II 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


WIND 


(c)  FOR  ®  *  1 .  USE  AVERAGE  VALUES 
(ARROWS  INDICATE  DIRECTION  OF  WIND  FLOW) 
Fig.  2  Buildings  With  One  Side  Openings 


12 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  5  External  Pressure  Coefficients  (C,J  for  Walls  of  Rectangular  Clad  Buildings 

(Clause  7.3 .3.1) 


BUHSSIN® 

HEIGHT 

RATIO 


¥*7 


\bhj\ 


1 2  w 


8U  SIDING 

MAN 

RATIO 


1-4*7 


±«u4 

2  w 


Jl 


|4<4 


*  w  s  2 


f4<4 


1.1 
w  2 


>1.9 


NOTE 

&  the  height  to  eaves  or  parapet,  /  is  the  greater  horizontal  dimensions  of  a  building  and  w  is  the  lesser  horizontal  dimensions  of  a 
building. 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  6  External  Pressure  Coefficients  (Cpe)  for  Pitched  Roofs  of  Rectangular  Clad  Buildings 

(Clause  7.3 .3 .2) 


gw  Wf 

mm  .  ahgue 

mm  « 

r 

&  GH 

VWAmit 

w® 

ee  m 

mzm 

M'Ti 

W'TI 

a  i 

waT  * 

_ , _ _ 

Dagpm 

0 

% 

» 

_ l  to 

0.3  *0.4 

-0;f  *04 

-tj  -©4 

*04  •  §4 

0  -04 

4  0.3  *Oi 

4©.7  -08 

-at  -04 

-a®  -04 

*01  -00 

-or  -o® 

-or  -ae 

*07  -M 

-or  *00 

-00 

-14 

-14 

*1.0 

*8J 

-2.8 

•1*2 

*14 

n 

1 

■ 

-0.®  -O® 

-at  -o.® 

-It  *0.# 

-a?  -03 

-Oi  -8$  ; 

*03  ; 

*8.§  -0.6 

-1.0  -0© 

-0®  *0®  1 

•08  -08  ; 

-08  -OS  : 

•  08  -  01  ! 

•OJ  •&§ 

-M  *0§ 

-00 

-00 

-1.0 

-IS 

-10 

-2.8 

-2.0 

-20 

-IS 

-2.0 
■  n 

-14 

.  -li . 

-10 

-1J 

-IO 

-10 

4 

7  «T  * 

0 

8 

h 

I  40 

1  m 
LA  m 

-07  -SJ 

•  of  ■ so 

-O?  -09 

-08  -0.# 

-io  -as 

-03  -0.3 

*02  -o.6 

♦  0*  -08 

-09  -or 

•  0®  • 0j 

-a®  -a.® 

-Of  -08 

•0®  -0.7 

•a®  *o.r 

-0.8  -or 

-0.8  -07 

-2,0 
•  2.0 
-2.0 
-18 
-IS 

-to 

I  ■ 

H 

H 

y=ftor0.15nr 
VWtfctewis  ft®  !«$«•. 


NOTE 

1  his  the  height  to  eaves  or  parapet  and  w  is  the  lesser  horizontal  dimension  of  a  building. 

2  Where  no  local  coefficients  are  given,  the  overall  coefficient  apply. 

3  For  hipped  roofs  the  local  coefficient  for  the  hip  ridge  may  be  conservatively  taken  as  the  the  appropriate  ridge  value. 

4  w  and  /  are  dimensions  between  the  walls  excluding  overhangs. 


14 


IS  875  (Part  3)  s  2015 


‘  Applied  to  length  w/2  from  wind- ward  end. 


**  Applies  to  remainder 


1  *  is  the  height  of  eaves  at  lower  side,  is  the  greater  horizontal  dimensions  of  a  building  and  w  is  the  lesser  horizontal  dimension  of 
a  building. 

2  /  and  w  are  overall  length  and  width  including  overhangs. 


IS  875  (Fart  3)  2  2015 


due  to  the  wind  pressure  on  any  fascia  and  to  friction 
over  the  surface  of  the  canopy.  For  any  wind  direction, 
only  the  greater  of  these  two  forces  need  to  be  taken 
into  account.  Fascia  loads  should  be  calculated  on  the 
area  of  the  surface  facing  the  wind,  using  a  force 
coefficient  of  1 .3.  Frictional  drag  should  be  calculated 
using  the  coefficients  given  in  7*4,1. 

NOTH  —  Tables  10  to  15  may  be  used  to  get  internal  and 
external  pressure  coefficients  for  pitches  and  troughed  free  roofs 
for  some  specific  cases  for  which  aspect  ratios  and  roof  slopes 
have  been  specified.  However,  while  using  Tables  10  to  15 
any  significant  departure  from  it  should  be  investigated 
carefully.  No  increase  shall  be  made  for  local  effects  except  as 
indicated. 

73,3,4  Pitched  and  saw-tooth  roofs  multi-span 
buildings 

For  pitched  and  saw-tooth  roofs  of  multi-span 
buildings,  the  external  average  pressure  coefficients 
shall  be  as  given  in  Tables  16  and  17  respectively 
provided  that  all  the  spans  shall  be  equal  and  the  height 
to  the  eaves  shall  not  exceed  the  span. 

733.5  Pressure  coefficients  on  overhangs  from  roofs 

The  pressure  coefficients  on  the  top  over-hanging 
portion  of  the  roofs  shall  be  taken  to  be  the  same  as 
that  of  the  nearest  top  portion  of  the  non-overhanging 
portion  of  the  roofs.  The  pressure  coefficients  for  the 
underside  surface  of  the  over-hanging  portions  shall 
be  taken  as  follows  and  shall  be  taken  as  positive  if  the 
overhanging  portion  is  on  the  windward  side: 

a)  1 .25,  if  the  overhanging  slopes,  downwards; 

b)  1 .00,  if  the  overhanging  is  horizontal;  and 

c)  0.75,  if  the  overhanging  slopes  upwards. 

For  overhanging  portions  on  sides  other  than  windward 
side,  the  average  pressure  coefficients  on  adjoining 
walls  may  be  used. 

733.6  Curved  roofs 

For  curved  roofs  the  external  pressure  coefficients  shall 
be  as  given  in  Table  18.  Allowance  for  local  effects 
shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  Table  6.  Two  values 
of  C2  have  been  given  for  elevated  curved  roofs.  Both 
the  load  cases  have  to  be  analyzed,  and  critical  load 
effects  are  to  be  considered  in  design. 

733.7  Cylindrical  structures 

For  the  purpose  of  calculating  the  wind  pressure 
distribution  around  a  cylindrical  structure  of  circular 
cross-section,  the  value  of  external  pressure  coefficients 
given  in  Table  19  may  be  used,  provided  that  the 
Reynolds  number  is  more  than  10  000.  They  may  be 
used  for  wind  blowing  normal  to  the  axis  of  cylinders 
having  axis  normal  to  the  ground  plane  (that  is, 
chimneys  and  silos)  and  cylinders  having  their  axis 
parallel  to  the  ground  plane  (that  is,  horizontal  tanks). 


provided  that  the  clearance  between  the  tank  and  the 
ground  is  not  less  than  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder,  h 
is  height  of  a  vertical  cylinder  or  length  ofa  horizontal 
cylinder.  Where  there  is  a  free  flow  of  air  around  both 
ends,  h  is  to  be  taken  as  half  the  length  when  calculating 
hD  ratio. 

In  the  calculation  of  resultant  load  on  the  periphery  of 
the  cylinder,  the  value  of  Cpi  shall  be  taken  into  account. 
For  open  ended  cylinders,  Cpj  shall  be  taken  as  follows: 

a)  -  0.8,  where  h!D  is  more  than  or  equal  to  0.3; 
and 

b)  -  0.5,  where  hID  is  less  than  0.3. 

733.8  Roofs  and  bottoms  of  cylindrical  elevated 
structures 

The  external  pressure  coefficients  for  roofs  and  bottoms 
of  cylindrical  elevated  structures  shall  be  as  given  in 
Table  20. 

Alternately,  the  pressure  distribution  given  in  Fig.  3 
can  be  used  together  with  the  force  coefficients  given 
in  Table  25  for  the  cylindrical  portion. 

733.9  Combined  roofs 

The  average  external  pressure  coefficients  for 
combined  roofs  are  shown  in  Table  21. 

733.10  Roofs  with  skylight 

The  average  external  pressure  coefficients  for  roofs 
with  skylight  are  shown  in  Table  22. 

733.11  Grandstands 

The  pressure  coefficients  on  the  roof  (top  and  bottom) 
and  rear  wall  of  a  typical  grandstand  roof  which  is  open 
on  three  sides  are  given  in  Table  23.  The  pressure 
coefficients  are  valid  for  a  particular  ratio  of  dimensions 
as  specified  in  Table  21  but  may  be  used  for  deviations 
up  to  20  percent.  In  general,  the  maximum  wind  load 
occurs  when  the  wind  is  blowing  into  the  open  front 
of  the  stand,  causing  positive  pressure  under  the  roof 
and  negative  pressure  on  the  roof. 

733.12  Spheres 

The  external  pressure  coefficients  for  spheres  shall  be 
as  given  in  Table  24. 

733.13  Frames 

When  taking  wind  loads  on  frames  of  dad  buildings  it 
is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  pressures  or  suctions 
inside  and  outside  the  structure  shall  not  be  fully 
correlated.  Therefore  when  taking  the  combined  effect 
of  wind  loads  on  the  frame,  a  reduction  factor  of 
Kc  =  0.90  may  be  used  over  the  building  envelope  when 
roof  is  subjected  to  pressure  and  internal  pressure  is 
suction,  or  vice-versa. 


16 


Table  8  Pressure  Coefficients  for  Monoslope  Free  Roofs 
(Clause  7.3.33) 


IS  875  (Fart  3)  :  2015 


RQOFAMGLE 


ROOF 
AUG  IS 
(Degree) 
a 


SOLIDITY  RATIO 
0 


MAXIMUM  (LARGEST  +  m)  AND  MMMUM  (LARGEST  - 
PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS 


OVERALL 

COEFFICIENTS 


LOCAL  COEFFICIENTS 


0 

5 

10 

n 

20 

25 

30 


Alt  values  of  0 


*  0.2 
-1*0.4 
■4*0.5 
-4-0.7 
4*0.5 
•MO 
412 


CZ3 
4  as 

4  0.8 
4  12 
4  1.4 
4  17 
4  2.0 
4  22 


4  16 
4  2.1 
4  2.4 
4  2.7 
4  2.9 
4  3.1 
4  3,2 


411 
4  13 
4  18 

4  18 

4  2.1 
4  2.3 
4  2.4 


0=0 

0=1 


*0.5 

‘1.0 


0.6 

1.2 


-1.3 

>1.8 


14 

15 


0-0 

0=1 


‘0.7 

-11 


11 

1.6 


‘17 
■  2.2 


18 

2.3 


10 


0=0 
0  si 


» 0.9 
*  1.3 


1.5 

2.1 


-  2,0 
>2.8 


2.1 

2,7 


15 


0^0 
0  =  1 


-11 

“14 


18 

2.3 


*2.4 

■2.9 


2.5 

3.0 


20 


0=0 

0=1 


“13 

-15 


2.2 

2.0 


“2.8 

*3.1 


2.9 

$2 


0=0 
0  =  1 


-1.6 

1.7 


2.6 

2.8 


*3.2 

■3.5 


3.2 

3.5 


30 


0=0 

0=1 


■1.8 

•18 


3.0 

3.0 


*3.8 

■3.8 


3.6 

3.6 


NOTES 

1  For  monopitch  canopies  the  centre  of  pressure  should  be  taken  to  act  at  0.3  w  from  the  windward  edge. 

2  W  and  L  are  overall  width  and  length  including  overhangs. 


IS  STS  (Part  3)  1 201 S 


Table  9  Pressure  Coefficients  for  Free  Standing  Double  Sloped  Roofs 

(Clause  7333) 


1  Each  slope  of  a  duopitch  canopy  should  be  able  to  withstand  forces  using  both  the  maximum  and  the  minimum  coefficients,  and  the 
whole  canopy  should  be  able  to  support  forces  using  one  slope  at  the  maximum  coefficient  with  the  other  slope  at  the  minimum 
coefficient.  For  duoptich  canopies  the  centre  of  pressure  should  be  taken  to  act  at  the  centre  of  each  slope. 

2  W  and  L  are  overall  width  and  length  including  overhangs 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  10  Pressure  Coefficients  (Top  and  Bottom)  for  Pitched  Roofs,  Roof  Slope  CE  *  30® 

(Clause  7.3 .3.3) 


Roof  slope  a  *30* 

0  =  0*-  45',  a  O'  E,  e  fall  length. 
0  *  SO8,  D,  O',  E,  £’  part  length. 
b‘,  thereafter  Gp=Q 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


Table  11  Pressure  Coefficients  (Top  and  Bottom)  for  Pitched  Roofs,  Roof  a = 30° 
with  effects  of  Train  or  Stored  Material 
( Clause  7.3 .3.3) 


Reef  stop#  a  ago0 
Effects  of  trains  or  stored  materials, 
a  «  0**  45*,  Of  135*  - 180",  D,  D\  E,  £’  Mi  length. 
8 31 90",  D,  O',  E,  E'  pert  length. 
b',  thereafter  Gp=0 


PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  Cp 

fl 

■V 

O' 

E 

F 

HMD  SURFACES 

19 

C 

O' 

G 

Q 

BB 

♦at 

mm 

Bjfl 

♦  0J 

19 

-0.1 

HJl 

*0.5 

-0.3 

*  0.5 

♦0.3 

-0.4 

Wj M 

-0.4 

Bom 

-0.4 

-0.5 

EB 

-0.3 

-°.g 

♦04 

l^Li 

For  as 
value 
of® 

For  J :  Cp  Top  »=  -1.5,  Cp  bottom  *  0.5 

Tengtmfidty  acting  fhcton :  /?9q«b  0.05 

20 


IS  87 S  (Part  3)  :  2015 


Table  12  Pressure  Coefficients  (Top  and  Bottom)  for  Pitched  Roofs,  a  =  10° 


(i Clause  7.3.3.3) 


C 


Rssf  slope  o  a  10® 

6  =  0®-  45®,  D,  D‘,  E,  E  fat!  length. 
6  *  00®,  D,  O',  E,  E'  part  length 
h",  thereaterCppO 


PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  Cp 

0 

D’ 

■ 

END  SURFACES 

D 

c 

■ 

c 

O' 

0 

G* 

0® 

-10 

♦  0,3 

R9 

*  0.2 

46® 

-0.3 

*0,1 

HI 

«**■ 

-0.4 

*0.8 

4-0.3 

-0.6 

-0.3 

0 

-0.3 

H 

•Foray 

value 

of® 

For  f :  CpTop  =  - 1.0,  Cp  bottom  *  0.4 

TangentUdty  acting  friction :  =  0.1  p<|  hd 

2 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  13  Pressure  Coefficients  (Top  and  Bottom)  for  Pitched  Free  Roofs,  a  =  10° 
with  effects  of  Train  or  Stored  Materials 
{Clause  7.3.3.3) 


Roof  slope  a  -  to* 

Effects  of  fmins  or  stored  materials, 

S  -  O’-  45*,  Of  135*  - 180*,  0.  O',  E.B’M  length. 
9  8  90°,  0, 0'  £  F  part  length. 
h',  thereafter  Cp=  o 


6 

PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  Cp 

n 

Q 

€ 

F 

END  SURFACES 

0 

c 

O 

wrm 

0° 

4a6 

sr 

iw 

- 1.3 

-0.1 

-0,3 

*0.4 

+  0.6 

+  0,4 

0 

-0.3 

-0,6 

-0.3 

-0,3 

*0.6 

0J 

+  0.3 

0 

-0.3 

-0.4 

+  06 

+  0.3 

-CJ 

L^-. _ 

For 

value 

of® 


For  f :  Cp  Top  =  -1.6,  Cp  bottom  =  -0.9 

TangentteBy acting friction :  R^q*  ® M 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


Table  14  Pressure  Coefficients  for  Troughed  Free  Roofs,  a  =  10° 
(Clause  13.33) 


Roof  slope  a  *  10* 

9  *  o*.  45*.  D,  O’,  E.  £'  M  length. 
9  *  SO*,  0,  O',  £,  F  part  length. 
6’,  thereafter  Cp^O 


23 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  15  Pressure  Coefficients  (Top  and  Bottom)  for  Troughed  Free  Roofs,  a  =  10° 
with  Effects  ofltain  or  Stored  Materials 

(Clause  7,33.3) 


Roof  slope  a  *  10* 

Effect®  of  trains  or  stored  materials. 

8  «  0®-  45®,  or  135*  •  110®,  D,  £>*,  E,  F  Mi  length. 
8  »  80®,  D,  D',  E,  F  pat  length. 


PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  C  p 


Porf:CpTop**1.1,  Gp  bottom  *  0.1 
TengenSaiy  acting  fMcto :  R  gge  s  o.l  Pp  btf 


24 


IS  87 S  (Part  3)  :  2015 


Table  16  External  Pressure  Coefficients  (CpJ  for  Pitched  Roofs  of  Muitispan  Buildings 

(All  Spans  Equal)  with  h  <  w' 

(Clause  7.3.3 .4) 


ROOF  PLAN 


c  d  m  m  n 


y  =  ftorQ.1w 
WHICHEVER 
IS  LESS 
hi = foz 


ROOF  WSMD  FIRST  SPAN  FIRST  'OTHER 

I  ANGLE  ANGLE  INTER6IE -  INTERME¬ 

DIATE  SPAN  OIATE  SPANS 


END  SPAN  LOCAL 

COEFFICIENT 


-0.4  -0.3  -0.3 

-0.4  -0.3  -0.3 

-0.4  -0.3  -0.3 

-0.2  -0.6  I  -0.4  -0.3  -0.2 

+  03  -0.6  -0.6  -0.4  -0.2 


ROOF 

ANGLE 

Q 

DEGREES 


UP  TO  45 


mm 

AmiE 

ft 

% 

D60REE s 

-0.3  -0,3  -0.3 

-0.3  -0.3  -0.4 

-0.3  -0.3  -0.5 

-0.3  -0.2  -0.5 

-0.4  -0.2  -0.5 


Frictional  drag  :  When  wind  angle  6  =  0°,  horizontal  forces  due  to  frictional  drag  are  allowed  for  in  the  above  values,  and 
When  wind  angle  6  =  90“,  allow  for  frictional  drag  in  accordance  with  7.4.1 

NOTE  —  Evidence  on  these  biddings  is  fragmentary  and  any  departure  from  the  cases  given  should  be  investigated  separately. 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  17  External  Pressure  Coefficients  (C,*)  for  Saw  Tooth  Roofs  of  Multispan  Buildings 

(AH  Spans  Equal)  with  h<w’ 

(Clause  7.33.4) 


V 


-0.1  w* 

-0.1  W  ft, 


■ 

lbs 

kmrnl 

■l 

'4^m\ 

1  W//M% 

%'/////////■. 

Ill 

1 

|B 

|| 

|| 

mm$ 

ill 

(1 

iB 

w*  ! 

w  3 1 

w  a 

i  w  - 

w*  _  1 

b  c 

d  ^ 

ROOF 

n  ^ 

FLAM 

n  % 

fta 


w 


I _ L 


y®ft©r9.1w 
WHICHEVER 
IS  LESS 

ft,®  ftf  aft 


SECTION 


WIND 

ANGLE 

FIRST  SRAM 

FIRST 
IHTERME  - 
DIATE  SPAM 

OTHER 

mmmB* 

DIATE  SPAMS 

INDIAN 

LOCAL 

COEFFICIENT 

i 

Degree® 

BSI 

DB 

B 

— i 

■  ■ 

gjp| 

mgm 

Ib 

ini 

0 

180 

-0.7  -0.4 

-0.3  -0.3 

-  0.3  -  02 

-04  .  -0.6 

-0.1  “8,3 

-0.8  -0,1 

H 

-is 

DISTANCE 

§9 

o 

mm 

h3 

m 

-0.8 

•  0.6 

“0  2 

270 

Similar  to  10®,  hi  i  hg,  *13,  are  needed  to  b*  toekewd  from  $s®  vsWwetd 
@dg®  to  (haems order 

Frictional  drag  :  When  wing  angle  0  =  0°,  horizontal  forces  due  to  frictional  drag  are  allowed  for  in  die  above  values,  and 
When  wind  angle  0  «  90°,  allow  for  frictional  drag  in  accordance  with  1.4.1, 

NOTE  —  Evidence  on  these  bindings  is  fragmentary  and  any  departure  from  the  cases  given  should  be  investigated  separately. 


26 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 

Table  18  External  Pressure  Coefficients  for  Curved  Roofs 
(Clause  7.3 .3.6) 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  19  External  Pressure  Coefficients  Around  Cylindrical  Structures 

(Clause  7.3.: 3.7) 


position  of 

PERIPHERY,  6 
IN  DEGREES 

PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS  Cp® 

h!Q*2 S 

A/O-7 

ft/D  *  1 

0 

1.0 

■m 

10 

15 

0.8 

Hfl 

0.8 

30 

0.1 

9.1 

0.1 

45 

-0.9 

*0.8 

-0.7 

50 

- 1.9 

-17 

-12 

75 

-2.5 

-2.2 

-18 

90 

-2.6 

■22 

-1.7 

105 

-1.0 

*  1.7 

-1.2 

120 

-0.9 

-0.8 

-0.7 

135  : 

-0.7 

-0.6 

-0.5 

150 

-0.5 

-0.4 

165 

-0.6 

-0.5 

-0.4 

ISO 

-0.6 

-0.5 

-0.4 

28 


IS  §75  (Part  3)  :  2015 


SECTION  AA 


a=  0.5  D  FOR  2  <fl  /  0<3 

0.15  h  +  0,2  0  FOR  0.2  <  h  /  0  <  2 


PLAN 

[For  force  coefficient  corresponding  to  she!!  portion  (See  Table  25)] 

Fig.  3  External  Pressure  Coefficients  on  the  Upper  Roof  Surface  of  Cyclindrical  Structures 

Standing  on  the  Ground 


29 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 

Table  20  External  Pressure  Coefficients  for  Roofs  and  Bottoms  of  Cylindrical  Structures 

(Clause  7.3.3.S) 


Total  force  acting  on  the  roof  of  the  structure,  P  »  0.785  D  2  (Cpj-  Cpe)  p( 
The  resultant  of  P  lies  eccenfeically,  e  *  0.10 


30 


COEFFICIENT  (Cpe) 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  21  External  Pressure  Coefficients  (Cp)  for  Combined  Roofs 
{Clause  133.9) 


|  VALUES  OF  COEFFICIENTS  (C  p@> 

PORTION 

DIRECTION  1 

DIRECTION  2 

9 

FROM  THE  DIAGRAM 

-0.4 

b 

Op® *-0.5,  |”*1S 
Cpe*  +  0.7;'^»'1.5 

■BHI 

SesTMS 

e 

8w  Clause  6.3.35 

31 


IS  875  (Pun  3)  :  2015 


Table  22  Externa!  Pressure  Coefficients  (C^  for  Roofs  with  a  Sky  Light 


DIRECTION  -  0.S 


VALUES  OF  COEFFICIENTS  (Cpg) 

PORTION 

b 

eattfb 

Cpe 

-O.e 

+  0.7 

S@@  labia  for  osmbinad 
roofs 

1A  Force  Coefficients 

The  value  offeree  coefficients  (Cf)  apply  to  a  building 
or  structure  as  a  whole,  and  when  multiplied  by  the 
effective  frontal  area  Ae  of  the  building  or  structure 
and  design  wind  pressure, gives  the  total  wind  load 
(F)  on  that  particular  building  or  structure. 

F-  CfAePd 

where  F  is  the  force  acting  in  a  direction  specified  in 
the  respective  tables  and  Cf  is  the  force  coefficient  for 
the  building. 


NOTES 

1  The  value  of  the  force  coefficient  differs  for  the  wind  acting 
on  different  faces  of  a  building  or  structure.  In  order  to 
determine  the  critical  load,  the  total  wind  load  should  be 
calculated  for  each  wind  direction. 

2  If  surface  design  pressure  varies  with  height,  the  surface  area 
of  the  building/stnicture  may  be  sub-divided  so  that  specified 
pressures  are  taken  over  appropriate  areas. 

3  In  tapered  buildings/structures,  the  force  coefficients  shall 
be  applied  after  sub-dividing  the  building/structure  into  suitable 
number  of  strips  and  the  load  on  each  strip  calculated 
individually,  taking  the  area  of  each  strip  as  Ar 

4  For  force  coefficients  for  structures  not  covered  above 
reference  may  be  made  specialist  literature  on  the  subject  or 
advice  may  be  sought  from  specialist  in  the  subject. 


32 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


Table  23  Pressure  Coefficients  at  Top  and  Bottom  Roof  of  Grand  Stands 
Open  Three  Sides  (Roof  Angle  Upto  5°) 


(Shaded  am®  to  seal®) 


PROMT  AND  SACK  OF  WALL 

8 

n 

K 

_ _ 

n 

M 

0® 

4*0.0 

KOI 

4  0.9 

•oj 

45* 

BB 

-0.6 

PHI 

"  1ST 

4  0.8 

-1.0  , 

160® 

•  0.3 

+  0.9 

-0.3 

ulmJ 

60® 

A*r-CoofK»-1i) 

SO® 

66(tr-Cp0f«l*^  10 

TOP  AND  BOTTOM  ROOF 

8 

n 

s 

c 

0 

F 

H 

r 

KE9 

+  0.9 

m;o 

Toil 

era 

4  0.0 

Bin 

+oS1 

45® 

Hio 

-0.? 

4  0.4 

EH 

i  +  0J 

-0.5 

Ell 

gTl 

-0.7 

•  OJ 

•11 

•0J 

160® 

ga 

TaT1 

-0.6 

BM 

-0.8^ 

-0.6 

ga 

4T 

•  Cp  (top)® -2.0 

45’ 

1  wR'.CpflNtlom)«4lJ0  _ _ _ i 

33 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Tab,e  24  External  Pressure  Distribution  Coefficients  Around  Spherical  Structures 


7.4.1  Frictional  Drag 

In  certain  buildings  of  special  shape,  a  force  due  to 
frictional  drag  shall  be  taken  into  account  in  addition 
to  those  loads  specified  in  7.3.  For  rectangular  clad 
buildings,  this  addition  is  necessary  only  where  the 
ratio  d/h  ord/b  is  more  than  4.  The  frictional  drag  force, 
F\  in  the  direction  of  the  wind  is  given  by  the  following 
formulae: 

a)  Ifk  <,b,F'= C/  (d-  4 h)  bpd  +  C/  (d- 4£)  2 h 
p#  and 


b)  \ih>b,  F-  Ct’(d- 4b) bp,  +  C{'(d- 4b)  2 k pd 

The  first  term  in  each  case  gives  the  drag  on  the  roof 
and  the  second  on  the  walls.  The  value  of  Q  has  the 
following  value: 

1)  C,'  =  0.01  for  smooth  surfaces  without 
corrugations  or  ribs  across  the  wind  direction, 

2)  Ct'  =  0.02  for  surfaces  with  corrugations 
across  the  wind  direction,  and 

3)  C/  =  0.04  for  surfaces  with  ribs  across  the 
wind  direction. 


34 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


For  other  buildings,  the  frictional  drag  has  been 
indicated,  where  necessary,  in  the  tables  of  pressure 
coefficients  and  force  coefficients. 

7.4,2  Force  Coefficients  for  Clad  Buildings 

7.4.2.1  Clad  buildings  of  uniform  section 

The  overall  force  coefficients  for  rectangular  clad 
buildings  of  uniform  section  with  flat  roofs  in  uniform 
flow  shall  be  as  given  in  Fig.  4  and  for  other  clad 
buildings  of  uniform  section  (without  projections, 
except  where  otherwise  shown)  shall  be  as  given  in 
Table  25. 


NOTE  —  Structures  that  are  ia  the  supercritical  flow  regime, 
because  of  their  size  sad  design  wind  velocity,  may  need  further 
calculation  to  ensure  that  the  greatest  loads  do  not  occur  at 
some  wind  speed  below  the  maximum  when  the  flow  will  be 
sub  critical.  The  coefficients  are  for  buildings  without 
projections,  except  where  otherwise  shown. 

In  Table  25,  ^  bis  used  as  an  indication  of  the  airflow  regime. 

7.4.2.2  Buildings  of  circular  shapes 

Force  coefficients  for  buildings  of  circular  cross-section 
shapes  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  25.  However  more 
precise  estimation  of  force  coefficients  for  circular 
shapes  of  infinite  length  can  be  obtained  from  Fig.  5 


b)  Values  of  Cf  versus  a/ b  fbrh/b«1 

Fig.  4  Force  Coefficient  for  Rectangular  Clad  Building  in  Uniform  Flow 


35 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  25  Force  Coefficients  C(  for  Clad  Buildings  of  Uniform  Section 
(Acting  in  the  Direction  of  Wind) 

( Clause  7 .4.2.2) 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Table  25  —  (Continued) 


IS  875  (fart  3):  2015 


Table  25  —  (< Concluded ) 


|  PLAN  SHAPE 

Cf  FOR  HEIGHT  /  BREADTH  RATIO 

UFTO  1/2 

2 

5 

10 

20 

CO 

AH  values 

B 

i 

1.8 

i 

1 

m 

<12 

0.7 

_ 

03 

0.8 

Q 

1.0 

i.i 

13 

*  « 

m 

0.7 

03 

m 

0.9 

11 

-o 

1  OCTAGON 

All  values 

i 

i2  : 

13 

1.4 

-o 

H0CAGW 

All  values 

1 

■ 

1.3 

14' 

,4 

| 

15 

taking  into  account  the  average  height  of  surface 
roughness  £.  When  the  length  is  finite  the  values 
obtained  from  Fig,  5  shall  be  reduced  by  the 
multiplication  factor  K  (see  Table  28  and  Annex  D). 

7.4.23  Free  standing  walk  and  hoardings 

Force  coefficients  for  free  standing  walls  and  hoardings 
shall  be  as  given  in  Table  26. 

To  allow  for  oblique  winds,  the  design  shall  also  be 
checked  for  net  pressure  normal  to  the  surface  varying 
linearly  from  a  maximum  of  1.7  Cf  at  the  windward 
edge  to  0.44  Cf  at  the  leeward  edge. 

The  wind  load  on  appurtenances  and  supports  for 
hoardings  shall  be  accounted  for  separately  by  using 
the  appropriate  net  pressure  coefficients.  Allowance 
shall  be  made  for  shielding  effects  of  one  element  on 
another. 

7.4.2.4.  Solid  circular  shapes  mounted  on  a  surface 

The  force  coefficients  for  solid  circular  shapes  mounted 
on  a  surface  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  27. 


7.43  Force  Coefficients  for  Unclad  Buildings 

7.433  This  section  applies  to  permanently  unclad 
buildings  and  to  frameworks  of  buildings  while 
temporarily  unclad.  In  the  case  of  buildings  whose 
surfaces  are  well-rounded,  such  as  those  with  elliptic, 
circular  or  oval  cross-sections,  the  total  force  can  be 
more  at  a  wind  speed  much  less  than  maximum  due  to 
transition  in  the  nature  of  boundary  layer  on  them. 
Although  this  phenomenon  is  well  known  in  the  case 
of  circular  cylinders,  the  same  phenomenon  exists  in 
the  case  of  many  other  well-rounded  structures,  and 
this  possibility  must  be  checked. 

7.43.2  Individual  members 

a)  The  force  coefficient  given  in  Table  29  refers  to 
members  of  infinite  length.  For  members  of  finite 
length,  the  coefficients  should  be  multiplied  by  a  factor 
K  that  depends  on  the  ratio  lib  where  l  is  the  length  of 
the  member  and  b  is  the  width  across  the  direction  of 
wind.  Table  28  gives  the  required  values  of  K.  Hie 
following  special  cases  must  be  noted  while 
estimating  K, 


38 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


IS f  2  3  4  5  6  8  tcf  2  3  4  S  9  3  10?  2  3  4  5  6  3  10? 

R@  - - - «*- 


Cf 

Fig.  5  Variation  of  — r-  with  R>3x  104  for  Circular  Sections 

1+— 

D 

Table  26  Force  Coefficients  for  Low  Walls  or  Hoardings  (<  15m  High) 

(Clause  7 .4.2.2) 


(WIND  NORMAL  TO  FACE) 


WIDTH  TO  HISOHT  RATIO,  Mi 

drag  cmpficmm  c? 

WALL  ABOVE  GROUND 

WALL  ON  GROUND 

FROM  0J  TO  6 

FTOM1T012 

u 

10 

20 

13 

r  i© 

32 

1.4 

20 

40 

ii 

m 

SO  “| 

1.7S 

m 

120 

1J 

80  OR  MORE 

160  OR  MORE 

ZQ 

39 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


1)  when  any  member  abuts  on  to  a  plate  or  wall 
in  such  a  way  that  free  flow  of  air  around  that 
end  ofthe  member  is  prevented,  then  the  ratio 
of  1/b  shall  be  doubled  for  the  purpose  of 
determining  K;  and 

2)  when  both  ends  of  a  member  are  so 
obstructed,  the  ratio  shall  be  taken  as  infinity 
for  the  purpose  of  determining  K. 


b)  Flat-sided  members  —  Force  coefficients  for  wind 
normal  to  the  longitudinal  axis  of  flat-sided  structural 
members  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  29. 

The  force  coefficients  are  given  for  two  mutually 
perpendicular  directions  relative  to  a  reference  axis  on 
the  structural  member.  They  are  denoted  by  Cfe  and  Cft 
and  give  the  forces  normal  and  transverse  respectively, 
to  the  reference  plane  as  shown  in  Table  29. 


Table  27  Force  Coefficients  for  Solid  Shapes  Mounted  on  a  Surface 
( Clause  7 .4.2.4) 


SIDE  ELEVATION 

DESCRIPTION  OF  SHAPE 

« . 
vf 

. . . 

1  Wmg 

■ 

CIRCULAR  HSC 

1 2 

mmmm 

■  . . 

| — ■ — ■ — ■ 

i 

!  md 

~} 

HEMISPHERICAL  BOM, 

14 

i  ^ 

1-0 

HEMISPHERICAL  BOWL 

0.4 

1  mmmm 

1  .  _  ..  . 

j  — 

i 

HEMISPHERICAL  SOLID 

12  | 

mmmm 

\ 

m 

SPHERICAL  SCUD 

0.5FORV2O<7 

1  02  FOR  Vg  D>T 

Table  28  Reduction  Factor  K  for  Individual  Members 
[(Clauses  7A.2.2,  7.4.3.2(a)] 

SI  No.  I/borl/D  T  ~5  “75  20  ~  4®  50  100  “ 

(1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  (10) 

0.58  0.62  0.68  0.74  0.82  0.87  0.98  1.00 

0.80  0.80  0.82  0.90  0.98  0.99  1.00  1.00 

0.62  0.66  0.69  0.81  0.87  0.90  0.95  1.00 


i)  Circular  cylinder,  subcritical  flow 

ii)  Circular  cylinder,  supercritical  flow 
(£>  fftji:  6m2/$) 

iti)  For  plate  perpendicular  to  wind 

(b  ffg>6m2/$) 


40 


Table  29  Force  Coefficients  Cf  for  Individual  Structural  Members  of  Infinite  Length 

[Clause  7.4.3.2(b)] 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Normal  force,  Fn  =  (C^  pd  K)fb 
Transverse  force,  Ft  =  (Cftpd  K)/b 

c)  Circular  sections — Force  coefficients  for  members 
of  circular  section  shall  be  as  given  in  Table  25  see 
also  Annex  D. 

d)  Force  coefficients  for  wires  and  cables  shall  be  as 
given  in  Table  30  according  to  the  diameter  (D),  the 
design  wind  speed  (Vd)  and  the  surface  roughness. 

7,43,3  Single  frames 

Force  coefficients  for  a  single  frame  having  either, 

a)  all  fiat  sided  members;  or 

b)  all  circular  members  in  which  ail  the  members 
of  the  frame  have  either: 

1 )  D  Vd  less  than  6  m2/$,  or 

2)  D  Vd  more  than  or  equal  to  6  m2/s, 

shall  be  as  given  in  Table  31  according  to  the  type  of 
the  member,  the  diameter  (D),  the  design  hourly  mean 
wind  speed  (  Vd)  and  the  solidity  ratio  (0). 

Force  coefficients  for  a  single  frame  not  complying 
with  the  above  requirements  shall  be  calculated  as 
follows: 

C,.YCi.t(l-T)^C,.+a-Y)^C/. 

Table  30  Force  Coefficients  for  Wires  and  Cables  (L/D  =  100) 


{Clause  7.4.3.2(d)] 

SI  No. 

Flow  Regime 

Force  Coefficient,  Cf  for 

^Smooth  Surface 

Moderately  Smooth  Wire 
(Galvanized  or  Painted) 

Fine  Stranded  Cables 

Thick  Stranded  Cables 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

i) 

D  tfd<  6m2/s 

1.2 

1.2 

1.2 

1.3 

ii) 

D  tfu  >6  m2/s 

0.5 

0.7 

0.9 

1.1 

Table  31  Force  Coefficients  for  Single  Frames 
{Clause  7,4.33) 


Solidity  Ratio 

Forte  Coefficient  Cs  for 

“"Flat  Sided  Members 

Circular  sections  — ^ 

_ _ 

^  Subcritica!  How 

Super  Critical  Flow"* 

(DVd  <  6  m2/s) 

(D  Vd6m2/s) 

_ m _ 

_ m _ 

(3) 

(4) 

0.1 

1.9 

1.2 

0.7 

02 

1.8 

1.2 

0.8 

0.3 

1.7 

1.2 

0.8 

0.4 

1.7 

u 

0.8 

0.5 

1.6 

U 

0.8 

0.75 

1.6 

IS 

1.4 

LOO 

2.0 

10 

2.0 

NOTE — Linear  interpolation  between  the  values  is  permitted. 

where 

Q  super  =  force  coefficient  for  the  supercritical  circular 
members  as  given  in  Table  31  or  Annex  D, 

Cf8ub  -  force  coefficient  for  subcritica!  circular 
members  as  given  in  Table  3 lor  Annex  D, 

Cf{1at  -  force  coefficient  for  the  flat  sided  members 
as  given  in  Table  31, 

Aire  sub =  effective  area  of  subcritical  circular 
members, 

A  fa  =  effective  area  of  flat-sided  members, 

^sub  ~  ^circsub 

Y  =  (Area  of  the  frame  in  a  supercritical  flow)/ 
Ae 

7,43,4  Multiple  frame  buildings 

This  section  applies  to  structures  having  two  or  more 
parallel  frames  where  the  windward  frames  may  have 
a  shielding  effect  upon  the  frames  to  leeward  side.  The 
windward  frame  and  any  unshielded  parts  of  other 
frames  shall  be  calculated  in  accordance  with  7,433, 
but  the  wind  load  on  the  parts  of  frames  that  are 
sheltered  should  be  multiplied  by  a  shielding  factor 
which  is  dependent  upon  the  solidity  ratio  of  the 
windward  frame,  the  types  of  members  comprising  the 
frame  and  the  spac-ing  ratio  of  the  frames.  The  values 
of  the  shielding  factors  are  given  in  Table  32. 


42 


Table  32  Shielding  Factor  B  for  Multiple  Frames 
{Clause  7.4.3 .4) 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


Effective  Solidity 
Ratio 

0) 


Frame  Spacing  Ratio 


0 

i.o 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.1 

0.9 

1,0 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.2 

08 

0.9 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.3 

0.7 

0.8 

1.0 

1.0 

1.0 

0.4 

0.6 

0.7 

i.o 

i.O 

1.0 

0.5 

0.5 

0.6 

0.9 

i.O 

1.0 

0.7 

0.3 

0.6 

0.8 

0.9 

i.O 

1.0 

0.3 

0.6 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

NOTE — Linear  interpolation  between  the  values  is  permitted. 


Where  there  are  more  than  two  frames  of  similar 
geometry  and  spacing,  the  wind  load  on  the  third  and 
subsequent  frames  should  be  taken  as  equal  to  that  on 
the  second  frame.  The  loads  on  the  various  frames  shall 
be  added  to  obtain  total  load  on  the  structure. 

a)  The  frame  spacing  ratio  is  equal  to  the  centre  to 
centre  distance  between  the  frames,  beams  or  girders 
divided  by  the  least  overall  dimension  of  the  frames, 
beam  or  girder  measured  in  a  direction  norma!  to  the 
direction  of  wind.  For  triangular  framed  structures  or 
rectangular  framed  structures  diagonal  to  the  wind,  the 
spacing  ratio  should  be  calculated  from  the  mean 
distance  between  the  frames  in  the  direction  of  the 
wind. 

b)  Effective  solidity  ratio,  0e: 

“  0  for  flat-sided  members. 

<Pe  is  to  be  obtained  from  Fig.  6  for  members  of 
circular  cross-sections. 


Fig.  6  Effective  Solidity  Ratio,  for  Circular 
Section  Members 


7A3S  Lattice  towers 

a)  Force  coefficient  for  lattice  towers  of  square 
or  equilateral  triangle  section  with  flat-sided 
members  for  wind  blowing  against  any  face 
shall  be  as  given  in  Table  33. 

b)  For  square  lattice  towers  with  flat-sided 
members  the  maximum  load,  which  occurs 
when  the  wind  blows  into  a  comer,  shall  be 
taken  as  1.2  times  the  load  for  the  wind 
blowing  against  a  face. 

c)  For  equilateral  triangle  lattice  towers  with  flat¬ 
sided  members,  the  load  may  be  assumed  to 
be  constant  for  any  inclination  of  wind  to  a 
face. 

d)  Force  coefficients  for  lattice  towers  of  square 
section  with  circular  members,  ail  in  the  same 
flow  regime,  may  be  as  given  in  Table  34. 

e)  Force  coefficients  for  lattice  towers  of 
equilateral-triangle  section  with  circular 
members  all  in  the  same  flow  regime  may  be 
as  given  in  Table  35. 

7*43.6  Tower  appurtenances 

The  wind  loading  on  tower  appurtenances,  such  as 
ladders,  conduits,  lights,  elevators,  etc,  shall  be 
calculated  using  appropriate  net  pressure  coefficients 


Table  33  Overall  Force  Coefficients  for  Towers 
Composed  of  Flat  Sided  Members 

[Clause  7.4.3.5(a)] 


SI  No. 

Solidity  Ratio 

Fore®  Coefficient 

0 

^Square 

Equilateral 

Towers 

Triangular 

Towers 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

0 

<0.1 

3.8 

3.1 

ii) 

0.2 

3.3 

2.7 

iii) 

0.3 

2.8 

2.3 

iv) 

0.4 

2.3 

1.9 

v) 

0.5 

2.1 

1.5 

43 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 

Table  34  Overall  Force  Coefficients  for  Square  Towers  Composed  of  Circular  Members 

{{Clause  7.43.5  (d)] 


SI  No. 


Solidity  Ratio  of  Front  Fa®® 
0 


For®®  Coefficient 

^  Suberitical  Flow  Supercritical  Flow 

(D  flu  <  6  m2/$)  {D  0/  >  6  mVs) 

— — .  ^nn.— .  — 

Onto  Face  Onto  Comer  Onto  Face  Onto  Comer 


<0 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

0 

•i) 

<0.05 

2.4 

2.5 

1.1 

1.2 

0.1 

2.2 

2.3 

1.2 

1,3 

iii) 

0.2 

1.9 

2.1 

1.3 

1.6 

iv) 

0.3 

1.7 

1,9 

1.4 

1.6 

v) 

0.4 

1.6 

1.9 

1.4 

1.6 

V!) 

0.5 

1.4 

■1.9 

1,4 

1.6 

for  these  elements.  Allowance  may  be  made  for 
shielding  effect  from  other  elements. 

8  INTERFERENCE  EFFECTS 

8.1  General 

Wind  interference  is  caused  by  modification  in  the  wind 
characteristics  produced  by  the  obstruction  caused  by 
an  object  or  a  structure  in  the  path  of  the  wind.  If  such 
wind  strikes  another  structure,  the  wind  pressures 
usually  get  enhanced,  though  there  can  also  be  some 
shielding  effect  between  two  very  closely  spaced 
buildings/structures.  The  actual  phenomenon  is  too 
cor  :*>lex  to  justify  generalization  of  the  wind  forces/ 
pressures  produced  due  to  interference  which  can  only 
be  ascertained  by  detailed  wind  tunnel/CFD  studies. 
However,  some  guidance  can  be  provided  for  the 
purpose  of  preliminary  design.  To  account  for  the  effect 
of  interference,  a  wind  interference  factor  (IF)  has  been 
introduced  as  a  multiplying  factor  to  be  applied  to  the 
design  wind  pressure/force.  Interference  effects  can  be 
more  significant  for  tall  buildings.  The  interference 
factor  is  defined  as  the  ratio  between  the  enhanced 
pressure/force  in  the  grouped  configuration  to  the 
corresponding  pressure/force  in  isolated  configuration. 


Since  the  values  of  IF  can  vary  considerably  based  on 
building  geometry  and  location,  the  given  values  of  IF 
are  a  kind  of  median  values  and  are  meant  only  for 
preliminary  design  estimates,  The  designer  is  advised 
that  for  assigning  values  of  IF  for  final  design 
particularly  for  tall  buildings,  specialist  literature  be 
consulted  or  a  wind  tunnel  study  carried  out. 

8.2  Roof  of  Low-Rise  Buildings 

Maximum  increase  in  wind  force  on  the  roof  due  to 
interference  from  similar  buildings  in  case  of  closely 
spaced  low-rise  buildings  with  flat  roofs  may  be  up  to 
25  percent  for  c/c  distance  (x)  between  the  buildings 
of  5  times  the  dimension  (b)  of  the  interfering  building 
normal  to  the  direction  of  wind  (see  Fig.  7).  Interference 
effect  beyond  20b  may  be  considered  to  be  negligible. 
For  intermediate  spacing  linear  interpolation  may  be 
used. 

8.3  Tall  Buildings 

Based  on  studies  on  tall  rectangular  buildings,  Fig.  8 
gives  various  zones  of  interference.  The  interference 
factor  (IF),  which  needs  to  be  considered  as  a 
multiplication  factor  for  wind  loads  corresponding  to 


Table  35  Overall  Force  Coefficients  for  Equilateral  Triangular  Towers  Composed  of  Circular  Members 


[Clause  7.4.3.5(c)] 

SI  Na 

Solidity  Ratio  of  Front  Face 
<t> 

Fore®  Coefficient 

(i) 

(2) 

: - 

Subcriticai  Flow 
(D  J}g<  6  m2/s) 

All  wind  Directions 
(3) 

Supercritical  Flow 
(D  0,  !>6m2/s) 

All  wind  Directions 

(4) 

0 

<0.05 

1.8 

0.8 

ii) 

0.1 

1.7 

0.8 

iii) 

0.2 

1.6 

1.1 

iv) 

0.3 

1.5 

1.1 

v) 

0.4 

1.5 

1.1 

vi) 

05 

1.4 

1.2 

44 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


isolated  building,  may  be  assumed  as  follows,  for 
preliminary  estimate  of  the  wind  loads  under 
interference  caused  by  another  interfering  tail  building 
of  same  or  more  height  located  at  different  zones  Z1 
toZ4as  shown  in  Fig.  8: 

Zone  Z1  Z2  Z3  Z4 

EF  1.35  1.25  1.15  1.07 

The  interference  effect  due  to  buildings  of  height  less 
than  one-third  of  the  height  of  the  building  under 
consideration  may  be  considered  to  be  negligible  while 
for  interference  from  a  building  of  intermediate  height, 
linear  interpolation  may  be  used  between  one-third  and 
full  height. 

9  DYNAMIC  EFFECTS 
9.1  General 

Flexible  slender  structures  and  structural  elements  shall 
be  investigated  to  ascertain  the  importance  of  wind 
induced  oscillations  or  excitations  in  along  wind  and 
across  wind  directions. 


In  general,  the  following  guidelines  may  be  used  for 
examining  the  problems  of  wind-induced  oscillations. 

a)  Buildings  and  closed  structures  with  a  height 
to  minimum  lateral  dimension  ratio  of  more 
than  about  5.0,  or 

b)  Buildings  and  structures  whose  natural 
frequency  in  the  first  mode  is  less  than  1.0 
Hz. 

Any  building  or  structure  which  satisfies  either  of  the 
above  two  criteria  shall  be  examined  for  dynamic 
effects  of  wind. 

NOTES 

1  The  fundamental  time  period  (T)  may  either  be  established 
by  experimental  observations  on  similar  buildings  or  calculated 
by  any  rational  method  of  analysis.  In  the  absence  of  such 
data,  T  may  be  determined  as  follows  for  multi-storied 
buildings: 

a)  For  moment  resistant  frames  without  bracings  or  shear  walls 
resisting  the  lateral  loads, 

T^QAn 

where 

n  -  number  of  storeys  including  basement  storey's;  and 

b)  for  all  others 


Fig.  7  Low-rise  Buildings  in  Tandem  Causing  Interference  Effect 


21  -  Zone  of  high  interference-  23  -  Zone  of  low  interference 

22  -  Zone  of  moderate  Interference  24  -  Zone  of  insignificant  interference 

Fig.  8  Interference  Zones  for  Tall  Rectangular  Buildings  of  Same  or  Greater  Height  (Clause  7.3) 


45 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


T  0.09 H 

T~~jr 

where 

H  *  total  height  of  the  main  structures  of  the  building,  in  m; 
and 

d  =  maximum  base  dimension  of  building  in  meters  in  a 
direction  parallel  to  the  applied  wind  force. 

2  If  preliminary  studies  indicate  that  wind-induced  oscillations 
are  likely  to  be  significant,  investigations  should  be  pursued 
with  the  aid  of  analytical  methods  or  if  necessary,  by  means  of 
wind  tunnel  tests  on  models. 

3  Across-wind  motions  may  be  due  to  lateral  gustiness  of  the 
wind,  unsteady  wake  flow  (for  example,  vortex  shedding), 
negative  aerodynamic  damping  or  due  to  a  combination  of  these 
effects.  These  cross-wind  motions  may  become  critical  in  the 
design  of  tall  buildings/structures. 

4  Motions  in  the  direction  of  wind  (known  also  as  buffeting) 
are  caused  by  fluctuating  wind  force  associated  with  gust.  The 
excitation  depends  on  gust  energy  available  at  the  resonant 
frequency. 

5  The  eddies  shed  from  an  upstream  body  may  intensify  motion 
in  the  direction  of  the  wind  and  may  also  affect  cross-wind 
motion. 

6  The  designer  should  also  be  aware  of  the  following  three 
forms  of  wind-induced  motion  which  are  characterized  by 
increasing  amplitude  of  oscillation  with  the  increase  of  wind 
speed. 

i)  Galloping  —  Galloping  is  transverse  oscillations  of  some 
structures  due  to  the  development  of  aerodynamic  forces 
which  are  in  phase  with  the  motion.  It  is  characterized  by 
the  progressively  increasing  amplitude  of  transverse 
vibration  with  increase  of  wind  speed.  The  cross-sections 
which  are  particularly  prone  to  this  type  of  excitation 
include  the  following: 

1)  All  structures  with  non-circular  cross-sections,  such  as 
triangular,  square,  polygons,  as  well  as  angles,  crosses, 
and  T  sections. 

2)  Twisted  cables  and  cables  with  ice  encrustations. 

ii)  Flutter  —  Flutter  is  unstable  oscillatory  motion  of  a 
structure  due  to  coupling  between  aerodynamic  force  and 
elastic  deformation  of  the  structure.  Perhaps  the  most 
common  form  is  oscillatory  motion  due  to  combined 
bending  and  torsion.  Although  oscillatory  motion  in  each 
degree  of  freedom  may  be  damped,  instability  can  set  in 
due  to  energy  transfer  from  one  mode  of  oscillation  to 
another  and  the  structure  is  seen  to  execute  sustained  or 
divergent  oscillations  with  a  type  of  motion  which  is  a 
combination  of  the  individual  modes  of  vibration.  Such 
energy  transfer  takes  place  when  the  natural  frequencies  of 
modes  taken  individually  are  close  to  each  other  (ratio  being 
typically  less  than  2.0).  Flutter  can  set  in  at  wind  speeds 
much  less  than  those  required  for  exciting  the  individual 
modes  of  motion.  Long  span  suspension  bridge  decks  or 
any  member  of  a  structure  with  large  values  of  d/t  (where  d 
is  the  length  of  the  member  and  t  is  its  dimension  parallel 
to  wind  stream)  are  prone  to  low  speed  flutter.  Wind  tunnel 
testing  is  required  to  determine  critical  flutter  speeds  and 
the  likely  structural  response.  Other  types  of  flutter  are 
single  degree  of  freedom  stall  flutter,  torsional  flutter,  etc. 

iii)  Ovalling  —  Thin  walled  structures  with  open  ends  at  one 
or  both  ends  such  as  oil  storage  tanks  and  natural  draught 
cooling  towers  in  which  the  ratio  of  the  diameter  or 
minimum  lateral  dimension  to  the  wall  thickness  is  of  the 
order  of  100  or  more  are  prone  to  ovalling  oscillations. 
These  oscillations  are  characterized  by  periodic  radial 
deformation  of  the  hollow  structure. 


1  Buildings  and  structures  that  may  be  subjected  to  significant 
wind  excited  oscillations.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  wind  induced 
oscillations  may  occur  at  wind  speeds  lower  than  the  design 
wind  speed. 

8  Analytical  methods  for  the  evaluation  of  response  of  dynamic 
structures  to  wind  loading  can  be  found  in  the  special 
publications. 

9  In  assessing  wind  loads  due  to  such  dynamic  phenomenon 
as  galloping,  fiutter  and  ovalling,  in  the  absence  of  the  required 
information  either  in  the  special  publications  or  other  literature, 
expert  advice  should  be  sought  including  experiments  on 
models  in  boundary  layer  wind  tunnels. 

*9*2  Motion  due  to  Vortex  Shedding 

3 

9.2,1  Slender  Structures 

For  a  structure,  the  vortex  shedding  frequency/,  shall 
be  determined  by  the  following  formula: 

/.5S& 

j%  . 


where 

St  -  Strouhal  number, 

hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height  z,  and 

b  **  breadth  of  a  structure  or  structural  member 
normal  to  the  wind  direction  in  the 
horizontal  plane 

a)  Circular  structures  —  For  structures  of 
circular  in  cross-section: 

Sx  =  0.20  for  D  V^H  less  than  6  m2/s,  and 

=  0.25  for  D  V,H  more  than  or  equal  to  6  m2/s. 

b)  Rectangular  structures  —  For  structures  of 
rectangular  cross-section: 

st-o.io 

NOTES 

1  Significant  cross  wind  motions  may  be  produced  by  vortex 
shedding  if  the  natural  frequency  of  the  structure  or  structural 
element  is  equal  to  the  frequency  of  the  vortex  shedding  within 
the  range  of  expected  wind  speeds.  In  such  cases,  further 
analysis  should  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  special 
publications. 

2  Unlined  welded  steel  chimney  stacks  and  similar  structures 
are  prone  to  excitations  by  vortex  shedding. 

3  Intensification  of  the  effects  of  periodic  vortex  shedding  has 
been  reported  in  cases  where  two  or  more  similar  structures 
are  located  in  close  proximity,  for  example  at  less  than  20b 
apart,  where  b  is  the  dimension  of  the  structure  normal  to  the 
wind. 

4  The  formulae  given  in  8.2 A  (a)  is  valid  for  infinitely  long 
cylindrical  structures.  The  value  of  St  decreases  slowly  as  the 
ratio  of  length  to  maximum  transverse  width  decreases,  the 
reduction  being  up  to  about  half  the  value,  if  the  structure  is 
only  three  times  higher  than  its  width.  Vortex  shedding  need 
not  be  considered  if  the  ratio  of  length  to  maximum  transverse 
dimension  is  less  than  2.0. 


46 


IS  87S  (Part  3):  2815 


1®  DYNAMIC  WIND  RESPONSE 

10.1  General 

Tall  buildings  which  are  ‘wind  sensitive’  shall  be 
designed  for  dynamic  wind  loads.  Hourly  mean  wind 
speed  is  used  as  a  reference  wind  speed  to  be  used  in 
dynamic  wind  analysis.  For  calculation  of  along  wind 
loads  and  response  (bending  moments,  shear  forces, 
or  tip  deflections)  the  Gust  Factor  (GF)  method  is  used 
as  specified  in  10.2.  The  across  wind  design  peak  base 
overturning  moment  and  tip  deflection  shall  be 
calculated  using  10.3. 

10.2  Along  Wind  Response 

For  calculation  of  along-wind  load  effects  at  a  level  s 
on  a  building/structure,  the  design  hourly  mean  wind 
pressure  at  height  z  shall  be  multiplied  by  the  Gust 
Factor  (GF).  This  factor  is  dependent  on  both  the 
overall  height  h  and  the  level  s  under  consideration 
(see  Fig.  9),  For  calculation  of  base  bending  moment 
and  deflection  at  the  top  of  the  building/structure  s 
should  be  taken  as  zero. 

The  design  peak  along  wind  base  bending  moment, 
(MJ  shall  be  obtained  by  summing  the  moments 
resulting  from  design  peak  along  wind  loads  acting  at 
different  heights,  z,  along  the  height  of  the  building/ 
structure  and  can  be  obtained  from, 

Ma  =  1FZZ 

Fz  -  Q.z^z  PdG 

where 

Fz  -  design  peak  along  wind  load  on  the  building/ 
structure  at  any  height  z 

Az  =  the  effective  frontal  area  of  the  building/ 
structure  at  any  height  z,  in  m2 

pd  -  design  hourly  mean  wind  pressure 
corresponding  to  V^d  and  obtained  as 
0.6  V*d  (N/m2) 


=  design  hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height  z, 
in  m/s  (see  6.4) 

Cfz  ~  the  drag  force  coefficient  of  the  building/ 
structure  corresponding  to  the  area  Az 

G  *  Gust  Factor  and  is  given  by. 


*  \+r 


8&(l+g)2 


+ 


Hj&SE 

P 


where 

r  —  roughness  factor  which  is  twice  the 
longitudinal  turbulence  intensity,  /hi 
(see  6.S), 

gv  =  peak  factor  for  upwind  velocity  fluctuation, 
=  3.0  for  category  1  and  2  terrains,  and 
=  4.0  for  category  3  and  4  terrains, 

Bs  -  background  factor  indicating  the  measure  of 
slowly  varying  component  of  fluctuating 
wind  load  caused  by  the  lower  frequency 
wind  speed  variations 


j 

}  |  j0.26(fe-s)S0.46^ 

Lh 

where 

bsh  ~  average  breadth  of  the  building/stnicture 
between  heights  s  and  h 

Lh  ~  measure  of  effective  turbulence  length  scale 
at  the  height,  A,  in  m 

/  h  \° 25 

*  85 1  —  J  for  terrain  category  1  to  3 

for  terrain  category  4 

$  =  factor  to  account  for  the  second  order 

turbulence  intensity 


NOTH  ~ G<s<h,  ands<z<h 


Fig.  9  Notations  for  Heights 


47 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


2 


7h  i  **  turbulence  intensity  at  height  h  in  terrain 
category  i 

Ht  =  height  factor  for  resonance  response 


10.2.1  Peak  Acceleration  in  Along  Wind  Direction 

The  peak  acceleration  at  the  top  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  along  wind  direction  ( i  in  m/s2)  is  given 
by  the  following  equation: 


where 


S  -  size  reduction  factor  given  by: 


where 

b0k  =  average  breadth  of  the  building/structure 
between  0  and  h. 

E  =  spectrum  of  turbulence  in  the  approaching 
wind  stream 

nN 

(l  +  70.8/V2)^ 

whert 

N  =*  effective  reduced  frequency 

_  4k 

fa  ~  first  mode  natural  frequency  of  the 
building/structure  in  along  wind  direction, 
in  Hz 

=  design  hourly  mean  wind  speed  at  height,  h 
in  m/s  {see  6.4) 

P  =  damping  coefficient  of  the  building/structure 
(see  Table  36) 

gR  =  peak  factor  for  resonant  response 


Table  36  Suggested  Values  of  Structural 
Damping  Coefficients 

{Clause  10.2) 


S! 

No. 

0) 

Kind  of  Structure 

(2) 

Damping 
Coefficient,  ,8 
(3) 

0 

Welded  steel  structures 

0.010 

ii) 

Bolted  steel  structures/RCC 
structures 

0.020 

iii) 

Frestressed  concrete  structures 

0016 

x  =  mean  deflection  at  the  position  where  the 
acceleration  is  required.  Other  notations  are 
same  as  given  in  10.2. 

For  computing  the  peak  acceleration  in  the  along  wind 
direction,  a  mean  wind  speed  at  the  height  of  the 
building/structure,  Vh  corresponding  to  a  5  year  mean 
return  period  shall  be  used.  A  reduced  value  of  0.01 1 
is  also  suggested  for  the  structural  damping,  0  for 
reinforced  concrete  structures. 

10.3  Across  Wind  Response 

This  section  gives  method  for  determining  equivalent 
static  wind  load  and  base  overturning  moment  in  the 
across  wind  direction  for  tail  enclosed  buildings  and 
towers  of  rectangular  cross-section.  Calculation  of 
across  wind  response  is  not  required  for  lattice  towers. 

The  across  wind  design  peak  base  bending  moment 
Mc  for  enclosed  buildings  and  towers  shall  be 
determined  as  follows: 

K  =  0.5ghphbk2  (1 .06  -  0.06  k ) 

where 


gh  =  a  peak  factor, 


in  cross  wind  direction; 


A  ~  hourly  mean  wind  pressure  at  height  h,  in 
Pa; 

b  =  the  breadth  of  the  structure  normal  to  the 
wind,  in  m; 

h  =  the  height  of  the  structure,  in  m; 

k  =  a  mode  shape  power  exponent  for 
representation  of  the  fundamental  mode 
shape  as  represented  by: 

V(z)=  ff) 

Jc  =  first  mode  natural  frequency  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  across  wind  direction,  in  Hz. 

The  across  wind  load  distribution  on  the  building/ 
structure  can  be  obtained  from  Mc  using  linear 


48 


IS  S75  (Part  3)  :  2015 


distribution  of  loads  as  given  below: 


where  F  = across  wind  load  per  unit  height  at  height  2. 
10.3.1  Peak  Acceleration  in  Across  Wind  Direction 
The  peak  acceleration  at  the  top  of  the  building/ 
structure  in  across-wind  direction  (y  in  m/s2)  with 
approximately  constant  mass  per  unit  height  shall  be 
determined  as  follows: 


5  =  i.5^M(0.76  +  0.24A) 
m0 


Typical  values  of  the  mode  shape  power  exponent,  k 
are  as  follows: 


a)  uniform  cantilever,  k  ~  1 .5 

b)  slender  framed  structure  (moment  resisting). 


*  =  0.5 

c)  building  with  a  central  core  and  moment 
resisting  facade,  *  =  1 .0 

d)  lattice  tower  decreasing  in  stiffness  with 
height,  or  a  tower  with  a  large  mass  at  the 
top,  k  =  2.3 

C  =  across  wind  force  spectrum  coefficient 
8  generalized  for  a  linear  mode,  (see  Fig.  10 
and  Fig.  11). 

P  =  damping  coefficient  of  the  building/structure 
(see  Table  36). 

m0  =  the  average  mass  per  unit  height  of  the 
structure  in,  kg/m. 

10.4  Combination  of  Along  Wind  and  Across  Wind 
Load  Effects 

The  along  wind  and  across  wind  loads  have  to  be 
applied  simultaneously  on  the  building/structure  during 
design. 


—^Turbulence  Intensity  of  0.12  at  2/3  h  -  Turbulence  Intensity  of  0.20  at  2/3  h 

Fig.  10  Values  of  the  Cross  Wind  Force  Spectrum  Coefficient  for  Square  Section  Buildings 


49 


iS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


ANNEX A 
{Clause  6.2) 

BASIC  WIND  SPEED  AT  10  m  HEIGHT  FOR  SOME  IMPORTANT  CITIES /TOWNS 


City /Town 

Basic  wind  S 
m/s 

Agra 

4? 

Ahmedabad 

39 

Ajmer 

47 

Aimora 

47 

Amritsar 

47 

Asansot 

47 

Aurangabad 

39 

Bahraich 

47 

Bengaluru 

'■j 

JJ 

Barauni 

47 

Bareilly 

47 

Bhatinda 

47 

Bhilai 

39 

Bhopal 

39 

Bhubaneshwar 

50 

Bhuj 

50 

Bikaner 

47 

Bokaro 

47 

Chandigarh 

47 

Chennai 

50 

Coimbatore 

39 

Cuttack 

50 

Darbhanga 

55 

Daijeeling 

47 

Dehradun 

47 

Delhi 

47 

Durgapur 

47 

Gangtok 

47 

Guwahati 

50 

Gaya 

39 

Gorakhpur 

47 

Hyderabad 

44 

Imphal 

47 

Jabalpur 

47 

Jaipur 

47 

Jamshedpur 

47 

Jhansi 

47 

Jodhpur 

47 

City/Towsi 

Basic  wind  Speed 
m/s 

Kanpur 

47 

Kohima 

44 

Kolkata 

50 

Kozhikode 

39 

Kumool 

39 

Lakshadweep 

39 

Lucknow 

47 

•Ludhiana  - 

47 

Madurai 

39 

Mandi 

39 

Mangalore 

39 

Moradabad 

47 

Mumbai 

44 

Mysore 

33 

Nagpur 

44 

Nainita! 

47 

Nasik 

39 

Nellore 

50 

Panjim 

39 

Patiala 

47 

Patna 

47 

Puducherry 

50 

Port  Blair 

44 

Pune 

39 

Raipur 

39 

Rajkot 

39 

Ranchi 

39 

Roorkee 

39 

Rourkela 

39 

Shimla 

39 

Srinagar 

39 

Surat 

44 

Tiruchirappalli 

47 

Trivandrum 

39 

Udaipur 

47 

Vadodara 

44 

Varanasi 

47 

Vijayawada 

50 

Vishakapatnam 

50 

51 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


ANNEX B 

[Clause  6.3. 2.4  (b)(ii)] 
CHANGES  IN  TERRAIN  CATEGORIES 


8-1  LOW  TO  HIGH  TERRAIN  CATEGORY 
NUMBER 

In  cases  of  transition  from  a  low  terrain  category 
number  (corresponding  to  a  low  terrain  roughness)  to 
a  higher  terrain  category  number  (corresponding  to  a 
rougher  terrain),  the  velocity  profile  over  the  rougher 
terrain  shall  be  determined  as  follows: 

a)  Below  height  h%,  the  velocities  shall  be 
determined  in  relation  to  the  rougher  terrain; 
and 

b)  Above  height  hx,  the  velocities  shall  be 
determined  in  relation  to  the  less  rough  (more 
distant)  terrain. 

B-2  HIGH  TO  LOW  TERRAIN  CATEGORY 
NUMBER 

In  cases  of  transition  from  a  more  rough  to  a  less  rough 
terrain,  the  velocity  profile  shall  be  determined  as 


follows: 

a)  Above  height  k%,  the  velocities  shall  be 
determined  in  accordance  with  the  rougher 
(more  distant)  terrain;  and 

b)  Below  height  h%,  the  velocity  shall  be  taken 
as  the  lesser  of  die  following: 

1)  that  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
less  rough  terrain,  and 

2)  the  velocity  at  height  hx  as  determined  in 
relation  to  the  rougher  terrain 

NOTE  —  Examples  of  determination  of  velocity 
profiles  in  the  vicinity  of  a  change  in  terrain 
category  are  shows  in  Figs.  12a  and  12b. 

B-3  MORE  THAN  ONI  CATEGORY 

Terrain  changes  involving  more  than  one  category  shall 
be  treated  in  similar  way  to  that  described  in  B-l  and  B-2. 

NOTE  —  Examples  involving  three  terrain  categories  are 
shows  in  Fig.  12c. 


. . . .  PROFILE  FOR  CATEGORY 4 

- - -  PROFILE  FOR  CATEGORY  2 

- — — —  DESIGN  PROFILE  AT  A 

a)  DETERMINATION  OF  VELOCITY  PROFILE  NEAR 
A  CHANGE  IN  TERRAIN  CATEGORY 

(less  rough  to  mere  rough) 


Fk3-  12  Velocity  Profiles  in  the  Vicinity  of  a  Change  in  Terrain  Category 


52 


IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


VELOCITY 


VELOCITY  PROFILE  FOR  CATEGORY  4 
VELOCITY  PROFILE  FOR  CATEGORY  3 
VELOCITY  PROFILE  FOR  CATEGORY  1 
OESSGN  PROFILE 


c)  Determination  of  Design  Profile  Involving  more  than  One  Change  in  Terrain  Category 
Fig.  12  Velocity  Profiles  in  the  Vicinity  of  a  Change  in  Terrain  Category 


53 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clause  633.1) 

EFFECT  OF  A  CLIFF  OR  ESCARPMENT  ON  EQUIVALENT 
HEIGHT  ABOVE  GROUND  (&3  FACTOR) 


C-l  The  influence  of  the  topographic  feature  is 
considered  to  extend  1.5  Le  upwind  and  2.5  Le 
downwind  of  the  summit  of  crest  of  the  feature  where 
Ie  is  the  effective  horizontal  length  of  the  hill  depending 
on  slope  as  indicated  below  (see  Fig.  13). 

Slope  4 

3°<es^17°  L 

B>\7°  Z/0.3 

where 

L  =  actual  length  of  the  upwind  slope  in  the  wind 
direction, 

Z  =  effective  height  of  the  topography  feature, 
and 

9S  =  upwind  slope  in  the  wind  direction. 

In  case,  the  zone  in  downwind  side  of  the  crest  of  the 
feature  is  relatively  flat  (89  <  3°)  for  a  distance 
exceeding  Le,  then  the  feature  should  be  treated  as  an 
escarpment.  Otherwise  the  feature  should  be  treated 
as  a  hill  or  ridge.  Examples  of  typical  features  are  given 
in  Fig.  13. 

NOTES 

!  No  difference  is  made,  in  evaluating  ky  between  a  three 

dimensional  hill  and  two  dimensional  ridge. 

2  In  undulating  terrain,  it  is  often  not  possible  to  decide  whether 


the  local  topography  to  the  site  is  significant  in  terms  of  wind 
flow.  In  such  cases,  the  average  value  of  the  terrain  upwind  of 
the  site  for  a  distance  of  5  km  should  be  taken  as  the  base  level 
from  wind  to  assess  the  height,  Z,  and  the  upwind  slope  8,  of 
the  feature. 

C-2  TOPOGRAPHY  FACTOR,  k3 

The  topography  factor  4  is  given  by  the  following: 

4  =  1  +  C  s0 

where  C  has  the  following  values: 

Slope  C 

3°  <  8S  <  17°  1.2  (HI) 

0s>  17°  0.36 

and  $0  is  a  factor  derived  in  accordance  with  C-2.1 
appropriate  to  the  height,  H  above  mean  ground  level 
and  the  distance,  jc,  from  the  summit  or  crest  relative 
to  the  effective  length,  Le 

C-2.1  The  factor,  s0  should  be  determined  from: 

a)  Fig.  14  for  cliffs  and  escarpments,  and 

b)  Fig.  15  for  ridges  and  hills. 

NOTE  -  Where  the  downwind  slope  of  a  hill  or  ridge  is  more 
than  3°,  there  will  be  large  regions  of  reduced  accelerations  or 
even  shelter  and  it  is  not  possible  to  give  general  design  rules 
to  cater  for  these  circumstances.  Values  of  s0  from  Fig.  15  may 
be  used  as  upper  bound  values. 


REGION  AFFECTED  BY 


54 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


1 3  (b)  HILL  AND  RIDGE  1 3  (c)  CLIFF  AND  ESCARPMENT 


Fig.  13  Topographical  Dimensions 


CREST  CREST 


IS  875  (Part  3)  :  2015 


ANNEX D 

{Clauses  7A.2.2, 7.43.2  and  7.4.33) 

WIND  FORCE  ON  CIRCULAR  SECTIONS 


D-l  The  wind  force  on  any  object  is  given  by: 
F=CfA  p„ 

f  c 

where 

Cf  =  force  coefficient, 

Ae  ~  effective  area  of  the  object  normal  to  the 
wind  direction,  and 

pd  =  design  pressure  of  the  wind. 

For  most  shapes,  the  force  coefficient  remains 
approximately  constant  over  the  whole  range  of  wind 
speeds  likely  to  be  encountered.  However,  for  objects 
of  circular  cross-section,  it  varies  considerably. 

For  a  circular  section,  the  force  coefficient  depends  on 
the  way  in  which  the  wind  flows  around  it  and  is 
dependent  upon  the  velocity  and  kinematic  viscosity 
of  the  wind  and  diameter  of  the  section.  The  force 
coefficient  is  usually  quoted  against  a  non-dimensional 
parameter,  called  the  Reynolds  number,  which  takes 
into  account  of  the  velocity  and  viscosity  of  the  flowing 
medium  (in  this  case  the  wind),  and  the  member 
diameter. 

Reynolds  number,  Re  =  DVd  fv 
where 

D  -  diameter  of  the  member 
Fd  “  design  hourly  mean  wind  speed 

v  =  kinematic  viscosity  of  the  air  which  is  1 ,46 
x  10~5  m2/s  at  15°C  and  standard 
atmospheric  pressure. 

Since  in  most  natural  environments  likely  to  be  found 
in  India,  the  kinematic  viscosity  of  the  air  is  fairly 
constant,  it  is  convenient  to  use  D  Vd  as  the  parameter 
instead  of  Reynolds  number  and  this  has  been  done  in 
this  code. 

The  dependence  of  a  circular  section’s  force  coefficient 
on  Reynolds  number  is  due  to  the  change  in  the  wake 
developed  behind  the  body. 

At  a  low  Reynolds  number,  the  wake  is  as  shown  in 
Fig.  16  and  the  force  coefficient  is  typically  1.2.  As 
Reynolds  number  is  increased,  the  wake  gradually 
changes  to  that  shown  in  Fig.  1 7;  that  is,  the  wake  width 
dw  decreases  and  the  separation  point  denoted  as  sp, 
moves  from  front  to  the  back  of  the  body. 

As  a  result,  the  force  coefficient  shows  a  rapid  drop  at 


Sp 


a  critical  value  of  Reynolds  number  followed  by  a 
gradual  rise  as  Reynolds  number  is  increased  still 
further. 

The  variation  of  Cf  with  parameter  D  Vd  is  shown  in 
Fig.  5  for  infinitely  long  circular  cylinders  having 
various  values  of  relative  surface  roughness  (z/D)  when 
subjected  to  wind  having  an  intensity  and  scale  of 
turbulence  typical  of  built-up  urban  areas.  The  curve 
for  a  smooth  cylinder  (e/D)  =  1  x  10  5  jn  a  steady  air 
stream,  as  found  in  a  low-turbulence  wind  tunnel,  is 
also  shown  for  comparison. 

It  can  be  seen  that  the  main  effect  of  free-stream 
turbulence  is^to  decrease  the  critical  value  of  the 
parameter  D  Vd .  For  subcritical  Hows,  turbulence  can 
produce  a  considerable  reduction  in  Cf  below  the  steady 
air-stream  values.  For  supercritical  flows,  this  effect 
becomes  significantly  smaller. 

If  the  surface  of  the  cylinder  is  deliberately  roughened 
such  as  by  incorporating  flutes,  riveted  construction, 
etc,  then  the  data  given  in  Fig.  5  for  appropriate  value 
of  e/D  >  0  shall  be  used. 

NOTE  —  Sn  case  of  uncertainty  regarding  the  value  of  e  to  be 

used  for  small  roughness,  s/D  shall  be  taken  as  0.001. 


56 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2015 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

(Excluding  Water  Resources  Development  Division)  Sectional  Committee,  CED  37 


Organization 

In  personal  capacity  (80,  SRP  Colony,  Peravallur,  Chennai  600  082) 
Atomic  Energy  Regulatory  Board.  Mumbai 

Bharat  Heavy  Electricals  Limited,  New  Delhi 
Central  Building  Research  Institute  (CSIR).  Roorkee 

Central  Electricity  Authority,  New  Delhi 

Central  Public  Works  Department  New  Delhi 

Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Engineer- in-ChieFs  Branch  (MES),  NewDelhi 

Engineers  India  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Gammon  India  Limited,  Mumbai 

Indian  Institute  of  Technology  Madras,  Chennai 

Indian  Institute  of  Technology  Kanpur,  Kanpur 
Indian  Institute  of  Technology  Roorkee,  Roorkee 

Indian  Metrological  Department,  New  Delhi 
M.N.  Dastur  &  Company  Limited,  Kolkata 

MECON  Limited,  Ranchi 

Ministry  of  Shipping,  Road  Transport  &  Highways,  New  Delhi 
Muncipa!  Corporation  of  Greater  Mumbai,  Mumbai 
National  Buildings  Construction  Corporation  Limited,  New  Delhi 
National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  Ballabgarh 
National  Thermal  Power  Corporation,  Noida 
Research,  Designs  &  Standards  Organization,  Lucknow 
RITES  Limited,  Gurgaon 

Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (CSIR),  Chennai 

TCE  Consulting  Engineers  Limited,  Mumbai 

The  Institution  of  Engineers  (India)  Ltd,  New  Delhi 


Representative  (s) 

Dr  N.  Lakshmanan  (Chairman) 

SHRI  L.  R.  BlSHNOl 

Shri  A.  D  Roshan  (Alternate) 

Shri  S.  S.  Mam 

Dr  A.  K,  Pandey 

Dr  Rajesh  Deoliya  (Alternate) 

Shri  R.  B.  Waljmbe 

Shri  S.  K,  Roy  Chowdhury  (Alternate) 

Shri  A.  K.  Garg 

Shri  Rajesh  Khars  (Alternate) 

Director  C&Mdd  (E&Ne) 

Director  C&Mdd  (N&W)  (Alternate) 

Brig  Sandeep  Rawat 

Shri  V.  K.  Jatav  (Alternate) 

Sum  Vinay  Kumar 

Shri  Sudhir  Chaturvedi  (Alternate) 

Shri  S.  W.  Deshpande 

Shri  Avinash  Y.  Mahendrakar  (Alternate) 

Dr  Devdas  Menon 

Dr  A  Meher  Prasad  (Alternate) 

Dr  Vinay  K.  Gupta 

Dr  Prem  Kishan 

Dr  S.K.Kaushik  (Alternate) 

Shri  K.  Ratnam 

Shri  A.  Das  Gupta 

Shri  Satyaki  Sen  ( Alternate ) 

Shri  Onkar  Sahay 

Shri  A.  K.  Beg  (Alternate) 

Shri  S.  K.  Puri 

Shri  Satish  Kumar,  SE  (P~9)  (Alternate) 

Deputy  Municipal  Commissioner  (ENGG) 
City  Engineer  (Alternate) 

Shri  Rakesh  Marya 

Shri  L.  P.  Singh  (. Alternate ) 

Shri  V.  V.  Arora 

Shri  S.  Sharma  (Alternate) 

Shri  H  Kundu 

Shri  Masoom  Au  (Alternate) 

Joint  Director  Standards  (B&S) 

JT  Director  Stnds  (B&S)  SB-I  (Alternate) 

Shri  Ashok  Kumar  Mathur 

Dr  S.  Selvi  Rajan 

Dr  P.  Harikrishna  (Alternate) 

Shri  A.  P.  Mull 

Shri  A.  Dutta  (Alternate) 

Shri  K.  B.  Rajoria 


57 


IS  875  (Part  3):  2615 

In  personal  capacity,  (P-121,  Sanjay  Nagar,  Ghaziabad  201  001) 

In  personal  capacity,  (142  Deshbandhu  Apartments, 

New  Delhi  110  019) 

In  personal  capacity,  (61,  Civil  Lines,  Roorkee  247  667) 

BIS  Directorate  General 


Shri  S.  K.  Agarwal 
Shri  G.  P.  Lah mi 

Dr  Prem  Krishna 

Shri  D.  K.  Agrawal,  Scientist  cF*  and  Head  (Civil  Engg) 
[Representing  Director  General  (Ex-officio)} 


Member  Secretaries 
Shri  S.  Chaturvedi 
Scientist  ‘F*  (Civil  Engg),  BIS 
and 

Shri  S.  Arun  Kumar 
Scientist  ‘C*  (Civil  Engg),  BIS 


58 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1  APRIL  2016 
TO 

IS  875  (PART  3)  :  2015  DESIGN  LOADS  (OTHER  THAN  EARTHQUAKE)  FOR 
BUILDINGS  AND  STRUCTURES  —  CODE  OF  PRACTICE 

PART  3  WIND  LOADS 

(Third  Revision) 

(Second  cover  page,  Foreword,  para  6,  line  1)  —  Substitute  ‘discipline’  /or  ‘descriptive’. 

(. Second  cover  page ,  Foreword,  para  6,  (c))  —  Substitute  ‘kf  for  ‘k2’. 

( Third  cover  page.  Foreword,  para  after  (j),  line  8)  —  Insert  ‘anemometer’  after  ‘with  the  help  of. 
(Page  2,  clause  3.1)  —  Substitute  ‘Cf  for  ‘Cfd 
(Page  3,  Symbol  r)  —  Insert  Ihfi  after  ‘height  /fi. 

(Page  3)  —  Substitute  ‘ V ZJ  for 

(Page  6,  Fig.  1)  —  Insert  the  follo  wing  notes  at  the  end  of  the  figure. 


‘NOTES 

1  The  occurrence  of  a  tornado  is  possible  in  virtually  any  part  of  India.  ITiey  are  particularly  more  severe  in  the  northern  parts  o! 
India.  The  recorded  number  of  these  tornados  is  too  small  to  assign  any  frequency.  The  devastation  caused  by  a  tornado  is  due  to 
exceptionally  high  winds  about  its  periphery,  and  the  sudden  reduction  in  atmospheric  pressure  at  its  centre,  resulting  in  an 
explosive  outward  pressure  on  the  elements  of  the  structure.  The  regional  basic  wind  speeds  do  not  include  any  specific  allowance 
for  tornados,  it  is  not  the  usual  practice  to  allow  for  the  effect  of  tornados  unless  special  requirements  are  called  for  as  in  the  case  of 
important  structures  such  as,  nuclear  power  reactors  and  satellite  communication  towers. 

2The  total  number  of  cyclonic  storms  that  have  struck  different  sections  of  east  and  west  coasts  are  included  in  Fig;  1,  based  on 
available  records  for  the  period  from  1877  to  1982.  The  figures  above  the  line  (between  the  stations)  indicate  the  total  number  of 
severe  cyclonic  storms  with  or  without  a  core  of  hurricane  winds  (speeds  above  87  km/h)  and  the  figures  in  the  brackets  below  the 
lines  indicate  the  total  number  of  cyclonic  storms.  These  have  been  included  only  as  additional  information.’ 

{Page  10,  Table  4,  *)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing:  ‘^Linear  interpolation  for  intermediate 
values  of  A  is  permitted.’. 

(Page  11,  clause  7.3.33,  para  2)  —  Substitute  ‘The  solidity  ratio  O  ’  for  ‘The  solidity  ratio  fi. 

(Page  1 1,  clause  7 .333, para  2,  lines  3,  5  and  10)  —  Substitute  ‘  0  ’  for  ‘fi. 


[Page  12,  Fig.  2(b),  Right-topmost  figure]  —  Substitute  the  existing  figure  with  the  figure  below: 


Price  Group  4 


Amendment  No.  1  to  IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 

(Page  13,  Table  5,  first  row  under  BUILDING  HEIGHT  RATIO  —  <  —  <  —  )  —  Substitute  ‘  1<— <— 

2  w  2  w  2 

l  3 

for1 

w  2 

1  h  3 

(Page  13,  Table  5,  second  row  under  BUILDING  HEIGHT  RATIO  — <  —  < —  )  —  Substitute 

2  w  2 

3  /  ,  3  1 

— <— <4  ’  for  ‘  — <— <4 
2  w  2  w 

(Page  14,  Table  6,  bottommost  figure)  —  Substitute  the  following  figure  for  the  existing: 


(Page  17,  Table  8)  —  Insert  a’  after  ‘ROOF  ANGLE’. 

(Page  17,  Table  8,  Note  2)  —  Substitute  ‘overhangs,  'for  ‘overhangs,’. 
(Page  1 8,  Table  9)  —  Substitute  the  following  figures  for  the  existing: 


2 


0. 


;S  875 


1  to! 


-  ve  ROOF  ANGLE 


* 

h 

1 


+  ve  ROOF  ANGLE 


(Page  19,  Table  10)  —  Substitute  the  following  figures  for  the  existing: 


C* 


(Page  19,  Table  10)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  table  below  figure: 


Amendment  No.  1  to  IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


0 

PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  Cp 

D 

D’ 

E 

E’ 

END  SURFACES 

C 

c* 

G 

G’ 

0° 

+0.6 

-1.0 

-0.5 

-0.9 

45° 

+0.1 

-0.3 

-0.6 

-0.3 

VO 

o 

o 

-0.3 

-0.4 

-0.3 

-0.4 

-0.3 

+0.8 

+0.3 

-0.4 

FOR  ALL 

VALUE  OF  0 

FOR  J  :  CpTop  =  1 .0,  Cpbottom  =  -0.2 

Tangentially  acting  friction  :  R9q°  =  0.05  p&bd 

(Page  20,  Table  11)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  table  below  figure: 


PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  Cp 

0 

D 

D’ 

E 

E’ 

END  SURFACES 

c 

C’ 

G 

G’ 

0° 

+0.1 

+0.8 

-0.7 

+0.9 

45° 

-0.1 

+0.5 

-0.8 

+0.5 

90° 

-0.4 

-0.5 

-0.4 

-0.5 

-0.3 

+0.6 

+0.3 

-0.4 

o 

O 

oo 

-0.3 

-0.6 

+0.4 

-0.6 

FOR  ALL 

VALUE  OF  0 

FOR  J  :  CpTop  =  -1.5,  Cpbottom  =  0.5 

Tangentially  acting  friction  :  R 90°  =  0.05  pAbd 

(Page  21,  Table  12,  below  figure ,  line  3)  —  Substitute  ‘0  =  90  °’for  ‘0  =  00°’. 
(Page  21,  Table  12)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  table  below  figure: 


0 

PRESSURE  COEFFICIENTS,  Cp 

D 

D’ 

E 

E’ 

END  SURFACES 

c 

C' 

G 

G’ 

0° 

-1.0 

+0.3 

-0.5 

+0.2 

45° 

-0.3 

+0.1 

-0.3 

+0.1 

0 

0 

0s. 

-0.3 

0 

-0.3 

0 

-0.4 

+0.8 

+0.3 

-0.6 

FOR  ALL 

VALUE  OF  0 

FOR / :  CpTop  =  -1.0,  Cpbottom  =  0.4 

Tangentially  acting  friction  :  R90o  =  0.1  pj)d 

(Page  22,  Table  13,  top  figure )  —  Substitute  4h'=0.8h’/<^  ‘hM).0h\ 


4 


Amendment  No.  1  to  IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


(j Page  22,  Table  13)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  table  below  figure: 


(Page  24,  Table  15,  bottom)  —  Substitute  ‘Tangentially’  for  Tengentiallyh 


(Page  26,  Table  17,  bottom)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  entry: 


5 


Amendment  No.  1  to  IS  875  (Fart  3) :  2015 

C Page  27,  Table  18)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  table: 

Table  18  External  Pressure  Coefficients  (Cpe)  for  Curved  Roofs 

_ Q Clause  7.3. 3. 6) _ 

C 


WIND 
- 0 


a)  ROOF  SPRINGING  FROM  GROUND  LEVEL 
C 


b)  ROOF  ON  ELEVATED  STRUCTURE 


VALUES  OF  (A  C\  an.d  C, 


H/f 

C 

C: 

c2 

(A 

0.1 

-  0.8 

too 

-0.8 

f  0.05 

0.2 

-  0.9 

+  0.3 

-  0.7 

+  0.1 

0.3 

- 1 .0 

+  0.4 

-  0,3 

+  0.15 

0.4 

- 1.1 

+  0.6 

4  0.4 

- 

0.5 

- 1.2 

-r  0,7 

0.7 

- 

VOTE:  When  the  wind  is  blowing  normal  to  gable  ends, 
CPg  may  be  taken  as  equal  to  -0.7  for  the  full 
width  of  the  roof  over  a  length  of  02  Iran  the 
gable  ends  and  -0.5  for  the  remaining  portion. 


6 


Amendment  No.  1  to  IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 

(Page 28,  Table  19 .figures)  -  Substitute  'D' far'd*  in  both  figures. 

(Page  31,  Table  2 \, figures,  y-axis,  between  0.4  and  0.8)  -  Substitute  ‘0.6’  for  ‘0.8’. 
(Page  31,  Table  21)  -Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  entry: 


[Page  34,  clause! A. I  (a)]  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

‘a)  If h  <  b,F  =  Cf (d  -  4 h)bpd  +  Cf(d  -  4/i)2/ipd.  and’ 

(Page  36,  Table  25,  Tif/e)  Substitute  ‘(Clause  7.4.2. l)’./br  ‘(Clause7.4.2.2)’. 

(Page  39,  Fig. 5)  —  Substitute  ‘Cf  =  FORCE  COEFFICIENT ’/or  ‘Cf  -  DRAG  COEFFICIENT’. 

(Page  39,  Table  26)  —  Substitute  ‘FORCE  COEFFICIENT,  Cf  for  ‘DRAG  COEFFICIENT  Cf\ 

[Page  40,  Table  28,  SI  No.  (ii),  col  2]  —  Substitute  ‘  DFa  >6m2  Is  ’  for  the  existing  information  given  in 
bracket. 

[Page  40,  Table  28,  SI  No.  (iii),  col  2]  —  Substitute  ‘  bV d  >6m2  / s  ’for  the  existing  information  given  in 
bracket. 

(Page  41,  Table  29,  Title)  —  Substitute  ‘[Clause  7.4.3. 2(a)]' for  ‘[Clause  7.4.3.2  (b)]\ 

(Page  42,  clause  7.4.3.4,  line  10)  —  Substitute  ‘spacing’^or  ‘spac-ing’. 

(Page  42,  Table  30,  Title)  —  Substitute  the  ‘(1/D  =  100)’  in  the  title  in  place  ‘(L/D  =  100)’. 

[Page  42,  Table  30,  SI  No.  (i)  and  (ii),  col  2]  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  values: 


(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

i) 

DV d  <6  m2/s 

1.2 

1.2 

1.2 

1.3 

ii) 

DV  a  >  6  m2/s 

0.5 

0.7 

0.9 

1.1 

(Page  42,  Table  31,  Force  Coefficient  Ct  for)  —  Substitute  ‘Force  Coefficient,  Cf  for’  for  ‘Force 
Coefficient  Ct  for’. 

(Page  42,  Table  31,  col  1)  —  Substitute  ‘0.2’  for  ‘02’. 

(Page  42,  Table  31,  col  4,  sub-sub  heading)  —  Substitute  ‘Super  Critical  Flow  ( DVC\  >  6  nr/s)’  for  the 
existing. 

(Page  43,  Table  32,  Title)  —  Substitute  ‘r (for  ‘H\ 

(Page  44,  Table  34,  sub-heading)  —  Substitute  ‘Subcritical  Flow  (DV a <6  m2/s)’  for  the  existing  and 
‘Supercritical  Flow  ( DPd>6  m2/s)’  for  the  existing. 


7 


Amendment  No.  1  to  IS  875  (Part  3) :  2015 


(Page  44,  clause  8.2,  line  4)  —  Substitute  ‘x’ for  ‘(x) 

(Page  44,  Table  35)  —  Substitute  ‘Subcritical  Flow  ( DV a  <6  m2/s)  All  Wind  Directions’  for  the  existing 
and  ‘Supercritical  Flow  ( DV (i  >  6  m2/s)  All  Wind  Directions’  for  the  existing. 

(Page 45,  Fig.  7)  —  Substitute  ‘x’/or‘X’. 

(Page  45,  Fig.  8,  caption)  —  Substitute  ‘(CLAUSE  8.3 Y  for  ‘(CLAUSE  7.3)’. 

(Page  46,  clause  9.2.1,  Note  2,  line  1)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

‘2  Unlined  welded  steel  cylindrical  structures...’ 

(Page  46,  clause  9.2.1,  Note  4,  line  1)  —  Substitute  ‘9.2.1  (ay  for  ‘8.2.1  (a)’. 

(Page  47,  clause  10.2,  line  14)  —  Substitute  ‘Ma  =  X  Fz  z'  for  ‘Ma  =  X  Fz  Z\ 

(Page  47,  clause  10.2,  line  28)  —  Substitute  ‘(1+  (j)  f'  for  ‘(l+g)2’  in  formula  of  Gust  factor. 

(Page  48,  claiisel()3.  line  13)  —  Substitute4  pu  ’  for  ‘pf. 

(Page  49,  Fig.  10,  x-axis)  —  Substitute ‘...6  8  10...’  for  ‘...6  6  10...’. 

[Page  53,  Fig.  12(b)]  —  Substitute  ‘DESIGN  PROFILE  AT  A’  for  ‘OESIGN  PROFILE  AT  A’. 

[Page  53,  Fig.  12(b)]  —  Substitute  ‘WIND  DIRECTION’  for  ‘WINO  OIRECTION’. 

[Page  53,  Fig.  12(c)]  —  Substitute  ‘WIND  DIRECTION Vor  ‘WINO  OIRECTION’. 

(Page  54,  clause  C-2,  line  6)  —  Substitute  ‘9S’  for  ‘0s’. 

(Page  54,  clause  C-2,  line  9)  —  Substitute  ‘distance,  FT  for  ‘distance,  x\ 

(Page  54,  Fig.  1 3(a)]  —  Substitute  ‘REGION  AFFECTED  BY  TOPOGRAPHICAL  FEATURE’  for 
‘REGION  AFFECTED  BY  TOPOGRAHICAL  FEATURE’. 

(Page  55,  Fig.  14,  caption)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  caption: 

FIG.  14  FACTOR  s0  FOR  CLIFF  AND  ESCARPMENT’ 

(Page  55,  Fig  15,  caption)  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing  caption: 

‘FIG.  1 5  FACTOR  s0  FOR  RIDGE  AND  HILL’ 

(Page  56,  Fig.  17)  —  Substitute  ‘s f  for  ‘sp’. 

(Page  56,  clause  Y)-\, para  7,  line  5)  —  Substitute  ‘s f  for  ‘sp’. 


(CED  37) 


Publication  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


