IS/IS0

3100-l : 1891 (Reaffirmed xxxxx 2001) 2007

w-?dhm5

*@em

--;rqittie
-

Indian Standard

MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS METHOD OF SAMPLING

Its

67.120.10

@BlS

1996

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August

1996

Price Group

2

Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 66

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 3100-l : 1991 `Meat and meat products - Sampling and preparation of test samples - Part 1 : Sampling' issued by the International Organisation for Stadardisation (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of lndii Standards on the recommendation of the Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectiial Committee and approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the word ` International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'; and b) Comma (J has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standard the current practice is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCES International Standard IS0 7002 : 1986 Agricultural food products -- Layout for a standard method of sampling from a lot Corresponding /mYianStandard IS 1648 : 1981 Manual on basic principles of lot sampling
.

Degree of Equivalence Related

IS 5404 : 1984 `Code of practice for handling of samples for microbiologicalanalysis (first revision)' is technically related to IS0 3100 - 2 : 1988 `Meat and meat products - Sampling and preparation of test samples - Part 2 : Preparation of test samples for mi&obiological examination'.

IS/IS0

3100-l : 1991

Indian Standard

MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS METHOD OF SAMPLING

1

Scope

2

Normative

reference

1.1 This part of IS0 3100 gives general instructions and specifies procedures to be f&owed for taking primary samples from meat and meat products.

1.2

A distinction is made between sampling procedures for the following categories of products:

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 3100. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision. and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 3100 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 7002:1986, Agricultural
for a standard method food products - Layout from a lot.

4 consignments

or lots of meat or meat products prepared or packed as individual units of any size (for example sausages, vacuum-packed minced meat, sliced sausages, canned cooked ham), or meat in pieces not exceeding 2 kg in mass;

of sampling

3

Deflnltlons

b) carcasses,

cuts of carcasses, or cured meat in pieces exceeding 2 kg in mass (for example bacon joints, sides of bacon, fresh or frozen joints of meat, fresh or frozen boneless meat, beef sides or quarters, pork sides, lamb carcasses, venison), and mechanically separated meat or dried meat.

For the purposes of this part of IS0 3100, the definitions given in IS0 7002 apply.

4

Administrative

arrangements

4.1
The size and commercial value of such products may make it necessary to take secondary samples, using only part(s) of each primary sample, taking into account the purpose for which those samples are required.

Sampling agent

I.3

1.4 These sampling procedures are generally intended for commercial purposes. In special cases, for example in the case of official food inspection, it may be necessary to follow other procedures.
1

Sampling shall be performed by a sampling agent authorized by the parties concerned and properly trained in the appropriate technique. He or she shall act independently and not accept interference by third parties. The sampling agent may be assisted, under his/her responsibility, by other persons. The sampling agent and his/her assistants shall take appropriate measures to prevent contamination of both the consignment [or lot(s)] and the sampling units (for example by washing the hands before handling the material to be sampled).

IS/ISO

3100-l

: 1991

4.2

Representatives

of parties

concerned

If possible, representatives of the parties concerned shall be given the opportunity to be present when sampling is performed.

perature of the product and of the sampling units, methods of sterilization of the apparatus and sampling containers, and any other special information relating to the material being sampled.

5
4.3 Sampling report

Seals and labels

Laboratory samples shall be accompanied by a report signed by the sampling agent and countersigned by the representatives of the parties concerned, if present. This report shall give the following information:

Laboratory samples shall each be sealed and labelled. The seal shall be fitted in a manner making it impossible for the contents, or the label, to be removed without disturbing the seal. The labels shall be of suitable quality and size for the purpose (for example light-coloured, greaseproof, waterproof board with a reinforced eyelet hole). The label shall be marked indelibly with all the information necessary for the identification of the sampling unit, Including at least the following:

a) name and address of the sampling agent; b) names and addresses
the parties concerned; of the representatives of

Cl place, date, point and time of sampling; 4 nature and origin of the consignment 6 quantity
.and number consignment or lot(s); of units or lot(s); the

4 nature and origin of the consignment b) quantity
and number consignment or lot(s); of units

or lot(s); the

constituting

constituting

cl place and date of sampling; 4 names of buyer and seller;

9 marks and lot number(s): 9) identification
lorry(ies), of the ship, as applicable; railway wagon(s) or

e) number and marking of the lot(s) from which the
sampling units were taken: of the air immediately around units at the moment of sampling. the

h) place of shipment; 9 destination;

9 temperature
sampling

6

Methods

of sampling
equipment and sampling unit

i) date of arrival of the consignment k) name and address of seller; 9 name and address of buyer;

or lot(s); 6.1 Sampling containers 6.1.1

General requirements

ml number and date of bill of lading or contract; n) method of sampling; 0) number of sampling PI designation
sampling units for each lot; units; Containers shall be of a capacity and shape suited to the size of the sampling units to be taken. They shall be securely closed, in the case of bottles by means of a suitable rubber or plastic stopper or a new cork stopper or by a screw cap made of metal or plastic. Stoppers shall be covered with a foil made of inert material before being pressed into the sample container. Screw caps shall have a liquidtight liner made of inert material. Materials and equipment shall not influence the results of the examinations to be carried out and, in particular, shall meet the appropriate requirements specified in 6.1.2 to 6.1.4. It may be necessary to minimize the effect(s) of light and/or oxygen. 2 Container materials coming directly into contact with the sampling units shall be waterproof, greaseproof, insoluble and non-absorbent.

of the seals of sampling

4) number and marking of the lot(s) from which the
units were taken; units: units are to be sent.

0 mass of the sampling

s) place to which the sampling

The report shall also include details of any relevant conditions or circumstances that may have influenced sampling, for example the state of the packages and the condition of their surroundings (temperature and humidity of the atmosphere), tem-

is/is0 3100-l :1991

6.1.2 Equipment and containers for sampling units intended for chemical analysis The sampling equipment and sampling unit containers shall be dry and clean, and shall not influence the chemical composition of the product. 6.1.3 Equipment and containers for sampling units intended for sensory examination The sampling equipment and sampling tainers shall be dry and clean, and shall any flavour or odour to the product. unit connot impart

separate of test.

sampling

units shall be taken for each type

6.3

Sampllng

procedure

6.3.1 Meat or meat products prepared or packed as lndlvldual units of any site, or meat in pieces not exceeding 2 kg In mass [see 1.2 a) J Take units units. Take units from mentioned or whole pieces as primary sampling the required number of primary sampling each lot according to the sampling plan in 6.2.

6.1.4 Equipment and containers for sampling units intended for microbiological examination and for other purposes (for example biological, parasitological, serological, histological or toxicological examination and for incubation tests) The sampling equipment and sampling tainers shall be clean and sterile, and influence the microflora of the product. unit conshall not

6.3.2 Carcasses, cuts of carcasses or cured meat in pieces exceeding 2 kg in mass, and mechanically separated meat or drled meat [see 1.2 b)] Take the required number of primary sampling units from each lot according to the sampling plan mentioned in 6.2 and isolate them either for the removal of secondary sampling units for destructive examination In ihe laboratory (for example chemical or microbloioglc~i examination) or for non-destructive examination (for example visual inspection, sensory assessment, microbiological tests using the swab technique). No single sample taken from a carcass or other large piece of meat can be truly representative of the whole but, equally, it is impracticable to anaiyse the entire meat unit. Therefore, in taking primary or secondary samples, the purpose for which they are being taken will determine the procedure to be foilowed. Thus, in general, samples shall be taken as roilows:

If necessary; sterilization of sampling equipment and sampling unit cont.ainers shall be performed by one of the following methods: a) wet sterilization at not less than less than 20 min; 121 "C for not

b) dry sterilization at not less than 170 "C for not less than 1 h, using an oven with efficient air circulation to ensure that the stated temperature is maintained in all parts of the oven. if the use of either method a) or method b) is impossible, and if the equipment is to be used immediately after sterilization, one of the following methods may be used: c) exposure to steam at 100 "C for 1 h; ethanol and flaming to

a) surface sampling

d) immersion in 96 % (V/V) burn off the ethanol; e) exposure to a hydrocarbon tane) torch flame so that contact the flame.

(e.g. propane or buail working surfaces

units (for example for the detectlon of coiiforms or Salmonellae) shall be taken by wiping over the entire meat unit (or selected areas) with large moist swabs or (for maklng microbiological counts) by defining areas using a template and excising or, in the case of frozen meat, scraping those areas; sampling units having a mass between 500 g and 1 kg for chemical or microbiological examination in the laboratory shall be taken, wherever possible, from an existing cut surface and in such a way as to cause minimum damage;

b) excised secondary

6.2

Number

of sampling

units to be taken

The number of sampling units to be taken in order to obtain a primary sample which is as representative as possible of the consignment or lot(s) shall be in accordance with the sampling plan specified in the contract or otherwise agreed between the parties concerned. if different types of test (e.g. chemical, microbioiogical, physical and sensory) are to be carried out, 3

(3 deep

muscle sampling units for microbiological examination [for example for the determination of the causes of deep putrefaction at bone level ("bone taint")] shall be taken from the affected pat-t of the carcass with a sterile stainless steel myectome or, in the case ot frozen meat, with a brace and bit:

IS/IS0 3100-l :1991

d)

fat sampling units (for example for the estimation of fat-soluble compounds such as certain pesticides) shall, wherever possible, be taken from the kidney fat; drip sampling units, for example from vacuumshall be taken packed refrigerated meat, aseptically through the foil or alter opening the package, using sterile syringes and/or flasks or bottles. If the meat is returned to the lot, this shall be done after repacking under vacuum. Temperature record the temperature of each

material, close it securely, clause 5 and 6.1).

seal

it and

label

it (see

e)

Pack swabs for microbiological exami.nation in sterilized containers and drip samples in sterile flasks or bottles. If it Is feasible to pack the different sampling NOTE 1 units together in one or more containers, sealing and labelling of each unit is not required if these containers are sealed and labelled in accordance with clause 5 and 6.1. 6.5 Transport and storage of sampling units

6.3.3

Where practicable, lot sampled. 6.4 Packaging

sampling

units

6.4.1 Meat or meat products prepared or packed as individual units of any size, or meat In pieces not exceeding 2 kg in mass [see 1.2 a)] If the units are packed in an airtight container, no further packing is required. If the units are not so packed, pack each sampling unit in a suitable sample container, close it securely, seal it and label it (see clause 5 and 6.1). 6.4.2 Carcasses, cuts of carcasses or cured meat in pieces exceeding 2 kg in mass, and mechanlcally separated meat or dried meat [see 1.2 b)] Pack each sampling unit in a bag of suitable plastic

Sampling units shall be sent to the laboratory as quickly as possible afler sampling, during which time they shall be maintained at the temperature at which the product concerned should be stored. l-lowe,/er, in the case of products that are refrigerated, transport the sampling units a) at 0 "C to 2 "C, if it is expected examined within 24 h, or that they will be

b) frozen at a temperature not exceeding in other cases; however, samples that subjected to physical or sensory tests in general, be frozen.

-24 "C, are to be shall not,

Take precautions to prevent exposure of the sampling units to direct sunlight during transport. Sampling units shall arrive in the laboratory in an undamaged state and with undisturbed seals.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indim Srandnrds Act, `i986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. FAD 56 ( 553 ).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone { 323 38 76 41 17

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M,b.

I. P. Road, Maniktola

1 337 84 86 26,337 99,337 9120 85 61

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 { 60 38 20 43 25 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 1 235 02 15 19,235 16,235 04 23 42 15 Western
: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi, India

