IS 13102 -( Part 5 ) : 1992

(Reaffirmed 2003)

Indian Standard GEOTEXTILES PART 5 DETERMINATION A WIDE

METHODS OF TEST
OF TENSILE PROPERTIES WIDTH STRIP USING

UDC

677'06 : 624'13 : 620'17

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

February 1992

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 3

Geotextiles

Sectional Committee,

TX 029

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 5 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Geotextiles Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. Tensile characteristics of geotextiles are of particular importance if the geotextile has to perform the reinforcing function. The test methods for these characteristics depend on the type of geotextile that is woven or nonwoven. Among the popular tests are the strip tensile test, the grab test and the wide width strip tensile test. The methods for strip tensile test and grab test as given in IS 1969 : 1985 are equally important for geotextiles. This standard prescribes wide width strip tensile test. Most geotextiles can be tested by this methods. Some modification of techniques may be necessary for particular geotextiles, for example strong geotextiles, meshes or geotextiles made from glass fibre, to prevent them from slipping in the jaws or being damaged as a result of being gripped in the jaws. The basic distinction between this method and other methods for measuring tensile properties of fabrics, is the width of the specimen. This width by contrast is greater than the length of the specimen. Some geotextiles have a tendency to contract ( neck down ) under load in the gauge length area. The width of the specimen specified in this method reduees the contraction effect of those fabrics and provides a closer relationship to expected fabric behaviour in the field and a standard comparision of geotextiles. This standard is based on draft international tensile test. standard ISO/DIS 10319 Geotextiles Wide width

In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13162 ( Part .5 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

GEOTEXTILES-METHODSOFTEST
PART 5 DETERMINATION A WIDE OF TENSILE PROPERTIES WIDTH STRIP IS USING Title

1 SC0P.E 1.1 This standard ( Part 5 ) prescribes an index test method for determination of the tensile properties of geotextiles and related products using a wide width strip. The method is applicable to most geotextiles including woven fabrics, non-wovens, layered fabrics, knitted fabrics and felts. The method is applicable to geogrids but thespecimen dimensions may need to be altered. 1.2 This method covers the measurement of load elongation characteristics and includes -procedures for calculation of secant stiffness, maximum-load per unit width, strain at maximum load and equivalent strain at maximum load. 1.3 Procedures for measuring the tensile properties of both conditioned and wet specimens are included. 1.4 The measuring device can be either In any case it mechanical, optical or infra-red. shall not damage the sample. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: are necessary

No.

1070 : 1977

Water for general laboratory use ( second revision ) Methods for determination of breaking load and elongation of woven textile fabrics ( second revision ) Method for conditioning of textiles Geotextiles - Methods of Test: Part 3 Determination of thickness at specified pressures

1969 : 1985

6359 : 1971

13162 ( Part 3 > : 1991

3 DEFINITIONS 3.0 For the purpose of this following deficitions shall apply. 3.1 Extension at Preload standard, the

The extension corresponding to an applied load equal to 1 percent of the -maximum load or 350 N which ever is less. 3.2 Maximum Load The maximum tensile force ( in kN ) obtained during a test ( see Point D in Fig. 1 ).

SECANT STIFFNESS

STRAIN

("/.I

Fra. 1 TYPICAL LOAD-STRAIN CURVE 1

IS 13162 ( Part 5 ) : 1992
3.3 Secant Stiffness

5 APPARATUS

AND REAGENTS

The ratio of change in load per unit width to a stated value of strain ( in kN/m 1 for examDIe in Fig. 1 the percent`age secant stiffness * is ( K/CA ). 3.4 The Gauge Lengtb The distance between the two reference points of the sample. They are placed on the sample symmetry axis which is parallel to the applied load and are 6 cm apart ( 3 cm on each side of the sample symmetry center ). This distance can be adapted for the geogrids in order to include an entire number of nodes in the gauge length. 3.5 Increase in Gauge Length The measured at the preload. 3.6 Strain The increase in gauge length of a specimen during a tensile test expressed as a percentage of the initial nominal -gauge length. 3.7 Strain at Maximum Load The percentage strain corresponding to maximum load ( see Point D in Fig. 1 ). 3.8 Tensile Strength ( kN/m ) The maximum resistance to deformation per unit width developed for a specific material when subjected to tension by one external force. 3.9 Strain Rate Strain rate of testing is defined as the speed of the jaws expressed as a percentage of the initial jaw separation. The initial jaw separation shall be as defined in 8.1.1. When testing with capstan grips, the strain rate shall be defined on the basis of the increase in gauge length at maximum load divided by the duration of the test.
4 PRINCIPLE

5.1 Tensile Testing Machines A constant rate of extension ( CRE ) or a constant-rate-of-traverse ( CRT ) tensile testing machine as specified in IS 1969 : 1985 shall be used. 5.2 Jaws which are sufficiently wide to hold the with width of the specimen and entire appropriate means to limit slippage or damage. 5.2.1 Compressive grips will be used for most materials. For materials where the use of compressive grips gives rise to excessive jaw breaks or slippage, capstan grips may be used. 5.2.2 When capstan grips are used, the reason for their use and the separation between the centre of the capstan at the beginning of each The use of test should be kept to a minimum. capstan shall be specified in the report.
NOTE - It is stressed that it is essential to choose jaw faces that limits the slippage of the geotextile that may occur especially for stronger geotextiles. Examples of number of jaw faces that have been found satisfactory is given in Fig. 2 (a) to2 (c). Other grips which limits slippage may also be acceptable. Examples of jaw designs suitable for testing geogrids are given in Fig. 3 (a) and (b).

extension

minus

the extension

the

5.3 Extensiometer 5.3.1 Extensiometer may also be used for testing in place of CRE or CRT tensile testing machines. The extensiometer shall be able to follow two reference points on the sample without any damage or slippage. Examples of extensiometers include mechanical, optical, infra-red or electrical devices. 5.3.2 Care should be taken to ensure that the measurement represents the true movement of the reference points. 5.3.3 If any irregularity of the stress-strain curve due to the extensiometer is remarked, this result shall be discarded and another specimen shall be tested. 5.4 Distilled -Water For wet specimens only ( see IS 1070 : 1977 ). 5.5 Non-Ionic Wetting Agent For wet specimens only. 6 TEST SPECIMENS 6.1 Number of Test Specimens 6.1.1 Cut a minimum of five test specimens in the machine direction and the cross direction. 6.2 Selection of Test Specimen 6.2.1 The specimens shall be selected as specified in IS 13162 ( Part 3 > : 1991. 2

A test specimen is held across its entire width in the jaws of a tensile testing machine operated at a ~given rate of strain, applying a longitudinal force to the test specimen until the specimen The tensile properties of the test ruptures. specimen are calculated from machine scales, recording charts, or an dials, autographic interfaced computer. The rate of strain is fixed at 20 f 5 percent per minute for all geotextiles and related products, if constant rate of extension tensile testing machine is used. In case of constant rate of traverse tensile testing machine, the rate of traverse shall be 20 f 5 mm per minute.

IS 13162(-Par4 5 ) : 1992

SERRATED WEDGE

GEOTEXTILE

Ii

SAMPL

.E-

3
0

EPOXY OR SOFT METAL WEDGE

COMPRE-SSIVE FORCE ADJUSABLE UP TO LOOkN,MAXIMUM WIOTH OF SAMPLE: 0.5m

(a)

(b) BLOCK JAWS COMPRESSIVE BLOCK JAWS

COMPRESSIVE

STRAIN MEASURMENT

PRINT

GEOTEXTLE

CAPSTAN

(cl

Frc;. 2 EXAMPLESOF JAWS FACES FOR TESTING ~GEOTEXTILES 6.3 Dimensions of Test Specimens 6.3.1 Prepare each finished test specimen 200 mm wide ( excluding fringes when applicable, see 6.3.2 ) and of sufficient length to ensure 100 mm between the jaws with the length dimension being designated and parallel to the direction for-which the breaking load is being measured. Where appropriate and for slippage control, draw two lines running the full width of the test specimen, perpendicular to the length dimension and separated by 100 mm ( except for capstan grips ) [ see Fig. 2(c) 1. 6.3.2 For woven geotextiles cut each specimen 220 mm wide and then remove an equal number of threads from each side to obtain the 200 mm, nominal specimen width. 6.3.2.1 This helps to maintain the specimen integrity during the test. When specimen integrity is not affected, the specimens can be initially cut to the finished width. 3 6.3.3 For geogrids the specimen shall be of at least 200 mm width and sufficiently long to ensure a length of at least 100 mm. The test specimen shall contain at least 5 complete tensile elements with the width and at least one row of nodes or cross-members excluding the nodes or cross-members by which the test specimen is held.in the jaws ( see Fig. 4 ). 6.3.3.1 The reference points shall be marked on a central row of tensile elements that are subjected to test and shall be at least 60 mm apart. The reference points shall be mounted at the central point of a rib and shall be separated by at least one node or cross member. If necessary, in order to achieve the minimum separation of 60 mm, the two reference points can be separated by more than one row of nodes or cross-members. In this case, the requirement to mount the reference points at mid-rib shall be maintained and the gauge length shall then be

IS 13162(Part 5):

1992

Al

(b) Fra.

3

EXAMPLES OF JAW DESIGN SUITABLE FOR TESTING GEOGRIDS

WIDTH

(w)

-I

NOTES 1 The nodes and ribs on lines C and D are those by which the specimen iS to be held in the jaws ~of the clamps. 2 Width W is greater or equal to 200 mm. 3 The gauge length shall be equal to or exceeded 60 mm aod shall enclose at least one low cross-members If it is necessary more rows or cross-members can be included in the gauge length until it exceeded 60 mm. The gauge length is always measured from mid rib to mid rib. 4 Cut all ribs at least 10 mm from any node. FIG. 4 SPECIMENS OF GEOGRIDS 4

IS 13162 ( Part 5 ) : 1992 an integral number of pitches of the Measure the gauge length within f3 mm. grid. machine direction and cross direction tests, respectively, is parallel to the direction of application of force. Where appropriate do this by having the two lines, which were previously drawn 100 mm apart across the width of the test specimen positioned as close as possible adjacent to the inside edges of the upper and lower jaws. 8.3 Installation of the Tensile on the Extensiometer Testing Machine

`6.3.4 When both the wet maximum load and the dry maximum load are required, cut each test -specimen at least twice the required length. Number each test specimen and then cut crosswise into two parts, one for determining the dry maximum load, and the other for determining the wet maximum load, each portion shall bear the specimen number. In this manner, each paired break is performed on test specimens containing the same threads.
NOTE - For geotextiles which shrink excessively when wet, the tensile strength is determined from the maximum load in wet conditions and the initial width before wetting.

Place the reference points on the sample. Ensure that there will be no slippage of the points during the mounting of test specimens or during testing. 8.4 Measurement of Tensile Properties

7 CONDITIONING

ATMOSPHERE

7.1 The test specimens shall be conditioned and the test conducted in the standard atmosphere for testing textiles as prescribed in IS 6359 : 1971.
NOTES 1 The test specimens may be considered to have been conditioned when the change in mass of the test specimen in any two successive weighings made at intervals of not less than 2 h does not exceed 0'25 percent of the original mass of the test specimen. 2 Conditioning and/or testing at a specified relative humidity may be omitted if it can be shown that the results are not affected.

8.4.1 Start the tensile testing machine and continue running the test until the specimen ruptures. Stop the machine and reset to the initial gauge position. Record and report the maximum load to an accuracy of 0'2 percent of the full scale and strain to the first decimal place. 8.4.2 The decision to discard a break shall be based on observation of the specimen during the test upon the inherent variability of the geotextile and the provision of 5.4. In the absence of other criteria for rejecting a jaw break, any break occurring within 5 mm of the jaws which results in a value below 50 percent of the average of all other breaks shall be discarded. No other break shall be discarded unless the test is known to be faulty.
NOTES

`7.2 Test sp-ecimens to be tested in the wet condition shall be immersed in water, maintained at a temperature of 27 & 2�C. The time of immersion shall be sufficient to wet out the test specimens thoroughly, as indicated by nd significant change in maximum load or stain following a longer period of immersion, and at least 21 hours. To obtain thorough wetting, it may be necessary to add not more than 0'05 percent of a nonionic neutral -wetting agent ( see 5.5 ) to the water. 8 PROCEDURE 8.1 Setting up of Machine 8.1.1 Adjust the distance between the jaws at the start of the test to give a length of 100 f 3 mm except for geogrids and for geotextiles when using capstan grips. Select the force range of the testing machine such that the break occurs between 30 percent and 90 percent of full scale force. Set the machine to a rate of strain or rate of traverse as given in 4.1. Test the conditioned specimens in the atmosphere specified in 7. 8.1.2 For wet test specimens perform the test within 3 minutes after removal from the water. 8.2 Insertion of Test Specimen in Jaws 8.2.1 Mount the test specimen centrally in the jaws. Take care that the specimen length in the 5

1 It is difficult to determine the precise reason why certain specimens break near the edge of the jaws. If a jaw break is caused by damage to the test specimen by the jaws, due to randomly distributed weak place, it is a legitimate resu!t. In some cases. it may also becaused by a concentration of stress in the area adjacent to the jaws width as the load is applied. In these cases, a break near the edge of the jaws is inevitable and should be accepted as a characteristic of the particular method of test.
2 Special procedures are required for the preparation of test specimens made from specific materials ( glass fibre, carbon, composite geotextiles. etc ). to minimize damage in the jaws. If a test specimen slips in the jaws or if more than one quarter of the specimens break at a point within 5 mm of the edge of the jaw, then (a) the jaws may be padded; (b) the test specimen may be coated under the jaw face area; or (c) the jaw face may be modified. If any of the modifications listed above are used, state the method of modification in tho test report.

8.5 Measurement of Strain Measure the increase in gauge length of the test specimen at any stated load by means of a suitable recording device.

IS 13162 ( Part 5 ) : 1992 9 CALCULATIONS 9.1 Tensile Strength Calculate the tensile strength ( kN/m ) directly from the information obtained from the tensile testing machine using the formula: af = Ff X C where
af =

where J 8CC

. ..(I)

the secant stiffness in ( kN/m ) at the specified strain E; = the determined load at strain E F (in kN); E = the corresponding percentage strain; land C = value obtained from formulae (2) or (3) given in 9.1 as appropriate.
=

the tensile strength in kN/m of width;

10 TEST REPORT The test report shall include the following information: 4 Identification of the sample tested;

Ff = the obsered maximum load ( in kN ); and C = value obtained from formulae (2) or (3) given below as appropriate. For nonwovens similar materials: or close woven fabrics or

b) The mean tensile strength

C = l/B

. ..(2)

where B = specimen width in metres, or For coarse woven fabrics, meshes, grids or similar materials: c = ZWNB . ..(3) where Nm = the minimum number of tensile elements within 1 m width of the product being tested; and Ns = the number of tensile elements within the test specimen. 9.2 Strain at Maximum Load Record the strain in percentage load ( see Fig. 1 ). 9.3 Secant Stiffness To calculate the secant stiffness, determine load for a specified strain, ( see Point B in Fig. 1 ) and use the following formula: (FXCX 100) 9 8ec = E at the maximum

d)

e>
f)

in both the machine direction and cross direction ( see 9.1 ); If applicable, the mean strain at the maximum load in both the machine direction and cross direction ( see 9.2 ); The mean secant stiffness corresponding to the strain of 2, 5 and 10 percent, if required; The standard deviation or coefficient of variation of any of the properties determined; The condition of the test specimens, that is wet nor dry; number of test specimens tested in each direction; The make and model of testing machine; The type of jaw including the dimensions of the jaws and the type of jaw faces used, type of deformation measuring system, and initial ja.w separation; A load-strain curve with the yield points; Details of any deviations from the specified procedure; and reported to 1 percent

8) The
h)

3
k) d

rate n) Strain accuracy.

Standard Mark Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of In&cm and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Irdian Standards. The use of the Standard
.I

Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Btmm of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. TXD 29 ( 001 I ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected be reproduced in the free use, in and sizes, type or Publication ), BIS.

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 BahadurLShah Zafar Marg, New-Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to,all Offices ) Telephones 331 01 31 331 13 7s

Regional Offices : Central :iManak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar"Marg, NEW Delhi-l 10002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 7OOqS4 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

37 86 62 53 38 43 412916

160036 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAGATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 93

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat

Press,

Delhi,

Indiaj

