Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


ama Gare Íeenn cnt 
URW srt 
(TEN FRAT ) 


Glossary of Terms in Human 
Resource Development 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.03; 03.100.30 


© BIS 2014 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e "IW Wo, 9 eme WAL nb ae feeeit-110002 
ade ac MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2014 Price Group 6 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Management and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


Human Resource Development (HRD) is part of Human Resource Management (HRM) function of an organization, 
focussed at development of employees through a wide range of interventions including Recruitment, Training, 
Career Planning, Job Enrichment, Job Rotation, Job Enlargement, Competence Building — Knowledge, Skills 
and Attitudes, Organizational Behaviour — Communication, Team Building, Interpersonal Relations, Performance 
Management including Reward and Recognition. HRD focuses on enhancing employee capacity, better quality 
of work life and achievement of organizational goals and objectives through increased organizational effectiveness. 


This is the first revision of this standard, which was initially published in year 2002 and has now been revised to 
include additional terms based on new and emerging concepts. 


This standard has been prepared for the guidance of all organizations to assist them in the correct interpretation 
of terms used in Human Resource Development. It is hoped that this glossary of terms will help in establishing a 
generally recognized usage and eliminate ambiguity and confusion that might arise from individual interpretation 
of terms. This standard is intended mainly to cover definitions of terms relating to human resource development, 
and it does not necessarily include all the legal meanings of the terms. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 15198 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard is intended to define and explain 
the terms commonly used in Human Resource 
Development. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


2.1 360 Degree Feedback — A process of collecting 
feedback from the relevant role set members that may 
include seniors, juniors, peers, customers etc. 


2.2 Absenteeism — An employee being away from 
work/workplace on a working day or during working 
hours. 


2.3 Accountability — Reportability of the individual, 
group or organization regarding its function to the 
authority. 


2.4 Action Learning — Action learning is an 
educational process whereby the participants study 
their own actions and experiences in order to improve 
performance. Learners acquire knowledge through 
actual actions and repetitions, rather than through 
traditional instructions. 


2.5 Action Research — Action research is a process 
based on systematic collection of data and then 
selection of a change action based on what the analyzed 
data indicate 


2.6 Alienation — A feeling of dejection, loss of a 
sense of identity and detachment. 


2.7 Aptitude — Aptitude is a set of characteristics 
symptomatic of an individual's ability to acquire with 
training, some specific field of knowledge, skill or set 
of responses. 


2.8 Aptitude Test — Tool to assess a person's aptitude. 


2.9 Appointing Authority — The authority 
empowered to make appointments to the post in an 
organization. 


2.10 Appreciative Inquiry — Seeking to identify the 
unique qualities and special strengths of an 
organization, which can then be built on to improve 
performance. 


2.11 Assertiveness — A form of behaviour 


characterized by a confident declaration or affirmation 
of a statement without need of proof; this affirms the 
person's rights or point of view without either 
aggressively threatening the rights of another 
(assuming a position of dominance) or submissively 
permitting another to ignore or deny one's rights or 
point of view. 


2.12 Assessment Centres — A dedicated place where 
a set of performance simulation tests are administered 
to evaluate a candidate's managerial potential. 


2.13 Association — An organized body of people who 
have an interest, activity or purpose in common. 


2.14 Attrition — The reduction in staff and employees 
in acompany through normal means (natural wastage), 
such as retirement and resignation. 


2.15 Attrition Rate — Attrition rate is calculated by 
dividing the number of employees who left in the year 
by average employees in the year and multiplied by 
100. 


2.16 Attitude — A state of mind related to feeling, 
thinking or behaviour of an individual. 


2.17 Audio-visual Aids — A tool for training through 
the use of sound and picture. 


NOTE — Audio-visual aids include overhead projector (OHP), 
computers, etc. 


2.18 Authority — The right vested in a managerial 
position to make decisions, to give orders and to expect 
the orders to be obeyed. 


2.19 Autonomy — Freedom to make certain decisions 
and act without reference to higher authority. 


2.20 Behaviour — Manifestation of feeling, attitude 
and values through written, verbal or body language. 


2.21 Body Language — A form of non-verbal 
communication based on body movement/ expression/ 
gestures. 


2.22 Bonus — A sum of money given to an employee 
in addition to the employee's usual compensation. 


2.23 Brainstorming — A group process for 
encouraging uninhibited generation of ideas commonly 
used in problem solving situations. 


IS 15198 : 2014 


2.24 Business Game — A technique based on 
simulation of real life business situations having 
multiple applications. 


2.25 Career Planning — A conscious and planned 
process for the development of employees of an 
organization with a view to utilize their full potential. 


2.26 Case Study — A method to study, to contemplate 
and to discuss a real/imaginary situation to define vital 
questions that need to be answered in a given situation. 


2.27 Change — Making things different. In the 
context of HRD, this term applies to forces that bring 
in dynamic effects in organizations such as attitudinal 
and behavioral change. 


NOTES 


1 Attitudal Change — Change in employee's thoughts, feelings 
and values. 


2 Behavioural Change — Manifestation of change in feelings, 
thoughts and values of employee (s) through written, verbal or 
body language. 


2.28 Change Agent — A person or group, which 
initiates or facilitates, desired changes in the 
organization. 


2.29 Coaching — A planned process aiming at 
improving an employee's capabilities through 
instructions and evaluations. 


2.30 Collective Bargaining — A process of joint 
discussion between authorized representatives of 
management and trade union to arrive at a decision 
based on offers and counter offers related to conditions 
of service. 


2.31 Communication — Transference and 
understanding of ideas, information and opinion. 


a) Formal Communication — Communication 
carried out through prescribed channels. 


b) Informal Communication — Communication 
arising out of personal relationship between 
two or more people. 


c) Vertical Channel of Communication — An 
upward or downward communication 
between different hierarchy of employees in 
an organization. 


d) Upward Channel of Communication — 
Communication from subordinate to seniors, 
in an organization. 

e) Downward Channel of Communication — 
Communication from seniors, to subordinate 
in an organization. 

f) Horizontal Channel of Communication — 
Communication between people holding 
same or similar position in an organization. 


2.32 Compensation — It is a monetary benefit given 


to employees in return for the services provided by 
them. 


2.33 Competition — A situation where an individual 
or a group of people strive to do better than others. 


2.34 Competency Mapping — Competency mapping 
is a process of identifying key competencies needed 
by an organization and/or a job and aligning 
organization's practices of training, recruitment, 
performance management, and succession planning to 
the competencies so identified. 


2.35 Conflict — Disagreement or diverse opinions due 
to factors related to resources, ideology, philosophy, 
psychology; may be with others or within oneself. 


2.36 Conflict Management — A process of 
understanding and resolving the conflict. 


2.37 Consultation — A process of seeking 
information, opinion and viewpoint. 


2.38 Content Validity — A test is content valid when 
it contains a fair sample of the tasks and skills actually 
needed for the job in question. 


2.39 Controlling — A process of measuring and 
correcting the deviation from expected work 
performance and behaviour. 


2.40 Coordination — It is the process of integration 
of efforts of individuals to achieve organizational goals. 


2.41 Core Values — Basic values of an individual/ 
institution which are uncompromising in nature and 
do not change frequently. 


2.42 Corporate Culture — It is a sum total of values, 
beliefs, attitudes shared by people working in an 
organization. 


2.43 Corporate Strategy — A plan of action by an 
organization to meet the challenges keeping in mind its 
inherent strength and weaknesses and likely 
opportunities and threats to achieve corporate objectives. 


2.44 Corporate Values — The philosophical and 
ethical values, beliefs, attitudes and standards explicitly 
and implicitly shared and adhered to by the company 
personnel for achieving organizational objectives and 
mission. 


2.45 Counselling — Face-to-face facilitation process 
with a view to increasing self-awareness and deciding 
how to improve. The principles followed in counselling 
are rapport building, empathy, objectivity, listening, 
confidentiality, self-judgement and self-determination. 


2.46 Creativity — Ability to generate new and useful 
ideas. 


2.47 Credibility — Dependability/trust of an 
individual/ institution. 


2.48 Credibility Gap — Variance in the degree of 
trust and understanding between two or more 
individuals/ institutions. 


2.49 Criterion Validity — Type of validity based on 
showing that scores on the test (predictors) are related 
to job performance (criterion). 


2.50 Decision-making — A process of choosing out 
of the given alternatives, the one which gives optimum 
results based on wisdom, intelligence and available 
information. 


2.51 Delegation — A process of giving authority in 
an organization. 


2.52 Delphie Technique — Consensus of group of 
experts from within and outside, based on subjective 
and objective results. 


2.53 Development — A process for improving 
competency and capacity of employees in an 
organization. 


2.54 Disciplinary Action — A process of taking 
departmental action against an employee for 
committing an act of misconduct. 


2.55 Disciplinary Authority — The authority 
competent to impose any of the penalties on its 
employees. 


2.56 Discussion Method — A training method in 
which learning takes place through information sharing 
and debate. 


2.57 Distributive Justice — The fairness and justice 
of a decision's result. 


2.58 Downsizing — Planned reduction in manpower. 
2.59 Ego — An individual's self-perception. 


2.60 Ego State — A state of mind of an individual's 
self-perception. In transactional analysis there are three 
ego states, namely, parent, adult and child. 


2.61 Emotional Labour — An effort to display 
organizationally required emotions irrespective of 
one's own feelings. 


2.62 Employee — A person who is hired to provide 
services to an organization on a regular basis in 
exchange for compensation. 


2.63 Employee Participation — Involving employees 
in activities of organization and decision-making 
process. 


2.64 Employer-Employee Relations — A harmonious 
relationship between the employer/management and 
the workforce of the organization based on shared 
responsibility. 


IS 15198 : 2014 


2.65 Employee Satisfaction — A sense of 
contentment among the employees in relation to their 
expectation from the organization. 


2.66 Employees Productivity — It is a measure of 
efficiency of utilization of resources by an employee. 


2.67 Evaluation of Training — Assessing the impact 
of training in relation to the defined objectives. 


2.68 Ex-gratia — A sum of money paid by the 
employer when there was no obligation or liability to 
pay it. 


NOTE — Ex-gratia in Latin means “out of goodwill”. 


2.69 Executive Development — A conscious and 
planned process of preparing executive for taking 
higher responsibilities. 


2.70 Exit Interviews — A method of obtaining 
feedback from an employee leaving the organization 
in order to improve organizational effectiveness. 


2.71 Employee Advocacy — Responsibility taken up 
for clearly defining how management should be 
treating employees, make sure employees have the 
mechanisms required to contest unfair practices, and 
represent the interests of employees within the 
framework of its primary obligation to management. 


2.72 Employee Engagement — An individual's 
involvement with, satisfaction with, and enthusiasm 
for the work he or she does. 


2.73 Expectation — The degree of responsibility 
anticipated from others. 


2.74 Experiential Method — A learning process in 
training by sharing work experience in a two way 
interaction. 


2.75 Faculty — In the context of HRD, this term refers 
to members involved in the process of imparting 
training. 


2.76 Feedback — Process of obtaining information 
about various systems in order to evaluate their 
efficiency and effectiveness and to make corrections, 
if necessary. 


2.77 Fish Bowl Method — A syndicate method in 
which a small group consisting of a person each drawn 
from other groups, consider problems and make 
decisions while the other participants of the groups 
act as observers. 


2.78 Flexible Work Hours — A system that allows 
employees some discretion over when they arrive at 
work and when they leave. 


2.79 Forced Distribution — Method similar to 
grading on a curve; predetermined percentages of rates 
are placed in various performance categories. 


IS 15198 : 2014 


2.80 Frustration — A negative state of mind of an 
individual/group that brings dejection and alienation. 


2.81 Gain Sharing — A formula-based group 
incentive plan whereby the gains arriving out of group's 
performance are shared with the group. 


2.82 Goal — It is a desired objective set by an 
organization. 


2.83 Goal Setting — A process of establishing goals 
to be achieved in a specified time with specified 
resources. 


2.84 Grapevine — An informal channel of 
communication based on hearsay. 


2.85 Grievance — A complaint relating to work or 
environment. 


2.86 Grievance Redressal — A process of resolving 
the grievance(s) of an employee(s). 


2.87 Group — Collection of a number of individuals 
for achieving common objective by sharing common 
norms with dependence on each other. There could be 


a) Formal Group — A collection of two or more 
people having structured relationship, well 
defined tasks and sharing common norms to 
achieve common objectives. 

b) Informal Group — A collection of two or 
more people having no predetermined roles 
and relations but sharing common objectives. 


2.88 Group Discussion — A process where number 
of individuals having common norms deliberate on 
some identified issues to bring about a consensus. 


2.89 Group Dynamics — Forces operating in a group 
which influences its behaviour. 


2.90 Guidance — Method of improvement of an 
employee's efficiency and effectiveness by giving 
appropriate advice. 


2.91 Halo Effect — Drawing a general impression about 
an individual on the basis of a single characteristics. 


2.92 Hierarchy — Structure with different vertical 
levels having a clear line of authority. 


2.93 Human Excellence — A sense of achievement 
or actual achievement of the employees to contribute 
the best of their potential to organization. 


2.94 Human Relations — Understanding, trust and 
interaction between two or more people. 


2.95 Human Resource Accounting (HR 
Accounting) — A means of accounting for people as 
an organizational resource and a measure of cost 
incurred towards recruitment, selection, training and 
development of human assets. 


2.96 Human Resource Audit (HR Audit) — A 
method of assessing the contribution of human resource 
to an organization and their weakness to achieve 
organization objective. 


2.97 Human Resource Development (HRD) — A 
continuous process to upgrade and develop 
information, knowledge, skill, behaviour, performance 
and potential of employees. 


2.98 Human Resource Information System — 
Interrelated components working together to collect, 
process, store, and disseminate information to support 
decision-making, coordination, control, analysis, and 
visualization of an organization's human resource 
management activities. 


2.99 Human Resource Utilization (HR 
Utilization) — Effective deployment of human 
resource for achieving the organization's objectives. 


2.100 HR Scorecard — Measures the HR function's 
effectiveness and efficiency in producing employee 
behaviours needed to achieve the company's strategic 
goals. 


2.101 Human Value System — A set of shared values 
promoting trust and understanding among employees. 


2.102 Hygiene Factor — Those working conditions 
and conditions of work which may lead a person to a 
stage of no dissatisfaction from a stage of dissatisfaction. 


2.103 In-basket Game — A form of training which 
attempts to simulate the working situation by setting 
the trainees realistic tasks with a view to develop 
capabilities. 


2.104 Incident Method — A variation of the case 
study in which a small team or group analyze the case 
to identify critical issues. 


2.105 Induction — A process of interaction between 
anewly appointed employee and the organization with 
a view to facilitating employee's adjustment in the 
organization. 


2.106 Induction Plan — A plan for systematic 
exposure of a new entrant to various aspects of an 
organization. 


2.107 Industrial Relations — Relations between 
employer and employee and different sets of people in 
an organization/ industry. 


2.108 Information Sharing — A process of sharing 
information relating to plans, changes and other 
organization related activities with employees. 


2.109 Innovation — A process of finding out new 
and desirable products, methods, procedures and other 
aspects for the betterment of the organization. 


2.110 Institution Building — A long-term strategy 
for the development of an organization with active 
involvement and participation of all its members. It 
aims at value based strengthening of the capacities. 


2.111 Integration — Harmonization of activities and 
synthesis of views, ideas and beliefs. 


2.112 Interpersonal Competence — Knowledge and 
skill to understand relations and successfully resolve 
disputes, if any, between individuals and group. 


2.113 Inter-union Rivalry — Conflicts and 
differences existing between two or more trade unions. 


2.114 Intra-union Rivalry — Conflicts and 
differences existing within the same trade union. 


2.115 Interview — A formal meeting to assess the 
capabilities and competencies of a person for specified 
task. In the context of HRD, generally used for 
recruitment and promotion. 


2.116 Job — All the work carried out by a worker or 
a group of workers in the completion of their prescribed 
duties and grouped together under one title or 
definition. 


2.117 Job Analysis — The process of determining and 
recording pertinent information relating to the nature 
of a specific job. 


2.118 Job Description — A written statement 
covering the duties and responsibilities of a job. 


2.119 Job Enlargement — Providing variety of 
functions to be performed at the same horizontal level 
to reduce monotony and broaden the perspective. 


2.120 Job Enrichment — A process of motivating 
employees by providing additional responsibilities so 
as to make the job more rewarding and satisfying. 


2.121 Job Evaluation — A process of determining 
the relative economic worth of jobs. 


2.122 Job Hopping — Frequent change of jobs in a 
short duration for personal gain. 


2.123 Job Redesign — A process of changing the job 
structure to achieve a new performance objective for 
overall improvement in the performance of work. 


2.124 Job Rotation — A process of planned transfer 
to a different job to broaden employees exposure and 
increase their knowledge and skill. 


2.125 Job Satisfaction — Contentment derived from 
the job and the work environment. 


2.126 Job Stress — Tension, anxiety relating to 
performance of a job when demands exceed abilities. 


2.127 Joint Decision-making — A process of making 


IS 15198 : 2014 


collective decision with the employee on organizational 
issues and sharing equal responsibilities for the same. 


2.128 Joint Management Council — A participative 
forum for joint decision-making at the organizational 
level. 


2.129 Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) — A term 
used to identify the indicators to be used for 
performance measurement. KPIs are commonly used 
by an organization to evaluate its success or the success 
of a particular activity in which it is engaged. 


2.130 Knowledge Management — The process of 
organizing and distributing an organization’s collective 
wisdom so the right information gets to the right people 
at the right time. 


2.131 Knowledge Workers — Knowledge workers 
are individuals who are valued for their ability to act 
and communicate with knowledge within a specific 
subject area. What differentiates knowledge work from 
other forms of work is its primary task of “non-routine” 
problem solving that requires a combination of 
convergent, divergent, and creative thinking. 


2.132 Leadership — The process of influencing 
people’s behaviour so that they strive willingly and 
enthusiastically for the attainment of organizational 
goals. The various styles of leadership are given below: 


a) Autocratic — Style of leadership with a high 
degree of ego, self-assertion, high concern for 
task and low concern for people. 


b) Democratic — Participative style of 
leadership with equal concern for task as well 
as people. 


C) Laissez-faire — Style of leadership with least 
interference with high concern for people and 
low concern for work. 


2.133 Learning — Enhancement of knowledge, skill 
and change in behaviour occurring as a result of 
training, insight, experience and practice. 


NOTE — Cognitive learning is defined as learning through 
one's experience. 


2.134 Learning Curve — The curve showing 
relationship between training time and the performance 
of learners. 


2.135 Learning Environment — A congenial 
atmosphere in an organization which facilitates 
acquisition of knowledge and germination of new 
ideas. 


2.136 Lecture Method — A training methodology 
giving theoretical and conceptual input of a subject by 
an individual speaking to the trainees. 


2.137 Line Function — Activities directly related to 


IS 15198 : 2014 


achievement of primary objectives of the organization. 


2.138 Management by Objectives (MBO) — A 
process of setting quantifiable time-bound targets and 
achieving these with willing cooperation of employees. 


2.139 Management Development — Planned efforts 
to improve managerial abilities and effectiveness. 


2.140 Management Education — Formal education 
in basic principles and practices of management. 


2.141 Management Game — A training method in 
which participants group into teams, consider a 
sequence of problems in the form of simulation and 
make decisions. 


2.142 Management Training — Systematic 
development of knowledge, skill and attitude, with a 
view to enhancing performance and potential of 
executives. 


2.143 Managerial Grid — A model representing 
different styles of leadership indicating task and people 
orientation. 


NOTE — This is sometimes also referred to as leadership grid. 


2.144 Manpower Planning — To forecast and assess, 
both qualitative and quantitative, needs of human 
resource in an organization. 


2.145 Mentoring — A process of inducting an 
employee in the work culture of an organization under 
the supervision and guidance of an experienced person. 


2.146 Method Improvement — A scientific analysis 
of existing work procedure with a view to find out the 
most economical and effective way of doing a work. 


2.147 Method Study — A systematic recording and 
critical examination of existing and proposed ways of 
doing work, as a means of developing and applying 
easier and more effective methods and reducing costs. 


2.148 Mission — The basic reason for the existence 
of an organization. It spells out who the company is, 
what it does, and where it is headed. 


2.149 Morale — State of mind of employees 
reflecting level of enthusiasm, satisfaction and 
willingness to work together. 


2.150 Motivation — An urge/ drive of an individual 
to put one's best to accomplish organizational goals 
and objectives. 


a) Extrinsic Motivation — Motivation created 
through external rewards. 

b) Intrinsic Motivation — Motivation created 
through internal rewards. 


2.151 Need — An urge to acquire and use any goods 
or services. 


2.152 Negative Reinforcement — It is an external 
and undesirable behavioural motivation which an 
individual gets from the organizational environment. 
It involves strengthening a behaviour through the 
removal of an aversive stimulus. 


2.153 Negotiation — Refers to a dialogue between 
two or more people when they try to find a mutually 
acceptable solution. 


2.154 Occupational Health Programme — 
Preventive medical measures for keeping employees 
in sound health. 


2.155 Off-shoring — Moving away some of the 
operations of a company outside of its national 
boundaries, primarily to take advantage of lower costs. 


2.156 Organization — A collective human endeavour 
to accomplish common objectives through defined 
roles and relationships. These could be of various types, 
as given under: 


a) Formal Organization — A structured 
organization with established chain of 
command and roles assigned to individuals. 

b) Informal Organization — An unstructured 
organization without established chain of 
command and assigned roles or where norms 
are decided by the members themselves. 

c) Flat Organization — An organizational 
structure with least possible number of 
hierarchy. 


d) Matrix Organization — A combination of two 
or more organizational structures wherein a 
set of individuals is accountable to two or 
more people 


2.157 Organizational Commitment — A job related 
attitude that broadly refers to an employee's 
psychological attachment to the organization. 


2.158 Organizational Citizenship Behaviour 
(OCB) — Discretionary behaviour that is not part of 
an employee's formal job requirements, but that 
nevertheless promotes the effective functioning of the 
organization 


2.159 Organizational Climate — A sum total of 
physical and psychological environment of an 
organization. 


2.160 Organizational Development — It is a 
systematic, integrated and planned intervention to 
improve organizational effectiveness. 


2.161 Organization Hierarchy — It is a pattern of 
multiple levels indicating the roles and relationships 
among employees in the organization. 


2.162 Organizational Structure — It is a framework 


that managers devise for creating a pattern of 
relationships to coordinate the activities of the 
employees of an organization. 


2.163 Outplacement — A term used to describe 
efforts made by a downsizing company to help former 
employees through the transition to new jobs and help 
them re-orientate to the job market. 


2.164 Outsourcing — The process of contracting out 
an activity(ies), fully or partly, to another organization. 


2.165 Participation — Involvement of employees in 
organizational activities. 


2.166 Participative Forum — Formal and informal 
forums providing opportunities for interaction and 
involvement of employees. 


2.167 Participative Management — A style of 
management based on involvement of employees in 
various managerial activities of the organization. 


2.168 Perception — A process by which individuals 
organize and interpret their sensory impressions in 
order to give meaning to their environment 


2.169 Performance Appraisal — A systematic 
evaluation of employees with respect to performance 
on the job and his potential for development. 


2.170 Performance Counselling — A process of 
helping an employee by a senior in analyzing 
performance and other job behaviour in order to 
increase effectiveness in the job. 


2.171 Performance Management — Taking an 
integrated, goal-oriented approach to assigning, 
training, assessing, and rewarding employees’ 
performance. 


2.172 Personality — Unique combination of physical, 
human and social qualities of an individual. 


2.173 Placement — It is a process of assigning a 
position to an individual in an organization according 
to his knowledge and skill, with a view to put the right 
person on the right job. 


2.174 Positive Reinforcement — It is an external and 
desirable motivation which an individual gets from the 
organizational environment. 


2.175 Potential — Capability of an individual or a 
group to perform a given job. 


2.176 Potential Appraisal — A process of assessment 
of the capability and capacity of an employee with a 
view to assigning higher responsibilities. 


NOTE — Potential appraisal is a part of performance appraisal. 


2.177 Potential Development — A process of 
imparting knowledge, enhancing skill, changing 


IS 15198 : 2014 


attitude with a view to assigning higher responsibilities 
and duties. 


2.178 Power — Ability to influence others' opinion 
and behaviour arising out of knowledge, competence 
Or position. 


2.179 Proactive Approach — An anticipatory plan 
of action for the situations likely to arise in future. 


2.180 Problem Solving — A process of facilitating 
managers to diagnose issues and arrive at solution 
thereof. 


2.181 Procedural Justice — The perceived fairness 
of the process used to determine the distribution of 
rewards. 


2.182 Productivity — Productivity is the measure of 
efficiency of utilization of resources. It can be 
quantitatively expressed as the ratio of the output in 
terms of the goods/ services and the input in terms of 
the resources used. 


2.183 Productivity Agreement — A mutually arrived 
consensus through collective bargaining relating to 
productivity norms in an organization. 


2.184 Productivity Audits — Systematic and 
objective activity to find out the extent to which 
requirements related to agreed productivity norms have 
been met. 


2.185 Productivity Bargaining — A process of 
negotiation and joint discussion between authorized 
representative of management and trade union related 
to productivity norms. 


2.186 Programmed Learning — Trainee teaching 
himself through a prepared text in stages — mastering 
one step and then going to other leading to a goal. 


2.187 Promotion — A process of placing an employee 
on a job carrying higher duties and responsibilities. 


2.188 Psycho-analysis — Psycho-therapeutic 
technique based on bringing out of unconscious 
meaning of words, actions and mental images. 


2.189 Psychometric Test — Psychological tests 
designed using mathematics, for measurement and 
applications in psychology particularly mental testing. 


2.190 Punishment — Punitive action against an 
employee. 


2.191 Quality Circle — It is a small group of 
employees doing similar work, meeting voluntarily and 
regularly, to identify and analyze work-related quality 
and their problems, recommending/ implementing their 
solutions themselves. 


2.192 Quality of Work Life — It relates to factors 


IS 15198 : 2014 


contributing to job satisfaction, well being, welfare, 
productivity and delight of an employee. 


2.193 Questionnaire Method — It is a technique of 
collecting information with the help of a structured 
questionnaire seeking written responses from the 
respondents. 


2.194 Reactive Approach — Action taken to deal with 
a situation subsequent to the occurrence of the event. 


2.195 Recognized Union — A union which has been 
granted formal recognition by the management. 


2.196 Recruitment — It is a process of encouraging 
prospective candidate to apply for a job. 


2.197 Recruiting Yield Pyramid — The historical 
arithmetic relationships between recruitment leads and 
invitees, invitees and interviews, interviews and offers 
made, and offers made and offers accepted. 


2.198 Redundancy — In the context of HRD, it refers 
to surplus manpower. 


2.199 Refreezing — A process of preparing an 
individual or a group to shed preconceived notions and 
inhibitions to receive human resource interventions. 


2.200 Registered Union — A union registered under 
Trade Union Act, 1926. 


2.201 Reinforcement — Refers to conditions which 
may be introduced into learning situations to increase 
the probability that a given response will reappear in 
the same situation. 


2.202 Relaxation — A psychotherapeutic process of 
getting rid of stress and strain. 


2.203 Responsibility — An obligation to discharge 
one's assigned task in the best possible manner. 


2.204 Retirement — Cessation of active service on 
reaching the age of superannuation. 


2.205 Retrenchment — ‘Retrenchment’ means that 
the business itself is being continued but that a portion 
of the staff or the labour force is discharged as surplus. 


2.206 Reward — Something given in appreciation of 
good work. 


2.207 Rightsizing — A planned process of 
optimization of manpower. 


2.208 Role — A set of expectations of how the 
occupant of a particular position in an organization 
ought to perform. 


2.209 Role Analysis —It is a process of analyzing the 
role to describe and list out various functions and 
activities in a job. 


2.210 Role Efficacy — It is the effectiveness of an 


individual occupying a particular role in an 
organization. 


2.211 Role Play — It is a training technique in which 
trainees assume an identity other than their own to deal 
with real or hypothetical situations. 


2.212 Salary — It is a form of compensation paid 
periodically by an employer to an employee. 


2.213 Selection — A process of choosing the right 
person for the job. 


2.214 Self-Actualization — A stage of highest 
motivation wherein one achieves the highest level of 
one's potential. 


2.215 Self-Development — A process of growth and 
learning for an individual by personal efforts. 


2.216 Self-Management — A stage in management 
where one understands one's responsibilities and 
conducts accordingly. 


2.217 Sensitivity Training/Sensitivity Lab/T Group 
— Unstructured group training with no agenda or stated 
goals. It aims at developing sensitivity within people 
towards thoughts, feelings and behaviour of other 
persons and through this, improve upon one's human 
interactions. 


2.218 Sexual Harassment — Intimidation, bullying 
or coercion of a sexual nature or the unwelcome or 
inappropriate promise of rewards in exchange of sexual 
favours substantially interfering with a person's work 
performance or crating a hostile or offensive work 
environment. 


2.219 Shop Council — A participative forum to 
discuss and solve problems and issues at the shop level. 


2.220 Simulation — The training provided in a 
specially created environment which reproduces 
conditions of the actual working situation. 


2.221 Skill — Operational competence to perform a 
job. 


2.222 Small Group Activity — A small group with a 
high degree of cohesiveness, understanding and clarity 
of roles with a view to improve or enhance the ability 
to achieve assigned task. 


2.223 Staff Organization — Activities facilitating/ 
supporting the line function. 


2.224 Stock Option — The right to purchase a stated 
number of shares of a company stock at today's price 
at some time in the future. 


2.225 Strategic Human Resource Management — 
Formulating and executing human resource policies 
and practices which help a company achieve its 
strategic aims. 


2.226 Succession Planning — a process for 
identifying and developing internal people with the 
potential to fill key business leadership positions in 
the company, when they fall vacant. 


2.227 Trade Union — It is a voluntary association of 
workers formed to promote and protect their interest. 


NOTE — For example, better working conditions or pay, 
through collective action. 


2.228 Training Needs — The assessment of 
deficiencies identified for upgrading/enhancing the 
competence of a person in an organization. 


2.229 Variable-pay Programme — A pay plan that 
bases a portion of an employee’s pay on some individual 
and/or organizational method of performance. 


IS 15198 : 2014 


2.230 Virtual Classroom — Special collaboration 
software used to enable multiple remote learners, using 
their PCs or laptops, to participate in live audio and 
visual discussions, communicate via written text, and 
learn via content such as Power Point slides. 


2.231 Wage — It is a form of compensation paid by 
an employer to an employee calculated on some piece 
or unit basis. 


2.232 Whistle-blower — A person who tells the 
public or someone in authority about alleged 
dishonesty, activities against public interest, illegal 
activities (misconduct), or unethical practices occurring 
in a government department, a public or private 
organization, or a company. 


IS 15198 : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 04 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 
ASSOCHAM, New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Confederation of Indian Industry, Bangalore 


DGQA, Kanpur 


Defence Research & Development Organization, Ministry of 


Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes, 


Ministry of Labour & Employment, Mumbai 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FICCI, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Finance, Delhi 


Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Management, Indore 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 
Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Vadodara 


Management Development Institute, Gurgaon 


Maruti Udyog Limited, Gurgaon 


National Informatic Centre, Department of Information 
Technology, New Delhi 


Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 


Punj Lloyd Limited, Gurgaon 


S.V. University, Tirupati 


The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (804, Chelsea Tower, Omaxe Heights 


Vibhuti Khand, Gomti Nagar, Lucknow 226010) 


10 


Representative(s) 
Suri V. K. Jan (Chairman) 
PROF AMAN AGARWAL 


Suri M. MALLARAJ Uns 
Sun BALARAJ SETH (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. SETH 
Suni JAGDISH PRASHAD (Alternate) 


Suri AJAY SINGH 
Suri S. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr Sarita NAGPAL 
Suri C. V. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI DEOKI NANDAN 
Suri M. V. KuMBHALKAR (Alternate) 


Sun Rasywant B. SINGH 
Suri S. S. KIRAR (Alternate) 


Dr M. RAJARAM 
Suri R. N. MEENA (Alternate) 


SHRI S.V. NARASIMHAM 
Suri M. K. Jan (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEVAN BAJAJ 


PROF SAURABH AGARWAL 
ProF (SHRIMATI) MANJU AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dn (SuRiMaTI) VuAYA KATTI 
Dn Biswasit Nac (Alternate) 


Dn V. K. Gupta 
Suri M. K. BHARDWAJ 
Ms RiNA CHAKRAVORTY 


Suri K. RAVINDRANATH 
Sarı MoHAMMED HABIBULLA (Alternate) 


DR B. A. METRI 


Suri A. K. TOMER 
Suri S. Bose (Alternate) 


Dr V. SIVARAMAKRISHNAIAH 


Capt D. K. SINGH 
Lr Cpr S SREEKANTH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. YADAV 
SHRI SANJAY SRIVASTAV (Alternate) 


SHRI ADARSH SONI 
Suri Mures Arora (Alternate) 


Pror P. RAJASEKHARA REDDY 
Suri J. P. SINGH 


Pror S. CHAKRABORTY 


IS 15198 : 2014 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (D-27, Panchsheel Enclave, New Delhi 110017) Pnor R. K. SACHDEVA 
BIS Directorate General Suri N. K. PaL, Scientist ‘F & Head (MSD) 
Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI RENU GUPTA 
Scientist ‘E’ (MSD), BIS 


Panel on Human Resource Management, MSD 4/P-29 


Organization Representative(s) 
Indian Institute of Management, Indore Pror KAMAL KisHorE JAIN (Convener) 
BIMTECH, Noida Pror K. K. SINHA 
Indian Institute of Management, Indore ProF S. K. Misura/Pror PATTURAJ 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 04 (0448). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


