**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8886-22 (1980) : Ships' ordinary rectangular windows, 
Part 22 Details of swing bolts and wing nuts [TED 17: 
Shipbuilding] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629*12-011 83 



IS : 8886 ( Part XXII ) - 1980 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
SHIPS' ORDINARY RECTANGULAR WINDOWS 

PART XXII DETAILS OF SWING BOLTS AND WING NUTS 



1- Scope — Specifies the dimensions for swing bolts and wing nuts used for glass holder for heavy 
and light type rectangular windows. 

2. Terminology — For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions given in IS : 8886 
(Part l)-1978 'Specification for ships 1 ordinary rectangular windows: Part I Types and dimensions' 
shall apply. 

3. Materia! — The material used fer the construction of swing bolts and wing nuts shall be according 
to IS: 8886 ( Part ll)-1978 'Specification for ships 1 ordinary rectangular windows: Part II General 
requirements'. 

4. Dimensions 

4.1 The dimensions of swing bolts shall be as given in Fig. 1. 

4.2 The dimensions of wing nut used with swing bolts shall be as given in Fig. 2. 

1 




50 



80 



2.5x45 




22 



3 



Ail dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS OF SWING BOLT 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 2 DIMENSIONS OF WING NUT 



Adopted 29 February 1980 



© May 1980, ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 




(S : 8886 (Part XXII)- 1980 

4.3 The dimensions of pin used for swing bolts shall be as given in Fig, 3 S 

5. Tolerances — The tolerances of dimensions shall conform to coarse series of 15:2102-1969 
* Allowable deviations for dimensions without specified tolerances (first revision) 1 . 

ENDS TO BE CLENCHED 



AFTER ASSEMBLV 


? 


\7W 




i 


1 


j 


1 


50 




*12M1 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 3 DIMENSIONS OF PIN USED FOR SWING BOLT 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on ship's rectangular windows. Other 
standards in the series are: 

Part I Types and dimensions 

Part II General requirements 

Part III Positioning 

Part IV Details of position of lugs for hinges and swing bolts and securing holes on the 

frame 
Part V Details of frame, inward opening, side hinged, heavy type bolted windows 
Part VI Details of frame, inward opening, side hinged, light type bolted windows 
Part VII Details of frame, inward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type welded windows 
Part VIII Details of frame, inward opening, top hinged, heavy type bolted windows 
Part IX Details of frame, inward opening, top hinged, light type bolted windows 
Part X Details of frame, inward opening, top hinged, heavy and light type welded windows 
Part XI Details of frame, non-opening, heavy type bolted windows 
Part XII Details of frame, non-opening, light type bolted windows 
Part XIII Details of frame, non-opening, heavy type welded windows 
Part XIV Details of frame, non-opening, light type welded windows 
Part XV Details of frame, outward opening, side hinged, heavy type bolted windows 
Part XVI Details of frame, outward opening, side hinged, light type bolted windows 
Part XVII Details of frame, outward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type welded 

windows 
Part XVIII Details of glass holder, inward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type bolted 

and welded windows 
Part XIX Details of glass holder, outward opening, side hinged, heavy and light type 

bolted and welded windows 
Part XX Details of glass holder, top hinged, heavy and light type bolted and welded 

windows 
Part XXI Details of hinge pin 
Part XXII Details of swing bolts and wing nuts 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following: 

a) ISO 3903-1977 Shipbuilding — Ships' ordinary rectangular windows. International 

Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 

b) DIN 80704 Bow nuts, metric screw thread. Deutches Institut fur Normung. 

c) 'DlN>85698 Eye bolts metric thread. Deutches Institut fur Normung. 

2 



Printed at Arcee Press. New Delhi 110055 



