HRA AAF IS 8148 : 2018 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


SACS BIN Tha та-фетен — 
fafsrts 


(480 ет) 


Ducted and Package 
Air-Conditioners — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 23.120 


© BIS 2018 


anda AM 5101 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чая, 9 serere TH MT, 4% ее - 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR МАКС 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 13 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1976 and subsequently revised in 2003. The experience gained in 
implementation of this standard necessitates this revision and certain changes that are necessary are incorporated 
in this revision. 


The methods of test for room air conditioners of capacity up to 10 500 W is specified in 1S 1391 (Part 1) : 2017 
‘Room air conditioners — Specification: Part 1 Unitary air conditioner’ and up to 18 000 ХУ is specified in 
IS 1391 (Part 2) : 2018 ‘Room air conditioners — Specification: Part 2 Split air conditioners’. This standard has 
been prepared to test ducted unitary and ducted split air conditioner of capacity above 3 500 W by psychometric 
and other methods of test suitable for such units. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from the following International 
Standards: 


ISO 13253 : 2017 Ducted air-conditioners and air-to-air heat pumps — Testing and rating for 
performance 
ISO 16358 (Part 1) : 2013 Testing and calculating methods for seasonal performance factors of 


air-cooled air conditioners and air-to-air heat pumps — Part 1: Cooling 
seasonal performance factor 


The quantities have been expressed in International System of Units (SI). The basic units of measurement 
together with their symbols for the various quantities used in the text have been listed in Annex H. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex J. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


DUCTED AND PACKAGE AIR — 
CONDITIONERS — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This Standard specifies performance testing, 
the standard conditions and the test methods for 
determining the capacity and efficiency ratings of 
air-cooled air-conditioners and air-to-air heat pumps. 
This Standard is applicable unitary and split ducted 
air conditioners having air-cooled and water cooled 
condenser, and ducted air to air heat pumps. 


1.2 This standard is applicable for: 


a) Residential and commercial unitary and split air 
conditioners and heat pumps; 

b) Utilizing single stage, two stage, multi stage and 
variable capacity components; 

с) Single refrigeration system having nominal 
cooling capacity 3500 W and above with one 
evaporator and one condenser, controlled by a 
single thermostat/controller; and 


d 


М7 


Multiple split system utilizing one or more 
refrigeration systems controlled by а single 
thermostat/controller: 

1) One outdoor and one or more indoor units, or 


2) One or more outdoor and one indoor unit. 


1.3 This Standard is not applicable to the rating and 
testing of the following: 


a) Water-source heat pumps; 

b) Multi-split-system air-conditioners and air-to-air 
heat pumps (VRF); 

c) Mobile (windowless) units having a condenser 
exhaust duct; 

d) Individual assemblies not constituting a complete 
refrigeration system; 

e) Equipment using the absorption refrigeration 
cycle; and 

f) Non-ducted equipment (see IS 1391 part 1 and 2 
for testing of such equipment). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 


of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


15 No. Title 

101 (Part 6/ Methods of sampling and test 
Sec 1) for paints, varnishes and related 
: 1988 products: Part 6 Durability tests, 


Section 1 Resistance to humidity 
under conditions of condensation 
(third revision) 


302 (Part 1) Safety of household and similar 


: 2008 electrical appliances: Part 1 General 
requirements (sixth revision) 
996 : 2009 Single-phase a.c. industrial motors 


for general purpose (third revision) 


1391 (Part 1) 
: 2017 


Room аш conditioners  — 
Specification: Part 1 Unitary air 
conditioners (third revision) 


1391 (Part2) Room air conditioners  — 
: 2018 Specification: Part 2 Split air 

conditioners (third revision) 

12360:1988 Voltage bands for electrical 
installations including > preferred 
voltages and frequency 

12615:2018 Line operated three phase а.с. motors 
( IE CODE ) “efficiency classes and 
performance specification” ( third 
revision ) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Packaged Air Conditioner — The unit for 
which the condenser is built as a separate package 
for remote field installation and interconnection shall 
be considered as a packaged air conditioner. It is an 
encased assembly as a self-contained unit primarily 
for floor mounting designed to provide free delivery 
of conditioned air to an enclosed space, room, or 
zone (conditioned space). It includes a prime source 
of refrigeration for cooling and dehumidification and 
means for the circulation and cleaning of air, with 
or without external air distribution ducting. These 
machines are equipped with either water-cooled or 
air-cooled condenser. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


3.2 Ducted Air Conditioner — An encased factory- 
made assembly or assemblies designed primarily to 
provide conditioned air to enclosed space (s) through 
a duct. It includes a prime source of refrigeration 
for cooling and dehumidification and means for the 
circulation and cleaning of air. This may be provided 
in more than one assemble, the separated assemblies 
which are designed to be used together. 


3.3 Ducted Heat Pump — An encased factory 
made assembly or assemblies designed to provide 
conditioned air to enclosed space (s) through a duct. It 
includes a prime source of refrigeration for heating and 
means for the circulation and cleaning of air. This may 
be provided in more than one assemble, the separated 
assemblies which are designed to be used together. 


3.4 Two (2)-stage Capacity Unit — Equipment where 
the capacity is varied by no more than two steps. This 
definition applies to each cooling and heating operation 
individually. 


3.5 Multi-stage Capacity Unit — Equipment where the 
capacity is varied by 3 or 4 steps. This definition applies 
to each cooling and heating operation individually. 


3.6 Variable Capacity Unit — Equipment where the 
capacity is varied to represent continuously variable 
capacity. This definition applies to each cooling and 
heating operation individually. 


3.7 Standard Air — Dry air at 20.0?C, and standard 
barometric pressure 10 332.275 kgf/m? (101.325 kPa), 
having a mass density of 1 204 kg/m’. 


3.8 Wet Bulb Temperature — Temperature indicated 
when the temperature-sensing element and wetted 
wick have reached a state of constant temperature 
(evaporative equilibrium) and when air is flowing over 
the cotton wick at a velocity of 5 to 10 m/s, wick is 
wetted with continuous source of distilled water. 


3.9 Discharge Air Flow of a Unit — Outlet ofthe indoor 
unit of split system or indoor side of the unitary system. 


3.10 Nominal Water Flow Rate — Rate of water 
flow through the condenser of water-cooled unit under 
capacity rating test conditions. 


3.11 Heating Capacity — Amount of heat that the 
equipment can add to the conditioned space in a defined 
interval of time expressed in watts. 


3.12 Total Cooling Capacity — Total available 
capacity of the unit for removing of sensible and latent 
heat from the space to be conditioned in a defined 
interval of time. 


3.13 Latent Cooling Capacity (Net Dehumidifying 
Effect) — Amount of latent heat that equipment can 
remove from conditioned space in a defined interval of 
time expressed in watts. 


3.14 Sensible Cooling Capacity — Amount of sensible 
heat that equipment can remove from conditioned 
space in a defined interval of time expressed in watts. 


3.15 Sensible Heat Ratio — Ratio of the sensible 
cooling capacity to the total cooling capacity. 


3.16 Indian Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio 
(ISEER) — Ratio of the total amount of heat that 
equipment can remove from the indoor air when operated 
for cooling in active mode to the total amount of energy 
consumed by equipment during the same period. 


3.17 Full-load Operation — Operation with the 
equipment and controls configured for the maximum 
continuous duty refrigeration capacity specified by the 
manufacturer and allowed by the unit controls 


3.18 Cooling Seasonal Total Load (CSTL) — Annual 
amount of heat that is removed from indoor air when 
equipment is operated for cooling active mode. 


3.19 Cooling Seasonal Energy Consumption 
(CSEC) — Total annual amount of energy consumed 
by equipment when it is operated for cooling active 
mode. 


3.20 Test Room — Room or space in which the unit is 
installed for test, with conditioning apparatus to ensure 
proper temperatures of air and water entering the unit, 
In case of water-cooled unit single room is required 
for the evaporator side along with water handling 
equipment to feed water into the condenser at desired 
temperature and rate of flow. In case of air-cooled unit 
two rooms are required, one for evaporator side and 
the other for condenser side, each with appropriate 
conditioning apparatus. 


3.21 Rated Voltage and Frequency — Voltage and 
frequency shown on the name plate or as per IS 12360. 


4 CONSTRUCTION (GENERAL) 


4.1 The unit shall be constructed with sufficient 
strength and rigidity to withstand normal manual and 
mechanical handling, transportation and usage without 
damage or failure. 


4.2 All parts that require periodic cleaning or 
maintenance shall be easily accessible when the 
unit is installed in accordance with manufacturer’s 
instructions. These shall be resistant to corrosion and 
withstand neutral salt spray test for 72 h in accordance 
with 3 of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 1). 


4.3 Units shall be free from undue noise and vibration. 


4.4 All parts that constitute an accident hazard shall be 
effectively guarded. 


4.5 An adequate method of condensate removal shall be 
provided. There shall be condensate tray of adequate size 


so that no water overflows. Тһе tray and drain shall be 
made of corrosion-resistant material, or suitably treated 
with corrosion-resistant coating to withstand neutral 
salt spray test for 72 h in accordance with 3 of IS 101 
(Part 6/Sec 1). The tray shall be adequately insulated to 
avoid condensation over its external surface. 


4.6 Pipes and connections to resiliently mounted parts 
shall be so arranged as not to foul or to transmit undue 
vibrations to other parts and shall be so designed as 
to prevent failure due to fatigue. All other pipes and 
connections shall be securely anchored. 


4.7 Suitable means shall be provided to prevent water 
condensed on cold parts of the refrigerating system 
from affecting the operation of the unit or its controls. 
Pipes shall be suitably insulated, wherever necessary. 


4.8 Water-cooled condenser shall have cleanable water 
passages, either by mechanical means or chemical or 
both. An adequate opening shall be provided in the 
casing so as to have access to the passage: bearing 
water, from either end, for the design amenable to 
mechanical cleaning. 


4.9 A suitable size refrigerant strainer shall be 
incorporated in the liquid line immediately before the 
expansion device. 


4.10 All valves and refrigeration piping shall be 
properly clamped so as to avoid excessive vibrations. 
4.11 Air Filter 


The air filter with following specifications shall which 
may be made from synthetic or any other suitable material. 


Mesh size: 10 x 10 per sq. cm and maximum open area 
65 percent + 5 (after reducing wire size from total area). 


[= 1cm = 


5 RATING REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Performance Requirements 


The total cooling capacity/heating capacity of tested 
unit shall have a capacity not less than 90 percent of 
the rated capacity. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


5.2 Cooling Capacity Ratings 

Cooling capacity ratings shall be based on tests 
conducted under conditions specified in 7.1 and with 
apparatus described in 10. Ratings shall include the 
total cooling capacity. 


5.3 Discharge Air Flow Ratings 

The airflow rate shall be measured when only the fan 
is operating, at an ambient temperature between 20°C 
to 30°C and relative humidity between 30 percent and 
70 percent. The airflow settings of the units shall be 
same as cooling capacity test clause 7.1. 


5.4 External Static Pressure Rating (ESP) 


5.4.1 If the rated ESP specified by the manufacturer is 
greater than or equal to the minimum value given in Table 1, 
the specified rated ESP is used as the ESP for rating. 


5.4.2 If the rated ESP specified by the manufacturer is 
less than the minimum value given in Table 1, then the 
value of Table 1 is used as ESP for rating. 


5.4.3 If the rated ESP is not specified by the 
manufacturer, the value of Table 1 is used as the ESP 
for rating. 


Table 1 ESP Requirement for Comfort 
Air-conditioners 


( Clause 5.4 ) 


SI No. Standard Capacity Minimum External 

Rating, kW Static Pressure, Pa 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 0<Q<9 10 
ii) 9<Q<14 20 
iii) 14<Q<30 30 
iv) 30<Q<60 40 
v) 60<Q<82 60 
vi) 82<0<117 100 
vii) 117<0 < 147 125 
viii) Q> 147 150 


5.5 Water Cooled Condenser Cooling Medium Flow 
Rating 

The water flow rating for condenser shall be 
specified by the manufacturer, in m?/h. Rated 
Flow of cooling water shall be maintained for the 
condenser during test conducted as per 7.1 to 7.6. If 
the flow rate is not specified by manufacturer, then 
flow rate 0.2 m?/h per kW shall be calculated for 
testing purposes. 


5.6 Heating Capacity Rating 


Heating capacity ratings shall be based on tests 
conducted under conditions specified in 7.7 and with 
apparatus described in 10. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


5.7 Electrical Ratings 


Ratings, in watts, for packaged air conditioner shall be 
based on rated voltage. The units, however, shall be 
capable of working at any voltage within +10 percent 
of the rated voltage. 


6 BASIS OF RATINGS 
Following information shall be furnished by the 
manufacturer as and when desired: 

a) Manufacturer’s name and address; 

b) Model, size or type; 

c) Total cooling capacity; 


d) Discharge air flow capacity and external static 
pressure (ESP); 


е) Water flow rate for condenser in m?/h ; 

f) Name of refrigerant; 

g) Weight of the refrigerant charged into the unit (for 
a given pipe length); 

h) Total power input; 

j) Name plate ratings of each motor as per IS 996 for 
single phase and IS 12615 for 3 phase; and 


К) Manufacturer's installation апа 


instructions. 


operating 


NOTE — АП capacity ratings and power input shall be under 
the same conditions as for capacity rating test. 


7 RATING AND TEST CONDITIONS 


7.1 Capacity Rating Test Condition 


The package air conditioner shall have nameplate 
rating determined by test conducted at the standard 
rating condition specified below: 


a) Evaporator side inlet air temperature: 


1) Dry bulb 27°C 
2) Wet bulb 19°C 
b) Condenser side inlet air temperature: 
1) Dry bulb 35°C 
2) Wet bulb 24°C** 
c) Inlet water temperature 30°C 


d) Condenser water flow rate Ав specified by 
manufacturer ог 


0.2 m*/h 
e) Test voltage Rated voltage 
f) Test frequency Rated frequency 


** The wet-bulb temperature condition shall be required only when 
testing air-cooled condensers that evaporate the condensate. 


7.2 ISEER Test Conditions 
For ISEER test conditions refer to Table 2. 


7.3 Maximum Operating Test Condition 


The maximum operating tests shall be conducted under 
the conditions specified below: 


a) Evaporator side inlet air temperature: 


1) Dry bulb 35°C 
2) Wet bulb 24°C 
Table 2 ISEER Test Conditions 
( Clause 72) 
SI No. Test Characteristics Fixed Two- Multi- Variable Default Value 
Stage Stage 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Standard cooling capacity Full capacity 9 (35) (W) 
В : и и и и 
Indoor DB 27°C Full power input Р, (35) (№) 
WB 19°C , Half capacity 0,, (35) (ХУ) u u о 2 0,,(29У1.077 
Outdoor DB 35°C Half power input P. (35) (W) P,,(29)/0.914 
m Required test 
O Optional test 
ii) Low temperature cooling Full capacity 0 „ (29) (W) ò © 1.077 #0 (35) 
capacity : m 
Full power input Р, (29) (W) 0.914*P, (35) 
Indoor DB 27°C . z 
WB 19°С Half capacity @, (29) (ХУ) u u © © 1.077%0, (35) 
Outdoor DB 29°C Half power input P... (29) (W) 1.077 %0, (35) 
Minimum capacity Ø, (29) (W 
pacity Ф, (29) (W) p М r Е 


Minimum power input Р, (29) (W) 


іш 
m Required test 
O Optional test 


b) Condenser side inlet air temperature: 


1) Dry bulb 46°C 
2) Wet bulb 27° Cr" 
c) Inlet water temperature 34°C 
d) Water flow rate As specified by 


manufacturer or 
0.2 m?/h 


е) Test voltage: 


1) For units with a single 
voltage rating 


90 and 110 percent 
of rated voltage 


2) For units with a dual 
voltage rating 


90 percent of 
lower rated voltage 


and 110 percent 
of higher rated 
voltage 


f) Test frequency Rated frequency 


*** The wet-bulb temperature condition shall be required only when 
testing air-cooled condensers that evaporate the condensate. 


7.4 Freeze-up Test Conditions 


Freeze-up tests shall be conducted under the conditions 
specified below: 


a) Evaporator side inlet air temperature: 


1) Dry bulb 219С 
2) Wet bulb 15°C 
b) Condenser side inlet air temperature: 
1) Dry bulb 21°C 
c) Inlet water temperature 19°C 
d) Water flow rate Ав specified Бу 


manufacturer or 


0.2 m?/h 
e) Test voltage Rated voltage 


f) Test frequency Rated frequency 


IS 8148 : 2018 


7.5 Enclosure Sweat Test Conditions 


The enclosure sweat test shall be conducted under the 
conditions given below: 


a) Evaporator side inlet air temperature: 


1) Dry bulb 27°C 
2) Wet bulb 24°C 
b) Condenser side inlet air temperature: 
1) Dry bulb 27°C 
c) Inlet water temperature 27°С 
а) Water flow rate As specified by 
manufacturer ог 
0.2 m?/h 
е) Test voltage Rated voltage 
f) Test frequency Rated frequency 


7.6 Condensate Disposal Test Conditions 


Condensate disposal test shall be conducted under the 
same conditions as those specified for enclosure sweat 
tests (see 7.5). 


7.7 Heating Capacity 


For heating capacity rating conditions refer to Table 3. 
8 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 Capacity Rating Test 
8.1.1 General Conditions 


8.1.1.1. АП equipment within the scope of this 
document shall have the cooling capacities and Indian 
seasonal energy efficiency ratios (ISEERs) determined 
in accordance with the provisions of this document and 
rated at the cooling test conditions specified in 7.1 and 
7.7. All tests shall be carried out in accordance with the 
requirements of Annex B and the test methods specified 


Table 3 Heating Capacity Rating Conditions 
( Clauses 7.7 and 9.1.1.4) 


Standard Rating Conditions* 
(3) 


i) Temperature of air entering the indoor-side: 


SI No. Parameter 

(1) (2) 
а) dry-bulb 
b) wet-bulb (maximum) 

ii) Temperature of air entering the outdoor- side: 
a) dry-bulb 
b) wet-bulb 

iii) Test frequency? 

iv) Test voltage 


20%С 
15 °С 


79С 

6°C 

Rated frequency 
Rated voltage 


“Tf a defrosting cycle occurs during the heating capacity test, testing under these conditions shall be accomplished using either the 
calorimeter or the indoor air enthalpy method (see Annexes D and E). 


^ Equipment with dual-rated frequencies shall be tested at each frequency. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


in 10. All tests shall be conducted with the equipment 
functioning at full-load operation, as defined in 3.17. 
The electrical input values used for rating purposes 
shall be measured during the cooling capacity test. 


8.1.1.2 If the manufacturer of equipment having 
a variable-speed compressor does not provide 
information on the full-load frequency and how to 
achieve it during a cooling capacity test, the equipment 
shall be operated with its thermostat or controller set to 
its minimum allowable temperature setting. 


8.1.1.3 Test results shall be used to determine capacities 
without adjustment for permissible variations in test 
conditions except as specified for deviations from 
standard barometric pressure. 


8.1.1.4 Capacities may be increased by 2.4 percent for 
each 10 kPa of barometric reading below 101.325 kPa 
at which the tests were conducted. 


8.1.1.5 Procedures 


Test methods are as per 10. The air conditioner shall be 
tested in test room complying with Annex B. 


Test conditions shall be maintained until equilibrium has 
been reached and maintained for not less than one hour, 
before recording data for capacity test. The test shall then 
be run for | h recording 7 sets of data at equal interval. 


The following minimum data to be recorded for this 
test. 


a) Data to be recorded — Air cooled cooling/heating 
unit: 
1) Date and time; 
2) Observations; 
3) Barometric pressure, in kPa; 
4) Equipment name plate data; 
5) ESP to evaporator air flow, in Pa; 
6) Power input to equipment, in watts; 
7) Applied voltages; 
8) Frequency; 
9) Fan speed setting; 
10) Dry bulb temperature of air entering equipment; 


11) Wet bulb 
equipment; 


temperature of air entering 


12) Dry bulb temperature of air leaving equipment 
(applicable for air enthalpy test method); 
13) Wet bulb temperature of air leaving equipment 
(applicable for air enthalpy test method); and 
14) Discharge air flow rate (applicable for air 
enthalpy test method). 
b) Data to be recorded — Water cooled air-conditioner 
unit: 
1) Date and time; 


2) Observations; 


3) Barometric pressure, in kPa; 

4) Equipment name plate data; 

5) ESP to evaporator air flow, in Pa; 
6) Power input to equipment — watts; 
7) Applied voltages; 

8) Frequency; 

9) Fan speed setting; 


10) Огу bulb temperature of ап entering 
equipment; 

11) Wet bulb temperature of ап entering 
equipment; 

12) Dry bulb temperature of air leaving equipment; 

13) Wet bulb temperature of air leaving equipment; 

14) Discharge air flow rate; 

15) Condenser inlet water temperature; and 


16) 


8.2 ISEER 
ISEER calculation shall be done as per Annex F 


Condenser water flow rate; 


8.3 Maximum Cooling Conditions Test 


8.3.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to prove that the air 
conditioner is capable of operating satisfactorily under 
maximum operating conditions. 


8.3.2 Test Condition 


The maximum operating conditions test shall be 
conducted under the conditions specified in 7.3. The 
unit's controls should be set for maximum cooling. 


8.3.3 Voltage 


Adjustment test voltage shall be as specified in 7.3. 
These voltages shall be maintained at the rated voltages 
+1 percent under running conditions. The electrical 
service supplied to the unit service connection shall be 
such that the voltage will not rise more than 3 percent 
when the unit is stopped. 


8.3.4 Procedure 


The air conditioner shall be operated continuously for 
1 h after the specified air temperatures and equilibrium 
condensate level have been established. All power to 
the air conditioner shall then be cut off for 3 min and 
then restored for 1 h. 


8.3.5 Requirements 


8.3.5.1 During one entire test, the air conditioner 
should operate without visible or audible indication of 
damage. 


8.3.5.2 The air conditioner motors should operate 
continuously for the first 1 h ofthe test without tripping 
of the motor overload protective devices. 


8.3.5.3 Тһе motor overload protective device may trip 
only during the first 5 min after the shut-down period of 
3 min. During the remainder of that 1 h test period, no 
motor overload device shall trip. 


8.3.5.4 For the models so designed that resumption 
of operation does not occur after initial trip within the 
first 5 min, the unit may remain out of operation for not 
longer than 30 min. It shall then operate continuously 
for 1 h. 


8.4 Freeze-Up Tests 


8.4.1 Purpose 


The air blockage test and drip test shall be conducted 
to determine the ability of the air conditioner to operate 
satisfactorily under conditions with the maximum 
tendency to frost or ice the evaporator. 


8.4.2 Test Conditions 


Freeze-up test shall be conducted under the conditions 
given in 7.4. The unit’s controls, fans speed, dampers 
and grills should be set to produce the maximum 
tendency to frost or ice the evaporator, provided such 
settings are not contrary to the manufacturer’s operating 
instructions. 


8.4.3 Air Blockage Test 
8.4.3.1 Procedure 


The test should be continuous, with the unit on the 
cooling cycle for 4 h after establishment of the specified 
temperature conditions. 


8.4.3.2 Requirements 


At the end of 4 h, the accumulation of ice or frost on the 
evaporator shall not obstruct the air passing through the 
evaporator сой, 


8.5 Drip Test 


8.5.1 Procedure 


The units should be operated for 4 h with the room side 
air inlet covered to completely block the passage of air 
so as to attempt to achieve complete blockage of the 
evaporator coil by frost. 


After the 4 h operating period, the unit shall be 
stopped and the air-inlet covering removed until the 
accumulation of ice or frost has melted. The unit shall 
then be turned on again, with the fan operating at the 
highest speed, for 5 min. 


8.5.2 Requirements 


During the test no ice shall drop from the unit, and 
no water shall drip or blow off the unit on the room 
side. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


8.6 Enclosure Sweat Test 


8.6.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this tests to determine the resistance to 
sweating of the air-conditioner when operating under 
conditions of high humidity. 


8.6.2 Test Conditions 


An enclosure sweat test shall be conducted under 
the conditions specified in 7.5. The unit's controls, 
fans, dampers and grillers shall be set to produce the 
maximum tendency to sweat, provided such settings are 
not contrary to manufacturer's operating instructions. 


8.6.3 Procedure 


After establishment of the specified temperature 
conditions, the equipment shall be started with its 
condensate collection pan filled to the overflowing 
point, and the equipment shall be run until the 
condensate flow has become uniform and the unit shall 
be operated continuously for a period of 4 h. 


8.6.4 Requirements 


When operating under the test conditions specified in 
7.5, no condensed water shall drip, run or blow from 
the equipment. 


8.7 Condensate Disposal Test 


8.7.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test to determine the capability of 
the air conditioner to dispose of condensate. This test 
may be conducted concurrently with the enclosure 
sweat test (see 8.5). 


8.7.2 Test Conditions 


A condensate disposal test shall be conducted under 
the conditions specified in 7.5. The unit's controls, 
fans, dampers and grillers shall be set to produce the 
maximum tendency to sweat, provided such settings are 
not contrary to manufacturer's operating instructions. 


8.7.3 Procedure 


After establishment of the specified temperature 
conditions, the air conditioner shall be started with 
its condensate collection pan filled to the overflowing 
point, and shall be operated continuously for 4 h after 
the condensate level has reached equilibrium. 


8.7.4 Requirement 


During this test, the air conditioner shall have the 
ability to dispose of all condensate and there shall 
be no dripping or blowing off of water from the unit 
such that the building or surroundings may become 
wet. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


8.8 Power Consumption Test 


8.8.1 Purpose 


The purpose of the power consumption test is to 
determine the power consumption, in watts. 


8.8.2 Test Condition 


The power consumption shall determine during the 
capacity rating test (see 8.1) under the condition given 
in 7.1. 


8.8.3 Test Procedure 


The power consumption shall be the average power 
consumption in watts measured during the capacity 
rating test. 


9 HEATING CAPACITY TESTS 


9.1 Heating Capacity Tests 
9.1.1 General Conditions 


9.1.1.1 For all heating capacity tests, the requirements 
specified in Annex B shall apply. Testing shall be 
conducted using the method(s) and instrumentation 
that meet the requirements of 10.1 and 10.2. 


9.1.1.2 Selectable resistive elements used for heating 
indoor air shall be prevented from operating during all 
heating capacity tests, except those used only during a 
defrost cycle. 


9.1.1.3 The test setup shall include instrumentation to 
allow measurement of the temperature change across 
the indoor coil. If using the indoor air enthalpy method, 
the same dry-bulb temperature sensors as used to 
measure capacity may be used. If using the calorimeter 
test method, the temperature change shall be determined 
using the sensors specified in Annex D. 


9.1.1.4 Standard rating conditions for heating capacity 
tests are specified in Table 3. 


9.1.1.5 Heating capacity tests shall be conducted with 
the heat pump functioning at full-load operation, as 
defined in 3.17. 


9.1.1.6 The manufacturer shall specify, for inverter- 
controlled compressors, the specific frequency that is 
needed to give full-load operation. The heat pump shall 
be maintained at this frequency for all heating capacity 
tests. If the manufacturer of a heat pump having a 
variable-speed compressor fails to provide information 
on the full-load operating frequency and how to achieve 
it during heating capacity tests, then the heat pump 
shall be operated with its thermostat or controller set to 
its maximum allowable temperature setting. 


9.1.2 Requirements when Testing Heat Pumps that 
Provide Both Cooling and Heating 


9.1.2.1 Equipment settings shall be the same as those 
established during the cooling capacity tests. 


9.1.2.2 Heating capacity tests shall be conducted with 
the same setting of the damper or exhaust fan as for the 
cooling capacity test. 


9.1.3 Requirements when Testing Heating-only Heat 
Pumps 


9.1.3.1 On the outdoor-side of the heat pump, all 
resistance elements associated with inlets, louvers, 
and any ductwork and attachments considered by the 
manufacturer as normal installation practice shall be 
installed. 


9.1.3.2 On the indoor-side of the heat pump, damper 
positions, fan speed, etc. shall be set in accordance with 
the manufacturer's published installation instructions 
that are provided with the equipment. In the absence 
of such installation instructions, damper positions, fan 
speed, etc. shall be set to provide the maximum heating 
capacity when testing at the temperature conditions as 
per Table 3. 


9.1.4 Defrost Operation 


9.1.4.1 Overriding of automatic defrost controls shall 
be prohibited. The controls may only be overridden 
when manually initiating a defrost cycle during 
preconditioning. 


9.1.4.2 Any defrost cycle, whether automatically or 
manually initiated, that occurs while preparing for 
or conducting a heating capacity test shall always be 
automatically terminated by the heat pump defrost 
controls. 


9.1.4.3 If the heat pump turns the indoor fan off during 
the defrost cycle, airflow through the indoor coil shall 
cease. 


9.1.5 Test Procedure — General 


The test procedure consists of three periods: a 
preconditioning period, an equilibrium period, and 
a data collection period. The duration of the data 
collection period differs depending upon whether the 
heat pump's operation is steady-state or transient. 


9.1.6 Preconditioning Period 


9.1.6.1 The test room preconditioning apparatus and 
the heat pump under test shall be operated until the test 
tolerances specified in 10.2 are attained for at least 10 
min. 


9.1.6.2 A defrost cycle may end a preconditioning 
period. If a defrost cycle does end a preconditioning 
period, the heat pump shall operate in the heating mode 
for at least 10 min after defrost termination, prior to 
beginning the equilibrium period. 


9.1.7 Equilibrium Period 


9.1.7.1 The equilibrium period immediately follows the 
preconditioning period. 


9.1.7.2 A complete equilibrium period is 1 hin duration. 


9.1.7.3 The heat pump shall operate while meeting the 
test tolerances in 10.2. 


9.1.8 Data Collection Period 


9.1.8.1 The data collection period immediately follows 
the equilibrium period. 


9.1.8.2 Data shall be collected as specified in 10.1 for 
the chosen test method(s). If using the calorimeter 
method, heating capacity shall be calculated as specified 
in Annex D. If using the indoor air enthalpy method, 
the heating capacity shall be calculated as specified in 
Annex Е. 


9.1.8.3 An integrating electrical power (watt-hour) 
meter or measuring system shall be used for measuring 
the electrical energy supplied to the equipment. During 
defrost cycles and for the first 10 min following a 
defrost termination, the meter or measuring system 
shall have a sampling rate of at least every 10 s. 


9.1.8.4 Except as specified in 9.1.8.3 and 9.1.8.5, data 
shall be sampled at equal intervals that span 30 s or 
less. 


9.1.8.5 During defrost cycles, plus the first 10 min 
following defrost termination, certain data used in 
evaluating the integrated heating capacity of the heat 
pump shall be sampled at equal intervals that span 10 
s or less. When using the indoor air enthalpy method, 
these more frequently sampled data include the change 
in indoor-side dry-bulb temperature. When using the 
calorimeter method, these more frequently sampled 
data include all measurements required to determine 
the indoor-side capacity. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


9.1.8.6 For heat pumps that automatically cycle off 
the indoor fan during a defrost, the contribution of the 
net heating delivered and/or the change in indoor-side 
dry-bulb temperature shall be assigned the value of 
zero when the indoor fan is off, if using the indoor air 
enthalpy method. If using the calorimeter test method, 
the integration of capacity shall continue while the 
indoor fan is off. 


9.1.9 Heating Capacity Test Results 


9.1.9.1 The electrical energy supplied to the heat 
pump during the test shall be recorded, along with 
the corresponding elapsed time, at the termination of 
each defrost cycle during the data collection period, if 
applicable, and at the termination of the data collection 
period. 


9.1.9.2 Average heating capacity and average electrical 
power input shall be calculated in accordance 
with 9.1.1. 


9.2 Maximum Heating Performance Test 


9.2.1 General Conditions 


The conditions given in Table 4 shall be used during the 
maximum heating performance test. The test shall be 
conducted with the equipment functioning at full-load 
operation, as defined in 3.17. 


The test voltages in Table 4 shall be maintained at the 
specified percentages under running conditions. 


The determination of heating capacity and electrical 
power input is not required for this performance test. 


9.2.2 Temperature Conditions 


The temperature conditions given in Table 4 shall be 
used during these tests unless the manufacturer specifies 
higher temperature conditions in the manufacturer's 
equipment specification sheets. 


Table 4 Maximum Heating Performance Test Conditions 
( Clause 9.2) 


SI No. Parameter Standard Test Conditions 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Temperature of air entering the indoor-side: 
— dry-bulb 27 °C 
ii) Temperature of air entering the outdoor-side: 
— dry-bulb 24°С 
— wet-bulb 18 °С 
iii) Test frequency® Rated frequency 


iv) Test voltage 


d Equipment with dual-rated frequencies shall be tested at each frequency. 


a) 90 percent and 110 percent of rated voltage for equipment 
with a single nameplate voltage rating 
b) 90 percent of the lower rated voltage and 110 percent of 


the higher rated voltage for equipment with a dual or extended 
nameplate voltage 


IS 8148 : 2018 


9.2.3 Airflow Conditions 


The maximum heating performance test shall be conducted 
with an indoor-side fan speed setting as determined in 5.3 
and Annex A. For heating-only heat pumps, the indoor- 
side fan speed shall be set as specified in 9.1.3.2. 


9.2.4 Test Conditions 
9.2.4.1 Preconditions 


The controls ofthe equipment shall be set for maximum 
heating. All ventilating air dampers and exhaust air 
dampers, if provided, shall be closed. 


9.2.4.2 Duration of test 


The equipment shall be operated for 1 h after the specified 
air temperatures have been attained from Table 4. The 
equipment shall be permitted to stop and start under the 
control of an automatic limit device, if provided. 


9.2.5 Performance Requirements 


The equipment shall operate under the conditions 
specified in Table 4, without indication of damage. The 
equipment shall be permitted to stop and start under 
the control of an automatic limit device, if provided. 
After the interruption of operation, the equipment shall 
resume operation within 30 min. 


9.3 Automatic Defrost Performance Test 


9.3.1 General Conditions 


This test is not required if provision is made to ensure 
that cool air (less than 18°C) is not blown into the 
conditioned space during defrost. The test shall be 
conducted with the equipment functioning at full- 
load operation, as defined in 3.17, except as required 
in 9.3.3. The conditions for test frequency and test 
voltage given in Table 3 shall be used during the 
automatic defrost test. The determination of heating 
capacity and electrical power input is not required for 
this performance test. 


9.3.2 Temperature Conditions 


The temperature of air entering the indoor-side shall 
be set as specified in Table 3. The temperature of air 
entering the outdoor-side shall be set temperature of air 
entering the outdoor-side: 


а) dry-bulb 2°C 
b) wet-bulb 1°C 


c) Airflow conditions — Unless prohibited by the 
manufacturer, the indoor-side fan is to be adjusted 
to the highest speed and the unit outdoor-side fan to 
the lowest speed, if separately adjustable. All other 
parameters shall be set as specified in 9.1.3.1. 


9.3.3 Unless prohibited by the manufacturer, the indoor- 
side fan is to be adjusted to the highest speed and the 
unit outdoor-side fan to the lowest speed, if separately 
adjustable. All other parameters shall be set as specified 
in 9.1.3.1. 


10 


9.3.4 Test Conditions 
9.3.4.1 Duration of test 


The equipment shall be operated until the temperatures 
specified in 9.3.2 have been stabilized. 


The heat pump shall remain in operation for two complete 
defrosting periods or for 3 h, whichever is longer. 


9.3.5 Performance Requirements 


During the defrosting period, the temperature of the 
air from the indoor-side of the equipment shall not be 
lower than 18°C for longer than 1 min. 


10 METHODS AND TOLERANCES 


10.1 Test Methods 
10.1.1 General 


Capacity tests shall be conducted in accordance with 
the testing requirements specified in Annex B using 
either the calorimeter test method (see Annex D) or the 
indoor air enthalpy test method (see Annex E). 


10.1.2 Calorimeter Test Method 


10.1.2.1 When using the calorimeter method as per 
Annex D for cooling capacity tests and for steady- 
state heating capacity tests, two simultaneous methods 
of determining capacities shall be used. One method 
determines the capacity on the indoor-side, the other 
measures the capacity on the outdoor-side. The capacity 
determined using the outdoor-side data shall agree to 
within 5 percent of the value obtained using the indoor- 
side data in order for the test to be valid. 


10.1.2.2 Steady-state conditions are achieved when the 
measured capacity at each 5 min time interval does not 
vary by more than 2 percent from the average measured 
capacity over the previous 35 min. 


10.1.2.3 The apparatus used to make the indoor-side 
airflow and static pressure measurements shall be 
located within the indoor-side test chamber of the 
calorimeter for all tests except for where the fixed 
duct resistance method specified in A-3 is used for 
setting the airflow. In this case, the airflow measuring 
apparatus may be removed after the damper has been 
set in order to obtain the required airflow and external 
static pressure as specified in Annex A. 


10.1.3 Indoor Air Enthalpy Method 


Cooling capacity tests and steady-state heating capacity 
tests by using indoor air enthalpy test method as per 
Annex Е. 


10.2 Test Tolerances 


10.2.1 All test observations shall be within the variations 
allowed as specified in Table 5, as appropriate to the 
test methods and type of equipment. 


10.2.2 Тһе maximum permissible variation of any 
observation during the capacity test is listed under 
‘maximum variation of individual reading from 
rating conditions’ in Table 5. This represents the 
greatest permissible difference between maximum 
and minimum instrument observations during the 
test. When expressed as a percentage, the maximum 
allowable variation is the specified percentage of the 
arithmetical average of the observations. 


10.2.3 Variations greater than those prescribed shall 
invalidate the test. 


11 SOUND TEST 


11.1 Test Purpose 

Verify the sound pressure level (dB level) for indoor or 
outdoor units in connected conditions. 

11.2 Temperature Conditions: 


Indoor 27 5°С апа 
Outdoor : 35 + 5°C 


Rated power of the units 


a) Test condition: 


b) Power supply: 
11.3 Back Ground Noise 


Minimum 10 dB lower than rated sound pressure level 
or 20 dB whichever is higher. 
11.4 Test Equipment 

a) dB meter for sound pressure level, or 

b) Measuring Tape. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


11.5 Equipment/Sensor Location for Sound Pressure 
Measurement: 


a) Unit is installed as it is installed for cooling 
capacity test; 

b) Unit controls should be set to full load capacity 
test conditions; and 


c) Measurement to be done at point TP as shown in 
Fig. 1 and 2. 
11.6 Method for Room Air Conditioner 
Take average of 3 reading to arrive at sound pressure 


11.7 Use attachments (duct, damper etc. for simulating 
site conditions) 


12 TESTS 


12.1 Tests shall be classified into the following three 
groups: 

a) Production routine tests; 

b) Type tests; and 

c) Acceptance tests. 


12.2 Production Routine Tests 


These shall consist of routine tests that would be 
conducted on each and every unit after completion at 
the manufacturer’s works. 


Table 5 Variations Allowed During Steady-State Cooling 
and Heating Capacity Tests 


( Clause 10.2.2 ) 


SINo. Reading Variations of Arithmetical Mean Maximum Variation of 
Values from Specified Test Individual Readings from 
Conditions Specified Test Conditions 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Temperature of air entering the indoor-side: 
a) dry-bulb +0:3°С + 0.5 °С 
b) wet-bulb + 0.2 °С? + 0.3 °С” 
ii) Temperature of air entering the outdoor-side: 
a) dry-bulb +0.3 °С + 0.5 °С 
b) wet-bulb + 0.2 °C” 0.3 °C? 
ili) Voltage + ] percent + 2 percent 
iv) Water temperature 
a) inlet +0.1°C +£0.2°C 
b) outlet 401 °C +0.2°C 
v) Water volume flow rate + 1 percent + 1 percent 
vi) External resistance to airflow + 5 Ра + 10 Ра 


? Not applicable for heating tests. 


2 Only applies to cooling capacity tests if equipment rejects condensate to the outdoor coil. 


11 


IS 8148 : 2018 


OUTDOOR SIDE 
CENTRAL WALL 


OUTDOOR UNIT 


KAA А А АА АЈ 
6969695606664 


LS 


шын 


INDOOR UNIT 


2 


INDOOR SIDE 


5555Ж 
0000000005004 


Fic. 1 DUCTED AIR CONDITIONER 


OUTDOOR SIDE 


1.0m 


OUTDOOR UNIT 


— 


CENTRAL PARTITION 


INDOOR SIDE 


INDOOR UNIT 


Fic. 2 PACKAGE AIR CONDITIONER 


12.2.1 Running Test 


a) Unitary unit — Each unit individually shall be 
given power supply and run to ensure vibration 
free running. 

b) Split unit — Indoor unit (IDU) and outdoor units 
(ODU) shall be run separately (without connecting 
IDU and ODU) to check the fan/blower running 
only. Compressor need not to be run during this test. 


12.2.2 Pressure Test or Leakage Test 


Unitary unit to be checked for leakage either at 
appropriate pressure defined by manufacturer process 
sheet and sealed properly after leak test. 


12 


Indoor unit and outdoor unit can be leak checked separately 
at appropriate pressure defined by manufacturer process 
sheet and sealed properly after leak test. 


12.2.3 Insulation Resistance Test 


The insulation resistance between all electrical circuit 
and metal parts when measured at normal room 
temperature with a voltage of not less than 500 V dc 
shall not be less than 1 МО. 


12.2.4 High Voltage Test 


The electrical insulation of all circuits shall be such as 
to withstand a test voltage of 1 000 V. applied for not 


less than 1s and tested as per IS 302-1. 


12.2.5 Leakage Current Test 


The leakage current shall not exceed 3.5 mA when 
tested as per IS 302-1 


12.2.6 Earth Resistance Test 


The earth resistance of the unit shall not exceed 0.1 О 
when tested as per IS 302-1. 


12.3 Type Tests 


The type tests shall consist of the tests that would 
be necessary to check up the performance and 
characteristics of the units and components. 


12.3.1 Besides all the production routine tests outlined 
in 12.2, the type tests shall comprise the following: 
a) Capacity rating and other tests specified in 8; and 
b) Room discharge air flow rating test in accordance 


with procedure given in Annex C and under 
conditions in 7.1. 


12.3.2 The type test report shall also contain the name- 
plate particulars of the air conditioners for purposes of 
identification. 


12.3.3 Safety Tests 
The following type safety tests to be carried out as per 
IS 302-1: 

a) Protection against the live part; 

b) Earth continuity test; 

c) Electric strength test; 

d) Functional tests; 

е) Provision for earthing; and 


f) Electrical insulation and leakage current at 
operating temperature. 


12.4 Acceptance Test 


If the purchaser desires any of the production routine 
tests to be repeated at the time of purchase, then, where 
agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer, 
the tests may be carried out at the manufacturer's 
works; alternatively the tests may be repeated at the 
place specified by the purchaser provided that all the 
arrangements for tests are made by the purchaser at 
the specified place. 


13 


IS 8148 : 2018 


12.5 Samples for Tests 


The number of samples shall be as agreed. 
13 MARKING 


13.1 The packaged/ducted air conditioner shall have 
the following information marked in a nameplate in a 
permanent and legible manner in a location where it is 
accessible and visible: 


a) Outdoor unit: 
1) Name and address of the manufacture; 


2) Type of model number and serial number of 
the unit; 


3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 


Power supply in V, phase апа Hz; 
Full load amperage; 
Name and quantity of refrigerant charge; 


Nominal capacity, in W, under temperature 
conditions specified in this standard; and 

7) Power consumption, in W, at the normal 
operating conditions specified in this standard. 
b) 


Indoor unit: 
1) Name and address of the manufacture; 


2) Type of model number and serial number of 
the unit; 


3) Power supply in V, phase and Hz; and 


4) Power consumption, in W, at the normal 
operating conditions specified in this standard. 


13.2 BIS Certification Marking 


Each ducted and package air-conditioner may also be 
marked with the Standard Mark. 


13.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and 
the Rules and Regulations made there under. The details 
of the conditions under which the licence for use of the 
Standard Mark may be granted to the manufacturers 
or the producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
( Clauses 9.2.3 апа 10.1.2.3 ) 
AIRFLOW SETTINGS FOR DUCTED UNITS 


A-1 GENERAL 


Two methods of setting are applicable: 
a) Fixed duct resistance method; and 
b) Adjusted exhaust fan setting method. 


Both methods, with their respective test apparatus, are 
described in this Annex. 


To measure the static pressure of the discharge air from 
the ducted equipment, a measuring duct is connected to 
the duct flange of the equipment. This measuring duct 
is used for both methods. If the dimensions of the outlet 
duct section are A and В, the equivalent diameter, D , is 
determined using equation 1: 


(4AB) 
T 


De = 2d 
In the case that the outlet duct is circular in section with 
diameter, D, the equivalent diameter, D , is equal to D. 


The length of the measuring duct, L , shall be no smaller 
than 2.5 D,. The static pressure taps should be located 
at a distance L = 2D, from the outlet flange. 


A-2 TEST METHOD 


A-2.1 The flow setting of the units shall be by means 
of the fixed duct resistance method, as shown in Fig. 3, 
or the adjusted exhaust fan setting method, as shown 
in Fig. 4. 


A-2.2 The static pressure measurement taps shall be 
arranged as shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. The unit under 
test shall be operated without the compressor running. 


A-2.3 Airflow measurements should be made in 
accordance with the provisions specified in Annex C, 
as appropriate, as well as other provisions established 
in this standard. 


A-3 FIXED DUCT RESISTANCE METHOD 


A-3.1 General 


A measuring duct shall be connected to the test unit and 
a damper installed on the opposite end of the measuring 
duct, to which a discharge chamber is connected. The 
minimum length of the discharge chamber in the flow 
direction, J, is 2 D 
NOTE — The setup of the test unit, measuring duct and the 
discharge chamber is illustrated in Fig. 3. 


A-3.2 Test Procedure 
A-3.2.1 Test Conditions 


The temperature and humidity conditions of the test 
room shall be within the range specified in 5.3. The test 
unit shall be operated in the blowing mode without the 
compressor running. The damper shall be adjusted to 
get the ESP as per 5.4 and measure the air flow rate 
once the required ESP is achieved. At the same time, 
the airflow rate of the airflow measuring apparatus 
shall be adjusted so that static pressure in the discharge 
chamber is (0 + 2) Pa. The above conditions shall be 
maintained for at least 30 min. External static pressure 
shall be maintained per Table 6 during the discharge air 
flow rate test. 


A-3.2.2 Discharge Air Flow Rate Test 


The dry and wet-bulb temperatures of the inlet air, 
airflow rate, ESP (p), dry and wet-bulb temperatures 
in front of the nozzle, and barometric pressure (p,) 
shall be measured. The measured airflow rate, q, shall 
be calculated according to equation 5. The measured 
airflow rate, 4,, shall be converted into the standard 
flow rate, 4, according to equation 10. 


A-3.2.3 Evaluation 
The ESP, p,, shall be that specified by 5.4. 


Table 6 Variation Allowed During Discharge Air Flow Rate Test 
( Clause A-3.2.1 ) 


SI No. Variation of Arithmetical Mean Values Variation of Individual Readings from 
Reading from Specified Test Conditions Specified Test Conditions 
< 100 Pa > 100 Ра < 100 Pa > 100 Pa 
(D (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 External Static + 5 Ра + 5 percent + 10 Ра + 10 percent 


Pressure (ESP) 


A-3.2.4 Cooling and Heating Tests 


The damper’s position shall remain fixed at the setting 
obtained in A-3.2.1, for all cooling and heating tests, 
which shall be conducted at the respective temperature 
and humidity conditions. During the cooling and heating 
tests, the static pressure of the discharge chamber shall 
be maintained at (0 + 2) Pa. 


The ESP, p., of the measuring duct at the cooling and 
heating tests is for reference only, and therefore it does 
not need to be published. The airflow rate measured 
when the equipment is operating in the cooling or 
heating mode is used for calculation of cooling and 
heating capacities. 


A-4 ADJUSTED EXHAUST FAN SETTING 
METHOD 


A-4.1 General 


A measuring duct shall be connected to the test unit 
and an airflow measuring apparatus connected to the 
opposite end of the measuring duct. 


NOTE — The setup of the test unit, measuring duct and the 
airflow measuring apparatus is illustrated in Fig. 4. 


A-4.2 Test Procedure 


The temperature and humidity conditions of the test 
room shall be within the range specified in 5.3. The 
test unit is operated in the blowing mode without the 


KEY - 


1 - AIRFLOW MEASURING APPARATUS 


2 - EXHAUST FAN 
3 - MANOMETERS 


4 - STATICS PRESSURE TAPS 
OF DISCHARGE CHAMBER 


5 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 
6 - DAMPER 


IS 8148 : 2018 


compressor running. The air flow measuring apparatus 
shall be adjusted so that the required ESP as per 5.4 is 
obtained. The above conditions shall be maintained for 
at least 1 h. External static pressure shall be maintained 
per Table 6 during the blowing test. 


А-4.3 Discharge Air Flow Rate Test 


The dry and wet-bulb temperatures of the inlet air, 
airflow rate, ESP (p,), dry and wet-bulb temperatures 
in front of the nozzle, and barometric pressure shall 
be measured. The measured airflow rate, 4,, shall 
be calculated according to equation 5. The measured 
airflow rate, 4,, shall be converted into the standard 
flow rate, 4, according to equation 10. 


A-4.4 Calculation of the Value of C 


Calculate the value of C, determined from equation 2: 


Pm is external static pressure at the measuring 
duct, Pa, especially for blowing test using 
adjusted exhaust fan setting method, апар, 
is considered to be equal to the external static 


pressure, р. 


7 - DISCHARGE CHAMBER 

J - MINIMUM LENGTH 

La - LENGTH OF MEASURING DUCT 

Lm - DISTANCE TO STATIC PRESSURE TAPS 
Pe - ESP OF THE EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 


Fic. 3 Fixen Duct RESISTANCE METHOD — SETUP 


IS 8148 : 2018 


A-4.5 Evaluation 
The ESP, p,, shall be that specified by 5.4. 


A-4.6 Cooling and Heating Tests 


Cooling and heating tests shall be performed following 
the discharge air flow rate test, at their respective 
temperature and humidity conditions. The speed of the 
exhaust fan of the airflow measuring apparatus shall be 
adjusted for the cooling and heating tests to maintain 
the ESP as per 5.4. 


For the cooling test, operate the equipment with 
the compressor in the cooling mode and allow the 
temperature to stabilize. 


For the heating test, repeat the cooling test above, 
except with the compressor operating in the heating 
mode. 


The airflow rate measured when the equipment is 
operating in the cooling or heating mode shall be used 
for calculation of cooling and heating capacities. 


KEY - 


1 - AIRFLOW MEASURING APPARATUS 
2 - EXHAUST FAN 

3- MANOMETERS 

4 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 

5 - NOZZLES 

La- LENGTH OF MEASURING DUCT 


Lm - DISTANCE TO STATIC PRESSURE TAPS 
Ре- ESP OF THE EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 


Pm - EXTERNAL STATICS PRESSURE АТ 
THE MEASURING DUCT, SPECIALLY 
FOR BLOWING TEST USING ADJUSTED 
EXHAUST 


Fic. 4 ADJUSTED EXHAUST FAN SETTING METHOD SETUP 


16 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX B 


( Clauses 8.1.1.1, 9.1.1.1 and 10.1.1 ) 


TEST REQUIREMENTS 


B-1 GENERALTESTROOM REQUIREMENTS 


B-1.1 If an indoor condition test room is required, it shall 
be a room or space in which the desired test conditions 
can be maintained within the prescribed tolerances. It 
is recommended that air velocities in the vicinity of the 
equipment under test do not exceed 2.5 m/s. 


B-1.2 If an outdoor condition test room or space is 
required, it shall be of sufficient volume and shall 
circulate air in such a manner that it does not change the 
normal air circulating pattern of the equipment under 
test. It shall be of such dimensions that the distance 
from any room surface to any equipment surface from 
which air is discharged is not less than 1.8 m and the 
distance from any other room surface to any other 
equipment surface is not less than 1 m, except for floor 
or wall relationships required for normal equipment 
installation. The room conditioning apparatus should 
handle air at a rate not less than the outdoor airflow rate, 
and preferably should take this air from the direction of 
the equipment air discharge and return it at the desired 
conditions uniformly and at low velocities. 


B-1.3 If the calorimeter room method is used with a 
facility having more than two rooms, then the additional 
rooms shall also comply with the requirements of 
Annex D. If the air enthalpy method is used with a 
facility having more than two rooms, the additional 
rooms shall also comply with the requirements of 
Annex E. 


B-2 EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION 


B-2.1 The equipment to be tested shall be installed 
in accordance with the manufacturer's installation 
instructions using recommended installation procedures 
and accessories. If the equipment can be installed in 
multiple positions, all tests shall be conducted using 
the least favorable configuration according to the 
manufacturer's recommendation. In all cases, the 
manufacturer's recommendations with respect to 
distances from adjacent walls, amount of extension 
through walls, etc. shall be followed. 


B-2.2 Ducted equipment rated at less than 8 kW and 
intended to operate at an ESP, р,, of less than 25 Pa 
shall be tested at free delivery of air according to 
IS 1391 (Parts 1 and 2). 


B-2.3 No other alterations to the equipment shall be 
made except for the attachment of the required test 
apparatus and instruments in the prescribed manner. 


17 


B-2.4 If necessary, the equipment shall be evacuated 
and charged with the type and amount of refrigerant 
specified in the manufacturer's instructions. 


B-2.5 АП standard ratings for equipment in which 
the condenser and the evaporator are two separate 
assemblies shall be determined on the basis of the 
manufacturer's specifications within 5 m to 7.5 m of 
connecting tubing on each line. The lengths shall be 
actual lengths, not equivalent lengths, and no account 
shall be taken of the resistance provided by bends, 
branches, connecting boxes or other fittings used in 
the installation for the test piece. The length of the 
connecting tubing shall be measured from the enclosure 
of the indoor unit to the enclosure of the outdoor unit. 
Any equipment in which the interconnecting tubing 
is furnished as an integral part of the unit, and not 
recommended for cutting to length, shall be tested with 
the complete length of tubing furnished. Not less than 
40 percent of the total length of the interconnecting 
tubing shall be exposed to the outdoor conditions with 
the rest of the tubing exposed to the indoor conditions. 
The line diameters, insulation, details of installation, 
evacuation and charging shall be in accordance with the 
manufacturer's published recommendations. 


B-3 STATIC PRESSURE MEASUREMENTS 
ACROSS INDOOR COIL 


B-3.1 Equipment with a Fan and a Single Outlet 


B-3.1.1 A short plenum shall be attached to the outlet 
of the equipment. This plenum shall have cross- 
sectional dimensions equal to the dimensions of the 
equipment outlets. A static pressure tap shall be added 
at the centre of each side of the discharge plenum, if 
rectangular, or at four evenly distributed locations 
along the circumference of an oval or round plenum. 
These four static pressure taps shall be manifolded 
together. The minimum length of the discharge plenum 
and the location of the static pressure taps relative to 
the equipment outlets shall be as shown in Fig. 5, if 
testing a split-system, and as shown in Fig. 6, if testing 
a single-package unit. 


B-3.1.2 A short plenum should be attached to the inlet 
of the equipment. If used, the inlet plenum shall have 
the same cross-sectional dimensions as the equipment 
inlet. In addition, four static pressure taps shall be 
added and manifolded together. This plenum should 
otherwise be constructed as shown for the inlet plenum 
in Fig. 6, if testing a single-package unit, and as shown 
in Fig. 7, if testing a split-system. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


NOTE — Fig. 7 is referenced here for guidance even though 
it specifically applies to ducted units tested without an indoor 
fan. 


B-3.2 Equipment with Fans and Multiple Outlets or 
Multiple Indoor Units 


B-3.2.1 Equipment with multiple outlet duct 
connections or multiple indoor units shall have a short 
plenum attached to each outlet connection or indoor 
unit, respectively. Each of these short plenums shall 
be constructed as described in B-3.1.1, including 
static pressure taps. All outlet plenums shall discharge 
into a single common duct section. For the purpose 
of equalizing the static pressure in each plenum, an 
adjustable restrictor shall be located in the plane where 
each outlet plenum enters the common duct section. 
Multiple blower units employing a single discharge 
duct connection flange shall be tested with a single 
outlet plenum in accordance with B-3.1. Any other 
test plenum arrangements shall not be used except to 
stimulate duct designs specifically recommended by 
the equipment manufacturer. 


B-3.2.2 A short plenum should be attached to the inlet 
of each inlet duct connection or indoor unit. Each of 
these short plenums shall be constructed as described 
in B-3.1.2, including static pressure taps. 


B-3.3 Equipment without a Fan and a Single Outlet 


For an indoor coil that does not incorporate a fan, a 
short plenum shall be attached to both the inlet and 
outlet of the equipment. These plenums shall have 
cross-sectional dimensions equal to the dimensions of 
the equipment inlet and outlet, respectively. A static 
pressure tap shall be added at the centre of each side of 
each plenum, if rectangular, or at four evenly distributed 
locations along the circumference of oval or round 
plenums. For each plenum, the four static pressure taps 
shall be manifolded together. The minimum length of 
the plenums and the location of the static pressure taps 
relative to the equipment inlet and outlet shall be as 
shown in Fig. 7. 


TO AIRFLOW-MEASURING APPARATUS 


NE 


STATIC 
PRESSURE 
TAPS 


Д(АхВу Л 


^ 


MANOMETER 


EXHAUST PLENUM 


EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 


Fic. 5 ESP MEASUREMENT — SPLIT SYSTEM 


IS 8148: 2018 


KEY 


1 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST - SINGLE PACKAGE UNIT 


2 - STATIC PRESSURE TAP, INLET ( 4 Nos. ) 


3 - STATIC PRESSURE TAP, OUTLET ( 4 Nos. ) 
NOTE - For circular ducts with diameter, d,substitute л 0/4 for (A x B) or (C x D) 


Fic. 6 Esp MEASUREMENTS — SINGLE PACKAGE 


9 


IS 8148 : 2018 


15ҰАХВ------- 


1- MANOMETER 

2- OUTLET PRESSURE TAPS 
3 - INLET DUCT 

4 - COIL SECTION 

3 - OUTLET DUCT 


а - TO AIRFLOW MEASURING 
APPARATUS 


1  AandB аге outlet dimensions; C and D are inlet dimensions 


2 For circular ducts with diameter, D,substitute x 2/4 for (C x D) and 2052/4 (A xB), 
where D, is inlet duct diameter and По is outlet duct diameter. 
3 The length of the inlet duct, 5VC x D is a minimum dimension. for more precise results, use 4VC x D 


Fic. 7 Ав STATIC PRESSURE DROP MEASUREMENT OVER THE COIL FOR A Соп-Омгу UNIT 


20 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 12.3.1 ) 


AIRFLOW MEASUREMENT 


C-1 AIRFLOW DETERMINATION 


C-1.1 Airflow should be measured using the apparatus 
and testing procedures given in this annex. 


C-1.2 Airflow quantities are determined as mass flow 
rates. 


C-2 NOZZLE APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Nozzle Apparatus 


Option 1 — Consisting of a receiving chamber and a 
discharge chamber separated by a partition in which 
one or more nozzles are located (see Fig. 8) 


Option 2 — Receiving chamber and discharge chamber 
can be made as separate chambers where nozzles are 
part of discharge chamber. 


Air from the equipment under test is conveyed via a duct 
to the receiving chamber, passes through the nozzle(s) 
in discharge chamber and is then exhausted to the test 
room or channelled back to the equipment's inlet. 


C-2.2 Diffusers 


Option 1 — Installed in the receiving chamber (at a 
distance at least 1.5 times the largest nozzle throat 
diameter, D.) upstream of the partition wall and in the 
discharge chamber (at a distance at least 2.5 times the 


KEY 


1 - DISCHARGE CHAMBER 
2 - EXHAUST FAN 
3 - DIFFUSION BAFFLE 


4 - PITOT TUBE (OPTIONAL) 


5- NOZZLE 
6 - RECEIVING CHAMBER 
7 - APPARATUS FOR DIFFERENTIAL 


PRESSURE MEASUREMENT 
8- ADAPTER DUCT 


a - Diffusion baffles should have uniform perforations, with 


approximately 40 percent of free area. 


b - Airflow. 


Fic. 8 AiR FLow MEASURING APPARATUS 


21 


IS 8148 : 2018 


largest nozzle throat diameter, D.) downstream of the 
exit plane of the largest nozzle. 


Option 2 — Installed in the discharge chamber (at a 
distance at least 1.5 times the largest nozzle throat 
diameter, D ) upstream of the inlet plane of the largest 
nozzle and (at a distance at least 2.5 times the largest 
nozzle throat diameter, D.) downstream of the exit 
plane of the largest nozzle. 


C-2.3 Exhaust Fan 


Capable of providing the desired static pressure at 
the equipment's outlet, installed in one wall of the 
discharge chamber and provided with a means of 
varying its capacity. 


C-2.4 Manometers / Differential Pressure Gauge 


For measuring the static pressure drop across the 
nozzle(s). 


Option 1— One end of the manometer should be 
connected to a static pressure tap located flush with 
the inner wall of the receiving chamber and the other 
end to a static pressure tap located flush with the inner 
wall of the discharge chamber, or preferably, several 
taps in each chamber should be connected to several 
manometers in parallel or manifolded to a single 
manometer. Static pressure connections should be 
located so as not to be affected by airflow. 


Option 2 — One end of the manometer should be 
connected to a static pressure tap located flush with the 
inner wall of the discharge chamber (inlet plane of the 
nozzles) and the other end to a static pressure tap located 
flush with the inner wall of the discharge chamber (exit 
plane of the nozzles), or preferably, several taps in each 
chamber should be connected to several manometers 
in parallel or manifolded to a single manometer. Static 
pressure connections should be located so as not to be 
affected by airflow. 


C-2.5 Means of Determining the Air Velocity at the 
Nozzle Throat. 


C-2.5.1 The throat velocity of any nozzle in use should 
be not less than 15 m/s or more than 35 m/s. 


C-2.5.2 Nozzles should be constructed in accordance 
with Fig. 9 and applied in accordance with the 
provisions of C-2.5.3 and C-2.5.4. 


C-2.5.3 The nozzle discharge coefficient, C,, for the 
construction shown in Fig. 9, which has a throat length 
to throat diameter ratio of 0.6, may be determined using 
equation 3: 


7.006 134.6 


ES 
Уве Ке 2.3 


for Reynolds numbers, №, of 12 000 and above. 


Са = 0.9986 — 


22 


2201 


1 - AXES OF ELLIPSE 

2 - THROAT SECTION 

3 - ELLIPTICAL APPROACH 

Da - DIAMETER OF NOZZLE THROAT, 
IN METRES 


Fic. 9 AiR FLow MEASURING NOZZLES 


The Reynolds number is defined as equation 4 


R _ VaDn 
e V 4 


where, 


V, is the mean airflow velocity at the throat of the 
nozzle; 


D. isthe diameter of the throat of the nozzle; and 


n 


V 15 ће kinematic viscosity of air. 


C-2.5.4 Nozzles may also be constructed in accordance 
with appropriate national standards, provided they can 
be used in the apparatus described in Fig. 8 and result 
in equivalent accuracy. 


C-3 STATIC PRESSURE MEASUREMETS 


C-3.1 The pressure taps should consist of 
(6.25 + 0.25) mm diameter nipples soldered to 
the outer plenum surfaces and centred over 1 mm 
diameter holes through the plenum. The edges of 
these holes should be free of burrs and other surface 
irregularities. 


C-3.2 The plenum and duct section should be sealed 
to prevent air leakage, particularly at the connections 
to the equipment and the air measuring device, and 
should be insulated to prevent heat leakage between 
the equipment outlet and the temperature measuring 
instruments. 


С-4 DISCHARGE AIRFLOW MEASUREMENTS 


C-4.1 The outlet or outlets of the equipment under 
test should be connected to the receiving chamber by 
adaptor ducting of negligible air resistance, as shown 
in Fig. 8. 


C-4.2 To establish zero static pressure with respect to 
the test room at the discharge of the air conditioner 
or heat pump in the receiving chamber, a manometer 
should have one side connected to one or more static 
pressure connections located flush with the inner wall 
of the receiving chamber. 


C-5 INDOOR-SIDE AIRFLOW MEASURE- 
MENTS 


C-5.1 The following readings should be taken: 
a) Barometric pressure; 


b) Nozzle dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures or 
dew point temperatures; and 


c) Static pressure difference at the nozzle(s) or 
optionally, nozzle velocity pressure. 


C-5.2 Air mass flow rate, 4., through a single nozzle is 


m? 


determined using equation 5: 


2 
qm = Y X Ca X An Ex 


Where, 4, is the area of the nozzle throat, in square 


29 


metres (m°). 


23 


IS 8148 : 2018 


The expansion factor, Y, is obtained from equation 6: 


Y=0.452 + 0.548 о 2-6 
The pressure ratio, a, is obtained from equation 7: 
а=1- al 
Pn 


Air volume flow rate, 4,, through a single nozzle is 
determined using equation 8 


Gy =Y X Ca X A, |2V', 2.8 
Where V". is calculated using equation 9 
v 
V'a = 8 
п = тру 2.9 


And W, is the specific humidity at the nozzle inlet. 


Air volume flow rate expressed in terms of standard air 
4,18 calculated by equation 10 


I qv 


= .. 10 
12040 


45 


C-5.3 Airflow through multiple nozzles may be 
calculated in accordance with C-5.2, except that the 
total flow rate is then the sum of the 4, or 4, values for 
each nozzle used. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX D 


( Clauses 9.1.1.3, 9.1.8.2, 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 ) 


CALORIMETER TEST METHOD 


D-1 GENERAL 


D-1.1 Thecalorimeter provides a method for determining 
capacity simultaneously on both the indoor-side and 
the outdoor-side. In the cooling mode, the indoor-side 
capacity determination should be made by balancing the 
cooling and dehumidifying effects with measured heat 
and water inputs. The outdoor-side capacity provides 
a confirmative test of the cooling and dehumidifying 
effects by balancing the heat and water rejection on the 
condenser side with a measured amount of cooling. 


D-1.2 The two calorimeter test chambers, indoor- 
side and outdoor-side, are separated by an insulated 
partition having an opening into which the non-ducted, 
single-packaged unitary equipment is mounted. 


The indoor unit of split unit is mounted on the frame 
away from the partition wall and at a suitable height. 
The outdoor unit of the split system 1s kept on table or 
trolley of height > 0.4m above the chamber floor. The 
distance around the indoor and outdoor unit shall be as 
per manufacturer instructions. 


The equipment should be installed in a manner similar 
to a normal installation. No effort should be made to seal 
the internal construction ofthe equipment to prevent air 
leakage from the condenser side to the evaporator side 
or vice versa. No connections or alterations should be 
made to the equipment which might in any way alter its 
normal operation. 


D-1.3 A pressure-equalizing device, as illustrated in 
Fig. 10, should be provided in the partition wall between 
the indoor-side and the outdoor-side test chambers 
to maintain a balanced pressure between these test 
chambers and also to permit measurement of leakage, 
exhaust and ventilation air. This device consists of one 
or more nozzles of Ше type shown in Fig. 9, a discharge 
chamber equipped with an exhaust fan and manometers 
for measuring test chamber and airflow pressures. 


Since the airflow from one test chamber to the other 
may be in either direction, two such devices mounted 
in opposite directions or a reversible device should be 
used. The manometer pressure pickup tubes should be 
located so as to be unaffected by air discharged from 
the equipment or by the exhaust from the pressure- 
equalizing device. The fan or blower, which exhausts 
air from the discharge chamber, should permit variation 
of its airflow by any suitable means, such as a variable 
speed drive or a damper as shown in Fig. 10. The 
exhaust from this fan or blower should be such that it 
does not affect the inlet air to the equipment. 


The pressure equalizing device should be adjusted 
during calorimeter tests or airflow measurements so 


24 


that the static pressure difference between the indoor- 
side and outdoor-side test chambers is not greater than 
1.25 Pa. 


D-1.4 The size of the calorimeter should be sufficient 
to avoid any restriction to the intake or discharge 
openings of the equipment. Perforated plates or other 
suitable grilles should be provided at the discharge 
opening from the reconditioning equipment to avoid 
face velocities exceeding 0.5 m/s. Sufficient space 
should be allowed in front of any inlet or discharge 
grilles of the equipment to avoid interference with 
the airflow. Minimum distance from the equipment to 
side walls or ceiling of the test chamber(s) should be 
1 m, except for the back of console-type equipment, 
which should be in normal relation to the wall. Ceiling 
mounted equipment should be installed at a minimum 
distance of 1.8 m from the floor. 


1- PRESSURE MANOMETERS рс - TEST CHAMBER 


2- DISCHARGE CHAMBER EQUALIZATION 
3- EXHAUST FAN PRESSURE 
5. NOZZLE PRESSURE 
Dy - NOZZLE THROAT 
6 - PICKUP TUBE DIAMETER, 
IN METRES 


Fic. 10 PRESSURE-EQUALIZING DEVICE 


Table 7 gives the suggested dimensions for the 
calorimeter. To accommodate peculiar sizes of 
equipment, it may be necessary to alter the suggested 
dimensions to comply with the space requirements. 


D-1.5 Each test chamber should be provided with 
reconditioning equipment to maintain specified airflow 
and prescribed conditions. Reconditioning apparatus 
for the indoor-side test chamber should consist of 
heaters to supply sensible heat and a humidifier to 
supply moisture. Reconditioning apparatus for the 
outdoor-side test chamber should provide cooling, 
dehumidification and humidification. The energy 
supply should be controlled and measured. 


D-1.6 When calorimeters are used for heat pumps, 
they should have heating, humidifying and cooling 


IS 8148 : 2018 


capabilities for both rooms (see Fig. 11 and 12) or other 
means, such as rotating the equipment, may be used as 
long as the rating conditions are maintained. 


D-1.7 Reconditioning apparatus for both test chambers 
should be provided with fans of sufficient capacity 
to ensure airflows of not less than twice the quantity 
of air discharged by the equipment under test in the 
calorimeter. The calorimeter should be equipped with 
means of measuring or determining specified wet- and 
dry-bulb temperatures in both calorimeter test chambers. 


D-1.8 It is recognized that in both the indoor-side and 
outdoor-side test chambers, temperature gradients 
and airflow patterns result from the interaction of the 
reconditioning apparatus and test equipment. Therefore, 
the resultant conditions are peculiar to and dependent on 


Table 7 Sizes of Calorimeter 
( Clause D-1.4 ) 


SI No. Rated Cooling Suggested Minimum Inside Dimensions 
Capacity of of Each Room of the Calorimeter 
Equipment” (m) 
(W) Width Height Length 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 3 000 2.4 24 1.8 
ii) 6 000 2.4 24 24 
iii) 9 000 2.7 24 3.0 
iv) 12 000? 3.0 24 3.7 


D All figures are round numbers. 
? Larger capacity equipment requires larger calorimeters. 


СШ 


@ 
И 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 


f 


222222222222...) 


2 
 ИЯЙЛЯЛЯОФОИФЯЯЛЛОООООООООФФЙ 


ЕА 


ШТ 


1-OUTDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 4-HUMIDIFIER 7 -AIR SAMPLING TUBE 
2- COOLING COIL 5 - FAN 8 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 
3 - HEATING COIL 6 - MIXER 9 - INDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 
10 - PRESSURE EQUALIZATION DEVICE 


Fic. 11 TYPICAL CALIBRATED RooM-TvPE CALORIMETER 


25 


IS 8148 : 2018 


NEN 


ИЯ 


1- CONTROLLER-TEMPERATURE 4 - HEATING COIL 8 - AIR SAMPLING TUBE 

AIR SPACE 5 - HUMIDIFIER 9 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 
2 - OUTDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 6. FAN 10 - INDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 
3 - COOLING COIL 7 - MIXER 


11- PRESSURE EQUALIZATION DEVICE 


Fic. 12 TypicAL BALANCED AMBIENT RooM-TvPE CALORIMETER 


a given combination of test chamber size, arrangement 
and size of reconditioning apparatus and the air 
discharge characteristics of the equipment under test. 


The point of measurement of specified test temperatures, 
both wet and dry-bulb, should be such that the following 
conditions are fulfilled: 


a) The measured temperatures should бе 
representative of the temperature surrounding the 
equipment and should simulate the conditions 
encountered in an actual application for both 
indoor and outdoor-sides, as indicated above. 


b 


wm 


At the point of measurement, the temperature of air 
should not be affected by air discharged from any 
piece of the equipment. This makes it mandatory 
that the temperatures are measured upstream of 
any re-circulation produced by the equipment. 


с 


ме 


Air sampling tubes should be positioned on the 
intake side of the equipment under test. 


D-1.9 During a heating capacity test, the temperature 
of the air leaving the indoor-side of the heat pump shall 
be monitored to determine if its heating performance 
is being affected by a build-up of ice on the outdoor- 
side heat exchanger. A single temperature measuring 
device, placed at the centre of the indoor air outlet, 
is sufficient to indicate any change in the indoor air 
discharge temperature caused by a build-up of ice on 
the outdoor-side heat exchanger. 


D-1.10 Interior surfaces of the calorimeter test chambers 
should be of non-porous material with all joints sealed 
against air and moisture leakage. The access door should 
be tightly sealed against air and moisture leakage by use 
of gaskets or other suitable means. 


26 


D-1.11 If defrost controls on the heat pump provide for 
stopping the indoor airflow, provisions shall be made 
to stop the test apparatus airflow to the equipment on 
both the indoor and outdoor-sides during such a defrost 
period. If it is desirable to maintain operation of the 
reconditioning apparatus during the defrost period, 
provisions may be made to bypass the conditioned air 
around the equipment as long as assurance is provided 
that the conditioned air does not aid in the defrosting. 
A watt-hour meter shall be used for obtaining the 
integrated electrical input to the equipment under test. 


D-2 CALIBRATED ROOM-TYPE CALORE- 
METER 


D-2.1 Heat leakage may be determined in either 
the indoor-side or outdoor-side test chamber by the 
following method: All openings should be closed. 
Either test chamber may be heated by electric heaters 
to a temperature of at least 11 °C above the surrounding 
ambient temperature. The ambient temperature should 
be maintained constant within +1 K outside all six 
enveloping surfaces of the test chamber, including 
the separating partition. If the construction of the 
partition is identical to that of the other walls, the heat 
leakage through the partition may be determined on a 
proportional area basis. 


D-2.2 For calibrating the heat leakage through the 
separating partition alone, the following procedure may 
be used: a test is carried out as described above. Then the 
temperature of the adjoining area on the other side of the 
separating partition is raised to equal the temperature in 
the heated test chamber, thus eliminating heat leakage 
through the partition, while the 11°C differential is 


maintained between the heated test chamber and the 
ambient surrounding the other five enveloping surfaces. 


The difference in heat input between the first test and 
the second test permits determination of the leakage 
through the partition alone. 


D-2.3 For the outdoor-side test chamber equipped with 
means of cooling, an alternative means of calibration 
may be to cool the test chamber to a temperature of at 
least 11°C below the ambient temperature (on six sides) 
and carry out a similar analysis. 


D-2.4 The indoor-side calorimeter including the central 
partition and the outdoor-side calorimeter shall be 
insulated so that heat leakage (including radiation) 
does not exceed 5 percent of the equipment capacity. 
Space where enough air circulation is available shall be 
secured under the floor of the room-type calorimeter. 


D-3 BALANCED AMBIENT ROOM-TYPE 
CALORIMETER 


D-3.1 The balanced ambient room-type calorimeter 
is shown in Fig. 12 and is based on the principle of 
maintaining the dry-bulb temperatures surrounding 
the particular test chamber equal to the dry-bulb 
temperatures maintained within that test chamber. If the 
ambient wet-bulb temperature is also maintained equal 
to that within the test chamber, the vapour-proofing 
provisions of D-1.10 are not required. 


D-3.2 The floor, ceiling and walls of the calorimeter 
test chambers shall be spaced a sufficient distance 
away from the floor, ceiling and walls of the controlled 
areas in which the test chambers are located in order 
to provide a uniform air temperature in the intervening 
space. It is recommended that this distance be at least 


1 - OUTDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 


2 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 
3 - INDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 


IS 8148 : 2018 


0.3 m. Means shall be provided to circulate the air 
within the surrounding space to prevent stratification. 


D-3.3 Heat leakage through the separating partition shall 
be introduced into the heat balance calculation and may be 
calibrated in accordance with D-2.2 or may be calculated. 


D.3.4 It is recommended that the floor, ceiling and 
walls of the calorimeter test chambers be insulated so 
as to limit heat leakage (including radiation) to no more 
than 10 percent of the test equipment’s capacity, with 
an 11°C temperature difference, or 300 W for the same 
temperature difference, whichever is the greater, as 
tested using the procedure given in D-2.2. 


D-4 CALIBRATION OF COOLING CAPACITY 


D-4.1 The energy flow quantities used to calculate 
the total cooling capacity, based on indoor-side and 
outdoor-side measurements, are shown in Fig. 13. 


D-4.2 The total cooling capacity on the indoor-side, 
$,, as tested in either the calibrated or balanced 
ambient, room-type calorimeter, is calculated using 
equation 11: 


0. = È Pic + (hwi — hw2)W, + Dip + дъ ...1l 


NOTE — If no water is introduced during the test, / is taken 
at the temperature of the water in the humidifier tank of the 
conditioning apparatus. 


When a cooling coil of the indoor-side calorimeter 
is used for testing of small capacity units, in order to 
stabilize the test condition, equation 12 shall be used. 
$,, in equation 12 is the amount of heat exchanged in 
the cooling coil of the indoor-side calorimeter. 


да = X Pic + (hwi — hw2)W; + Dip + Oi — Dei ...12 


(һ.ҙ-Пу2)9мг 


Fic. 13 CALORIMETER ENERGY FLows DurRING COOLING САРАСІТҮ TESTS 


27 


IS 8148 : 2018 


D-4.3 Whenitis not practical to measure the temperature 
of the air leaving the indoor-side test chamber to the 
outdoor-side test chamber, the temperature of the 
condensate may be assumed to be at the measured or 
estimated wet-bulb temperature of the air leaving the 
test equipment. 


D-4.4 The water vapour condensed by the equipment 
under test, W, may be determined by the amount of 
water evaporated into the indoor-side test chamber by 
the reconditioning equipment to maintain the required 
humidity. 


D-4.5 Heat leakage, ф,, into the indoor-side test 
chamber through the separating partition between the 
indoor-side and outdoor-side test chambers may be 
determined from the calibrating test or, in the case of 
the balanced-ambient room-type test chamber, may be 
based on calculations. 


D-4.6 The total cooling capacity on the outdoor-side, $,  , 
as tested in either the calibrated or balanced-ambient, 
room-type calorimeter is calculated using equation 13: 


Dreco = 0. — X Poc — Pe (hus — hw2)W; + Dip + Dio КЕН 5; 


NOTE — The л enthalpy is taken at the temperature at which 
the condensate leaves the outdoor-side test chamber of the 
reconditioning apparatus. 


D-4.7 The heat leakage rate into the indoor-side test 
chamber through the separating partition between the 
indoor-side and outdoor-side test chambers, фр тау Бе 
determined from the calibrating test ог, in Ше case of 
the balanced-ambient room-type test chamber, may be 
based on calculations. 


NOTE — This quantity is numerically equal to that used in 
equation 11 if, and only if, the area of the separating partition 
exposed to the outdoor-side is equal to the area exposed to the 
indoor-side test chamber. 


D-4.8 The latent cooling capacity (room dehumidifying 
capacity), ф „15 calculated using equation 14: 


Oa = КИ ...14 


D-4.9 The sensible cooling capacity, ø., is calculated 


using equation 15 
0. = 


D-4.10 Sensible heat ratio (SHR) is calculated using 
equation 16 


sci? 


бы — Da 2.15 


SHR = Pee 2416 


D-5 CALCULATION ОЕ HEATING CAPACITY 


D-5.1 The energy flow quantities used to calculate 
the total heating capacity, based on indoor-side and 
outdoor-side measurements, are shown in Fig. 14. 


D-5.2 Determination of the heating capacity by 
measurement in the indoor-side test chamber of the 
calorimeter, ¢,,, is calculated using equation 17. 


Oni = да — X Pic — Dip — Он NONE! 


NOTE — EP, is the other power input to the indoor-side test 
chamber (for example, illumination, electrical and thermal 
power input to the compensating device, heat balance of the 
humidification device), in watts. 


D-5.3 Determination of the heating capacity by 
measurement of the heat absorbing side, ф,, is 
calculated for equipment where the evaporator takes 
the heat from an airflow using equation 18 


Dro = УР. +P, + Um — hws) dwo — Up — до 2.18 


1- OUTDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 


2 - EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 
3 - INDOOR-SIDE TEST CHAMBER 


Р, (Pua-hus)dwo 


Fic. 14 CALORIMETER ENERGY FLows DurRING HEATING Capacity TESTS 


28 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX E 


( Clauses 9.1.8.2, 10.1.1 and 10.1.3 ) 


INDOOR AIR ENTHALPY TEST METHOD 


E-1 GENERAL 


In the air enthalpy test method, capacities are 
determined from measurements of entering and leaving 
wet and dry-bulb temperatures and the associated 
airflow rate. 


E-2 APPLICATION 


E-2.1 Air leaving the equipment under the test shall 
lead directly to the discharge chamber. If a direct 
connection cannot be made between the equipment 
and the discharge chamber, a short plenum shall be 
attached to the equipment. In this case, the short 
plenum shall have the same size as the discharge 
opening of the equipment or shall be constructed 
so as not to prevent the leaving air from expanding. 
The cross-section area of the airflow channel 
through the discharge chamber shall be such that the 
average air velocity is less than 1.25 m/s against the 
airflow rate of the equipment under test. The static 
pressure difference between the discharge chamber 
and intake opening of the equipment under test shall 
be zero. 

E-2.2 Airflow measurements shall be made in 
accordance with the provisions specified in Annex C. 


E-3 CALCULATION 
CAPACITY 


OF COOLING 


The total cooling capacity based on the indoor-side test 
data, ¢,,,, shall be calculated using equation 19 
— Svi(hat-ha2) _ qvi(ha1—ha2) 
v'a(14Wg) 


Oi 


Un 


29 


The sensible cooling capacity based on the indoor-side 
test data, 9. ., shall be calculated using equation 20 


Qvi(Cpaita1—Cpa2ta2) 


d. = Qvi(Cpaitat—Cpa2taz) | 
= v 'a(1-Wg) 


Un 


...20 


The latent cooling capacity based on the indoor-side 
test data, ¢,, shall be calculated using equation 21 
and 22: 


_ Kiqu(Wii-Wiz) _ Ki1qvi(W i; -Wiz) 
да ы CH 2.21 
фа = Drai — Oa 2222 


E-4 CALCULATION ОЕ HEATING CAPACITY 


Total heating capacity based on indoor-side data, ф 
shall be calculated using equation 23: 


thi? 


__ Qvi(Cpa2ta2—Cpaita1) 4Уі1(Сра2Ұба2-Сра1ба1) 
v’n(1+Wy) 


Oni 


NOTE — Сы сап be equal to С: 


429 


Un 


E-5 AIRFLOW ENTHALPY MEASUREMENTS 


E-5.1 Tunnel Air Enthalpy Method 


The equipment to be tested is typically located in a test 
room or rooms. Ап air measuring device is attached 
to the equipment air discharge (indoor). This device 
discharges directly into the test room or space, which 
is provided with suitable means for maintaining the 
air entering the equipment at the desired wet- and dry- 
bulb temperatures (see Fig. 15). Suitable means for 
measuring the wet- and dry-bulb temperatures of the 
air entering and leaving the equipment and the external 
resistance shall be provided. 


IS 8148 : 2018 


| 10 
| 


ШІ Е 
| жағы 


L 


Ms 


| 


L—1 900000090 


1- OUTDOOR-SIDE TEST ROOM 7 - DOOR/WINDOW 
2 - OUTDOOR UNIT OF EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 8 - INSULATION 
3 - INDOOR-SIDE COIL SECTION OF EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 9 - INDOOR-SIDE TEST ROOM 


4 - AIR TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY 10 - ROOM CONDITIONING APPARATUS 
, 2.2. INSTRUMENTS 11 - APPARATUS FOR DIFFERENTIAL 
` PRESSURE MEASUREMENT 


6 - AIRFLOW MEASURING APPARATUS 


Fic. 15 TUNNEL AIR ENTHALPY TEST METHOD ARRANGEMENT 


30 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX F 
( Clauses 7.2 and 8.2) 


ISEER CALCULATIONS 


F-1 COOLING SEASONAL PERFORMANCE 
FACTOR (CSPF) 


The cooling seasonal performance factor (СРЕ), Ес, 
of the equipment shall be calculated by equation 24. 


Fesp = Lesr ...24 


F-2 DEFINED COOLING LOAD 


The defined cooling load shall be represented by a 
value and the assumption that it is linearly changing 
depending on the change in outdoor temperature. 


Defined cooling load which shall be used is shown in 
Table 8. 


Table 8 Defined Cooling Load 
( Clause F-2 ) 


Parameter Load Zero (0) een 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

1) Cooling load (W) 0 [KC 
ii) Temperature (?C) % ting 


Where, ¢,,, is the outdoor temperature at 100 percent 


load and t, is the outdoor temperature at 0 percent load. 


Reference values of defined cooling load to be used 
shall be as follows: 


t, = 23 °C and t, = 35 °C 


Defined cooling load L(t) at outdoor temperature і, 


which is necessary to calculate the cooling seasonal 
energy consumption, shall be determined by equation 25 


L.(t;) = Ügu(tioo) X 


tj-to 


425 


tioo—to 


Where, ф (f...) is the cooling capacity at t o at full-load 
operating conditions. 


F-3 OUTDOOR TEMPERATURE 
DISTRIBUTION FOR COOLING 


BIN 


Cooling seasonal performance factor (CSPF) shall be 
calculated at the reference climate condition in Table 9. 


The calculation of cooling seasonal performance factor 
may also be done for other climate conditions. 


Table 9 shows the reference outdoor temperature bin 
distribution. 


Bin hours of each outdoor temperature may be 
calculated by multiplying the fractional bin hours by 
the total annual cooling hours if the fractional bin hours 
are applicable. 


F-4 COOLONG SEASONAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF FIXED CAPACITY UNITS 


Operational performance at each test, which is used for 
calculation of seasonal performance factor, shall be in 
accordance with 7.2 Table 2. 


F-4.1 Capacity Characteristics against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Capacity P(t) (W) of the equipment when it is 
operated for cooling at outdoor temperature /. linearly 
changes depending on outdoor temperatures as shown 
in Fig. 16, and it is determined by equation 26 from 
two characteristics, one at 35 °C and the other at 29 °C. 


(29)- ) 
Dealt) = 04,(35) + 2899-9869 (35-5) ...26 
Е-4.2 Power Input Characteristics Against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Power input PAK) (W) of the equipment when it is 
operated for cooling at outdoor temperature /. linearly 
changes depending on outdoor temperatures as shown 


Table 9 Reference Outdoor Temperature Bin Distribution 
( Clause Е-3) 


Binnumberj | 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 | 16 | 17 18 19 | 20 | Total 
Outdoor 
temperature | 24 | 25 | 26 | 27 | 28 | 29 | 30 | 31 | 32 | зз | 34 | 35 | 36 | 37 | 38 | 39] 40 | 41 | 42 | 43 | — 
9С 
1 
Average 

527 | 590 | 639 | 660 | 603 | 543 | 451 | 377 | 309 | 240 | 196 | 165 | 130] 101 | 79 | 59 | 44 | 31 | 20 | 10 |5774 
Annual Hours 
n 9.1 102 11.1]1.4|10.3/9.4 | 7.8 | 6.5 | 54|42|34|29 23] 17| 14| 1 108 | 05 | 03 | 02 | 100 
Bin hours п, п, п, п, п, n. nc n. n. n, no n, ny na n, n nc n; Nig по Nyy = 
Reference bin} i^, | 195 | 211 | 218 | 199 | 179 | 149 124| 102] 79 | 65 | 54 | 43 | 32 | 26 | 18| 14 | 9 | 6 | з |1900 
hours (n) h 


IS 8148 : 2018 


in Fig. 16, and it is determined by equation 27 from 
two characteristics, one at 35 °C and the other at 29 °C. 


Рещ(29)-Р, 
Ры (5) = Раа(35) + Pa x (35-6) 2) 


Е-4.3 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Total Load 
(CSTL) 


Cooling seasonal total load (СТІ), 1... shall be 
determined using equation 28 from the total sum of 
cooling load at each outdoor temperature f, multiplied 
by bin hours п. 


Lest = Ула 1.05) x nj + Уў=т+1 alh) хт ...28 
a) In the range of L (t) < ¢,,(¢) G = 1 to m): 
L{t) shall be calculated by equation 25. 
b) In the range of L(t) > (С) (j =m-+1 to n): 
Pelt) shall be calculated by equation 26. 


F-4.4 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Energy 
Consumption (CSEC) 

Cooling seasonal energy consumption (CSEC), C... 
shall be determined using equation 29 from the total 
sum of cooling energy consumption at each outdoor 
temperature f. 


Cese = Ул X (6) X Pru (t5) х —— ...29 


еще j) 


Operation factor A(t) shall be calculated by 


equation 30. 


сар 
Lp 
€ 2230 


X(t) = 


In the case of L (t) > д“). Ха) = 1. 


Part load factor (PLF), Е "0! caused by the equipment 
when it is cyclically operated. at outdoor temperature ts 
shall be determined by equation 31 using degradation 
coefficient С. 


Fp, (tj) = 1— Cp(1 — X(t,)) E 


a) Cyclic operation (L (t) < ф 10): 
In equation 29, X(t) shall be calculated Бу 
equation 30. 
In equation 30, (4) = Ф (1). 
b) Full capacity operation (L(t) > фы(6)): 
In equation 29 Хо = Ft) =1 
F-5 COOLING SEASONAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF TWO-STAGE CAPACITY UNITS 


Coefficients specified in Table 9 may be used for each 
characteristic. 


32 


F-5.1 Capacity Characteristics Against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Capacity ф MO (W)ofthe equipment when it is operated 
for cooling full capacity at outdoor temperature t shall 
be defined by equation 26. 


Capacity Ф 06) (W) of the equipment when it is 


operated for cooling minimum capacity at outdoor 
temperature t, shall be defined by equation 32. 


min(29)—Omin 
0 (5) = Ømin (35) + Pm x (35 — 1), 32 


35 


Е-5.2 Power Input Characteristics against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Power input P(t) (W) of the equipment when it is 
operated for cooling full capacity at outdoor temperature 
і shall be defined by equation 27. 

Power input Put) (W) of the equipment when it 1s 
operated for cooling minimum capacity at outdoor 
temperature f, shall be defined by equation 33. 


P, min(tj) = 


Pmin(29)—Pmin(35) 
35-29 


Раш (35) + x (35 4) .. 433 


Е-5.3 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Total Load 
(CSTL) 


Equation 28 in F-4.3 shall be used. 


F-5.4 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Energy 
Consumption (CSEC) 

Cooling seasonal energy consumption (CSEC), C... 
shall be calculated by: 


_ ok X(tj)xP min (tj )xn; 
Cese = 242 БЕ ЗЫ + Ук P melti) 


x т; + o Pau (tj) x Th . ..34 


Relation of cooling capacity characteristics and 
power input characteristics to cooling load at outdoor 
temperature г is shown in Fig. 17. 
a) First stage cyclic operation (L(t) < 6..(t)). 
j^1tok): 
In equation 34, X(t) shall be calculated by 
equation 30. 
In equation 30, H(t) = ф (г). 


min 


b) Second stage cyclic operation (Ф) < L) 
<¢,,(4), j=k-+1 tom): 
Pme(t;) = Xme(t;) x Prin (t;) + (1 - Xme(t;)) x Ре (6) T .35 


Оғш(5))-1(6)) 
Ae) 
па i) Oru (tj)—Omin(t;) 236 


с) Full capacity 
j^m-*l ton) 
Р (С) shall be calculated by equation 27. 


operation 


(са) > pult) 


F-6 COOLING SEASONAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF MULTI-STAGE CAPACITY UNITS 


F-6.1 Capacity Characteristics against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Capacities Peat) and (А) (W) of the equipment 
when it is operated for cooling at outdoor temperature 
t, are shown in Fig. 18 and shall be determined by 
equations 26 and 32 respectively. 


Below equation shows cooling half capacity 
characteristics at outdoor temperature t, 


_ Оһа/(29)-Өһа/(35) _ 
Dnar(tj) = дъа(35) + — xum X(35—1)...37 
F-6.2 Power Input Characteristics against Outdoor 


Temperature 


Power input Р (6) and P in (г) (W) of the equipment 
when it is operated for cooling at outdoor temperature 
г shall be determined by equations 27 and 33, 
respectively. 


Below equation shows cooling half power input at 
outdoor temperature г. 


а(29)-Рцак(35) 
Ра (5) = Phar(35) + Tuan Tar) х(35-4) ...38 
F-6.3 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Total Load 


(CSTL) 
Equation 28 in F-4.3 shall be used. 


F-6.4 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Energy 
Consumption (CSEC) 


When the minimum capacity data are available, then 
the cooling seasonal energy consumption (CSEC), 


С ср» shall be calculated by: 
к X(tj)XPmin(tj)xnj 
Cese = Xj-i : Fn 1 + P uus Pyn(t;) xX nj + 
Ур 1 Рд) хт + Djem41 Pgj(tj) х т..39 ,39 
Relation of cooling capacity and power input 


characteristics to cooling load at outdoor temperature 
t is shown in Fig. 18. 


a) First stage cyclic operation (L (£) < Ф (1). J = 1 
to k): 

In equation 39, Х(/) shall be calculated by 
equation 30 

In equation 30 , фа) = д, (2). 

Second stage cyclic operation (¢,,,.(¢) < L (t) 
< Palt) J =k + 1 to p): 


Prin (tj) = Xn (t) x Prin (6) + (1 хай Хаһ(8)) x Ръз# (6) ...40 


b 


wm 


33 


IS 8148 : 2018 


Onar(tj)—Lc(t;) 
Onat(tj)—Omin(t;) 


Хаһ(8)- 2.41 


с) Third stage cyclic operation (ды) < Lt) 
< é (1). j =p + 1 to m): 


Pa(t;) = Хъ(6) x Phar(t;) + (1 — Xne(t)))  Paa(t;) ...42 


9tui(t;)-Lc(tj) 
Хб) — — ...43 
м( ) Oru(tj)-?nar(tj) 
d) Full capacity operation (L (£) > ¢,,(¢) j - m + 1 


to n): 
Р (С) shall be calculated by equation 27. 


F-7 COOLING SEASONAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF VARIABLE CAPACITY UNITS 


Coefficients specified in Table 9 may be used for each 
characteristic. 


Е-71 Capacity Characteristics against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Capacities Pelt)» Ф 06) апа Prat) (W) of the 
equipment when it is operated for cooling at outdoor 
temperature / are shown in Fig. 19 and shall be 
determined by equations 26, 32 and 37, respectively. 


F-7.2 Power Input Characteristics against Outdoor 
Temperature 


Power input Pat) P 06) апа PU) (W) of the 
equipment when it is operated for cooling at outdoor 
temperature t, shall be determined by equations 27, 33 
and 38, respectively. 


F-7.3 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Total Load 
(CSTL) 


Equation 28 in F-4.3 shall be used. 


F-7.4 Calculation of Cooling Seasonal Energy 
Consumption (CSEC) 


When the minimum capacity data are available, then 
the cooling seasonal energy consumption (CSEC), 
С. Shall be calculated by equation 39. 


CSE? 
When the minimum capacity data are not available, 
then the cooling seasonal energy consumption 


(CSEC), Cosg, shall be calculated alternatively by 
р  X(tjxPnar(tj)xnj 
Y. FpL(tj) 
bam Pau (tj) хт 
Relation of cooling capacity, power input and EER 


characteristics to cooling load at outdoor temperature 
t is shown in Fig. 19. 


Pyr(t;) х п} + 


Cese + ym 


...44 


Calculation methods for each term of equation 39 are 
as follows: 


a) Cyclic operation (L (£) < 9... 


min 


(t). j = 1 tok): 


IS 8148 : 2018 


In equation 39, X(t) shall be calculated Бу 
equation 30 
In equation 30, (г) = 9... (1). 

b) Variable capacity operation between minimum 
and half capacity ($,.(6£) < L) <= Prt), 
j^"k-1to p): 

t is outdoor temperature when cooling load is 
equal to cooling minimum capacity. (The 


calculation method for the crossing point 18 
described in Annex G.) 


Ew NA shall be calculated from 4 . 


(t) and 
min min* p 
тіп“ p^* 


t. is outdoor temperature when cooling load is 
equal to cooling half capacity (refer to Annex G). 


Еш» mlt) Shall be calculated from ф (t) and 


haf* с?” 
It is assumed that Е, linearly changes depending 
on outdoor temperature when the capacity of 
equipment changes continuously. 


EgRnat(tc)-EERmin(tp) 


Ezn an (t) zs Ева) + х (t; m ty) x .45 


tc-tp 


P (fj), power input between minimum and half 
capacity operation, shall be calculated from Lt) 
cooling load and E, Ja) by: 


Lc(t;) 
Egnmn(tj) 


2.46 


Pran(tj) = 


c) Variable capacity operation between half and full 
capacity (¢,,(¢) < L(t) S pult) J =p + 1 to m): 
t. is outdoor temperature when cooling load is 
equal to cooling half capacity (refer to Annex G) 
Еш mt (4), Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) at 
outdoor temperature г. at half capacity operation, 
shall be calculated from 9, . (1) and Р, (t) by: 


Onaf(tc) 
Phaf(tc) 


Еквла/ (tc) = 2.47 


t is outdoor temperature when cooling load is 
equal to cooling full capacity. 


34 


Еш m) Energy Efficiency Ratio (EER) at 
outdoor temperature /, at full capacity operation, 
shall be calculated from ф (t,) and P, (¢,) by: 


— 9fui(tb) 


P futo) ...48 


Egg rui (to) 


Itis assumed that EER linearly changes depending 
on outdoor temperature when the capacity of 
equipment changes continuously. 

Ервы(8) = Eernar(te) + бавно а ашин! x (t; — te) ...49 
Е (4), power input between half and full capacity 


operation, shall be calculated from Lt) cooling 
load and by: 


Р/(5)- 


Lc(tj) 


EgRnnf(tj) 2-50 


d) Full capacity operation (0 ,,, (4) < L(f), j - m * 1 
to n): 


Р (4) shall be calculated by equation 27. 


In case that the minimum capacity is not measured, the 
cooling seasonal energy consumption (CSEC), Cesp 
shall be calculated by equation 44. 

a) Cyclic operation (L (£) < $, (t), j = 1 to p): 
In this range, calculation shall be made assuming 
that the air conditioner cyclically operates with the 
half operating capacity. 
In equation 44, Хо) shall be calculated by 
equation 30. 
In equation 30, фа) = фы). 
Variable capacity operation between half and full 
capacity (ф (£) < L (t) S falt) j =p + 1 to m): 
This calculation shall be made by using 
equations 47 to 50. 
Full capacity operation (¢ ,. (г) < L (t), ј=т+1 
Топ): 
Р (С) shall be calculated by equation 27 


b 


wm 


с 


— 


IS 8148 : 2018 


20 25 29 30 35 


Key 
X -OUTDOOR TEMPERATURE 
Y1 - CAPACITY OR LOAD 
Y2 - POWER INPUT 


Fic. 16 COOLING Capacity, POWER INPUT AND COOLING LOAD For FIXED Capacity UNITS 


35 


IS 8148 : 2018 


(W) 


Pru(29) 


Ф.(35) 
Y1 
Prnin(29) 


Pmin(35) 


Key 


X - OUTDOOR TEMPERATURE 
Y1 - CAPACITY OR LOAD 
Y2 - POWER INPUT 


Fic. 17 Соопмс Capacity, POWER INPUT AND COOLING LOAD FoR Two STAGE Capacity UNITS 


m Р,(35) 


Р,(29) 
Phat(35) 


Y2 Prat(29) 


Prnin(35) 
Prnin(29) 


(W) 


Y1 Ф,,29) 


Кеу x 


X - OUTDOOR TEMPERATURE 
Y1 - CAPACITY OR LOAD 
Y2 - POWER INPUT 


Fic. 18 Соопмс CAPACITY, POWER INPUT AND COOLING LOAD FoR MULTI-STAGE CAPACITY UNITS 


36 


IS 8148 : 2018 


(W) 
Е Ев minltp) 
E ER nar(c) 
E ER, tui (tp) 


ҮЗ 


de Pult) 
ӘЖЕСІ БЕ — — "PEE do m 


POI Phat) 

Y2 Р,а(35) baccis cR eee = п) =65 
Р,а(29) Ф 

Prin(35) 


Prnin(29) 


Y1 


Prin(t}) 
| 1 | 1 1 1 1 | | | 1 | 1 | 


20 25 b 29 ё 35 

k k+1 p p+1 ae 
------- { (°С) 
Кеу х ! 

X - OUTDOOR TEMPERATURE 

Ү1-САРАСІТҮ OR LOAD 

Y2 - POWER INPUT 

Y3 - ENERGY EFFICIENCY RATIO (EER) 


Fic. 19 CooLinG Capacity, POWER INPUT AND COOLING LOAD AND EER FOR VARIABLE CAPACITY UNITS 


37 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX G 

( Clause F-7.4 ) 
CALCULATING METHOD FOR TEMPERATURE WHEN 
DEFINED LOAD LINE CROSSES EACH CAPACITY LINE 


Defined load L (t) is calculated by equation below: 


Фһағ(29)-фһағ(35) 
Pnat(t;) = Pnat(35) I x (35 – tj) ...53 


(tj—to) 
1-(4) = Фа (оо) X = nel p 
M $min(t}) = dui (35) + nin —#иш #9 „ (зв г), 54 
. наны ағы Crossing point of full capacity operation line and load 


line, 4,, is calculated by equation 51 and 52 


Фе(5) = Фр. (35) + va (29)- $8139)», (35-4) 


(35-29) 2-22. 


L-(t;) = fult) 2.55 


38 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX Н 
( Foreword ) 
BASIC UNITS OF MEASUREMENT AND THEIR SYMBOLS 
SI No. Quantity International System (SI) Unit Metric Units 
Name of Unit Symbol Name of Unit Symbol 
1) Air mass flow rate kilogram per second kg/s kilogram per hour kg/h 
Air volume flow rate Cubic metre per second m?/s cubic metre per hour m?/h 
ii) | Air specific humidity kilogram per kilogram kg/kg kilogram per kilogram kg/kg 
iii) | Air specific volume cubic metre per m?/h cubic metre per m/kg 
iv) | Air static volume | newton per square metre | N/m? millimetre of water mm Н,О 
pressure or dynamic 
pressure 
v) | Air velocity metre per second m/s metre per second m/s 
vi) | Air volume cubic metre m? cubic metre m? 
vii) | Area square metre m? square metre m? 
уш) | Barometric pressure newton per square metre | N/m? bar millibar millimetre of | bar mbar 
mercury (torr) mm Hg 
ix) | Cooling effect watt W kilocalorie per hour kcal/h 
x) | Dehumidifying effect watt W kilocalorie per hour kcal/h 
Xi) | Electric current input ampere A ampere A 
xi) | Electric frequency hertz Hz hertz Hz 
xil) | Electric power input watt W watt W 
xiv) | Specific enthalpy joule per kilogram J/kg kilocalorie per kilogram | kcal/kg 
xv) | Rotating speed radian per second rad/s turn per second turn per | tr/str/min 
minute 
xvi) | Heat flow rate watt W kilocalorie per hour kcal/h 
xvii) | Heat leakage rate watt Ww kilocalorie per hour kcal/h 
xviii) | Linear measurements metre millimetre mmm  |metre millimetre mmm 
xix) | Temperature Interval of | kelvin K degree Celsius хе 
temperature 
xx) | Water mass flow rate kilogram per second kg/s kilogram per hour kg/h 
xxi) | Acceleration metre per square second | m/s? metre per square second | m? 
Symbols for Annexes are as given below: 
SI No. Symbol Description Unit 
i) A, coefficient, heat leakage J/(s:K) 
ii) A, nozzle area m? 
iii) Coat specific heat of moist air entering indoor-side^ J/(kg^-K) 
iv) Сыз specific heat of moist air leaving indoor-side^ J/(kg®-K) 
у) біз specific heat of moist air entering outdoor-side^ J/(kg*-K) 
vi) m specific heat of moist air leaving outdoor-side^ J/(kg*-K) 
vii) Coy specific heat of water J/(kg?-K) 


39 


IS 8148 : 2018 


SI No. Symbol Description Unit 
viii) C airflow coefficient Pa/(m?/sy 
ix) C, nozzle discharge coefficient -а 
х) D, equivalent diameter M 
xi) D, diameter of circular ducts, inlet m 
xii) D. nozzle throat diameter m 
xiii) D. diameter of circular ducts, outlet m 
xiv) D, outside diameter of refrigerant tube m 
ху) ha specific enthalpy of air entering the indoor-side J/kg? 
xvi) hs specific enthalpy of air leaving the indoor-side J/kg? 
xvii) h specific enthalpy of air entering the outdoor-side J/kg? 
xviii) F specific enthalpy of air leaving the outdoor-side J/kg? 
хіх) specific enthalpy of refrigerant liquid entering expansion 
hs device ike 
XX) he specific enthalpy of refrigerant liquid leaving condenser J/kg 
ххі) h specific enthalpy of refrigerant vapour entering compressor Ло 
xxii) ЩЕ specific enthalpy of refrigerant vapour leaving compressor J/kg 
xxiii) һ, specific enthalpy of refrigerant entering the indoor-side J/kg 
ххіу) ША specific enthalpy of refrigerant leaving Ше indoor-side J/kg 
хху) specific enthalpy of water or steam supplied to the indoor side 
LAT J/kg 
test chamber 
xxvi) specific enthalpy of condensed moisture leaving the indoor 
h : J/kg 
Me side test chamber 
xxvil) specific enthalpy of condensed moisture leaving outdoor-side 
h J/kg 
wa test chamber 
ххуш) h specific enthalpy of the water supplied to the outdoor side test Үк 
ма chamber g 
ххіх) specific enthalpy of the condensed water (in the case of НІ 
hs test condition) and the frost, respectively (in the case of H2 or J/kg 
H3 test conditions) in the test unit 
XXX) K, latent heat of vaporization of water (2 460 J/kg at 15 °C) J/kg 
хххі) L length of refrigerant line m 
xxxil) L, length of duct m 
xxxiii) La length to external static pressure measuring point m 
xxxiv) P, barometric pressure kPa 
XXXV) D, test chamber equalization pressure Pa 
xxxvi) P, external static pressure (ESP) Pa 
xxxvii) internal static pressure drop of the indoor coil cabinet Pa 
Pis assembly measured from the cooling capacity test 
xxxviii) Pa external static pressure (p, during the blowing test) Pa 
хххіх) Р, absolute pressure at nozzle throat Pa 
xl) velocity pressure at nozzle throat or static pressure difference Pa 
Py across the nozzle 
xli) Р estimated fan power to circulate indoor air W 
xlii) Р, power input, indoor-side data W 


40 


IS 8148 : 2018 


SI No. Symbol Description Unit 
xlii) Р, power input to the compressor W 
xliv) P, total power input to the equipment W 
xlv) 4, air mass flow rate kg/s 
xlvi) 4. refrigerant flow rate kg/s 
xlvii) 4. refrigerant and oil mixture flow rate kg/s 

xlviii) 4, air volume flow rate m/s 
xlix) 44 air volume flow rate, outdoor-side m/s 

1) Ivo air volume flow rate, outdoor-side m/s 
li) 4, condenser water flow rate kg/s 
lii) 4... rate at which water vapour is condensed by the equipment kg/s 
liii) д water mass flow supplied to the outside test chamber for kg/s 
wo maintaining the test conditions 
liv) Re Reynolds number zi 
lv) SHR Sensible heat ratio zi 
lvi) T thickness of tubing insulation m 
lvii) t temperature, ambient of compressor calorimeter °G 
lviii) ty temperature of air entering the indoor-side, dry bulb °С 
lix) M temperature of air leaving the indoor-side, dry bulb ме 
Іх) M temperature of air entering the outdoor-side, dry bulb ме 
Ixi) ta temperature of air leaving the outdoor-side, dry bulb °С 
lxii) 4 temperature of surface of condenser of the compressor °С 
с calorimeter 
Ixiii) ; temperature of surface of evaporator of the compressor °С 
e calorimeter 
Ixiv) Е temperature of water entering condenser of the compressor °С 
wl calorimeter 
Ixv) temperature of water leaving condenser of the compressor °С 
w2 calorimeter 
Ixvi) v velocity of air, at nozzle m/s 

Ixvii) A specific volume of dry air portion of mixture at nozzle? m?/kg^ 

Ixviii) v'i specific volume of dry air portion of mixture at nozzle m°/kg 
Ixix) W, mass of cylinder and bleeder assembly, empty g 
Ixx) W, mass of cylinder and bleeder assembly, with sample g 
Ixxi) W. mass of cylinder and bleeder assembly, with oil from sample g 
Ixxii) ША specific humidity of air entering Ше indoor-side^ kg/kg” 

Ixxiii) ША specific humidity of air leaving the indoor-side^ kg/kg” 

Ixxiv) ША specific humidity at nozzle inlet? kg/kg” 
lxxv) ША water vapour (rate) condensed kg/s 

Ixxvi) X concentration of oil to refrigerant-oil mixture zi 

Ixxvii) X. mass ratio, refrigerant to refrigerant-oil mixture zi 

Ixxviii) Y expansion factor zi 

Ixxix) а pressure ratio -а 
Іххх) о. Interconnecting tubing heat transfer coefficient W/(m?:K) 


41 


IS 8148 : 2018 


SI No. Symbol Description Unit 
lxxxi) 1 thermal conductivity W/( та: К) 
Ixxxii) y kinematic viscosity of air m?/s 
Іхххш) ДА estimated indoor fan static efficiency -* 
Іхххіу) 9 o estimated indoor motor efficiency -а 
Іххху) other power input to the indoor side test chamber (for 
example, illumination, electrical and thermal power input to 
УР р р р үу 
ic the compensating device, heat balance of the humidification 
device) 
Іхххуі) УР sum of all total power input to the outdoor side test chamber, у 
ос not including power to the equipment under test 
Іхххуп) 4 heat removed by the cooling coil in the outdoor-side test у 
а chamber 
Ixxxvili) Фф heat removed by cooling coil in the indoor-side test chamber W 
Ixxxix) $a latent cooling capacity (dehumidifying) W 
xc) д, heat input to evaporator of compressor calorimeter W 
xci) ф, heating capacity, indoor-side test chamber W 
xcii) Pr heating capacity, outdoor-side test chamber W 
хсш) Р heat leakage into the indoor side test chamber through walls, у 
р floor and ceiling 
xciv) heat leakage out of the outdoor side test chamber through 
ф " W 
lo walls, floor and ceiling 
xcv) ó heat leakage into the indoor-side test chamber through the у 
їр partition separating the indoor-side from the outdoor-side 
xcvi) (A line heat loss in interconnecting tubing W 
хсуп) $i sensible cooling capacity, indoor-side W 
xcviii) ф, refrigerating capacity of a refrigerant compressor W 
хсіх) биде | 
фы total cooling capacity, indoor-side W 
c) фо total cooling capacity, outdoor-side W 
ci) ды total heating capacity, indoor-side W 
cii) P no total heating capacity, outdoor-side W 


a dimensionless value 


b it means the mass of dry air; the mass, kg of denominator in this unit is based on dry air (or da). for units practically used in the air conditioning 
field, *kg (da)' is very often used for denominator. Example; j/kg(da), m3/kg(da), kg/kg(da) 


NOTE — all parameters are in relation to the unit being tested unless specified otherwise. 


42 


IS 8148 : 2018 


ANNEX J 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 

Blue Star Ltd., Mumbai 

Carrier Aircon Ltd, Gurgaon 

Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 
Consumer Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


Danfoss Industries Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon 

Directorate of Quality Assurance (Engg. Div.), Pune 

Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Electronic Regional Test Laboratory, New Delhi 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt. Ltd, Karad 

Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Co. Ltd., Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engg , Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand, Bangalore 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Horticulture Board, Ministry of Agriculture, 
Gurgaon 


43 


Representative(s) 


Pror (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


Suri С. К. PRASAD 
Suri J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI SAURABH DIDDI 
SHRI MANJEET SINGH(Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
ӛнкі D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI А. К. RAVIKUMAR 
SHRI GUJJALA B. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 
Ms Sweta MAHAJAN 


SHRI DEEPAK VERMA 
SHRI К. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Lr CoL MAHENDRA Prasa (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
SHRI RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI DAMAN Kumar биат (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. P. DESPANDE (Alternate) 


нкі BURZIN J. WADIA 
SHRI ABHIJIT А. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dr Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dn бор К. Das (Alternate) 


Dr JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
SHRI ASHISH RAKHEJA 


SHRI MITTAKOLA VENKANNA 
SHRI JEYAPRAKASH GURUSAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
Suri С. M. Ратнак (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV KOCHHAR 
Suri S. Т. HAQUE Елвир (Alternate) 


Dn R. K. SHARMA 
SHRI BRAJENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 8148 : 2018 


Organization 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nirma University of Science & Technology, Ahmedabad 


Refrigeration & Airconditioning Mfr Association, 
New Delhi 


Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Spirotech Heat Exchanger Pvt Ltd., Bhiwadi 


SRF Ltd 
Symphony Ltd, Mumbai 


The Chemoours India Pvt Ltd., Gurgaon 

The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

Voltas Ltd, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organizationn in Interest of Consumer Voice, 
New Delhi 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. К. Jua (Alternate) 
Dn Ужазн J. LAKHERA 


SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Suri К. К. МЕНТА (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL BHARDWAJ 
SHRI Оуупевн GAUTAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RABINDEER N. KAUL 


SHRI P. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI Amit Rami (Alternate) 


Suri VIKAS MEHTA 
Suri NISHIT SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI P. S. CHIDAMBARAM 
SHRI GIRISH SETHI (Alternate) 


Suri V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH КОмАк (Alternate) 


Suni RITESH SINGH 
Suri A. D. Комвнав (Alternate) 


Suri H. WADHWA 


Suri B. К. Мокнорарнулү (Alternate) 


Suni J. К. AGRAWAL 


SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 


ӛнкі RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “Е” AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


Ms. Кнознво JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist “В” (MED), BIS 


44 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (12767). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2021 
TO 
IS 8148 : 2018 DUCTED AND PACKAGE 
AIR-CONDITIONERS — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


(Page 1, clause 1) — Insert the following note at the end: 
“NOTE — Standard for Treated Fresh Air Unit (TFA) is under consideration’ 


[Page 1, clause 1.3 f)] — Insert the following at the end: 


е 


5 
h) Roof top units; 


a 


Units with 100 percent fresh air intake requirements; 


j) Efficiency rating (ISEER) of the water-cooled air conditioners and air to 
air heat pump; and 


k) Multi type air-conditioner system comprising one or more outdoor units 
with the combination of ducted and ductless types indoor units like 
Hi-wall/ cassette and ducted.’ 


(Page 1, clause 2) — Insert the following new entry: 


‘IS No. Title 
10617 : 2018 Hermetic compressors — Specification (second 
revision) 
IS 15575 (Part 1) : 2016/ — Electroacoustics — Sound Level Meters Part 1 
IEC 61672-1 : 2013 Specifications ( first revision)’ 


(Page 1, clause 3.1, line 11) — Delete ‘or without’. 
(Page 2, clause 4.2) — Substitute ‘IS 9844’ for “3 of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 1)’. 


(Page 2, clause 4.5) — Substitute ‘IS 9844” for ‘3 of IS 101 (Part 6/Sec 1)’. 


Price Group 2 


(Page 3, clause 4.8, line 1) — Substitute ‘may’ for ‘shall’. 
(Page 3, clause 4.10, line 1) — Delete ‘and refrigeration piping’. 


(Page 3, clause 4.11) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


“4.11 Air Filter 


The air filter with following specifications shall be used which may be made 
from synthetic or any other suitable material. 


The filter used on the evaporator coil of the unit shall have a 637 percent open 
area when measured in an area of 1 cm? . The measurement shall be made by 
measuring the wire diameter. Count the number of wires in 1 cm? to calculate 
closed area, deduct overlap area and calculate the total closed area. Actual open 
area percent — (Total area — closed area) / Total area * 100. A specimen of the 
cut piece removed from the filter for the purpose of measurement is shown 
below for guidance.’ 


(Page 3, clause 4.11) — Insert the following new clauses at the end of the 
clause: 


‘4.12 Compressors 


The compressors shall conform to IS 10617. 


4.13 Motors 


The motor used for driving the fan/blower motor shall be either capacitor type 
induction motors or brushless d. c. motor (BLDC). 


The capacitor type induction motor shall comply with the requirements given in 
IS 996 as applicable for fan duty motors. 


In the case of BLDC motors, the test for full load test shall be carried out at the 
rated frequency declared by the manufacturer. The measured power input and 
the speed shall be within + 10 percent of the declared value. In addition, BLDC 
motors shall comply with the following requirements as specified in the respective 
clauses of IS 996 as applicable: 


a) Dimensions (see 7.1); 

b) Terminal box (see 9.2); 

c) Mounting (see 9.3); 

d) Constructional features (see 9.4); 

e) Enclosure (see 10 of IS 996 and IP code as per IS/IEC 60529 : 2001); 
f) Method of cooling (see 11); 


g) Full load test for measurement of power input and full load speed at the 
declared frequency (see 12.5 and F-6.2.4); 


h) Insulation resistance excluding the requirement of temperature rise test 
(see 12.7); 


j) High voltage (see 13.1); and 
k) Moisture proofness (see 13.2). 


NOTE — Separate standards for BLDC motor is under development. Requirement of overload 
protector, the centrifugal switch and capacitor from IS 996 does not apply for BLDC motor. 


4.14 Temperature Sensing Control 


Temperature sensing controls shall conform 8 to 28 of І5ЛЕС 60730-2-9 as 
applicable.’ 


(Page 3, clause 5.1) — Insert following at the end of clause: 
‘The ISEER of production unit shall not be less than 90 percent of the rated value. 


Capacity at half load for variable capacity units shall be within + 10 percent of 
rated half load capacity. 


Power at half load for variable capacity units shall not exceed the rated half load 
power by more than 10 percent.’ 


[Page 4, clause 7.1 d)] — Substitute ‘0.2 m*/h/kW’ for ‘0.2 m?/h'. 


[Page 4, clause 7.1 f)] — Insert the following at the end of clause: 
‘g) Fan / Blower speed — Speed declared by the manufacturer.’ 


[Page 4, clause 7.3 d)] — Substitute ‘0.2 m*/h/kW’ for ‘0.2 m*/h’. 
[Page 5, clause 7.4 d)] — Substitute ‘0.2 m*/h/kW’ for ‘0.2 m*/h’. 
[Page 5, clause 7.5 d)] — Substitute ‘0.2 m*/h/kW’ for ‘0.2 m?/h'. 
(Page 6, clause 8.3.3, sentence 1 and 2) — Substitute the following for 


existing: 


“Тһе test voltage shall be adjusted as specified in 7.3. These voltages shall be 
maintained at the test voltages +1 percent under running conditions.’ 


(Page 6, clause 8.3.4, sentence 1) — Delete “апа equilibrium condensate 
level’. 


(Page 7, clause 8.5.2) — Insert the following at the end of the clause: 


‘In case unit start cycling on low pressure (LP) cut off or temperature control, test 
to be continued for 6 cycle or 2 h, whichever is lower.’ 


(Page 7, clause 8.6.3) — Substitute the following for existing clause: 


“8.6.3 Procedure 


After establishment of the specified temperature conditions, the equipment shall 
be started and operated continuously for a period of 4 h.* 


(Page 7, clause 8.6.4) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


*8.6.4 Requirements 


When operating under the test conditions specified in 7.5, no condensed water 
shall drip or blow from the equipment. 


No running of condensed water on unit body/connected duct and no accumulation 
of water on body is acceptable. 


Equipment which rejects condensate to the condenser air shall dispose of all 
condensate and there shall be no dripping or blowing-off of water from the 
equipment such that the building or surroundings become wet.’ 


(Page 7, clause 8.7.4) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


“8.7.4 Requirements 


When operating under the test conditions specified in 7.5, no condensed water 
shall drip or blow from the equipment. 


No running of condensed water on unit body/connected duct and no accumulation 
of water on body is acceptable. 


Equipment which rejects condensate to the condenser air shall dispose of all 
condensate and there shall be no dripping or blowing-off of water from the 
equipment such that the building or surroundings become wet.’ 


(Page 11, clause 10.2.3) — Insert the following new clauses at the end of 
the clause: 


*10.3 Instruments 


10.3.1 Temperature Measuring Instruments 
Instrument accuracy shall be within the following limits: 


a) Wet bulb and dry bulb temperatures of reconditioned air in room side 
calorimeter compartment, +0.1°C; 


b) Water temperatures, outdoor side compartment conditioning coil, +0.1°C. 


c) All other temperatures, +0.5°C. 


NOTE — In all measurements of wet bulb temperature, sufficient wetting shall be provided and 
sufficient time shall be allowed for the state of evaporative equilibrium to be attained. 


10.3.1.1 Whenever possible, temperature measuring instruments used to measure 
the change in temperature should be arranged so that they can be readily 
interchanged between inlet and outlet positions to improve accuracy. 


10.3.2 Pressure Measuring Instruments 


10.3.2.1 Accuracy of pressure measuring instruments, without including 
barometers should permit measurements within +1 N/m? (0.01 m bar) (0.1 mm 
H,O). 


10.3.2.2 Barometric pressure shall be measured by a barometer having accuracy 
within + 0.5 percent of full scale. 


10.3.3 Electrical Instruments 


Electrical measuring instruments shall have accuracy of + 0.5 percent of the 
quantity measured. 
10.3.4 Water Flow Measuring Instruments 


Volume measurements shall be made with either of the following instruments 
having an accuracy of + 1.0 percent of the quantity measured: 


a) Liquid quantity meter, measuring either mass or volume; and 
b) Liquid flow rate meter. 
10.3.5 Sound Measuring Instrument 
Sound level meter shall conform to the class 2 of IS 15575 (Part 1) : 2016/ 
IEC 61672-1 : 2013. 
10.3.6 Time 


Time interval measurements should be made with instruments whose accuracy is 
+ 0.2 percent of the quantity measured.’ 


[Page 11, clause 11.5 a)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


*a) Unit is installed as it is installed for cooling capacity test and the air 
flow meter is disconnected. Connect the duct of minimum 1 m length 
and maintain the CFM equivalent to cooling capacity test by varying the 
RPM of the blower/fan and/or connect damper as applicable.’ 


(Page 12, clause 12.2.3) — Delete. 


(Page 12, clause 12.2.4) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


*12.2.4 Electric Strength Test 


The insulation ofthe appliance is subjected to a voltage of substantially sinusoidal 
waveform having a frequency of approximately 50 Hz for 1 s as described in A-2 
of IS 302-1. The value of the test voltage and the points of application shall be 
in accordance with Table 19 of IS 302-1. For inverter units or units with surge 


protection, remove the earthing wire of the inverter drive/surge protection device 
before testing, as Variable Frequency Drives (VFDs) provide a ground path for 
noise (electrical) filter. 


During the test no breakdown shall occur.’ 
(Page 13, clause 12.2.5) — Delete 


(Page 13, clause 12.2.6) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


*12.2.6 Earthing Continuity Test 


The earthing continuity test shall be carried out in accordance with method 
prescribed in A-1 of IS 302-1. 


The voltage drop is measured and the resistance is calculated. It shall not exceed: 


a) for the appliances having a supply cord, 0.1 Q or 0.2 Q plus the resistance 
of the supply cord; and 


b) for the other appliances, 0.1 Q. 


NOTES 


1 The test is only carried out for the duration necessary to enable the voltage drop to be 
measured. 


2 Care is to be taken to ensure that the contact resistance between the tip of the measuring probe 
and the metal part under test does not influence the test results.” 


(Page 13, clause 12.3.3) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 


*12.3.3 Safety Tests 

The following type of safety tests are to be carried out as per IS 302-1: 
a) Protection against access to live part (see 8); 
b) Leakage current at operating temperature (see 13.1); 
c) Electric strength test at operating temperature (see 13.2); and 
d) Provision for earthing (see 27). 


(Page 17, clause B-2.2) — Delete. 


(Page 17, clause B-2.5, line 4) — Substitute ‘min 5 m’ for ‘within 5 to 7.5 m’. 


(Page 31, clause F-1) — Insert the following note at the end of the clause: 


‘NOTE — For water cooled condenser system ISEER and heat pumps calculation method is 
under consideration till such time full load COP shall be used for energy efficiency. 


(Page 38, Annex G) — Insert the following note at the end of the clause: 


*NOTE — For water cooled condenser system ISEER and heat pumps calculation method is 
under consideration till such time full load COP shall be used for energy efficiency. 


(Page 38, Annex С, equation 52) — Substitute ‘Ø (29V for “о, (29). 


(MED 03) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


