IS 13924
IS0

: 1994 5840 : 1989

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard
CARDIOVASCULAR IMPLANTS - CARDIAC VALVE PROSTHESES - SPECIFICATION
UDC 615.46:616,126,3-08928

0 Em 1994 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

tNDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

July 1994

Price Group 5

Thoracic

and Cardiovascular

Surgery

Instruments

Sectional

Committee,

MHD 6

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 5840 : 1989 `Cardiovascular implants-Cardiac Valve Prostheses', issued bythe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee and approval of the Medical Equipment and Hospital Planning Division Council. This Indian Standard has been prepared taking into consideration the problems associated with heart valve substitute and theirdevelopments. In several areas, the provisions of this standard have deliberately been left open so as to retain the scope for development and innovation. For the reasons, this standard intentionally does not attempt to specify performance requirements for finished valves. It specifies types of tests, test methods and/or requirements for test apparatus, and requires disclosure of test methods and results. The parameters covered by this standard are expected to facilitate quality assurance, aid the surgeon in his choice of heart valve substitute and ensure that the device will be presented in a convenient form at the operating table. Emphasis has accordingly been placed on specifying types of in vitrotesting on in viva animal and clinical evaluation, on reporting of all in vitro, in vivoand clinical studies, and on the labelling and packaging aspects of the device. Such a process involving in VitrO, in vivoandclinical studies is intended to clarify the procedure priorto market release and enable prompt identification and notification of subsequent problems. With regard to in vitrotesting and reporting, apart from basic materialtestingformechanical, physical, chemical and biocompatibility characteristics, this Indian Standard also covers important hydraulic and accelerated fatigue characteristics of heart valve substitutes. The exact test methods have not been specified for hydrodynamic and accelerated fatigue testing, but the requirements of the test apparatus are given. The text of the above mentioned IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal a point (.) as a decimal marker.

marker

while

in Indian

Standards,

the practice

is to use

In the informative Annex A of this standard, respective place the following:

the following

International

Standards

are referred to.

Read in their

International Standard ISO/R 527 Plastics , Determination of tensile properties

Corresponding Indian Standard IS 8543 (Part4Secl) : 1984 Methods of testing plastics : Part 4 Short-term mechanical properties, Section 1 Determination of tensile properties IS 5347 (Parts 2 to 8 and Pan 12) Requirements for orthopaedic implants IS 5347 (Part 10) : 1987 Requirements for orthopaedic implants : Part IO Ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, Powder form

Degree of Correspondence Technically equivalent

IS.0 5832 Implants for surgery-Metallicmaterials IS0 5834 -1 Implant for surgery - Ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene - Pan 1: Powder form IS0 6474 Implants for surgery Ceramic materials based on alumina

Identical

Identical

IS 5347 (Part 9) : 1984 Requirements for orthopaedic implants : Part 9 Ceramic materials based on alumina (Continued

Identical

ori third cover)

IS 13924:
IS0

1994

5840:1989

Indian Standard
CARDIOVASCULAR IMPLANTS - CARDIAC VALVE PROSTHESES -SPECIFICATION

1

Scope

This International Standard specifies a number of test methods and makes recommendations regarding the performance characteristics of equipment to be used for determining the biological and mechanical properties of heart valve substitutes of all types and the materials of which they are made. Recommendations and evaluation recommendations programme. Specifications are also given for the packaging and labelling of are also made for in viva testing and clinical in this International Standard. These test

2.4 external sewing ring diameter: Maximum external diameter of a heart valve substitute, including the sewing ring or flange (see figure 1).

2.5 profile height: Maximum axial dimension of a heart valve substitute in the open or closed position, whichever is the greater (see figure I).

evaluation and for the reporting of results of all types of testing covered do not purport to comprise a complete

heart valve substitutes. This International Standard valve substitutes comprised human origin.
NOTE given A rationale El. for the provisions of this International Standard is

excludes in whole,

consideration of heart or in part, of tissue of

in annex

2

Definitions
Standard, the following Figure 1 Designation valve of dimensions of heart substitutes

For the purposes of this International definitions apply.

2.1

heart valve substitutes; cardiac valve prostheses: Devices used to replace or supplement the natural valves of the heart; these are categorized according to the position in which to be used (valve type).

they are intended

2.6 cycle: One complete sequence in the action of a test heart valve substitute under pulsatile flow conditions.

2.1.1 mechanical heart valve substitute: substitute wholly of synthetic origin.

Heart

valve

2.7 cycle rate : Number of complete cycles per unit of time, usually expressed as cycles per minute (cycles/min).

2.8 2.1.2 biological heart valve substitute: Heart valve substitute consisting wholly or partly of tissue obtained from animal sources. 2.9 2.2 occluder : Component(s) move(s) to inhibit reflux. of a heart valve substitute that

stroKe

volume:

Volume

of fluid moved through

a test

heart valve substitute in the forward direction during one cycle.

regurgitant

volume:

Volume of fluid that flows through

a test heart valve substitute in the reverse direction during one cycle; it is the sum of the closing volume and the leakage volume (see figure 2).

2.3 mounting diameter: External diameter of a heart valve substitute, including any covering, where it is intended to mate with the smallest diameter of host tissue (see figure 1).

2.9.1

closing

volume:

That

component

of the regurgitant of valve closure

volume which is associated with the dynamite (see figure 2).

IS 13924: 1SO 5540

1994

: 1989

2.9.2 leakage volume: That component of the regurgitant volume which is associated with leakage through the closed valve (see figure 2). 2.9.3 regurgitant fraction : Regurgitant as a percentage of the stroke Volume. volume expressed

2.13

mean

pressure

difference;

(deprecated arithmetic

:.

mean during

pressure

gradient)

: Time-averaged

mean value of

the pressure difference across a heart valve substitute the forward flow phase of the cycle.

2.10 forward fl6w phase: That portion oj the cycle time during which forward flow occurs through a test heart valve substitute. 2.11 root mean square volume flow; r.m.s. volume Square root of the time-averaged arithmetic mean square value of the volume flow through a test heart valve substitute during the forward flow phase of the cycle.

2.14

arterial

peak

systolic

pressure:

Maximum

value of

the arterial pressure.

flow:

2.15

arterial

diastolic

pressure:

Minimum

value

of the

arterial pressure.

2.12

mean volume flow: Time-averaged arithmetic mean volume flow through a test heart valve substitute during the
forward flow phase of the cycle.

2.16

,nean

arterial

pressure

: Time-averaged

arithmetic

mean arterial pressure during one cycle.

2.17

simulated

cardiac

output:

Net forward

fluid volume

flowing through a test heart valve substitute

per minute.

Closing volume (see 2.9.1) eakage volume (see 2.9.2)

2.18

reference

valve:

Heart valve substitute

which is used

to assess the conditions established in the test device employed to evaluate the test heart valve substitute.
NOTE - The reference valve should approximate to the test valve in its type, configuration and mounting diameter; it could be an earlier model of the same valve, if it fulfils the necessary conditions. The characteristics of the reference valve should preferably be well

documented with both in vifro and clinical data available in the
Figure

2 -

Simulated

flow

waveform

showing

regurgitant

literature.

volume (closing volume plus leakage volume) for one cycle A 4 Systole_ Diastole C

3

Testing

of materials

3.1

Requirements

and

procedures

All materials used shall have been identified and characteristics specified: the methods of identification and of specifying characteristics shall be relevant to the materials under test (see annex A). Evaluation for biological safety and compatibility shall be made according to generally accepted principles and methods for materials intended for long-term implantation. The test results shall be reported. 0

I

c
Time 3.2

Test report
information

Each test report shall include the following a) the rationale for the test;

:

b) the identity of the material tested (e.g. chemical generic name or biological source) ;

cl
0 d)

sample identification

(e.g. batch number); tested;

the number of specimens the test method

1

1 second

I

e)

used and., where a test method other Standard
l

than a test specified in an International full details of the test procedure;

is used,

Figure 3 - Diagrams of haemodynamic wave-forms simulating those of healthy humans

f)

test results.

IS 13924: 1994 IS0 5940 : 1999

4
4.1

Testing of components
Requirements and procedures

b) c)

have a variable stroke volume up to at least 100 ml; have a variable cycle rate up to at least 150 cycles/min;

Samples of the heart valve components shall have been tested for biological compatibility, durability and mechanical characteristics, and the results reported. Testing of the complete heart valve substitute may satisfy the requirements for component testing.

dj have a forward flow phase that accounts for 35 % f 5 % of the total cycle time at a cycle rate of 70 cycles/min f 10 cycles/min; e) simulate the relevant cardiac chamber and vascular dimensions; f) include an equivalent hydrodynamic model of the systemic circulation which incorporates both resistive and compliant components; g) simulate an arterial peak systolic pressure of at least 16 kPa f 1 kPa (120 mmHg f 7,5 mmHg) and an pressure of 10,7 kPa It 0,5 kPa arterial diastolic (80 mmHg f 3.8 mmHg); h) permit the measurement of time-dependent pressures and flows; i) allow the observer to view and photograph the test valve at all stages of the cycle; j) have had its properties and performance established by means of testing reference valve(s), and these characteristics shall be monitored by means of regular tests using a reference valve.

4.2

Test reports

Each test report shall include the following information : a) b) c) d) e) the rationale for the test; a description of the item(s) tested; the number of specimens tested; details of the test method used; test results.

5
5.1

Testing of heart valve substitutes
General

All heart valve substitutes to be tested shall be of the quality suitable for human implantation. Before testing, each heart valve substitute shall have been sterilized by the process used, or intended to be used, by the manufacturer for production purposes. In the case of a heart valve substitute that may be resterilized by the user, it shall also be subjected to the recommended maximum number of re-sterilization cycles using the method stated by the manufacturer to be the worst case procedure.

5.3.1.2

Measuring equipment accuracy

5.3.1.2.1 The pressure-measuring system shalt have a natural frequency of at least 20 Hz and a measurement accuracy of at least f 0.15 kPa (approximately f 1 mmHgl.

5.2

Description

Details of each test heart valve substitute and reference valve, including their identity, type (e.g. aortic or mitral), mounting diameter, external sewing ring diameter and profile height shall be provided. Details of each test heart valve substitute, including the materials of which it is made, and, if appropriate, the specific gravity, mass and travel of the occluder shall be provided.

5.3.1.2.2 All flow-measuring equipment used to measure regurgitant volume shall have a measurement accuracy of at least f 1 ml.

5.3.1.2.3 All other measuring equipment used shall have a measurement accuracy of f 5 % of the full scale reading. _ 5.3.1.3

Test fluid

5.3
5.3.1

Hydrodynamic

testing

(see clause B.l for rationale)

The test fluid shall be isotonic saline, blood or a bloodequivalent fluid, the physical properties of which (e.g. specific gravity, viscosity at working temperature) are stated.

Test apparatus and fluids 5.3.2

5.3.1.1 Pulse duplicator for pulsatile flow testing of heart valve substitutes The pulse duplicator shall a) produce pressure and flow wave-forms that approximate to those found in healthy adult humans (for an example, see figure 3) ;

Test method

5.3.2.1

Aim

The aim of the test procedure is to generate infoJmation on the fluid mechanical performance of the heart valve substitute during one complete cycle.

3

IS 13924: 1994 IS0 5840 : 1989

5.3.2.2

Procedure

4) 5)
6) 7)

the stroke volume, the mean and r.m.s. volume flows,
the mean pressure difference the regurgitant (see 2.13). fraction, closing mean

Test at least three heart valve substitutes of each mounting diameter in the position in which they are intended to be used. Carry out all measurements and qualitative assessments over a volume flow range corresponding to simulated cardiac outputs from 2 Vmin to at least 7 I/min. Use at least four simulated cardiac outputs. Carry out at least ten measurements of each variable, and calculate the mean and standard deviation. These ten measurements shall be obtained from either consecutive or randomly selected cycles. Assess qualitatively and document the opening and closing action of each heart valve substitute. If possible, qualitatively investigate the flow field in the immediate vicinity of the heart valve substitute; Determine the following parameters : a) the mean pressure difference across the test heart valve substitute; b) the mean and r.m.s. volume flows through the test heart valve substitute;

volume, regurgitant

volume, leakage volume and the corresponding pressure difference across the closed valve, 8)

the mean arterial pressure over the whole cycle (for only) ;

aortic valve substitutes

e) a permanent recording of at least ten consecutive cycles of the time-dependent simultaneous pressures proximal and distal to the heart valve substitute, and the volume flow through it.

5.4

Durability

testing

(see clause B.l for rationale)

cl
d) e)

the stroke volume;

5.4.1

Aim

the cycle rate; the mean arterial pressure over the whole cycle;

The aim of the test procedure is to provide information on the change of form and durability in vitro of heart valve substitutes; this procedure is normally undertaken at an accelerated cycle rate chosen so that the conditions specified in 5.4.2.1 a) and b) are achieved.

f) the duration of forward flow through the test heart valve substitute, as a percentage of the cycle time;

g) the regurgitant volume at three cycle rates, including the closing volume, the leakage volume (see figure 2) and the corresponding mean pressure difference across the closed valve.

5.4.2

Test apparatus and fluids
Test apparatus shall

5.4.2.1 5.3.3 Test report

The test apparatus

The test report shall include the following information :
a) a description of the test fluid, including its biological origin or chemical components as well as its temperature, viscosity and specific gravity under the test conditions;

a) produce a pressure difference across the closed heart valve substitute .of at least 10 kPa (75 mmHg) and shall maintain it for all test cycle rates;
b) produce full valve opening and closing during each cycle; c) allow objective evaluation of the opening and closing action of the heart valve substitute under test.

b) a description of the pulse duplicator, as specified in 53.1 .l, and major components of the test loop and associated apparatus, including a schematic diagram of the system giving the relevant chamber dimensions, details of the location of the pressure-measuring sites relative to the mid-plane of the valve sewing ring and a representative flow wave-form at approximately pressure and 70 cycles/ min ; an assessment, including appropriate documentation, of the opening and closing action of a representative test heart valve substitute and, if possible, its adjacent flow field under stated conditions; d) details of the following performance test variables (mean, range and standard deviation) at each simulated cardiac output for each test , heart valve substitute and reference valve, presenting the data in tabular or graphic form, as appropriate :

5.4.2.2

Measuring

equipment

accuracy

cl

5.4.2.2.1 The pressure-measuring system shall have a natural frequency of at least 20 Hz and a measurement accuracy of at least + 0,15 kPa (approximately k 1 mmHg).

5.4.2.2.2 All flow-measuring equipment used to measure regurgitant volume shall have a measurement accuracy of at least * 1 ml.

5.4.2.2.3 All other measuring equipment used shall have a measurement accuracy of + 5 % of the full scale reading.

1) the simulated cardiac output,
2) 3) the cycle rate, the duration of forward flow phase as a percentage
5.4.2.3 Test fluid

of the cycle time,

The test fluid shall be appropriate for the conditions set by the test apparatus (see 5.4.2.1).

IS 13924 : 1994

IS0 5940 : 1999

5.4.3

Procedure

Animal mation

testing

shall provide

at least the following

infor-

:
of haemodynamic performance during or

Test at least three heart valve substitutes of each of the largest, medium and smallest mounting diameters as well as at least one valve of all intermediate mounting diameters. Monitor the performance of the test apparatus by performing comparative tests on at least one reference valve [see 5.4.4d)l. Continue the test until either valve failure occurs or until at least 380 x 10s cycles have been completed. During the test, examine each heart valve substitute at least every 35 x 10s cycles. If failure cause shall occurs, the modes of failure and its most probable be defined and documented.

a)

an evaluation

after the third month following implantation: this shall include measurements of the pressure difference. across the heart valve substitute, ment of regurgitation; b) an assessment the cardiac output and an assess-

of any structural

change

of the heart

valve substitute; c) an assessment implantation; of the haematological consequences of

NOTE - Structural damage and/or functional impairment may occur during testing. Examples of structural damage may include holes, tears, gross delamination, fraying, coaptation problems, fracture, excessive deformation of the valve, failure of any individual component, other mechanical breakdown and/or wear. Examples of functional impairment may include excessive regurgitation and/or excessive pressure drop across the valve.

d) an assessment of any pathological major organs.

consequences

to the

5.5.2

Test

report information model

The test report shall contain the following 5.4.4

:

Test report
information

a)

a detailed

description

of the animal

used, the of

The test report shall include the following a) a description of the test fluid,

:

rationale for its use and the pre-test each animal;

clinical assessment

including

its biological

origin or chemical components as well as its temperature, viscosity and specific gravity under the test conditions; b) a description and the specification of the test and

b) a gross and microscopic pathology report on each animal in which a heart valve substitute was implanted, including any animal that did not survive for the minimum period post-implantation

: this report should include visual

associated diagram c)

apparatus

(see 5.4.2.11,

including

a schematic

records of the heart valve substitute in situ and the results of macroscopic examination including visual records of any thromboembolism of the major organs - the cause death shall be given if the animal was not sacrificed; of

of the system;

the cycle rate; c) the name and dose of the medications received by the animal during the survival period, especially of those drugs altering haemostasis; d) a description and results of any blood studies performed, including a statement of the time elapsed between implantation and these studies;

d) a validation of the test method, by means of documentation of the pressure difference across each heart valve valve, substitute and. reference as described by pressure/time wave-forms, and appropriate visual recording of the opening and closing characteristics of at least one heart valve substitute of each mounting diameter and at least one reference valve;

e) a detailed description of the appearance of the heart valve substitute at the completion of the test, or upon the appearance of structural change and/or damage should be fully characterized appropriate terization. means, e.g. histology or failure by using surface any the

e) a report on the post-operative haemodynamic performance of the heart valve substitute, including the pressure difference across the heart valve substitute, and an assessment cardiac output measurements f) of regurgitation; heart valve of degener-

charac-

a report on the appearance including changes, e.g.

of the explanted damage,

substitute, structural

a visual record and an assessment macroscopic

5.5

Animal

tests

(see clause 8.2 for rationale)

ation of the materials, deformation and calcification; if appropriate, the functional status of the heart valve substitute should be assessed, described in 5.3. e.g. by hydrodynamic testing as

5.5.1

Aim 5.6

The aims of animal testing are to provide data pertaining to the function of a heart valve substitute in viva and to the host response in at least five animals of the same species that have survived for at least three months after implantation. The data shall also include those obtained from animals that do not survive this three-month period. Thus each animal in which a heart valve substitute has been implanted post-mortem examination. is to be subjected to a

Clinical

evaluation

(see clause 8.3 for rationale)

5.5.1

Aim

The aim of the clinical evaluation is to obtain ddta on the performance of the heart valve substitute in humans under monitored conditions.

5

IS 13924: IS0 5840

1994 : 1989

5.6.1 .l

Number of institutions
at a minimum of five

5.6.2.3

Operative

data

The clinical evaluation shall be conducted

The following a) bl

data shall be collected diagnosis;

:

institutions. The minimum number of heart valve substitutes implanted at any institution shall be 20 for each type being evaluated. Each valve type (e.g. aortic or mitral) should be implanted in as broad a distribution of mounting diameters as possible.

the operative the operative

procedure(sl ;

c)
5.6.1.2 Number of patients dl e) f)

the date of operation; the valve model, type and serial number; diameter;

A minimum of 150 recipients of isolated aortic heart valve substitutes and a minimum of 150 recipients of isolated mitral heart valve substitutes shall be evaluated. If the valve is intended for implantation in only one position, a minimum of 150 heart valve substitutes shall be evaluated in that position.
NOTE substitute.

the valve mounting operative

complications.

5.6.2.4

Follow-up

data

"Isolated" refers to recipients who have only one heart valve

The following a)

data shall be collected

:

the valve serial number; the date and method of follow-up, e.g. telephone, let-

5.6.1.3

Duration

of the study b) ter or personal visit; c) d) the New York Heart Association the haemodynamic evaluation, functional class;

The study shall be continued for a minimum of 12 months after the implantation of the last heart valve substitute.

5.6.2

Clinical

data

(e.g. cardiac catheteriz-

ation, Doppler echocardiography).; e) blood studies, for haemolysis; including coagulation profile and tests

Clinical data specified in 5.6.2.1 to 5.6.2.4 shall be reported for all patients receiving the test heart valve substitute at the institutions referred to in 5.6.1 .l.

f) dates of initiation and discontinuation of anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet therapy - the type(s) of therapy shall be 5.6.2.1 Identifying data specified ;

The following a) b) c)

data shall be collected

:

g) h)

systemic embolism thrombotic

data; of the heart valve substitute;

the patient's sex and date of birth; the investigator's name;

dysfunction

the name of the institution.

i) data regarding complications, to include : haemolysis, infection, valve dysfunction, perivalvular leak, intracardiac thrombus, anticoagulation complications; j) a report of the results of electrocardiogram X-ray studies, if performed; and chest

5.6.2.2

Pre-operative

data

The following

data shall be collected

:
diseases; class;rj

k) I) m) n)

re-operation

report(s)

;

a)
b) cl d)

the pre-operative

diagnosis and co-existing functional

the explant analysis; the date and cause of death; an autopsy report.

the New York Heart Association previous cardiovascular the haemodynamic

operations;

evaluation; coagulation profile and tests Follow-up data shall be collected within six months of implantation.of the heart valve substitute, at one year, and annually thereafter for the duration of the study (see 5.6.1.3).

e) blood studies, for haemolysis.

including

1) This classification is recognized internationally and is found in literature worldwide; it is the standard method for classifying patients with heart disease. For further information reference should be made to Diseases of the Heart and Blood Vessels; nomenclature and cheria for diagnosis, Little,
Brown and Co., 1964.

6

IS 13924 : 1994 IS0 5640: 1969

5.6.3 Clinical evaluation report The report shall include the tabulation of the information specified in 5.6.2.1 to 5.6.2.4 and the following information : a) analysis of survival rates and freedom from complication rates using actuarial techniques; b) deaths and complications, with appropriate analysis and rationale for the analysis used; cl results in terms of 1) 2) overall survival, survival free from any complications,

6.4
6.4.1

Labelling
Unit container

Each unit container shall be marked with at least the following information : a) a description of the contents, including the name, model and type of the heart valve substitute, in accordance with 6.la) and b), the mounting diameter, in accordance with 6.ld), and the serial number; b) the word "STERILE" or equivalent;

c) a warning against use of the device if the package ha: been previously opened or damaged; d) e) f) 6.4.2 the date of sterilization (year and month`); the expiry date (year and month), if applicable; the manufacturer's name and address. Outer container

3) survival free from specific complitifions (including valve thrombosis, systemic embolism, anticoagulantrelated haemorrhage, endocarditis, heart valve substitute failure, re-operation, and periprosthetic leaks].

6
6.1

Packaging and labelling
Designation of type and size

Each outer container shall be marked with all the information specified in 6.4.1 as well as recommendations for storage. 6.4.3 Product information

The type and size of the heart valve substitute shall be designated by a) b) the name of the heart valve substitute; the model and type;

Each unit container shall be accompanied by product information literature that shall include at least the following information : a) a description of the heart valve substitute, in accordance with 6.la), 6.lb) and 6.1~); b) warnings regarding handling or use of the heart valve substitute; c) details of any precautions to be observed;

c) the common and/or chemical names of the construction materials; d) the mounting diameter, in millimetres, as defined in 2.3;

e) the external sewing ring diameter, in millimetres, as defined in 2.4; f) the profile height, in millimetres, as defined in 2.5.

d) an account of techniques/instructions for use with the heart valve substitute; e) a description of any accessories required and instructions for their use; f) recommendations for storage;

6.2

Sterility

Heart valve substitutes shall be supplied sterile.

6.3
6.3.1

Packaging
Unit container

g) instructions for re-sterilization, if appropriate, including the maximum number of sterilization cycles that may be undertaken; h) the manufacturer's name, telephone number and full address. 6.4.4 Patient identification form

The heat-tvalve substitute shall be packaged in a unit container. The unit container shall be designed so that once it has been opened it shall be apparent that it has been opened. The unit container shall maintain the sterility of the contents under normal conditions of handling, transit and storage, and permit the contents to be presented for use in an aseptic manner. If the manufacturer states that the heart valve substitute can be resterilized by the user, either the unit container shall permit resterilization of the contents and shall provide physical protection against mechanical damage to the contents during resterilization, or instructions shall be provided by the manufacturer for suitably re-packaging the heart valve substitute for resterilization. 6.3.2 Outer container

The manufacturer shall supply with each heart valve substitute a form or card which shall contain or make provision for recording at least the following data : a) b) cl d) e) f) gl the patient's name; the patient's hospital file number; the name and address of the hospital; the name of the surgeon performing the implantation; the date of implantation; the position of the implant; the manufacturer's name; I

The unit container shall be packaged in an individual outer container (or containers) in order to protect the unit container.

h) the model, type, mounting diameter and serial number of the heart valve substitute.

7

IS 13924: 1994
IS0 5840 : 1989

Annex A (informative) Test methods that may be of use in the evaluation for heart valve substitutes of materials

Material Metal alloys

Property/characteristic Basic mechanical resistance Molecular properties and corrosion

International Standard in which test method is specified IS0 5832, Implants for surgery Metallic materials

Ptastic

materials

mass (relative solution viscosity)

IS0 5834-1,

Implants

for surgery -

-

Ultra-high

molecular weight polyethylene Part 1: Powder form Ash content IS0 3451, Plastics (in four parts)

Determination

of ash

Melt flow index

IS0 1133, Plastics - Determination flow rate of thermoplastics ISO/ R 527, Plastics properties Determination

of the melt

Tensile properties

of tensile

Flexural properties

IS0 178, Plastics - Determination properties of rigid plastics IS0 6474, Implants for surgery materials based on alumina ISOIR 527, Plastics (adapted) -

of flexural

Ceramic&alumina

-

Ceramic

Biological

materials

Tensile properties

Determination

of tensile

properties

8

IS 13924:
IS0

1994 5940 : 1989

Annex B (informative) Rationale for the provisions of this International Standard

B.l

Rationale

for in vitro testing
performance

(see 5.3 and 5.4) and durability of

models has its advantages a knowledge

and limitations;

therefore,

a specific

animal model and implant protocol should be chosen based on In vitro testing of hydrodynamic heart valve substitutes of these factors. is an important indicator of clinical per-

formance. It is recognized that the direct translation of in vitro results to in viva performance is currently not feasible. As with all in vitro tests, knowledge paramount importance of the limitations of the test is of in analysing the results.

8.3

Rationale

for clinical

evaluation

(see 5.6)

B.2

Rationale

for animal

testing

(see 5.5)

The objective of pre-clinical

animal implantation

is to aid in the

evaluation of those valve performance characteristics which are not assessable by in vitro testing. Thus, while it is not feasible to assess the clinical durability of a valve by using an animal model, valuable data on haemodynamic and certain aspects of biological performance can be obtained by implantation in an animal. While no uniformly acceptable animal model has been established, studies have been published on the use of the calf, dog, sheep and goat. It is recognized that each of these animal

Data obtained from in vitro and animal testing alone cannot replace the evaluation of valve performance in patients, where physiological and metabolic factors may contribute to long-term survival and freedom from complications. The objective of clinical evaluation is to obtain data on the performance of the heart valve substitute in humans. The clinical evaluation described in this International Standard represents a first phase that involves a small number of patients and short duration of follow-up to detect early valve-related problems without unduly delaying the general availability of new heart valve substitutes. Larger numbers of patients followed for a longer period will be necessary for detailed statistical analysis of the incidence of complications. The potential for late complications warrants long-term follow-up of the initial patient population. Acceptance of a valve following this first phase of clinical studies should be contingent upon a commitment to prospective, comprehensive, long-term monitoring.

9

(Continued from second cover)
The following international Indian Standards: standards referred to in the Annex A do not have the identical or technically equivalent

IS.0 178 Plastics IS0 1133 Plastics IS0 3451 Plastics -

Determination Determination Determination

of flexural properties

of rigid plastics

of the melt flow rate of thermoplastics of ash

The technical Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the abovementioned IS0 standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. For the purpose of deciding, whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) `. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Bureah of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious

development of the activities of standardization,`marking connected matters in the country. Copyright

and quality certification of goods and attending to

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these pub'ications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude he free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises'pnthe basis df comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is Reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian-Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the late,st amendments or edition by referring to thd latest issne of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. : MHD 6 (2558)

, Axwnd Nq

.Amendments Issued~Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 33101_31,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western
branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 1 331 13 75 G37 84 99, 37 85 61 78626, 378662 { 53 38 43~. 53 16 40 53 23 84 (2 35 02 16, 235 04 42 235 15 19, 235 23 15 1 632 92 95, 632 78 58 632 78 91, 632 7$92

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T.`Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Secmr35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol; Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093 GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. THIRWANANTHAPURAM. HYDERABAD.

: AIIMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BI-IUBANBSWAR. COIMBAT~RB. FARIDABAD.

JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW.

PATNA.

Printed at Bee Kay Primers, New Delhi-1 1bOt5, India

