**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10445 (1982) : Scissors, bandage and clothing, angle to 
side [MHD 1: Surgical Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



'2*S> W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 615*472-4 



IS : 10445 - 1982 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
SCISSORS, BANDAGE AND CLOTHING, 
ANGLED TO SIDE 



1. Scope — Dimensional and other requirements for bandage and clothing scissors, angled to side, 
of 210 mm size, used in general surgery. 

2. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1. 




ENLARGED 
SECTION XX 



oooooooooooqqsq: 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
F!Q S l SCISSORS, BANDAGE AND CLOTHING, ANGLED TO SIDE 

2.1 Screw used shall be of a slotted cheese head pattern as shown in Fig. 1- The profile of the screw 
thread shall conform to IS : 4218 (Part I to Part VI) 'ISO metric screw threads'. 

2.1.1 The thread shall be of such iength as to allow sufficient shank for proper bearing and to 
adequately secure the two halves of scissors with proper tension for cutting. Screw shall retain 
position after setting without binding or loosening during use and shall be flush with the surface of 
the blades. 

2.2 The distance across the face of the cutting bevel edge shall be not less than 0'5 mm. 

3. Material— The scissors shall be made of stainless steel conforming to Designation 30Cr13or 
40Cr13 of IS : 6603-1972 'Specification for stainless steel bars and flats'. 

4. Workmanship and Finish 

4.1 The scissors shaii be free from rough edges, cracks, seams, burrs, flaws and other defects. The 
edges shall be even and rounded except for the cutting edge which shall be sharp. The cutting edges 
shall be free from nicks, feathers, jags, waviness and burrs. 

4.2 The scissors shall be made symmetrical. 



Adopted 27 December 1982 



©May 1983, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10445-1982 

4.3 The joints shall work smoothly and shall not have any play. They shall also satisfy the require- 
ments given in Section II of IS : 3642-1978 'General requirements for surgical instruments (first 
revision)'. 

4.4 The scissors shall be polished bright and passivated. 

4.5 The handle of the scissors shall have a spring action and a locking arrangement as shown in Fig. 1. 

4.6 The tip of the one end of the blade arm shall be made in elliptical bulbous form as shown in 
Fig. 1. 

4.7 The handle shall have serrations for proper grip. 

5. Heat Treatment — The scissors shall be hardened and tempered to give a hardness of 500 to 
600 HV. 

6. Tests 

6.1 Performance — The scissors shall cut from pinch to tip wet tissue paper teased out cotton wool, 
fine hair and frayed lint accurately and cleanly. The tip shall cut chamois leather neatly. The test 
shall be carried out with both right and left hands. 

6.2 Corrossion Resistance — The instruments shall show no sign of corrosion when put to boiling 
and autoclaving test in accordance with IS : 7531-1975 'Method for boiling and autoclaving test for 
corrosion resistance of stainless steel surgical instruments'. 

7. Marking — The scissors shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the following : 

a) Manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark; and 

b) The words 'Stainless Steel' or 'SS'. 

7.1 ISt Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from DIN 13120, 'Speci 
fication for bandage and clothing scissors, angled to side' issued by Deutsches Institut fur Normung. 



Printed at Printrade. New Delhi, India 



