IS 14773 (Part 3) : 2000 ISO-7919-3 : 1996
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

lndian Standard

MECHANICAL VlBRATlOmN OF NON-RECIPROCATING MACHINES MEASUREMENTS ON ROTATING SHAFTS AND EVALUATION CRITERIA
PART 3 COUPLED INDUSTRIAL MACHINES

ICS

17.160

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK . July 2000

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group

3

Mechanical

Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee, ME 28

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7919-3:1996 `Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines - Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria - Part 3 : Coupled industrial machines' issued by-the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In the adopted standard certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

b) Comma (J has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker. In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: lnterna~tional Standard IS0 7919-1 : 1996 Corresponding Standard Indian Degree of Equivalence Identical

IS 14773 (Part 1) : 2OOO/ISO 7919-1 : 1996 Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating machine - Measurements on rotating shaft and evaluation criteria : Part 1 General guidelines (first revision) IS14773 (Part 2) : 2OOO/lSO7919-2:1996 Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating machines - Measurements on rotating shaft and evaluation criteria : Part 2 Large land based steam turbine generator sets IS 11724 (Part 1) : 2OOO/ISO 10816-l : 1995 Mechanical vibration-Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts : Part 1 General guidelines

IS0 7919-2 : 1996

do

IS0 10816-l

: 1995

do

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred in this adopted standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating IS0 7919-5 : 1997 on rotating shafts machines -Measurements and evaluations criteria - Part 5 : Machine sets in hydraulic power generating and pumping plants For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of final value,observed or calculated, expressing the result of test accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical significant places retained in the rounded off~value should be the in this standard. this standard is complied with, the or analysis shall be rounded off in values (revised)`. The number of same as that of the specified value

IS 14773 (Part 3) : 2000 IS0 7919-3 : 1996

Indian Standard

MECHANICAL VIBRATION OF NON-RECIPROCATING MACHINES MEASUREMENTS ON ROTATING SHAFTS AND EVALUATION CRITERIA
PART 3 COUPLED INDUSTRIAL MACHINES

1

scope

This part of IS0 7919 gives guidelines for applying evaluation criteria for shaft vibration under normal operating conditions, measured at or close to the bearings of coupled industrial machines. These guidelines are presented in terms of both steady running vibration and any magnitude changes which may occur in these steady values. The numerical values specified are not intended to serve as the only basis for -vibration evaluation since, in general, the vibratory condition of a machine is assessed by consideration of both the shaft vibration and the associated structural vibration (see the introduction to IS0 7919-1). This part of IS0 7919 applies to coupled industrial machines with fluid-film bearings, having maximum continuous rated speeds in the range 1 000 r/min to 30 000 r/min, and not limited by size and power, comprising steam turbines; turbocompressors; turbopumps; turbogenerators; turbofans; electric vant. drives and associated gears, where rele-

This part of IS0 7919 does not apply to large landbased steam turbine generator sets for power stations with outputs greater than 50 MW (see IS0 7919-Z). nor to machine sets in hydraulic power generating and pumping plants with outputs of 1 MW or greater (see IS0 7919-5).

2

Normative

references

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisjons of this part of IS0 7919. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 7919 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain. registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 7919-1:1996, Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines - Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria Part 1: General guidelines. IS0 7919-2:1996, Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines - Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluarion criteria - Part 2: large landbased steam turbine generator sets. IS0 791 g-5:--". Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines - Measurements on rotating

1) To be published.

IS 14773 ( Part 3 ) : 2000 IS0 7919-3 : 1996

shafts and evaluation cr/ter/a - Parr 5: Machine sets in hydraulic power generating and pumping plants. IS0 10816-l : 1995, Mechanical vibration of machine vibration by measurements rotating parts - Part 7: General guidelines. Evaluation on non-

3

Measurement

procedures
to be followed and the be as described in

The vibration magnitude is the higher value of the peak-to-peak displacement measured in two selected orthogonal measurement directions. The values presented are the result of experience with machinery of this type and, if due regard is paid to them, acceptable operation may be expected. If only one measuring direction is used, care should be taken to ensure that it provides adequate information (see IS0 79194 ). The criteria are presented for the specified steadystate operating conditions at the rated speed and load ranges. They apply for normal slow changes in load but do not apply when different conditions exist or during transient changes, for example during start-up and shut-down and when passing through resonance ranges. In these cases alternative criteria are necess-

The measurement instrumentation IS0 7919-I.

procedures used shall

In industrial machines, shaft vibration relative to the bearing is normally measured. Therefore, unless stated otherwise, this part of IS0 791~9 always refers to relative vibration drsplacement. In view of the relatively high rotational frequencies involved with industrial machines, measuring methods using noncontacting transducers are most common and are generally preferred on rotor elements with operating frequencies of 3 000 r/min and above. For monitoring purposes, the measuring system shall be capable of covering overall vibration up to a frequency equivalent to 2,5 times the maximum service speed. However, it should be noted that for diagnostic purposes it may be desirable to cover a wider frequency range.

ary.
It should be rioted that an overall judgement of the vibratory state of a machine is often made on the basis of both relative shaft vibration as defined above and of measurements made on non-rotating parts (see IS0 10816-l).

4

Evaluation

criteria

Criteria for vibration magnitude, changes in vibration magnitude and operational limits are presented in annex A.

IS 14773 ( Part 3 ) : 2000 IS0 7919-3 : 1996

Annex A (normative) Evaluation criteria for relative shaft vibration of coupled industrial machines under specified operating conditions
A.`1 General
Zone D: Vibration values within this zone are normally considered to be of sufficient severity to cause damage to the machine. A.2.2

Two evaluation criteria are used to assess the relative shaft vibration of coupled industrial machines, measured at or close to the bearings. One criterion considers the magnitude of the observed broad-band relative shaft vibration; the second considers changes in magnitude, irrespective of whether they are increases or decreases.

Evaluation

zone limits

A.2 Criterion I: Vibration rated speed under steady conditions

magnitude operating

at

In accordance with present accumulated experience of shaft vibration measurements in this field, the recommended values for the zone boundaries are inversely proportional to the square root of the shaft rotational frequency n (in revolutions per minute). The recommended values presented in figureA. are derived from the expressions below:

Zone boundary A/B
This criterion is concerned with defining limits for shaft vibration magnitude consistent with acceptable dynamic loads on the bearing, adequate margins on the radial clearance envelope of the machine, and acceptable vibration transmission into the support structure and foundation. The maiimum shaft vibration magnitude observed at each bearing is assessed against four evaluation zones established from international experience. A.2.1 Evaluation zones

Zone boundary

B/C pm

s (WI = 9 000/J;;

Zone boundary C/D St,) = 13 200/&L
NOTE 1 pm
of S~p,I, see IS0 7919=1.

For a definition

The following typical evaluation zones are defined to permit a qualitative assessment of the shaft vibration on a given machine and provide guidelines on possible actions. Zone A: The vibration of newly commissioned chines would normally fall within this zone.
Zone B: Machines

ma-

These values are not intended to serve as acceptance specifications, which shall be subject to agreement between .the machine manufacturer and customer. l-iowever, they provide guidelines for ensuring that gross deficiencies or unrealistic requirements are avoided. In certain cases, there may be specific features associated with a particular machine which would require different zone boundary values (higher or lower) to be used. For example, with a tilting pad bearing it may be necessary to specify alternative vibration values, whilst in the case of an elliptical bearing, different vibration criteria may apply for the directions of maximum and minimum bearing clearances. In particular, it should be recognised that the allowable vibration may be related to the journal diameter since, generally: running clearances will be greater for larger diameter bearings. Consequently different values may

with vibration within this zone are normally considered acceptable for unrestricted longterm operation. Zone C: Machines with vibration within this zone are normally considered unsatisfactory for long-term continuous operation. Generally, the machine may be operated for a limited period in this condition until a suitable opportunity arises for remedial action.

3

IS 14773 (Part3) : 2000 IS0 7919-3 : 1996

apply for measurements taken at different bearings on the same rotor line. in such cases, it is normally necessary to explain the reasons for this and, in particular, to confirm that the machine will not be endangered by operating with higher vibration values. Higher values of vibration can be permitted at other measuring positions and under transient conditions, such as start-up and run-down (including passage through critical speed ranges).

A.3 Criterion II: Change in vibration magnitude
This criterion provides an assessment of a change in vibration magnitude from a previously established reference or baseline value. A significant increase or decrease in shaft vibration magnitude may occur which requires some action even though zone C of Criterion I has not been reached. Such changes can be instantaneous or progressive with time and may indicate that damage has occurred or be a warning of an impending failure or some other irregularity. Criterion II is specified on the basis of the change in shaft vibration magnitude occurring under steadystate operating conditions. The reference value for this criterion is the typical, reproducible normal vibration, known from previous measurements for the specific operating conditions. If this reference value changes by a significant amount, and certainly if it exceeds 25 % of the upper limiting value for zone B, regardless of whether this increases or decreases the magnitude of vibration, steps should be taken to ascertain the reasons for the change. A decision on what action to take, if any, should then be made after consideration of the maximum value of vibration and whether the machine has stabilized at a new condition. When Criterion II is applied, the vibration measurements being compared shall be taken at the same transducer location and orientation, and under approximately the same machine operating conditions. It is necessary to appreciate that a criterion based on change of vibration has limited application, since significant changes of varying magnitude and rates can and do occur in individual frequency components, but the importance of these is not necessarily reflected in the broad-band shaft vibration signal (see IS0 7919-l 1. For example, the propagation of a crack in a rotor may introduce a progressive change in vibration components at multiples of rotational frequency, but their magnitude may be small relative to the amplitude of the once-per-revolution rotational frequency compo-

nent. Consecluently, it may be difficult to identify the effects of the crack propagation by looking at the change in the broad-band vibration only. Therefore, although monitoring the change in broad-band vibration will give some indication of potential problems, it may be necessary in certain applications to use measuring and analysis equipment which is capable of determining the trends of the vector changes that occur in individual frequency components of the vibration signal. This equipment may be more sophisticated than that used for normal supervisory monitoring and its use and application requires specialist knowledge. Hence, the specification of detail criteria for measurements of this type is beyond the scope of this part of IS0 7919.

A.4

Operational limits

For many machines, mainly those of small size or power, continuous monitoring of vibration is not necessary. However, for those machines for which continuous monitoring of vibration is employed, it is common practice to establish operational vibration limits. These limits Lake the form of ALARMS and TRIPS. ALARMS: To provide a warning that a defined value of vibration has been reached or a significant change has occurred, at which remedial action may be necessary. In general, if an ALARM situation occurs, operation can continue for a period whilst investigations are carried out to identify the reason for the change in vibration and define any remedial action. TRIPS: To specify the magnitude of vibration beyond which fuvher operation of the machine may' cause damage. If the TRIP value is exceeded, immediate action should be taken to reduce the vibration or the machine should be shut down. Different operational limits, reftecting differences in dynamic loading and.support stiffness, may be specified for different measurement positions and directions.

A.41

Setting of ALARMS

The ALARM values may vary considerably, up or down, for different machines. The values chosen will normally be set relative to a baseline value determined from experience for the measurement position or direction for that particular machine. It is recommended that the ALARM value should be set higher than the baseline by an amount equal to 25 % of the upper limit of zone B. If the baseline is low, the ALARM may be below zone C.

4

IS 14773 ( Part 3) : 2000 IS0 7919-3 : 1996

Where there is no established baseline, for example with a new machine, the initial ALARM setting should be based either on experience with other similar machines or relative to agreed acceptance values. After a period of time, the steady-state baseline value will be established and the ALARM setting should be adjusted accordingly. If the steady-state baseline changes (for example after a machine overhaul), the ALARM setting should be revised accordingly. Different operational ALARM settings may then exist -for different bearings on the machine, reflecting differences in dynamic loading and bearing support stiffnesses.

A.42

Setting

of TRIPS

The TRIP values will generally relate to the mechanical integrity of tHe machine and be dependent on any specific design features which have been introduced to enable the machine to withstand abnormal dynamic forces. The values used will, therefore, generally be the same for all machines of similar designand would not normally be related to the steady-state ~baseline value used for setting ALARMS. There may, however, be differences for machines of different design and it is not possible to give more precise guidelines for absolute TRIP values. In general, the TRIP value will be within zone C or D.

450 400 350 300 \ 2 250 1 c" 200 .k 0 g IS0 t

I10

I

3
2

-

4

Shaft rotational

6 8 10 frequency x1000 (r/mid

20

30

Figure A.1 -

Recommended values for maximum relative displacement of the shaft as a function maximum service speed for coupled industrial machines

of the

5

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the~prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need,arises on the basis of comments. Standards are ~alsoreviewed periodically; astandard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ME 28/LM 04 ( 0398 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAUOFINDIANSTANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar~Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17 1 323 38 41 337 8499,337 85 61 { 337 86 26,~337 91 20 60 38 43 60 20 25 1 235 02 16,235 04 42 1 2351519,2352315 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi

CALCUTTA700054 Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

Branches AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed

at : Rahhat

Offset Rem, New Delhi-2

