( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984

Indian Standard
GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRON MENTAL TESTING
PART I GENERAL

Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, LTDC 2
Chairman
LT-GEN D. SWAROOP

Representing
Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), New Delhi

Members
B RIG R. C. DHINGRA SHRI K. C. CHHABRA ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay D R P. K. DUTTA S HRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute S HRI GHASITA SINGH ( CSIR ), Pilani National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. G HOSH SHRI B. C. M UKHERJEE ( Alternate ) Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore SHRI G. R. G HOSH National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. C. GOSALIA J OINT D I R E C T O R S T A N D A R D S R e s e a r c h , Designs & Standards Organization, ( S & T )/TESTS, RDSO Mimstry of Railways, Lucknow J OINT D IRECTOR S TANDARDS ( S & T)/LAB, RDSO ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Bangalore B RIG L. G. KETKAR SHRI P. N. L ABRU ( Alternate ) Radio Eletronic & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. P. KULKARNI Association, Bombay D R P. K. DUTTA ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development & Production SHR~ I. C. MATHUR ( Air ), Ministry of Defence S QN LDR K. N. SAMPATH KUMAR ( Alternate ) Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI H. V. MEHTA SHRI S. RAMALINGAM ( Alternate ) SHRI K. R. A NANDAKUMARAN N AIR Lucas-TVS Limited, Madras SHRI C. RANGANATHAN ( Alternate ) Instrumentation Ltd, Kota B RIG Y. NIRULA SHRI A. P. G UPTA ( Alfernate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI N. V. PANDIT D R 0. P. CHHABRA ( Alternate I ) SHRI B. K. MAHAJAN ( Alternate II ) ( Continued on page 2 ) Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), New Delhi

@ Copyright 1984 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9001( Part 1) - 1984
( Continuedfrompage 1 ) Members
SHRI

Representing

Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay D. V. PETKAR S HRI JAGDISH LAL ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore !SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD SHRI D. S. GOPALAKRISHNA ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. R AMARAO S HRI T. D. VEERVANI ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd. Bangalore S HRI P. V. RA O SHKI B. VIRESALINGAM ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, S HRI K. K. T ANEJA New Delhi S HRI H. S. DUBEY ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi S HRI R. C. TRIPATHI _ S HRI A. K. JAIN c Alternate 1 Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Bangalore COL J. V ARGHESE \ S HRI P. K. SHUKLA ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' S HRI H. C. VERMA Association, Bombay D EPUTY SECRETARY , IMDA ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN , Director ( Electronics )

Secretary
SHRI HARCHARAN S I N G H Sr Deputy Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel for Climatic Tests LTDC 2 : P7
Convener
S HRI P. S. K. P RASAD Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

Members
SHRI D. S. GOPALAKRISHNA ( Alternate to Shri P. S. K. Prasad ) Naval Headsuarters, Ministry of Defence. New Delhi C DR B. BOSE L T C DR R. KUMAR ( Alternate ) Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), S HRI K. C. CHHABRA New Delhi S HRI B. B. S AHA ( Alternate ) Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay D R P. K. DU T T A SHRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay S HRI JAGDISH LA L Ministry of Defence (DGI ), Bangalore D R A. MUKHERJEE SHRI ~0. C. A STHANA ( Alternate ) Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras S HRI C. RANGANATHAN Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore S HRI P. V. RA O SHRI B. V IRESALINGAM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Bangalore S HRI P. K. SHUKLA Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. V. SURYANARAYANA

2

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984

Indian Standard
GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING
PART I GENERAL

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards

Institution on 16 April 1984, after the draft finalized by the Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard lays down general guidance details for environmental testing. The guidance details for individual tests are laid down in subsequent parts of this standard. 0.3 This standard is largely based on IEC Pub 68-l ( 1982) `Basic environmental testing procedures: Part 1 General and guidance', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS:2-1960". The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1) deals with general guidance details relating to environmental testing of electronic and electrical items.

2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Repeatability - The closeness of agreement between successive results obtained with the same method on identical test material and under the same conditions (same operator, same apparatus, same laboratory and same time ).
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 3

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984 2.2 Reproducibility -The closeness of agreement between individual results

obtained with the same method on identical test material but under different conditions ( different operators, different apparatus, different laboratories and/or different times ). 2.3 Combined Test - A test in which two or more test environments act upon the test item simultaneously.
NOTE - Measurements are usually taken at the start and at the end of the test.

2.4 Composite Test - The test in which the test item is exposed to two or
more test environments in close succession and for which the times of intervals between the exposures to different test environments are defined

precisely, because they have a significant effect on the test item. Pre-conditioning and recovery or stabilization periods are usually not performed between each exposure.
NOTE - Measurements are usually taken prior to the start of the first exposure and at the conclusion of the last exposure.

2.5 Sequence of Tests - A sequence in which the test item is exposed successively to two or more test environments. The times of intervals between the exposures to different test environments are such that they normally have no significant effect on the test item. Pre-conditioning and recovery periods are usually performed between each exposure.
NOTE - Measurements are usually taken before and after each exposure, the final measurement of one test being the initial measurement of the next.

3. GENERAL
3.1 Environmental testing is intended to demonstrate with some degree of

assurance that an electrotechnical product will survive and perform under specified environments, either by simulating the real life environment or by reproducing the effects of that environment. 3.2 The test procedures of IS : 9000* have the following aims: a) to determine the suitability of an electrotechnical product for storage, transportation, and operation under specific environments, taking account of its expected life; and b) to provide information about the quality of a design or of a manufactured electrotechnical product.
*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items.

4

IS : 9001( Part 1) - 1984 3.3 The selection from IS:9000* of the severity of a test procedure, or even, in part, the choice of the test itself, corresponding to a given environmental stress can be difficult. Although it is not possible to give a rule which is universally valid for all components, equipments and other electrotechnical products, relating test conditions to real life environmental conditions, it is nevertheless possible, in some cases, to establish such relations. 3.4 Consequently, this guide is restricted to an enumeration of the essential points which require to be taken into consideration when choosing a test and test severities. It should be stressed that the order in which tests are made on an item ( see 2.5 ) can be important. 3.5 For certain tests, specific guidance is to be found in the individual standards of IS : 9001 i. 4. BASIC CONSIDERATIONS 4.1 When there is a requirement for environmental testing, the test procedures of IS : 9000* should always be used unless there is no appropriate test there included. The reasons are the following: achieve the intended repeatability and reproducibility; b) As the tests of IS: 9000* are liable to be applied to very diverse electrotechnical products, they have been designed so as to be independent, as far as possible, of the kind of electrotechnical product tested; 4 The results obtained in different laboratories may be compared; 4 The proliferation of slightly differing test procedures and apparatus can be avoided; and e) The continued employment of the same test enables the results to be related to the results of earlier tests on items for which information about the performance in service is available. 4.2 As far as possible, the tests are specified in terms of the test parameters and not by a description of the test facilities. However, for some tests it has been necessary to specify the test apparatus. 4.3 In choosing the test procedure to be applied, the specification writer should always take into account the economic aspects, particularly where two different tests exist, both capable of providing the same information.
*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items. TGuidance for environmental testing.

4 Full compliance with a test procedure of IS : 9000* is necessary to

5

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984 4.1 When the separate successive application of two or more environments does not provide the desired information, recourse should be had to combined tests ( as defined in 2.3 ). The most significant combined tests are given in IS : 9OOCP. 4.5 In some cases, however, it might be necessary to have recourse to other combinations of environmental conditions. There should then be taken into account the possible difficulties: a) in the description and in the carrying out of the tests; and b) in the interpretation of the results; it needs to be clear, in particular, that the information obtained in this manner will be better than that which could be obtained by the application of separate successive tests. 5. -RELATION BETWEEN THE REAL LIFE ENVIRONMENT AND TEST CONDITIONS 5.1 In order to describe the test, the precise nature of the environmental conditions to which the test items are to be subjected should first be defined. However, on the one-hand it is scarcely possible to reproduce the real life conditions, which follow ill-defined laws, and on the other hand the tests would probably take as long as the life expectancy of the items. 5.2 Moreover, the conditions of operational use are not always defined. For these reasons, environmental tests are generally accelerated tests with, in the majority of cases, the real life stresses increased to give a quicker result. 5.3 The acceleration factor for a test will depend upon the electrotechnical product to which it is to be applied. For this reason, and because the relation between the required reduction in testing time and the appropriate intensification of stress is not always known, it is difficult to give a figure for the acceleration factor, and this has not been attempted. 5.4 Acceleration factors should always be chosen to avoid the introduction of mechanisms of failure which differ from those occurring in operational use. 6. PRINCIPAL EFFECTS DUE TO THE ENVIRONMENT 6.1 The principal effects on an item of exposure to an environment include corrosion, cracking, embrittlement, moisture adsorption or absorption, oxidation. These may result in a change in the physical or chemical properties of materials.
*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items.

6

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984 6.2 The principal effects of some single environments and of resulting

typical failures are listed in Appendix A. Electromagnetic fields, nuclear radiation, mould growths and explosive atmospheres are examples of environments which are not listed. Not all the environments listed have related tests in IS : 9000*. 7. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TEST FOR COMPONENTS AND FOR EQUIPMENT 7.1 Testing of Components 7.1.1 In general, the precise environment in which the given component may have to operate is not known at the time of its design. Also, it may be used in a variety of equipment and other electrotechnical products under conditions which differ from the environment to which the equipment or other electrotechnical product is itself subjected. 7.1.2 Components are frequently available in sufficient quantities to permit different tests to be applied to several samples from different lots. The number of components tested may allow of statistical analysis of the results. It is often possible for destructive testing to be adopted. 7.2 Testing of Equipment and Other Electrotechnical Products- Test items for testing are often available only in small numbers because of their cost and very often, for complex equipment and products, there is only one sample, either complete or only a part of an assembly, available for test. Destructive testing is not, therefore, usually possible and the sequence of tests is of particular importance. In certain cases, information from tests on components, assemblies and sub-assemblies may allow to testing otherwise required to be reduced. 8. SEQUENCE OF TESTS 8.1 Introduction 8.1.1 When the effect of one test condition on the test item depends on the previous conditions to which the item has been exposed, it is necessary that it be exposed to the different environmental tests in a specified order. 8.1.2 In a sequence of tests ( as defined in 2.5 ), the intervals of time between the exposures to different test environments are such that they normally have no significant effect on the test item. If the interval does have an influence, recourse should be had to a composite test ( as defined in 2.4 ), in which the intervals of time between the -exposures to different environments are defined precisely, because they have a significant effect on the test item.
*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items.

7

IS: 9001 ( Part 1 ) -1984 Examples:

a) Composite test b) Sequence of tests

Composite temperature/humidity [ 1S:9000 ( Part 6 )-1978* ]

cyclic

Solderability [IS: 9000 (Part 18 )-198 lf'] -- followed by rapid change of temperature [ Sec 1 of IS: 9000 (Part 14)-1978$ ] � followed by shock [ Sec 1 of IS: 9000 ( Part 7 )-1979$ ]

8.2 Choice of a Sequence of Tests -- The choice of the sequence of tests as a function of the intended objective depends upon considerations which The objectives of test sequences and may sometimes be contradictory. appropriate applications are discussed below:
Objectives Principal Applications

a) To obtain information about failure tendencies from the early part of the test sequence, that is by starting with the most severe tests. However, tests which result in inability of the item to resist further testing are placed at the end of the sequence. b) To obtain as much information as possible before the item is damaged, that is, by starting with `the least severe tests, for example, non-destructive tests. c) To use a sequence of tests which will give the most significant effects; in particular, certain tests may reveal damage caused by previous tests. d) To use a sequence of tests which simulates the sequence of environments most likely to occur in practice.

Development testing. Generally used as part of investigations into the capabilities of prototypes.

Development testing. Generally used as part of investigations into the capabilities of prototypes, especially when a limited number of items is available. Standardized type approval testing of components and equipments.

Type approval testing of equipment and complete systems where the conditions of use are known.

Basicenvironmentaltestingproceduresfor electronicand electricalitems: *Part 6 Compositetemperature/humidit y cyclictest.
?Part 18 Solderability test. :Part 14 Change of temperature, Section 1 Rapid change of temperature two- chamber method. $Part 7 Impact test, Section 1 Shock. by

8

15:9OOl(Partl)-1984 8.3 Sequence of Tests for Components 8.3.1 Because of the difficulty of standardizing a general sequence of tests applicable to all types of components, appropriate sequences should be given in the relevant specifications. However,mwhen choosing a sequence, the following considerations should be taken into account: 4 A test with a rapid change of temperature should come at the start of the sequence; b) Tests for robustness of terminations and soldering (including resistance to heat from soldering) should be included early in the sequence of tests; and Then, all or part of the mechanical tests should be performed, so c) as to accentuate the faults likely to have been produced by rapid temperature changes and to provoke new faults, such as cracks or leaks. Such faults are easily detected by climatic tests carried out at the end of the sequence. Unless otherwise specified, these climatic tests should be those prescribed in climatic sequence given in Appendix B of IS : 9000 ( Part 1 )- 1977". The dry heat and cold phases should be applied early in the sequence of climatic tests so that the short-term effects of temperature may be recognized. The damp heat cyclic phase will introduce moisture into any cracks and the effects of this will be accentuated by the cold phase, and possibly by a low air pressure phase. The application of a further damp heat cyclic phase will introduce more moisture into any cracks present and after recovery, this may be demonstrated by changes in the electrical parameters measured. d) In some cases, sealingtests may be used for the rapid detection of cracks or leaks; e) A damp heat (steady state ) test is often applied at the end of the whole sequence of environmental tests or, where not included in the sequence, on separate items in order to determine the long-term behaviour of the component in a humid atmosphere; and f) Tests such as corrosion, drop and topple, solar radiation are not normally included in a standard sequence of tests and if required, should be made on separate samples. 8.4 Sequence of Tests for Equipment and Other Electrotechnical Products 8.4.1 Choice of Sequence 8.4.1.1 Whenever possible, the sequence of tests should be determined on the basis of information about the conditions of operational use.
*Basic environmental Part 1 General.

testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: 9

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984
8.4.1.2 When this information is not available, it is recommended that a sequence giving the most significant effects be used. A sequence suitable for most types of equipment and other electrotechnical products is given in 8.4.2. It is, however, stressed that only those tests which are significant in relation to the intended use of an equipment should be applied.

8.4.2 General Sequence of Tests to Give the Most Significant l@ects [ See 8.2 (c ) ] - An example of a general sequence of tests, as referred to in 8.4.1, suitable for most types of equipment follows.
Test Comment -

Cold Dry heat Rapid change of temperature

May cause mechanical stress which may make the item more sensitive to later tests. Causes mechanical stress which may make the item fail immediately or make it more sensitive to later tests. Application of these tests will reveal the effects of the preceding thermal and mechanical stress tests. Application of these tests may aggravate the effects of the preceding thermal and mechanical stress tests. The tests of IS : 9000 (Part 16)-l 983; may be used.

*Shock or bump *Vibration Air pressure Damp heat (cyclic) Damp heat (steady state) Corrosion Dust and tsand

tIngress of solid bodies Ingress of water, for example, rain

NOTE-TeStS for damp heat, steady state and corrosion should be made on different samples whenever possible.

*The order of application of these tests may be reversed. tNo test procedure yet published in IS : 9000. fBasic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 16 Driving rain test. 10

IS : 9001 (Part 1) - 1984 8.43 Tests for Special Applications - The following tests should only be specified for special applications where products are likely to be affected by such environments in operational use:

Acceleration ( steady state ) Mould growth Solar radiation *Acoustic noise *Ozone *Icing
N O T E-Tests for mould growth should he made on different samples whenever possible.

APPENDIX ( Clause 6.2 )
Environment Principal Eflects

A

PRINCIPAL EFFECTS OF SINGLE ENVIRONMENTS Typical Failures Resulting

High temperature

Thermal ageing: oxidation cracking chemical reaction Softening, melting, sublimation Viscosity reduction, evaporation Expansion

Insulation failure, mechanical failure, increased mechanical stress, increased wear on moving parts due to expansion or loss of lubrication properties

Low tempera_ Embrittlement Ice formation ture Increased viscosity and solidification mechanical Loss of strength Physical contraction
*No test procedure yet published in IS:9000. 11

Insulation failure, cracking, mechanical failure, increased wear on moving parts due to contraction or loss of mechanical strength and to loss of lubricating properties seal and gasket failure

IS : 9001 (Part 1) - 1984 Environment Principal Effects Typical Failures Resulting

High relative humidity

Moisture absorption or adsorption Swelling mechanical Loss of strength Chemical reaction: corrosion electrolysis Increased conductivity of insulators Desiccation Embrittlement Loss of mechanical strength Shrinkage Increase of abrasion between moving contacts Compression, deformation Expansion Reduced electric strength of air Corona and ozone formation Reduced cooling Chemical, physical and photochemical reactions Surface deterioration Embrittlement Discoloration, ozone formation Heating Differential heating and mechanical stresses
13

Physical breakdown, insulation failure, mechanical failure

relative Low humidity

Mechanical failure, cracking

High pressure Low pressure

Mechanical failure leaks (failures of sealing) Mechanical failure, leaks (failures of sealing), Aashover, overheating

Solar radiation

Insulation failure see also <High temperature'

IS : 9001 ( Part 1) - 1984 Environment Sand or dust Principal Efects Typical Failure Resulting

Abrasion and erosion Seizure Clogging Thermal insulation Electrostatic effects Chemical reactions: corrosion electrolysis Surface deterioration Increased conductivity Increased contact resistance Force application Fatigue Deposition of materials Clogging Erosion Induced vibration Water absorption Temperature shock Erosion Corrosion Erosion Temperature shock Mechanical deformation Mechanical loading Water absorption Temperature shock Temperature shock Differential heating 13

Increased wear, electrical mechanical failure, failure, overheating

Corrosive atmospheres

Increased wear, mechanical failure, electrical failure

Wind

Structural collapse, mechanical failure, See a l s o Sand or dust' and Corrosive atmospheres'

Rain

Electrical failure, cracking, leaks, surface deterioration

Hail

Structural collapse, surface damage

Snow or ice

Structural collapse see also `Rain' Mechanical failure, cracking, seal damage, leaks

Rapid change of temperature

IS : 9001 (Part 1) - 1984 Environment Ozone Principal Efects Typical Failures Resulting

Rapid oxidation Embrittlement (especially rubber) Reduced electric strength of air

Electrical failure, mechanical failure, crazing, cracking

Acceleration Mechanical stress

(steady

state

) Fatigue
Resonance

Vibration Acoustic noise Bump or shock

M e c h a n i c a l failur2, increased wear of moving parts, structural collapse

14

