Is 7500:2000
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND OBSERVATION OF CROSS ARMS FOR MEASUREMENT OF INTERNAL VERTICAL MOVEMENT IN EARTH DAMS (First Revision )

ICS 93. 160; 17.020

C) BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

September2000

Price Group

8

Hydraulic Structures-Instrumentation

Sectional Committee, WRD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by theBureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Structures-Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. Generally the more important field observations made on the behaviour of earth dams are those of settlement of embankment and measurements of internal pore pressure. These provide a record of field performance and furnish information that would enable future designs to be based on realistic conditions. Vertical movement devices provide a means of determining volume change within the embankment and settlement of foundations, and identify zones of excessive and uneven settlement which may lead to stabi Iity problem and cracking. The cross arm installation especially permits the measurement of consolidation within any desired lift or lifts of embankment both during, and after construction. Consideration governing the choice and location of this instrument is given in IS 7436 ( Part 1 ) :1-993 `Guide for types of measurements for structures in river valley projects and criteria for choice and location of measuring instruments: Part 1 For earth and rock-fill dams'. This standard was first published in 1974. A revision of this standard has been taken up to incorporate certain changes found necessary in the standard in the light of comments received from the users. The major changes in this revision are inclusion of paragraphs on general guidance, maintenance and advantages and limitations of the mechanical type of installation. However, these provisions for electrical type of installation shall be considered for inclusion as soon as text for the same is prepared and finalized. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the

standards and practices prevailing

in different countries in addition to relating it-to the practices in the field in this

country. As per USBR Publication `Embankment Dam Instrumentation Manual, Jan 1987', mechanical type of cross arms is not being used in that country because other instruments that are easier to install and monitor have been developed. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. Thenumber of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7500:2000

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION AND OBSERVATION OF CROSS ARMS FOR MEASUREMENT OF INTERNAL VERTICAL MOVEMENT IN EARTH DAMS ( First Revision)
1 SCOPE
This standard covers the requirements of installation and observation of cross arms of the mechanical.and electrical types of measurement of internal vertical movement of earth dams. Vibrating wire settlement sensor which are being increasingly not been covered here. SECTION 2 REFERENCE The following standard contains provision which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the s~andard"indicatedbelow: used now has This section is a length of 50 mm nominal steel pipe that serves as a spacer between the cross mm units. Itis2500 mm long for the 3000 mm spacing of cross arm units ( see Fig, 1 ) in rock-free soils. The spacer pipes are cut to two 1250 mm length and connected by pipe couplings when the units are installed rocky soils. in of 75 mm steel channel (6.8 kg/m) `is fastened with a U-Bolt normal to the pipe length at the centre point. The cross arm anchors the column of telescoping pipe to the embankment (see Fig. I). 3.1.3

Spacer Section

1 MECHANICALTYPE

NOTE -- When the measurements of vertical movement is desired at intervals of 1 500 mm the cross arm units wi II be placed.1 500 mm centre to centre, and the length of the spacer section will be 1 000 mm.

3.1.4

Top Section

IS No.
6!?35 :1973

1 Title
Method for dpterminationof level in a bore hole water

This piece of 50 mm nominal bore steel pipe of variable length extends the column of pipe to the surface of the embankment. It is capped by a 50 mm coupling and a pipe plug. The reading scale is attached to this top section while readings are taken. When the installation is completed, the top section should be encased in concrete to reduce horizontal displacement. An `asbuilt' elevation to the nearest 2 mm should be established for the pipe coupling on the top of the pipe (see Fig. 2).

3 EQUIPMENT

3.1 Components 3.1.1

of Installation

Base Extension

The base pipe extension consist of two lengths of 50 mm nominal 2350 bore steel pipe for extending 3.2

Equipment for Observation

mm below the middle of the bottom cross arm

placed on the foundation excavation line. The lower 600 mm length of 50 mm pipe in the foundation serves as a trap to catch debris and is separated from the upper 1500 mm length by latching plate. The base extension anchors the installation to the foundation and provides room tolatch the pawls on the measuring device ( see Fig. 1 ). 3.1.2

3.2.1

Measuring Torpedo

Readings of cross arms are taken by lowering from the top of the cross arm system, a torpedo attached to a steel measuring tape or calibrated stain less steel aircraft cable. The torpedo is machined to dimensions from a brass shaft and contains two wings or pawls whi-ch open or close at opening and closing slots The maximum dimension of due to spring action. torpedo at the wings when fully opened is less than

Cross Arm Unit
mm length of 40 mm

The cross arm unit is a 1000

50 mm and greater than 40 mm ( see Fig. 3 ).

nominal bore steel pipe to which a I 000 mm length 1

Is 7500:2000
ELEVATION, TOP OF SYSTEM

~$,.

a

w

HEMP OR O AKUM

t
HEMP OR OAKUM

-- 4.
`1 .,
CROSS ARM
n

=",

I

I

II
l-----i

flREOUIRED

EXCAVATION

w'
I
MEASURl Nr3 POINT=

k
II
[
1t

`

L____

-7
/ /

EXCAVATION OF ROCK LINE ~ 65 i ---- 1 -.1

l..

I
100mm@ MIN HOLE

., j &
J

= Y1.!

LATCHl Nr3 PLATE

NOTE

-- As each cross arm unit is placed, determine All dimensions

the elevations

of all cross arms installed.

in millinvxres. T)'tw FOR 3000

FIG. 1 TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF CROSS ARM, MeChaniCal.

mm SPACING -- Gt;NI:RAi.

2

1S 7500:2000

,,
\ \

P';' -,,,$JEXCA VAT';, ,
cIF \

\4fMlNELEvATION
EMBANKMENT
BEFORE BEGINI NING EXCAVATION \ FOR CROSSARM

"

o

u-l Ln

I i

\ \ \ \ ,1

1
OAKU~ -/

`1 \
\

f

POWER COMPACTED EARTHFILL

i-

I

d
I
OAKUM OR

I
I

I I

0

I

m N ,

I
`EM'
50mm @

`AcK'NGl\

PIPE \

I I
I I k +--

`--t
I I

I

o

In

2 LUQS, 12mm SQX50mm

LONG R

125N

HAND COMPACTED EARTHFILL

/4-1
I

`+7 I

50 t
0 0 0

i
200mm + HOLE I I ( DEPRESSION AROUND PIPE FORMED BY PIPE ,0,,,>,
----1 i

I
IN I I

BORED TO PROJECTING p,pE~

All dimensions in millimt!tres. FIG. 2 TYPICAL INSTALLATION OF CROSS ARM, MECHANICAL TYPE FOR 3000

mm SPAC]NG--"DETA]L NEAR ToP

3.2.2

Reading Scale and Adaptor
of reading scale with adaptor used for If torpedo for aircraft

3.2.3

Water Level Indicator
in IS 6935. The

The details

Any suitable device as described

lowering the torpedo are given in Fig. 4. reading scale may be suitably modified cable.

measuring .devices should be kept clean and free of grit. It is suggested that each type of instrument be disassembled, in so far as practicable, and cleaned following completion of readings. The tape should be carefully inspected for kinks and breaks.

is attached to calibrated stainless steel aircraft cable,

3

IS 7500:2000
STEEL TAPE

Ii
tml'
--35mm d 1:

-3EL-. "
Dfie,Tin.&FuallluN READING 1 % 0 s
PAWLS 1

Ql!F A w
TAPE EYE 10 mm YOKE 00 w
1

I !

~_-PAWL

S

LOT Iii

FIG. 3 MEASURING TORPEDO

4 METHOD

OF LOCATING

A COLUMN

OF

CROSS ARMS
Prior to installation of the test equ ipment, permanent instrument benchmarks and targets should be established on the abutments of the dam. These targets should be visible and accessible throughout construction of the entire embankment. From the control targets of especially established targets on opposite abutments, line can be extended which will passover and will intersect at the centre of the installation. From this system of intersecting baselines, temporary straddle hubs may be established at any embankment elevation. When chalk lines are stretched between installation. the straddle hubs, the points of intersection will be the centre.ofthe

sections anchored to the embankment by horizontal cross arms. The base extension is installed at the foundation level while the cross arm and spacer sections are placed alternatively, one above the other up to the top of the dam progressively as the construction proceeds. To prevent the ingress of soil all telescopic joints should be protected with oakum or hemp packing held in-place by hessian wired on to the pipes. The cross arms a~e installed progressively as the embankment is placed. Settlement readings are obtained by means of the specially designed measuring torpedo. The torpedo is lowered into the pipe barrel by means of a steel tape of the cable so attached that the upper edge of the pawls of the torpedo corresponds to zero points of graduation of the tape or the cable. While making a measurement the torpedo is lowered to a point a few centimetres below the elevation of the uppermost measuring point, then lifted until the extended pawls engage the lower end of the inside 40 mm diameter pipe.

5 DESCRIPTION

OF INSTALLATION

The installation comprises a series of.alternate telescopic 40 mm diameter and 50 mm diameter pipe

4

AfMlrST VERNIER SCALE F~ ZERO ATTHIS POINT (LEvEL POINT) \

--

1#-

SCALE

STRAPIR*

SUPPORT

BRASS STRIP
F-

[

19mm 51AN0AR0 COUPLING

r 64 mm STANO PIP E \

`oRpEoO\

r

-.

F

40mm

*

STANDARD

PIPES INSERT

u
I
u \
THUM8 SCREW

ENLARGED L) AOAPTGR FOR SOmm PtPE

sOmm * STANDARD PIPE -

e

[

HEXAGONAL NUT WELOEO

NOTES 1 Recommend a 15-kg spring scale. grapple hook. tape clamp handle and a 10-kg tension on tape wheit taking settlement readings. 2 Use device as shown during construction. Thereafter cut device to I I 20 mm length and thread bottom end of 50-mm pipe to tit top of installation. FIG. 4 READING SCALE wtrri ADAWOR

$

z
..
N

o 0 0

1s 7500:2000

6 INSTALLATION 6.1 The vertical
instaLled movement apparatus should be as embankment placement operations

hemp or oakum telescoping pipe.

packing

between

the lengths of

progress. Each pipe section should be placed in a vertical position. The operation of all heavy equipment should be prohibited in the immediate vicinity of the installations when sections of the apparatus are being placed."if, for some reason, the upper surface of the embankment in the vicinity of the installation should' be ~eworked before an additional unit is completed, the installation should be flagged or prominently marked so that it will not be damaged or displaced by earth movingaquipment 6.2 Base Extension The base extension for the device consists of two ( see Fig. 1).

6.3.1.2 A practical method for boring the required holes below the excavated trench for a cross arm unit is by the use of a power auger. After the cross arm unit is installed, the angular space surrounding the pipe in the bore hole should be backfilled with selected fine material and the soil compacted by hand rodding around the telescopic pipe section. 6.3.1.3 Because of the difficulty in working the bottom end of the 2500 mm length of 50 mm spacer pipe over the projecting40 mm pipe from the underlying crow arm unit, lugs are welded to opposite sides of the 50 mm pipe at about 300 mm from its top. A special tee wrench may be fabricated on the job to slip over the top end of the 50 mm pipe engaging the lugs, and permitting the 50 mm pipe to be twisted and worked down over the 40 mm pipe for the required 250 mm. The engaging end of the wrench consists of 400 mm length of65 mm nominal bore pipe, having two 15 mm wide slots, 75 mm deep. To this piece of 65 mm pipe, tw(pieces of25 mm nominal bore, steel pipe, approximately 900 mm and 1 200 mm long respectively, are welded to form a T-shaped handle. The 250 mm of overlap of the 50 mm spacer pipe over the projecting 40 mm pipe, deep in the augered hole, can be determined by lowering a T-shaped stick wh ich has been notched at a length of 2250 50 mm pipe. 6.3.-1.4 When the embankment contains a considerable mm. inside the

pieces of the pipe w"hich "form the extension into the foundation. This extension is assembled and set into a 10 mm minimum diameter hole which has been drilled to the required depth into the foundation. The hole may be drilled by wash boring, chum drill, earth auger or diamond drill depending upon the type of foundation material and equipment available. After setting the pipe extension, the backfill around the 50-mm pipe should be done with cement grout to within 250 mm of its top. If the foundation cross arm is not installed immediately, a temporary pipe cover should be placed over the extending 50-mm pipe and covered with a 450 mm minimum of compacted embankment material. 6.3 Placing Cross Arm Units The vertical movement apparatus ( see Fig. 2 ) can be installed either in `rock-free' soil or in-'rocky' soils or in a combination of soil as found in a zoned type of earth and rockfili embankment. A `rock-free' soi I is defined as a soil that can be penetrated by 250 mm diameter power auger. Installation in `rock-free' soils in 6.3.2. of the apparatus soils is given in 6.3.1 and in `rocky'

amount of rock, the augering of hole for installation of cross arm units"tan be expedited if the backfill over the pipe cover is selected fine material. This fine material can be placed and compacted inside a cylinder of metal pipe or tubing having an internal diameter of approximately 250 mm. Thepipe may be progressively ~acked to a-higher elevation. When the hole is augered for succeeding cross arm unit, most of.the fine material is removed. 6.3.1.5

BackjWing trenches for cross arm unit
with typical

6.3.1

Procedure for Installation in Rock-Free Soils

When the trench has been backfilled

6.3.1.1 In `rock-free' soils the embankment should reach an elevation of approximately 4500 mm above the measuring point of a cross arm unit previously placed before excavating the trench for the next cross
arm. After.exciuvating the bench and boring the hole for a cross arm unit, a section of Iightweight.pipe or tubing may-be placed in the hole to keep dirt from entering the pipe system when the pipe cover is removed from the existing installation. The pipe cover should be removed and replaced as required with twisting motion in order to retain undisturbed, the

embankment materials to within approximately 300 mm of the top of the 40 mm pipe ( bottom of pipe cover ) the initial elevation of the cross arm measuring point should be recorded as described in 7.2.1. Thereafter, a minimum of 500 mm of typical embankment material should be compacted over the pipe cover before embankment placing operations are resumed at the place of installation. 6.3.1.6 The sequence of operations involved in installation of cross arm device in rock-free soils is given in Fig. 5.

6

IS 7500:2000 6.3.2 6.3.2.1

Procedure forlnstallation

in

Rocky Soils

Since boring of holes for aligning the cross

cover leaving a depression around the pipe cover. A 50 mm thick sand pad should be placed and then the cross arm device should be placed and aligned (after removing the top cover of the upper spacer pipe). 6.3.2.5 The sequence of operations involved in

arm device is not possible in rocky soils, a practicable method is mounding around the 40 mm pipe of the cross armdevice. TEIS method should be adopted in previous zones of zoned embankments. 6.3.2.2 The cross arm device should be placed and then aligned and backfilled with previous (rocky) material .up to 250 mm above the cross arm. The lower 1 250.mm section of 50 mm spacer pipe should then be placed and aligned. 6.3.2.3 The pipe cover should be placed and rocky materials mounded to lower end of pipe cover. The embankment should be raised 1 200 mm above cross arm. The upper 1250 mm section of50 mm spacer pipe with coupling should be connected to the lower section of the spacer pipe and pipe cover should be put on the top of the upper section of the spa~~r pipe. 6.3.2.4 Rocky material should be mounded around the upper section of spacer pipe. Embankment placing should be continued to 150 mm above top of pipe

installing cross arms in rocky soils is given in Fig. 6. 6.4 Correction

for Alignment

After installing the 2500 mm length of spacer pipe in the bored hole and again after the cross arm assembly has been installed, the protective pipe cover should be removed and the vertical alignment of the system checked by lowering a plumb bob from the straddle hub strings. If it is impracticable to correct the error. succeeding pipe sections should be placed vertically and the offsetfrom the true vertical alignment recorded. If a deviation from vertical alignment is found, an attempt should be made immediately to correct the error. 6.5 Rotation of Cross Arms Each cross arm section should be placed in a

manner that will distribute the weight of the channel

.An&xz&;
i$ll ti--1
Pm Cevm

COVE
--OAKUM ( B)

#A1 8 1-

.,L

f-. Y'-

7s

eROSS ARM

OARUM {A) 40 mm 6 PIPE

PHASE 1

PHASE 2

Operations
1.Locate centre of installation
a,
L. LtwtrI

Operations
1. Locate centre of installation
w cenwe
------

---- ,r-.r.----
vu wrr

ukd area

J:

-----

aujaceru

_

J:-------

12rrxmng

-l-_-,--_

2. Excavate trench remove soil above soil pipe cover 3. Remove pipe cover from foundation extension 4. Place and align cross arm 5. Place pipe cover at top of 40 mm pipe, warp with oakum burlap of(A) and (B) 6. Backfill hole and trench to level of oakum ( B) 7, Obtain original elevation of cross arm measuring point 8. Complete backfilling 9. Continue embankent placing

3. Bore 100 mm minimum dia hole; clean hole 4. Place and align foundation extension in hole 5. Place sand-cement grout around pipe preferably with a tremie 6. Place removable pipe coveC tamp fine soil around cover to foundation line 7. Compact embankment above installation

All dimensions in milliktrw. FIG. 5 TYPICAL VERTICAL MOVEMENT DEVICE -- INSTALLATWN IN IbCK-FREE Sons (

Continued )

7

Is 7500:2000

PE

I 4'

I ;~..y --200mm

6 BORED

1

L

PHASE 3

PHASE 4

Operations
1. Locate centre of installation
2. Excavate trench 3. Bore hole, remove pipe cover 4. Place 50 mm spacer pipe, align pipe 5. Backfill hole to 400 mm below bottom of trench 6. Continue with operation 4 through 9 of phase 2 7. Repeat operation for each cross arm unit

Operations
1.

At outer slope of rock-free zone locate centre of installation

2. Level a working area, bore hole 3. Assemble, place and align 50 mm standard pipe extension to outer surtace of embankment 4. Backfillhole 5. Mould rocky soils around pipe to outer embankment slope 6. Place concrete All dimensions in millinwlms.

FIG. 5 TYPICAL VERTICAL MOVEMENT

DEVICE --

INSTALLATION IN ROCK-FREE

SOILS

section and prevent misalignment of the vertical column of pipe. When each new cross arm unit is installed, the channel section of the new unit should be rotated 90" (clockwise) with respect to the channel section previously placed. 6.6 Compaction

6.8 Completion

of an Installation
nears the outer surface of the the operations given in 6.8.1

As the installation dam embankment,

to 6.8.3 should=be done. 6.8.1 I.engths of 50 .mm spacer pipe should be

of Soil Around Installation
should be compacted

Soil around the installation

to the equivalent unit dry weight of the surrounding material and recorded samples of the soiI at the location of each cross arm should be taken. 6.7 Protection of Telescopic Joints

assembled to extend the installation progressively to the surface of the completed embankment. 6.8.2 As construction progresses pipe cover should

be removed, assembled 50mm spacer pipe extension should t-seinstalled and the soil (rock-free or rocky) backfilled or mounded around the pipe as the case slope. may be, to outer embankment

To prevent the ingress of soils all the telescopic joints should be protected with hemp packing or oakum held in place by hessian wired on the pipes, taking care that the telescopic movement of the pipes is not prevented. 8

6.8.3 Concrete should be-placed near the top of the slope as shown in Fig. 1.

IS 7500:2000 7 OBSERVATIONS be withdrawn from the system, When readings are taken, the reading scale is attached to the top section of the pipe projecting from the existing installation. The elevation of the Ievelling plate on top of the reading scale should be established from a permanent benchmark of the dam, Vertical distances from the top of the reading scale to the respective cross arm measuring points are obtained by using the torpedo and attached cable. 7.2 Determining

7.1 The equipment required for obtaining settlement
readings rncluded the torpedo ( Fig. 3 ). The elevat ion of the cross arm units are determined by lowering the torpedo through the reading scale (Fig. 4) and into the pipe system by means of the steel tape or calibrated/aircraft cable. Pawls on the torpedo successively engage the lower ends of the 40 mm pipe (measuring points on each cross arm unit) and upon reaching the t)ottom of the installation they latch in a closed position to enable the torpedo to

Original Elevation

7.2. I The original elevation of each cross arm shou Id
C OF INSTALLATION 1

<

/-

qIPE Gov&R

mu
EMT

PIPE,

PHASE 1

PHASE 2

Operations
1. Locate centre of installation
2. Level 75 cmarea adjacent to centre of installation 3. Bore 100 mm dia hole; clean hole 4. Place and align foundation extension in hole 5. With a tremie, place sand-cement extension pipe 6. Placeand align cross arm unit 7. Place oakum and wrap with burlap at ( A ), backfill to 225 mm above centre line of cross arm 8. Obtain originalelevation of cross arm measuring point 9. Place and align lower section of spacer pipe 10. Place oakum and wrap with burlap at ( B ), seat pipe cover grout around

Operations
1. Raise embankment 100 m above cross arm
2. Place and align upper section of spacer pipe 3. Place pipe cover and mound around pipe 4. Continue embankment placing to 150 mm above top of pipe cover, leaving a depression around pipe

11.Mound soil around pipe to lower end of pipe cover
All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 6

TYPiCAL

VERTiCAL

MOVEMENT

DEVICE -- INSTALLATION

IN

ROCKYSOILS( Confinued )

9

Is 7500:2000
-- PIPE COVSR T HRE40EB ENo so m m $ SP4CER PIPS LOWER SEC,,ON 4%, F i +> x OAKSJM(B) ~Omm # PIPS

-J=. 12s0 I /GO1

.

v

OIL

2

T

2000

J+&
=-.

` llR
~ BURRICO c *

SURRtSD SO mm
SPACER qIPES

#

OP IMSTALLAT ION CROSS ARM

CROSS.ARM

c:?!*''ocR"
PAO

PHASE 3

PHASE 4

Operations
1. Check centre of installation 2. If necessary, realign column 3. Place and pad 4. Place and align cross arm 5. Repeat operations 7.through 11 of Phase 1

Operations
1. When embankment is raised to 300 mm below top of

lower spacer pipe, remove cover, place and align pipe extension assembly 2. Place mound around pipe as embankment is raisecf 3. Place concrate cap

All dimensions in millimetres.

FIG. 6 ~YPKAL

VERTICAL

MOVEMENT

DEVICE -- INSTALLATION IN ROCKYSOILS

be determined by Ievelling methods with reference to an established-benchma~k located away from the dam. The original elevationshould be recorded when a cross arm is installed. These original elevations should be recorded when backfill around a cross arm is placedto within approximately 500 mm of the top of the 40 mm pipe. At that time, the pipe cover should be removed, the reading scale attached and the elevation of the zero or reference point on the scale determined to the nearest 2 mm. Then the torpedo

The torpedo should then be withdrawn column.

from the pipe

NOTE -- If the pawls on the torpedo fai I to latch when
the device reaches the bottom of the pipe column, a section of 10 mm pipe 60 mm long may be slipped over the tape cable and lowered by means of a wire. into the installation until it rests on top of the torpedo. This added weight should latch the torpedo.

7.3 Current elevations of cross artn measuring points should then.be determined vertical by using the established the current elevation of the top of the reading scale and the measured distance. Then by subtracting elevations of originally established ( see 7.2 ) vertical movements of cross arms should be obtained, Elevation of the top of the reading scale should be obtained for each set of periodic readings with reference to a permanent benchmark but this elevation is temporary and is not a fixed point on the structure.

(which is attached to an Engineer's tape or calibrated aircraft cable) should be lowered into the pipe and the initial distance to the measuring point of the top cross arm unit read and recorded. The distance should be read and the elevations of all cross arm measuring points below the cross arm unit just placed determined. After determining the elevation of the bottom ctoss arm in the system, the torpedo should be dropped to the latching place to latch the pawls ( see Note ).

10

Is 7500:2000 7.3.1
Water depth in the pipe system should be
I`ecord tests mentioned in 8. In addition, other relevant

determined by using the water level indicator, every time the set of observations by torpedo is taken. 7.4 A complete set of readings should be made on

the entire existing installation, each time an additional cross arm unit is installed during construction of the embankment. When construction is suspended the system should be so adopted so that readings can be made at monthly (30 days ) intervals or earlier in special cases, if required. The first set of periodic reading should be made immediately after installation, thereafter readings should be taken every three months for the first three years and every six months thereafter. A proforma for the record of observations is given in Annex A. 8 RECORD

~ata, such as the corresponding lake levels, pore )ressure in the vicinity of the cross arm installation 1 I`ainfall on the day of observation and the exact stage >f construction should also be reported. 10 GENERAL GUIDANCE

10.1 All steel parts of the installation should be coated with 2 coats of red oxide or any similar anti-corrosive
Ipaint to prevent corrosion. 10.2 The edges of the 40 mm pipe should be machine cut or filed flat so that the accuracy of the readings k maintained. 10.3 It is necessary to see that the 40 mm steel pipe is securely bolted to the channel to prevent slippage.

OF TESTS

Alternatively

it could be welded.

8.1 Record tests of embankment and foundation -materials at the instrument installation are necessary
to obtain data on the soils adjacent to the instruments. These should include tests for grain size analysis, consistency limits and consolidation characteristics for the soil placed at every C}OSSarm level. 8.2 In addition, at-each unit of the internal vertical movement apparatus in earthfill material, two field density tests should be made; one test sample should be obtained from the soil at the bottom of the trench excavated for the cross arm unit; the other should be obtained in the tamped backfi II of the trench after it has been brought up to grade. 8.3 When all or a part of the dam is founded on highly compressible materials representative undisturbed installations, samples should be obtained from the unless suitable samples have been foundation at the location of the vertical movement obtained previously from these locations.

11 MAINTENANCE 11.1 It is essential to ensure plumbness of the installation by preventing movement of heavy equipment, particularly during construction.
11.2 Ciipping of the installation during all.d after

installation should be ensured to prevent any foreign debris, etc, being introduced into the installation by unauthorized personnel. 11.3 Each time the measuring torpedo is used, it should be properly cleaned and lubricated for free movement of the spring loaded pawls. The steel tape of the stainless steel cable should also be inspected for any kinks or damage and cleaned and oiled. if required. 11.4 To prevent unnecessary misuse and possible

loss of the measuring torpedo, use of a dummy torpedo of equal length and 33 mm dia with soft wire or strong nylon cord or string should be used to determine if there is any inclination and/or obstruction in the installation. Thereafter the measuring torpedo should be used. 12

8.4 No tests are required when the internal movement device is placed on rock foundation unless specially requested. 8.5 Tests at the internal movement units should be designated `record rolled', `record tamped' or `undisturbed' depending on the material being tested. 9

ADVANTAGES

AND

LIMITATIONS

12.1 Advantages The installation is relatively simple and cheap which provides accurate determination of consolidation at different levels during and after construction, thereby controlling the progress of fill material .This data provides a warning of any instability in the foundation and/or embankment due to uneven settlement which may call for remedial measures. 12.2 Limitations Since drill hole installations are not possible in this

PROGRESS

REPORTS

9.1 The report should show the current elevation
of the embankment at the installation, the number of cross arms, the compression of the embankment and the settlement of the foundation. The narrative portion of the progress report should discuss variations from the instructions and installation Photographs, drawings and charts the installation 9.2 The should be included. should also contain results of 11 procedures. pertinent to

case the device has to be placed during construction of embankments. This"will obstruct the movement of

report

1s 7500:2000 construction equipment damage to device. Maintaining the vertical alignment of the whole causing delay and possible similar to the mechanical type (Section I ) except for the following: a)
b)

Plastic pipes are used instead of steel pipes.
Aluminium channel sections are used for the cross arms instead of steel channels.

installation is very essential for the measurement of the settlement with torpedo. Since construction of high dams take comparatively longer period, there exists greater possibility of horizontal movements in embankment and plumbness of the installation is affected. Hence cross arms may be installed w ith greater confidence in medium dams of 30 to 40 metres height.

c)

The aluminium channels are not fastened to the vertical pipes. An electrical probe attached to graduated cable is used for measuring depths of cross arm of torpedo.

d)

SECTION 2 ELECTRICAL TYPE
13 EQUIPMENT 13;1 The electrical type OTcross arm installation
is

13.1. I A typical installation enabling measurements at 1 500 mm interval is illustrated in Fig. 7.

PIPE PLUG ANO COUPLING

~TOP

OF SLOPE

TOP SECTION 40 mm IDXS4mm 00

Ii??

ID

Alldimensionsin millimetres.
FIG. 7 TYPICALCOMPLETED CROSSARM INSTALLATION ELECTRICAL TYPE FOR I 500 mm SPACING OF CROSS ARMS

12

1S 7500:2000 13.2 Components 13.2.1 forlnstalIation placed alternatively as the construction proceeds. To prevent the ingress of soil, all telescopic joints shall be protected with rubber `O' ring seals ( see Fig. 8 ). The cross arms are installed progressively as the. embankment is placed. Settlement readings are obtained by means of the specially designed measuring probe. The probe is lowered into the pipe barrel by means of a calibrated electrical cable attached to it. While making a measurement the probe is lowered into the pipe barrel by means ofa calibrated electrical cable attached to it. While making a measurement the probe is lowered to a point, a few centimetres below the elevation of the uppermost cross arm, then lifted until audio signal is heard. It maybe necessary to pass the probe up and down slowly at this elevation to precisely locate the position of the cross arm.

Base Extension

The base pipe extension consists of a 40 mm inside diameter and 54mm outside diameter rigid PVC pipe, 1050 mm long, sealed at the bottom and concreted into a drill hole in the foundation. 13.2.2 Cross

Arm Unit

The cross arm unit consists of a 1 000 mm long, 100 mm x 50 mm Aluminum channel with a hole in the centre through which a 1 150 mm long, 25 mm inside diameter and 35 mm outside diameter rigid PVC pipe is passed normal to the channel. The cross arm pipe should be fitted with four rubber `O' ring seals at each end located in grooves to provide a watertight overlap with the spacer section ( see Fig. 9). 13.2.3

Spacer Section

RIOID PVC SPACER PIPE 40 ID, 54 OD RIGID PVC CROSS\ ARM PIPE 25 10,35 00=2

eAL

This section is 1150 mm long, 40 mm inside diameter and 54 mm outside diameter rigid PVC-pipe that serves as a spacer between the cross arm units. "13.2.4

Top Section

The piece is a rigid PVC pipe 40 mm inside diameter and 54 mm outside diameter and of variable length extending the column of pipes to the surface of the embankment. It is capped by a suitable pipe coupling and plug. When the installation is completed, the top section should be encased in concrete to prevent horizontal displacement.

7
320 =i=k
_d_
CROSS ARMS

1150

400

i

13.3 Equipment for Observation
Detail at `A of Telescopic Pipe Joint 13.3.1

Measuring Probe
All dimensionsin millinwtres. FIG. 8 TYPICALCOMPLETED CROSS ARM lNs'rAr.l.AlmN ELECTRICAL TYPE FOR I 500 mm SPACING OF

The probe contains a metal proximity sensing device and an electrical transmitter. As the probe passes through the hole in the aluminum channel which is located in each section of tubing, a signal is transmitted to a receiver unit. The depth of the probe is measured when signal is heard; by the length of sealed cable in the tubing. 13.3.2

16

INSTALLATION )

16.1 (See6.1

Water Level Indicator

16.2 Base Extension
The base extension for the device consists of two

Any suitable device as described in 1S 6935. 14 METHOD C-ROSS ARMS OF LOCATING ( See 4 ) OF 1NSTALLATION A COLUMN OF pieces of pipe which form the extension into the

foundation. This extension is assembled and set into a 100 mm minimum diameter hole which has been drilledto the required depth into the foundation. The hole may `be drilled depending upon the type of foundation material and the equipment available. After setting the pipe extension, to within the backfill around the 40 mm pipe should be carried out with cement grout 175 mm of its top. If the foundation cross a temporary pipe arm is not installed immediately, 13

15 DESCRIPTION

The installation comprises of series of alternate telescopic 25 mm diameter and 40 mm diameter pipe section placed in the embankment along with cross arms. The base extension is installed at the foundation level while the cross arm and spacer sections are

1s 7500:2000

-i501-

SECTION XX

3-1
0

T

------

I

--

--.-- Mq!31 1-o.

.._.

1OOO--I
CHANNEL CROSS ARM

ALUMINIUM

~SPECIALLY COMPACTED ZONE MA*ERIAL

IL
~PIPE COVER I I I 750 LA II I II 1~:1 /'+' TRENCH.MIN DIMENSIONS 1500 X750 X1050rnm DEEP, MAX DEPTH 1200 mm + 1,~ j!

I

I

i 450mm#lN BACKFILL OVER PIPEI COYER I 750 ---; .--- J

ALUMINIUM CHANNEL \ AUGER HOLE, 150mm -+ x 950 mm DEEP

DE TAIL OF CROSS ARM INSTALLATION
All dimensions in millimetres, FIG. 9 TYPICALCOMPLETED CROSS
ARM INSTALLATION 13LECTIUCAL TYPE

FOR 1500 mm SPACING OF Cw)ss AiiMs

cover should be placed over the extending 40 mm pipe and covered with a450 mm minimum of compacted embankment material. 16.3 Placing Cross Arm Units "

to keep dirt from entering

the pipe system when the the existing installation.

pipe cover is removedfrom

The pipe cover should be removed and replaced as required with a twisting motion in order not to disturb the packing between the lengths of telescoping pipe. 16."3.1.2 A practical method for boring the required holes below the excavated trench for a cross arm unit is by the use of a power auger. After the cross arm unit is installed, the angular space surrounding the pipe in the bore should be backfilled with selected fine material and the soil compact day hand rodding around the telescoping ~ipe section. 16.3.1.3 When the embankment co"ntains a

The vertical movement apparatus ( see Fig. 7 ) can be installed either in `rock-free' soil or in `rocky' soils, or in a combination of soils as foundin a zoned type of earth and rockfill embankment. A `rock-free' soil is defined
as a soil that can be penetrated by; 250 mm

diameter power auger. Installation of the apparatus in `rock-free' soils is given in 6.3.1 and in `rocky' soils in 6.3.2. 16.3.1

Procedure for Installation

in

Rock-Free Soils

considerable amount of rock, the augering of holes for installation of cross arm units can be expedited if the backfill over the pipe cover is of selected fine

16.3.1.1 In `rock-free' soils the embankment should
reach an elevation of approximately placed before excavating 4500 mm above the measuring points of a cross arm unit previously the trench and boring the the trench hole for the cross arm. After excavating

material. This fine material can be placed and compacted inside a cylinder of metal pipe,or tubing having an internal diameter of approximately 250.mm. The pipe may be progressively jacked to a higher elevation. When the holeis augered for succeeding cross arm unit, most of the fine material is removed. 14

and boring the hole of a cross arm unit, a section of light-weight pipe or tubing maybe placed in the hole

1s 7500:2000 1-6.3.1.4

Backjllling tr.enchesfor cross armunil

of each cross arm should be taken. 16.7 Protection

Whenthe trench has been backfilled with typical embankment materials to within approximately 300 mm of the top of the 25 mm pipe (bottom of pipe cover) the initial elevation of the cross arm measuring point should be recorded as described in 17.2. Thereafter, a minimum of 500 mm of typical embankment material should be compacted over the pipe cover before embankment placing operations are resumed at the place of installation. 16.3.2

of Telescoping

Joints

To prevent the.ingress of soil, all the telescopic joints shall be protected with rubber `O' ring seals as described in"Fig. 8. 16.8 Completion of an Installation nears the outer surface of the the operations given in 16.8.3

As the installation dam embankment,

Procedure for Installation in Rocky Soils

should be carried out. 16.8.1 Lengths of 40 mm spacer pipe should be assembled to extend the installation progressively to the surface of the completed embankment. 16.8.2 As construction progresses pipe cover should be removed, assembled, 40 mm spacer pipe extension should be installed and the soil ( rock-free or rocky ) backfilled or mounded around the pipe as the case slope. may be, to outer embankment

16.3.2.1 Since boring of holes for aligning the cross arm device is not possible in rocky soils, a practicable method is mounding around the 25 mm pipe of the
cross arm device. This method should be adopted in perviously zoned embankrnemts. 16.3.2.2 The cross arm @vi,c~l should be placed and

then aligned and backfilled with pervious ( rocky ) material up to 175 mm above the crd~s arm. TAe 40 mm spacer pipe should than be placed and aligned. 16.3.2.3 Rocky material should be mounded around the upper section of spacer.pipe. Embankment placing
should be continued to 75 mm above the top of pipe

16.8.3 Concrete should be placed about the top of the slope as shown in Fig. 7. 17

OBSERVATIONS

cover leaving a depression around it, A 50 mm thick sand pad should be placed and then the cross arm device should be pIacedand aligned (after removing the top cover of the upper spacer pipe).

17.1 The equipment required for obtaining settlement readings are an Electrical Probe, Marked Cable and an Indicator. The elevation of the cross arm units are determined by lowering the probe through the reading scale ( see Fig. 10) and into the pipe system by means of the calibrated cable. The cable is passed over the pulley and the probe is lowered into the 25 mm pipe ( measuring points on each cross arm unit ). On reading the location of each cross arm, the indicator gives an audio signal upon which the reading is taken with the help of the marking on the cable and on the scale. When readings are made, the reading scale is attached to the top section of the pipe projecting from the -existing installation. The elevation of the levelling plate on top of the reading scale should be established from the top of the reading scale to the respective cross arm measuring points are obtained by using, the probe and attached cable. 17.2 The original elevation of each cross arm should be determined by Ievelling methods with reference to an established benchmark located away from the dam. The origrnal elevation should be recorded when across arm is installed and backfill around.it is placed to within approximately 300 mm of the top of the 25 mm pipe. At that time, the pipe cover should be removed, the reading scale attached, and the elevation of the zero or reference point on the scale determined 15 to nearest 2 mm. Then the probe (which

16.4 C-orrection for Alignment
After installing the 1150 mm length of spacer pipe in the bored hole and also the cross arm assembly, the protective pipe cover should be removed and the vertical alignment of the system checked by lowering a p"lumb bob from the straddle hub strings. It is impracticable to correct the error, succeeding pipe sections should be placed vertically and the offset from the true vertical alignment recorded. If a deviation from vertical alignment is found, an attempt should be made immediately to ccmrect the error.

16.5 Rotation of Cross Arms
Each cross arm section should be placed in proper alignment of the vertical column of pipe. When each new cross arm unit is installed, the channel section of the new unit should be rotated 90� (clockwise) with respect to the channel section previously placed. 16.6 -Compaction

of Soil Around Installation

Soil around the installation should be compacted to the equivalent unit dry weight of the surrounding material and record of samples of the soil at the Iocat ion

Is 7500:2000 is attached to a calibrated electrical cable) should be Iow-ered into the pipe and the initial distance to the location of the top cross arm unit read and recorded. This distance should be read and the elevations of all cross arm measuring points below the cross arm unit just placed determined. After determining the elevation of the bottom cross arm in the system, the probe should be withdrawn from the pipe column. 17.3 See 7.3. 17.3.1 See 7.3.1. 18 17.4 A complete set of readings should be made on the entire existing installation each time an additional RECORD.OF cross arm unit is installed during construction of the embankment. When construction is suspended, the system should be adopted so that readings can be taken at monthly ( 3b days ) intervals or earlier in special cases, if required. The first set of periodic readings should be taken immediately after installation, thereafter readings should be taken every three months for the first three years and every six months thereafter. A profc)rma for the record of observations
in Annex A.
is given

TESTS ( See 8 ) REPORTS ( See 9 )

19 PROGRESS

ADJUST SCALE FOR zERO AT THIS ~lNT (LEVEL MINT)

\

(

aJo&&Eo CASTER
BRASS PLATE STRAP IRON SUPPORT
MARKEO

%
o w *

1[
Iv

SRASS STRIP

CADLE

t

\

PROBE
M mm L.fh STANOARD PVC NSERT, . PIPE

\

THREADED TO SUIT TOP OF hJSTALLAT ION

[

COmm

L-

I I
`
J

ll\~

TNREAO~D BOSS GLUCD

1

NOTE -- Use device as shown during construction. Thereafter cut device to I I 20 mm FIG. 10 READING
SCALE WITH ADAFTOR

II

THUMB SCREW

Iengtts to fit top

of

installittion,

16

ANNEX A ( Clauses 7.4 and 17.4)
PROFORMA FOR RECORD
Project ............................................ Location ......................................... Date ................................................ Observed by ................................... Cross arm No. Top Level of Measuring Scale Tape Reading Correction for Torpedo Length Corrected Scale Rkading Original Elevatibn of Cross Arm ( See Notes land3) Present Elevaticin of Croks Arm ( See Note I ) settlement of Cross Arm Original Distance Betweeh ( See Notes 2and3) (7) (8) (9) (lo) (11) (12)

OBSERVATION OF VERTICAL CROSSARM INSTALLATION
Dam ....................................................... Topofdm ........................................... Reservoir water level R. L ................... Water level in the installation ............. Present Distance Between Consolidation Between Cross Arms Remarks

Cross Arms Cross Arms

(1)
=

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

NOTES I The elevation of the cross arms are the elevation df the cross arm measuring points.' 2 Original distance betueen cross arms is tbe difference between e[cva(ions of successive cross
arm measuring

points the cross arm unit is placed.
and appear as constants

3 Once established. [he original elevations of cross arm measuring points and the original distance be[ween points are fixed values

in later readings.

Bureau

of Indian Standards

BIS is a statuto~ institution establishtiunder the BUIWKIU ofZnc/ian Stundard.T.4cf, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to -connected matters in the country.

Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. NOpart of these publicationsmay be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken W. for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascetiain that they are in possession of the latest amendmerits or edition' by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. WRD 16 (24).
Amendments Issued Since -Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New-Delhi 110002 Telephones :3230131, 3239402, 3233375 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : 1/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Telegrams. Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 3237617 3233841 { 3378499, { 3378626, 3378561 3378662 603843 { 602025

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 60(H 13 W,estern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

2350216,2350442 { 2351519,2352315 8329295,8327858 { 832"/891,8327892

BHUBANESHWAR. Branches : AHMADA33AD. BHOPAL. BANGALORE. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuria, Ind]a

