атг Ah 15 3703 : 2023 


Indian Standard (Атадатато 15 3703 : 2004, 
IS 10543 : 1983 & IS 12147 : 2013) 


чта зъл «їч чє cht ñq ват 
Шш чадат ) 


Recommended practice for magnetic 
particle flaw detection 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 19.100 


@ BIS 2023 


заета 99% э 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чел, 9 FST зе зе ни, +š Вет - 110002 
3 МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2023 Price Group 11 


Non-Destructive Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Non-Destructive Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1966 and subsequently revised in 1980 and 2004. The second revision 
was published under the modified title ‘Recommended practice for magnetic particle flaw detection’ and modified 
scope. In the second revision the clause on optimum sensitivity was added and clause on different types of 
magnetic field was modified. 


While reviewing the standard the committee felt to revise this standard keeping in view the latest development in 
the field of magnetic particle flaw detection. The current revision supersedes IS 3703 : 2004 'Recommended 
practice for magnetic particle flaw detection(second revision), IS 10543 : 1983 ‘Method for dry 
powder magnetic particle testing’ and IS 12147 : 2013 ‘Recommended practice for wet magnetic particle 
examination (first revision). 


In the present revision, following major modifications have been made: 


a) For achieving the optimum condition for carrying out magnetic particle flaw detection, the levels of 
magnetic flux density has been modified in 8.5; 

b) Amperage values have been deleted as these values are often confusing and not practical; 

c) Formulae for magnetic field strength calculation have been added in 11.2; 

d) Flash point (closed cup) has been increased to 93 °C, Min for more safety; 

e) Newclause related to dry powder application has been added and the clause for wet powder application 
has been modified taking care of adequate requirements; 

f) The limits of illumination of light used for inspection of flaws have been increased in case of both 
fluorescent and non-fluorescent inks/powders in 14.7; and 

g) Тһе recommended practices pertaining to dry and wet magnetic particle testing have been included which 
were previously covered separately in IS 10543 : 1983 ‘Method for dry powder magnetic particle testing’ 
and IS 12147 : 2013 ‘Recommended practice for wet magnetic particle examination (first revision)’. 


Magnetic particle flaw detection is used to locate cracks, discontinuities, non-metallic inclusion and segregation 
at or just below the surface in ferromagnetic material. However, the method cannot be used on non-magnetic 
material. It is hoped that the use of this recommendation would help in establishing a unified practice for magnetic 
particle testing within the country. 


This standard does not cover the acceptance criteria for magnetic particle testing which should be subject to mutual 
agreement between the contracting parties. 


Examination according to this standard can be carried out on all ferromagnetic objects in the raw material stage 
as well as in the semi-finished/finished stages of the components/assemblies made out of such raw materials. 


This method of flaw detection is not recommended in such case where the subsequent process/end-use of the 
objects does not permit the presence of even slightest residual magnetism. This practice covers the principle of 
testing applicable for both dry and wet methods. It briefly covers the methods and types of fields induces in the 
part to be tested as per its configuration. It suggests the equipment for generating the fields and the empirical 
formulae and guidelines for the current requirements. Advantages and limitations of ways of magnetizing various 
configurations of components are presented in tabular form. Also, applications of various types of detection media 
are mentioned. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR MAGNETIC PARTICLE 
FLAW DETECTION 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


11 This standard specifies techniques апа 
recommended procedure for both dry and wet 
magnetic particle flaw detection, a non-destructive 
testing method, for detecting cracks and other 
discontinuities which are open to surface or just 
below the surface in ferromagnetic materials. The 
method is applicable only to material which can be 
easily magnetized notably iron, steel, cobalt, nickel 
and their alloys. Techniques described may be 
applied to raw materials, semi-finished material, 
finished material and welds regardless of heat 
treatment. 


1.2 This practice may be used to prepare procedures 
for magnetic particle flaw detection of materials and 
parts. 


2 REFERENCES 


For following standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
edition was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged investigating the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 

IS 3415 : Glossary of terms used in magnetic 

1998 particle flaw detection (second 
revision) 

IS 6410 : Magnetic flaw detection inks and 

2013 powders — Specification (second 
revision) 

IS 13805: General standard for qualification 

2004 and certification of non-destructive 
testing personnel — Specification 


(first revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 3415 shall apply. 


4 QUALIFICATION AND CERTIFICATION 
OF PERSONNEL 


Non-destructive testing (NDT) personnel shall be 
qualified and certified as per IS 13805 or equivalent 
standard. The practice or standard used and the 


applicable revision shall be specified in Ше 
contractual agreement between parties. 


5 PRINCIPLE OF TEST 


The magnetic particle method is based on Ше 
principle that magnetic lines of forces, when present 
in a ferromagnetic material will be distorted by a 
local change in the permeability due to the presence 
of any discontinuity having permeability different to 
that of the test piece. These distorted magnetic lines 
of forces result in leakage flux which leaps through 
air from one side of the discontinuity to the other 
side creating magnetic north and south poles at these 
points of exit and re-entry respectively. If finely 
divided ferromagnetic particles are applied to the 
surface of the test piece, they are attracted by these 
poles to form a pattern of the discontinuity. 


6 DRY AND WET TECHNIQUES 


Depending upon the type of ferromagnetic particle, 
whether free flowing dry powder or suspension of 
powder in a suitable liquid medium, the method is 
classified into dry and wet magnetic particle flaw 
detection respectively. 


7 METHOD 


In the application of the method, the following 
essential steps are involved: 


a) The part must be properly magnetized; 


b) Suitable magnetic particles must be applied 
over the surface of the part in such a way that 
they can move to collect at leakage fields 
occurring at discontinuities; and 


c) Any accumulation of magnetic particles 
must be observed and interpreted. 


8 TYPES OF MAGNETIC FIELDS 


The magnetic force can be produced by means of 
either the magnetic effect of electric current or by 
the magnetic fields of a permanent magnet. 
Depending upon the types of magnetizing methods 
used, generally three types of magnetic fields are 
produced: 


a) Circular magnetization; 
b) Longitudinal magnetization; and 


c) Multidirectional magnetization. 


IS 3703 : 2023 


8.1 Circular Magnetization 


In this method, electric current is passed through a 
part or by use of a central conductor through a 
central opening in the part, inducing a magnetic field 
at right angles to the current flow. The magnetic 
field is essentially contained within the contours of 
the part (see Fig. 1). 


8.2 Longitudinal Magnetization 


When electric current is passed through a multi-turn 
coil (either rigid or cable formed) which encloses the 
part or section of the part to be examined a 
longitudinal field parallel with the axis of the coil is 
induced in the part. Longitudinal magnetization is 
also known as bi-polar magnetization (see Fig. 2). 


8.3 Multi-Direction Magnetization 


It is not possible to have more than one direction of 
magnetic field present in a part at any given time. 
However, in multi-direction magnetization method, 
magnetic fields having different directions may be 
induced in the part in very rapid sequence, following 
each so rapidly that magnetic particles attracted by 
one field do not have time to fall away before the 
field is repeated. In this method, magnetic field is 
made to oscillate, or move, within the part from one 
direction to another, usually approaching 90°, which 
permits build-up of indications in more than one 
direction. 


9 OPTIMUM SENSITIVITY 
9.1 Direction of Field 


Maximum sensitivity is achieved when the flaw lies 
at right angles to the magnetic flux, but the 


MAGNETIC FIELD 


< Š 
\ 
КЕЕ 
МА 
` 
x -d -- м 


sensitivity 15 not reduced below ће effective level if 
the flaw is oriented at an angle of up to 45° from the 
optimum direction. Beyond 45, the sensitivity 15 
diminished apparently. For this reason, the complete 
examination of any surface requires the flux to be 
passed in two direction at right angle to each other 
in separate operation. 


9.2 Type of Field 


Type of magnetic field is also an important factor 
while considering the sensitivity. For a given 
magnetizing force, a stronger circular field is 
produced than if it were producing a longitudinal 
field. 


This is due to the circular field being completely 
contained within the part, which has a low 
reluctance path. The longitudinal field must use an 
air path to return from north pole to south pole. 
Hence a high reluctance path. Further, the external 
poles of a longitudinal field attracts magnetic 
particles and produce confusing indications. 
Adequate inspection in the vicinity of such poles is 
impossible. For these two reasons the circular 
method of magnetization is preferred whenever it 
can be used. 


9.3 Location of Flaw 


If a flaw is open to the surface, the flux leakage, 
therefore sensitivity will be a maximum for a given 
size and shape of discontinuity. When a flaw is 
below the surface, flux leakage diminishes giving 
diffused indications. For sub-surface flaw, 
sensitivity decreases rapidly with the depth of the 
flaw below the surface. 


MAGNE TIZING 
CURRENT 


TEST PIECE 


Fic. 1 CIRCULAR MAGNETIZATION OF A TEST PIECE THROUGH 
WHICH A MAGNETIZING CURRENT PASSES 


22 FIELD 
ka отъ 


IS 3703 : 2023 


“9. MAGNETIZING 
CURRENT 


Fic. 2 LONGITUDINAL MAGNETIC FIELD WITHIN A CURRENT-CARRYING MAGNETIZING COIL 


9.4 Surface Coatings 


It is possible to inspect components that have been 
treated with a non-magnetic coating (that is, 
cadmium plate or paint) not greater than 50 mm 
thick, with only slight loss in sensitivity. 


9.5 Magnetic Field Strength 


The lines of force must be of sufficient strength to 
indicate those discontinuities which аге 
unacceptable, yet must not be so strong that an 
excess of particles is accumulated locally (known as 
furring), thereby masking relevant indications. This 
optimum condition can be achieved if the magnetic 
particle flaw detection is carried out at levels of 
magnetic flux density should be between 30 Gauss 
to 60 Gauss (30 to 60 x 107“ Т). 


10 TYPES OF MAGNETIZING CURRENTS 


10.1 The three basic types of current used in 
magnetic particle examination to establish part 
magnetization are alternating current (AC), single 
phase half-wave rectified alternating current (HW) 
and three phase full-wave rectified direct current 
(FWDC). The inductance associated with AC results 
in the ‘skin effect’ that confines the magnetic field 
to the surface of a part. In contrast, both HW and 
FWDC produce a magnetic field having maximum 
penetrating capabilities and are used when near 
surface discontinuities of concern. 


10.1.1 Part magnetization with alternating current is 
limited to those applications where examination 
requirements call for the detection of discontinuities 
that are open to the surface. Alternating current is 
also extensively used for the demagnetization of 
parts after examination. The through coil technique 
is normally used for this purpose due to its simple, 
fast nature. 


10.1.2 Direct Current 


Years ago, batteries and DC generators were used to 
produce a magnetizing current and were used for 
relatively small operations. They have given way, 
however, to HW and FWDC. 


10.1.3 Half-Wave Rectified Current 


Half-wave rectified alternating current is used 
primarily with prod type examination but is also 
applicable to examinations involving both coil and 
through current techniques. When used іп 
conjunction with dry powder, its pulsating 
characteristics provides an additional degree of 
mobility to the particles giving a great deal of 
sensitivity to sub-surface type discontinuities. It is 
usually associated with portable and mobile type 
equipment, although it is sometimes incorporated 
into the design of horizontal wet particle units. 


10.1.4 Full-Wave Rectified Current 


Full wave rectified current (FWDC) may use single 
as well as three phase current. As a source of part 
magnetization, FWDC is applicable for the detection 
of both surface and near surface discontinuities. This 
type of magnetic particle testing equipment (wet 
horizontal or stationary power packs) provides the 
high magnetizing currents necessary for the 
magnetic particle inspection of large components 
such as castings and forgings. 


11 PART MAGNETIZATION TECHNIQUES 


11.1 A part can be magnetized either directly or 
indirectly. For direct magnetization, the magnetizing 
current is passed directly through the part creating a 
circular magnetic field in the part. With indirect 
magnetization technique, a magnetic field is induced 
in the part, which can create a circular, longitudinal, 
or multi-directional magnetic field in the part. 


11.2 The choice of direct or indirect magnetization 
will depend on such factors as size, configuration, or 
ease of processing. Table 1 compares the advantages 
and limitations of the various methods of part 
magnetization. 


11.2.1 Direct Contact Magnetization 


For direct magnetization, physical contact must be 
made between the ferromagnetic part and the current 
carrying electrodes connected to the magnetizing 
power source. Both localized magnetization and 


IS 3703 : 2023 


overall part magnetization are direct contact means 
of part magnetization achieved through the use of 
prods, head and tailstock, clamps and magnetic 
leeches. 


11.2.1.1 Localized area magnetization 
a) Prod technique 


The prod electrodes (generally solid copper or 
braided copper tips) are first pressed firmly 
against the test part. The magnetizing current is 
then passed through the prods and into the area 
of the part in contact with the prods. This 
established a circular magnetic field in the part 
around and between each prod electrode, 
sufficient to carry out a local magnetic particle 
examination (see Fig. 3). 


1) Alternating current limits, the prod 
technique to the detection of surface 
discontinuities. Half-wave rectified direct 
current is most desirable since it will detect 
both surface and near surface 
discontinuities. Тһе prod technique 
generally utilizes dry magnetic particle 
materials due to better particle mobility. Wet 
magnetic particles, however, are not 
generally used with the prod technique 
because of potential electrical апа 
flammability hazards. 


2 


МУ 


Proper prod examination entails a second 
placement with the prods rotated 
approximately 90° from the first placement 
to assure that all existing discontinuities are 
revealed. Depending оп the surface 
coverage requirements, overlap between 
successive prod placements may Бе 
necessary. 


CAUTION: Extreme care should be taken to 
maintain clean prod tips to minimize heating 
at the point of contact and to prevent are 
strikes and local overheating on the surface 
being examined since these may cause 
adverse effects on material properties. Steel 
or aluminium or copper braided tip prods or 
pads rather than the solid copper tip prods 


are recommended where the possibility of 
copper penetration exists. Open circuit 
voltage should not exceed 25 V. 


3) A remote-control switch, which may be 
built into the prod handles, should be 
provided to permit the current to be 
turned on after the prods have been 
properly placed and to turn it off before 
the prods are removed in order to 
minimize arcing. 


b) Manual clamp/magnetic leech technique 


Local areas of complex component may be 
magnetized by electrical contact manually 
clamped or attached with magnetic leeches to 
the part. As with prods, sufficient overlap may 
be necessary if testing of the contact location is 
required. 


11.2.1.2 Overall magnetization 


a) Head and tailstock contact 


Parts may be clamped between two electrodes 
(such as a head and tailstock of horizontal wet 
magnetic particle equipment) апа the 
magnetizing current applied directly through 
the part. The size and shape of the part will 
determine whether both field directions can be 
obtained with such equipment (see Fig. 4) 


b) Clamps 


The magnetizing current may be applied to the 
test parts by clamping the current carrying 
electrodes to the part producing a circular 
magnetic field. 


c) Multi-directional magnetization technique 


With suitable circuitry, it is possible to produce 
a multi-directional (oscillating) field in a part by 
selectively switching the magnetic field within 
the part between electrode contacts/clamps 
positioned approximately 90° apart. The wet 
method technique is generally employed. 


MAGNETIZING 
CURRENT 


Fic. 3 CIRCULAR MAGNETIZATION WITH PROD TYPE CONTACTS 


IS 3703 : 2023 


CONTACT PLATES 
MAGNETIC FIELD 


рте CURRENT 


Ес. 4 CIRCULAR MAGNETIZATION OF TEST PIECE BY PASSING ELECTRIC CURRENT 
THROUGH THE TEST PIECE FROM MACHINE CONTACT PLATES 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Table 1 Advantage and Limitations of the Various Ways of Magnetizing a Part 


Types of Magnetization 
and Part Details 
(1) 


(Clauses 11.2 апа 15.1.1) 


Advantages 


(2) 


Limitations 


(3) 


I. Direct Contact Part Magnetization 


A. Head/Tailstock Contact 


i) Solid, relatively small parts 


(Castings, forgings, 
machined) that сап be 
processed on a horizontal wet 
unit 


i) Fast and easy technique 

ii) Complete circular magnetic field 

iii) Good sensitivity to surface and near 
surface discontinuities 

iv) Simple as well as relatively complex 
parts can usually be easily processed 

v) Complete magnetic path is 
conductive to maximizing residual 
characteristics of material 


1) Possibility of arcing exists If 
proper contact conditions are 
not made 


ii) Long parts should Бе 
magnetized in sections to 
facilitate bath application 
without resorting to an overly 
long current shot 


п)Гагее casting and forgings 


Large surface areas can be processed 
and examined in relatively short time 


High amperage requirements 
dictates special DC power 
supply 


ш) Tubular-type parts such as 
tubing, pipe, hollow shafts, 
etc 


i) Entire length can Бе circularly 
magnetized by contacting end to end 

п)Епаѕ must be conductive to electrical 
contact and capable of carrying 
required current without excessive 
heat 


Effective field limited to outside 
surface and cannot be used for 
inside diameter examination 


iv) Long solid parts such as 
billets, bars, shafts etc 


i) Entire length can be circularly 
magnetized by contacting end to end 

ii) Current requirements are 
independent of length 

iii) No end loss 


1) Voltage requirement increases 
as length increases due to 
greater impedance of cable 
and part 


ii)Ends must be conducive to 
contact and capable of 
carrying required current 
without excessive heat 


B. Prods 


i) Welds 


i) Circular field can be selectively 
directed to weld areas by prod 
placement 


ii) In conjunction with HW current and 
dry powder provides excellent 
sensitivity to sub surface 


discontinuities as well as surface 
type 


iii) Flexible, in that prods, cables and 


power packs can be brought to test 
site 


i) Only small area can be tested 
at one time 


ii) Arcing due to poor contact 


iii) Surface must be dry when 
dry powder is being used 


iv) Prod spacing must be in 
accordance with magnetizing 
current level 


Table 1 (Continued) 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Types of 
Magnetizations and Parts 
Detail 


(1) 


Advantages 


(2) 


Limitations 


(3) 


1) Large castings ог forgings 


i) Entire surface area can be examined 
increments using nominal current 
values 

п) Circular field can be concentrated in 
specific areas that historically are 
prone to discontinuities 

ш) Equipment сап be brought to Ше 
location of parts that are difficult to 
move 

іу) Іп conjunction with HW current and 
dry powder provides excellent 
sensitivity to near surface 
sub-surface type discontinuities that 
are difficult to locate by other 
methods 


i) Coverage of large surface 
areas require a multiplicity of 
shots that сап be time 
consuming. 

п) Possibility of arc strike due to 
poor contact. 


iii) Surface should be dry when 
dry powder is being used. 


П. Indirect Part Magnetization 


A. Central Conductor 


i) Miscellaneous parts having 
holes through which a 
conductor can һе threaded 
such as: 

1) Bearing race 
2)Hollow cylinder 
3)Gear 

4)Large nut 
5)Large clevis 
6)Pipe coupling 


i) No electrical contact to part and 
possibility of arcing is eliminated 

ii) Circumferentially directed magnetic 
field is generated in all surfaces 
surrounding the conductor (inside 
diameter, outside diameter, faces etc) 

iii) Ideal for those cases where the 
residual method is applicable. 
Light weight parts can be supported 
by the central conductor. Multiple 
turns may be used to reduce current 
required. 


i) Size of conductor must be 
ample to carry required 
current 


ii) Ideally, conductor should be 
centrally located within hole 


iv) Larger diameters require 
repeated magnetization with 
conductor against inside 
diameter and rotation of part 
between processes. Where 
continuous magnetization 
technique is being employed 
Inspection is required after 
each magnetization 


п) ТоБшаг type parts such as: 
1) Pipe 
2) Tubing 
3) Hollow shaft 


1) No electrical contact of part required. 
ii) Inside diameter as well as outside 
diameter examination 
iii) Entire length of part 

magnetized 


circularly 


Outside diameter sensitivity may 
be somewhat diminished relative 
to inside diameter for large 
diameter and extremely heavy 
wall 


ш) Large valve body and similar 
parts 


Provides good sensitivity for detection 
of discontinuities located on internal 
surfaces 


Outside diameter sensitivity may 
be somewhat diminished relative 
to inside diameter for large 
diameter and extremely heavy 
wall 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Table 1 (Continued) 


Types of Magnetization and 
Part Details 


(1) 


Advantages 
(2) 


Limitations 


(3) 


B. Coil/Cable Wrap 


i) Miscellaneous medium sized 
parts where the length 
predominates such as crank shaft. 


All generally longitudinal surfaces 
are longitudinally magnetized to 
effectively locate transverse 
discontinuities 


Length may dictate multiple shot 
as coil is repositioned 


ii) Large 
shafting 


castings, forgings or 


Longitudinal field easily attained 
via cable wrapping 


Multiple magnetization required 
due to configuration of part 


11) Miscellaneous small parts 


i) Easy and fast, especially where 
residual magnetization is 
applicable 

ii) Non-contact 

iii) Relatively complex parts can 
usually be processed with same 
ease as those with simple cross 
section 


i) L/D (length/diameter) ratio 
important consideration in 
determining adequacy of 
ampere-turns 


Effective LD ratio can be 
altered by utilizing pieces of 
similar cross-sectional area 


ii 


s 


ii) Use smaller coil for more 
intense field 


iv) Sensitivity diminishes at ends 
of part due to general leakage 
field pattern 


v) ‘Quick break’ desirable to 
minimize end effect on short 
parts with low L/D ratio 


C. Induced Current Fixtures 


i) Examination of ring shaped part 
for circumferential-type 
discontinuities 


1) No electrical contact 

ii) All surface of part subjected to 
toroidal type magnetic field 

iii) Single process for 100 % 
coverage 

iv) Can be automated 


i) Laminated 
through ring 


core required 


ii) Type of magnetizing current 
must be compatible with method 
iii) Other conductors encircling 
field must be avoided 
iv) Large diameter require 
special considerations 


ii) Ball examination 


1) No electrical contact 

ii) 100 percent coverage for 
discontinuities in any direction 
with three step process and 
proper orientation between 
steps 

iii) Can be automated 


For large diameter balls limited 
to residual magnetization. 


iii) Disk and gears 


1) No electrical contact 

ii) Good sensitivity at or near 
periphery or ring 

iii) Sensitivity in various areas can 
be varied by core or pole piece 
selection 


i) 100 percent coverage may 
require two steps process with 
core or pole piece variation or 
both. 


ii)Type of magnetizing current 
must be compatible with part 
geometry. 


Table 1 (Сопсшаед) 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Types of Magnetization and 
Part Details 


(1) 


Advantages 
(2) 


Limitations 


(3) 


D. Yokes 


1) Examination of large surface areas 


1) No electrical contac 


i) Time consuming 


for surface-type | ii) Highly portable ii) Must be systematically 
discontinuities ш) Can locate discontinuities in repositioned in view of 
any direction with proper random discontinuity 
orientation. orientation 
пета а i) No electrical contact i) Must be properly positioned 
A) Miscellaneous ре equina п) Good sensitivity to direct relative to orientation of 
examination of localized areas ) КАЛЕ ; Р 
surface discontinuities discontinuities 
iii) Highly portable 


iv) Wet and dry technique 

v) Alternating current type can 
also serve as demagnetizer in 
some instances 


п) Relatively good contact must 
be established between part 
and poles 


iii) Complex part geometry may 
cause difficulty 
iv) Poor sensitivity to subsurface 


type discontinuities except in 
isolated areas 


11.2.2 Indirect Magnetization 


Indirect part magnetization involves the use of a 
preformed coil, cable wrap, yoke, or a central 
conductor to induce a magnetic field. Coil, cable 
wrap and yoke magnetization are referred to as 
longitudinal magnetization in the part. 


11.2.2.1 Coil and cable magnetization 


When a magnetic material is placed within a current 
carrying rigid coil of several turns, the magnetic 
lines of force created by the electric current 
concentrate themselves in the part and induce a 
longitudinal magnetic field as indicated in Fig. 5. 
Parts too large to fit in a fixed coil may be 
magnetized longitudinally by making a coil of 
several turns of flexible cable (cable wrap) around 
the parts (see Fig. 6). 


11.2.2.2 Central conductor and threshing cable 
magnetization 


Indirect circular magnetization of hollow 
pieces/parts can be performed by passing the 
magnetizing current through a central conductor 
passed through a central opening in the part 
(see Fig. 7A and Fig. 7 B). 


11.2.2.3 Induced current flow method 


This is a technique of setting up circumferential 
current flow in large ring specimens by making it, in 
effect, the secondary of a mains transformer. The 
optimum flow direction is basically circumferential 
as shown in Fig. 8. 


IS 3703 : 2023 


ELECTRIC CURRENT 


MAGNETIC DIRECTION OF 
PARTICLE INDICATIONS 


MAGNETIC FIELD 


А 


МАОМЕТІС 
FIELD 


)——MAQGNE TIZING 
CURRENT 


Fic. 6 LONGITUDINAL MAGNETIZATION OF TEST PIECE WITH CoL 


IS 3703 : 2023 


MAGNETIZING 
CURRENT MAGNETIC FIELD 


7A Circular Magnetization of Passing Current 
Through a Central Conductor 


7B Threading Coil Technique 


Fic. 7 CENTRAL CONDUCTOR AND THREADING CABLE MAGNETIZATION 


IS 3703 : 2023 


PRIMARY COIL 


FLAWS 


Fic. 8 INDUCED CURRENT FLOW TECHNIQUE 


11.2.2.4 Yokes 


Yokes are essentially C-shaped electromagnets 
which create a longitudinal magnetic field between 
the poles. The dry magnetic particles are generally 
employed with yoke magnetization technique and 
are applied while the electromagnetic yoke is 
energized (see Fig. 9) 


ELECTROMAGNETIC 
YOKE 


Alternating current electromagnetic yokes provide 
effective means of pat magnetization for the 
detection of surface discontinuities. Half-wave 
rectified direct current electromagnetic yokes, 
however, provide an effective means for near 
surface discontinuities as well. 


{> 


WELD 


DISCONTINUITIES 


NOTE — Electromagnetic yoke, showing position and magnetic field for detection of discontinuities paraliet to а weld 
bead. Discontinuitiss across a weld bead may be detected by placing the contact surface of the yoke next to and on 
either side of the bead (rotating yoke about 90° from position shown here). 


Fic. 9 ELECTROMAGNETIC YOKE 


12 CURRENT REQUIREMENTS 


To produce satisfactory indications, the magnetic 
field in the part shall have sufficient strength as 
mentioned in 9.5. Factors that affect the strength of 
the field are the size, shape and material of the part, 
and the technique of magnetization. Since these 
factors vary widely it is difficult to establish rigid 
rules for the field strengths for every conceivable 
part configuration, it is usually best to experiment 
with the pats having known discontinuities 
determining the actual requirements. In general, 
however, following guidelines can be effectively 
applied to calculate the current value for establishing 
proper of longitudinal 
magnetization. 


levels circular and 


12.1 Circular Magnetization 


12.1.1 Overall Magnetization with Head and Tail 
Stock Contact (Head Shot Method) 


a) For all solid and hollow sections value of 
FWDC and HW current shall be as given 
below; 


b) Alternating magnetizing current can be used 
at approximately half these values for 
detection of surface discontinuities; 


c) For parts with geometric shapes other than 
round, the greatest cross-sectional diagonal 
in a plane at right angles to the current flow 


shall be taken as ‘D’ in above formulae; and 


The head shot method produces the 
maximum circular field at the outer diameter 
(O.D) but a greatly reduced field at the inner 
diameter (I.D) surface of a part for a given 
current. 


d) 


IS 3703 : 2023 


12.1.2 Central Conductor Technique 


a) Assuming that the central conductor is 


b) 


с 


wm 


located centrally, the values given in 12.1.1 
may be used taking the outside diameter or 
perimeter of the component as the criteria 
for selecting current value. The resulting 
field is concentric relative to the axis of the 
part this permits Ше 
circumference to the processed at one time. 


and entire 
In this technique, the maximum field is 
obtained at the inside diameter of the part; 


When several bars or cable are passed 
through the component, the current value 
shall be reduced in proportion to the number 
of the windings; and 


Off-setting the central conductor is most 
often restored to when the magnetizing 
current capabilities are lacking, for example 
in the case of large outside diameter parts. 
As a matter of convenience if small ring like 
parts are allowed to rest against their inner 
wall on a central conductor, this method 
provides high speed of testing because all 
parts are magnetized in a single shot. In 
such instances for the purpose of current 
calculation as per 12.1.1, part diameter D is 
taken as diameter of central conductor plus 
twice the wall thickness of the test part. The 
entire circumference should be inspected by 
re-positioning the part(s) on the central 
conductor allowing for approximately 10 
percent magnetic overlap. The distance 
along the circumference that is effectively 
magnetized is approximately four times the 
diameter of the central conductor. 


Part Diameter ‘D’ in mm 


Current Value in Ampere/mm of Part Diameter 


Min Max 
D < 125 28 26 
125 < D < 375 20 28 
D > 375 4 12 


IS 3703 : 2023 


12.1.3 Localized Magnetization 


a) Prod technique 


With prod, the field strength of circular 
magnetization is proportional to the amperage 
used but varies with the prod spacing and 
thickness of the section being inspected. The 
following values are generally recommended: 


12.2 Longitudinal Magnetization 


Longitudinal part magnetization is produced by 


passing a current through a multi-turn coil encircling 
he part or section of the part to be examined. The 
field strength in a part being magnetized in a coil is 
determined by the ampere-turn of the coil and the 
length (L) to diameter (D) ratio of the object. The 


field strength can be calculated as per following 


SINo. Section Current value in formulae: 

Thicknes Атреге/тт of prod 

st in spacing where 

ala мй Max I = Current supplied to magnetizing coil (in 
1) t < 20 3.5 4.5 amp); 
ii) t> 20 4.0 5.0 


Prod spacing should not exceed 200 mm. Prod 
spacing less than 75 mm is usually not practical 
due to banding of the particles around the prods 


b) Yoke techniques 


The field strength of yoke can be empirically 
determined by measuring its lifting power as 


mentioned in 13.2.2. 


= No. of turns of coil; 


N 

L = Length of the object in mm; 

D = Diameter of the object in mm; 

К = radius of the coil in mm; 

NI, = Field strength, high; using formula (d); 

NI, = Field strength, low; using formulae (a) or 
(b); and 

a = ratio of the cross-section area of the coil 
to the cross-section area of object. 


SI №. Fill factor 


Position of object 


Field strength (NI) ampere turns (+ 10 


percent) 
(i) Low Near/ close to inside surface of 45000 
coil L/D 
(ii) Low At the centre of the coil 1690 x R 
L 
6(5)-5 
(iii) Inter- mediate Cross section of the coil > twice 
and < 10 times the cross section 
of the object NI, (10 — a) + МІ, (a — 2) 
8 
(iv) High Cross section area of the coil < 35000 
twice cross section area of the L 2 
object (5) i 


When calculating L/D ratio for a hollow or partially 
hollow part, D may be replaced by with an effective 
diameter Dep given as below: 


For partially hollow parts: 
Deff =2 |с) 


À, = Ше total cross sectional area of Ше part; 


where 


and 
An = the total cross sectional area of the hollow 
sections of the part. 


For hollow cylindrical parts: 
Derr = V[(OD)? — UD)?] 
where 


OD = the outside diameter of the cylinder; and 
ID = the inside diameter of the cylinder. 


13 EQUIPMENT FOR MAGNETIC 


PARTICLE FLAW DETECTION 
13.1 Fixed Equipment 


13.1.1 The equipment should be capable of enabling 
the component or material to be tested in accordance 
with the specified technique. Current flow sources, 
such as transformers, giving maximum current 
values from 2 000 A up to 20 000 A at a safe open 
voltage between 6 V and 27 V are usually suitable. 


13.1.2 The current flow may be derived from either 
DC, AC, full or HWDC supplies or a combination 
of these. Rectified AC supplies may be obtained 
from either single or three-phase mains. 


13.1.3 It is recommended that all parts of the 
equipment should be capable of continuously 
carrying the rated current available for the apparatus, 
for an operating cycle of 5 s ‘on’ and 20 s ‘OFF’ 
without overheating. 


13.1.4 The equipment should normally, be provided 
with controls for adjusting the excitation currents 
either continuously from zero to the maximum, or in 
steps such that they required current values may be 
obtained within + 10 percent of the nominal. 


13.1.5 When DC or rectified AC supplies are 
employed, the equipment should be provided with a 
current reversing switch to facilitate 
demagnetization. 


IS 3703 : 2023 


13.1.6 The apparatus should be equipped with an 
ammeter for measuring the current used in any test. 
For DC supplies, and for rectified AC supplies, it 
shall be of the permanent magnet moving coil type 
marked in direct current amperes. For AC supplies it 
shall be of the moving iron, electrodynamics or 
induction type marked in rms amperes. Ammeter 
shall be calibrated for variations not exceeding +10 
percent of the nominal. 


13.1.7 The installation for wet magnetic testing 
should normally have a reservoir tank to contain the 
magnetic powder. The tank should preferably be 
fitted with a powered agitator; but if this is not 
provided, the tank should be so designed that 
adequate agitation by a manually operated paddle 
may be carried out frequently during the operation 
of the equipment. Air agitation of the powder is not 
recommended. 


13.1.8 Suitable means should be provided for 
applying the detecting media to the component 
under test. For liquid media, a powered pump system 
should be used. 


13.1.9 The apparatus shall be equipped with means 
for firmly clamping the component under test 
between the current carrying contacts or 
electromagnet poles. 


13.2 Mobile and Portable Apparatus 


13.2.1 Mobile and portable apparatus consists 
basically of a high current low voltage source. 
Alternatively, a DC battery may be used provided 
the test requirements are met. 


13.2.2 The magnetizing force of a yoke can be tested 
by determining its lifting power on a steel plate. 
Alternating current electromagnetic yokes should 
have a lifting force of at least 4.5 kg with a 150 mm 
pole spacing. For DC yokes at a maximum pole 
spacing of 150 mm, a lifting power of 18 kg is 
recommended. 


13.2.3 Unless otherwise agreed, the mobile ог 
portable apparatus should also conform 10 Ше 
requirement of fixed equipment, as specified in 13.1. 


13.3 Ancillary Equipment 


The following ancillary equipment should normally 
be required for magnetic particle inspection: 


a) Bars of various diameters of solid copper, 
brass or aluminium rod, or of larger sizes 
plugged aluminium tubing; 


IS 3703 : 2023 


b) Rigid coil of 100 mm, 200 mm, 300 mm and 
upward in diameter having five or more 
turns of cables; 

c) Copper gauge face C-Clamps; 

d) Heavy duty welding cables for leads, to be 
used with the ‘prod’ technique; 

e) Wooden blocks for supports; 

f) Jigs and fixtures; and 

g) Magnetic field indicators. 


13.4 Associated Equipment 


The following associated equipment shall also be 
required: 


a) A demagnetizer of adequate size and power 
to satisfactorily demagnetize the component 
under test; and 

b) Suitable sources of white or black light for 
viewing the flaw indication. 


14 INSPECTION MEDIUM 
POWDERS AND FLUIDS) 


(MAGNETIC 


14.1 The inspection medium shall consist of finely 
divided ferromagnetic particles, which may be 
suspended in a suitable liquid medium (wet method) 
or used in dry powder form (dry method). The main 
requirements for magnetic powders are high 
permeability and low retentivity and a very small 
size and proper shape to be readily mobile over the 
surface being tested. The colour of the magnetic 
particles (non-fluorescent) to be used should have 
adequate contrast with background colour of the 
surface to be tested for clear identification of flaws. 


14.1.1 The dry powder method is more sensitive that 
the wet method in the detection of near surface 
discontinuities, but is not as sensitive in detecting 
fine surface discontinuities. It is also convenient to 
use in conjunction with portable equipment for the 
inspection of large areas or for field inspection. The 
dry powder method is, therefore, often used for the 
inspection of large parts, such as large castings, 
forgings or weldments or parts with rough surfaces. 
It is not normally used for the inspection of smaller 
parts, such as automotive or aircraft parts, in which 
case the wet method with stationary equipment is 
usually more convenient and effective. 


14.2 Dry Powders 


Dry powders are designed to be used as supplied and 
are applied by spraying or dusting directly on to the 
surface of the part being examined. Dry powders 
may also be used under extreme environmental 
conditions. They are not affected by cold; therefore 


examination can be carried out at temperatures that 
would thicken or freeze wet baths. Dry powders are 
also heat resistant and can be used up to 315 С. 
Generally dry powders are available in light grey, 
black, red, or yellow colours. The choice is based on 
maximum contrast with the part to be examined. 
These materials are not generally fluorescent, and 
examination is done under white light. The dry 
powders should meet the requirements of IS 6410. 


14.3 Wet Powders 


Wet magnetic particles are designed to be suspended 
in a vehicle such as water or oil at a given 
concentration for application to the test surface by 
flowing, spraying or pouring over the surface, or the 
specimen under inspection may be immersed in an 
agitated bath of the inspection medium. Wet 
magnetic particles meeting the requirements of 
IS 6410 should be used in this method. Two types of 
wet magnetic particles may be used as follows: 


a) Fluorescent Magnetic Particles 


The particles used in the wet fluorescent 
magnetic particles bath are coated with a dye 
which caused them to fluoresce brilliantly when 
exposed to near black light. The purpose of the 
dye is to provide maximum contrast between 
the indications and their background so that fine 
discontinuities may be detected; and 


b) Visible Magnetic Particles 


The visible magnetic particle normally used in 
wet-baths are either reddish or black and are 
observed under normal white light. There is no 
difference is sensitivity with respect to dry 
powder method, and the colour should be so 
selected as to provide the best contrast against 
the background of the part being inspected. 


14.3.1 Liquid Vehicle 
a) Water Vehicles 


Water may be used for suspending wet 


magnetic particles provided suitable 
conditioning agents are added which provide 
proper wet dispersing, in addition to corrosion 
protection to the parts being tested and the 
equipment in use. Water vehicle is safe to use as 


it is non-flammable. 
b) Oil Vehicles 


The oil used in preparing the bath is a light, 
well-refined petroleum distillate of low sulphur 


content, preferably treated to reduce апу 
unpleasant odours, and having approximately 
the following characteristics: 


Viscosity (Kinematic at 38 °C) 3 cSt, Max 


Flash-point (closed cup) 93 °C, Min 


NOTE — Stoke is the CGS unit of kinematic viscosity, 
[1centiStoke (cSt) = 10 m?/s]. 


Where оП is used as a vehicle for fluorescent 
particles, it should have the minimum amount of 
natural fluorescence and should not degrade 
suspended particles. Uniform dispersion of magnetic 
particles in oil vehicles and corrosion protection to 
parts and equipment are the chief advantages of the 
use of oil vehicles. Principal disadvantages are 
flammability. Commonly employed oil for 
suspending both fluorescent and non-fluorescent 


magnetic particles is kerosene. 


14.3.2 Bath Strength 


The concentration of шаспейс particles in the bath 
should be maintained at the proper level if the 
inspection results are to be reliable and consistent. 
The concentration is periodically checked by taking 
a 100 ml sample from a well stirred bath and 
allowing it to settle for 30 min in pear-shaped 
centrifuge tube. The volume settling out at the 
bottom is indicative of the particle concentration. 
With red or black material, the recommended 
concentration from a 100 ml sample is 1.2 ml to 
2.4 ml. For fluorescent material the recommended 
concentration is 0.1 ml to 0.4 ml. Care should be 
taken to see that the inspecting medium is not 
contaminated with grease, oil, water or foreign 
matter. If a clear line of demarcation is seen between 
the sediment and the liquid when the medium is 
allowed to settle in the centrifuge tube, it may be 
taken as being free from contamination. 


15 TEST PROCEDURE 


15.1 General 


All tests consist of the following processes which 
should be carried out in the given order: 


a) Surface preparation; 

b) Initial demagnetization; 

c) Degreasing and cleaning; 

d) Applying the excitation 
generating the magnetic field; 

e) Applying the detecting media; 

f) Viewing; 


current for 


IS 3703 : 2023 


g) Marking position of indications; 

h) Assessment and recording the nature of 
flaws; 

j) Demagnetization; 

k) Repetition of the tests, if necessary; 

m) Cleaning; and 

n) Preparation for storage 


15.1.1 Selection of Test Method 


A suitable test technique should be selected as per 
given in Table 1, for 
examination of a component with a specific 
geometric shape. 


the recommendations 


15.2 Surface Preparation 


15.2.1 The surface to be inspected shall be clean, dry 
and free from rust, oil, scale, excessive slag and 
other extraneous matter which may interfere with 
efficient inspection. Machined or plated surfaces 
normally do not require any preliminary surface 
treatment other than degreasing. However rough 
surfaces such as very rough weld bead make the 
interpretation difficult due to mechanical trapping of 
the magnetic powder thereby producing false 
indications. In such cases surface preparation by 
wire brushing, sand blasting, grinding, machining or 
other suitable method is necessary. 


15.2.2 Painted Parts 


a) Parts, which are to be painted, should 
preferably be tested before application of the 
paint. Otherwise, subject to mutual 

agreement between the manufacturer and 

the buyer, paint shall be removed locally, so 
as to provide adequate contact areas for the 
current flow tests. Other painted areas will 


only require degreasing; and 


b 


wm 


Poor contrast is likely to be obtained if the 
colour of the paint is the same as that of the 
particles in the ink to be used. In such cases, 
an approved contrast aid may be applied. A 
contrast aid is normally a thin white adherent 
coating which is compatible with the ink and 
readily removed after use. 


15.2.3 Loose rust and scale should be removed from 
components before testing by suitable mechanical or 
chemical methods. 


15.3 Initial Demagnetization 


All components should be demagnetized before 
testing, in order to release any adhering magnetic 


IS 3703 : 2023 


swarf and to remove any magnetic fields such as 
those which cause magnetic writing. 


15.4 Degreasing and Cleaning 


All components should be thoroughly cleaned 
before testing, as adhering grease and dirt may mask 
the defects and also contaminate the ink. 


15.4.1 For cleaning unassembled parts, it is essential 
to subject them to a degreasing operation, followed 
by a mechanical wiping operation to remove 
adherent solid residues. 


15.4.2 When a component is to be tested in-situ in a 
structure, the following cleaning procedure is 
recommended: 


a) The heavier soil should be removed using a 
clean rag or cotton waste moistened with a 
suitable solvent preferably white spirit or 
paraffin. Liquid chlorinated hydrocarbons 
are hazardous and should not be used. 


b) The cleaning should be continued with a 
fresh lint-free rag and fresh solvent, until a 
satisfactory clean surface is obtained. 


15.5 Application of Magnetizing Current 


Magnetic flux should be generated in the component 
by any one of the methods specified in 10, which is 
suitable for the individual requirement. Depending 
upon the sequence of application of the magnetic 
particles on the test object, with respect to 
magnetizing current there are two variations in the 
method as follows. 


15.5.1 Continuous Method 


In this method, the inspection medium is applied to 


the surface under inspection while the АШ 


magnetization current is flowing. 
15.5.2 Residual Method 


In this method, the inspection medium is applied to 
the surface under inspection is applied to the surface 
under inspection after the magnetization current has 
been turned off. This method may be used, when 
specified, on parts having a relatively high magnetic 
retentively. It depends upon the residual magnetic 
field in the part to produce indications, and is usually 
limited to the detection of surface cracks. Residual 
method offers some advantage when numerous 


small parts of high retentivity materials such as high 
carbon or hardened steel are being tested by this 
method. Parts may be magnetized rapidly and then 
immersed in a wet bath, or powder applied; therefore 
reducing the inspection time as compared to the 
continuous method. 


15.6 Application of the Detecting Media 


Unless residual magnetization methods have been 
agreed upon, the detecting medium should be 
applied immediately before and during excitation. 
The application should stop before the 
magnetization current is switched off. Sufficient 
time, not less than 3 s, should be allowed for the 
indications to build up before moving or examining 
the component under test. 


15.6.1 Dry Powder Application 


Dry powder when used, should be applied with a 
suitable blower in a manner that uniform dust cloud 
settles on the test part surface. The dry powder 
should be applied when the magnetization force is 
ON. Excess powder if any must be removed by dry 
air current just sufficient enough to remove the 
powder which may interfere in the evaluation of 
indications. 


15.6.2 Wet Powder Application 


Wet powders visible or fluorescent suspended in 
suitable vehicle may be applied by spraying, flowing 
or immersion technique. The particle bath should be 
suspended in a stable form before the magnetizing 
current is turned OFF. Care should be taken that fine 
and weakly held indications are not washed away. 


15.7 Viewing Conditions 


15.7.1 The lighting used for inspection purposed 
should be adequate without creating strong shadows 
or highlights. There should be an even illumination 
to a level of not less than 1 076 lux daylight or 
artificial light to permit proper evaluation of the 
indications revealed on the test surface. 


15.7.2 When using fluorescent inks and powders, the 
inspection area should be darkened and level of 
illumination due to white light should not exceed 
20 lux. The inspection should be carried out under 
ultraviolet radiation with a predominant wave length 
of 365 nm (3 650 A), that is, “black light’ conditions. 
The intensity of blacklight at the test surface shall be 
not less than 1 000 иМУ/ст? and unnecessary 


reflection of ultraviolet radiation from the test 
surface should be avoided. 


15.8 Marking of Flaws 


Where necessary, flaws shall be indicated by an 
approved means, such as red-wax pencil. 


15.9 Assessment of Indications 


The indications obtained by magnetic particle flaw 
detection are all of a general form — a ‘pilling up’ of 
the magnetic particles at the lines of flaws, 
variations being of size, shape and position. The 
accurate interpretation of flaw indications is a matter 
requiring considerable experience. The service 
condition of a component should always be borne in 
mind when specifying flaws. The common flaws are 
easily identifiable, but in 
indications may be obtained. Typical examples of 
these are: 


some cases, false 


a) Grain flow indications caused Бу over- 
magnetizing; 

b) Over heavy indications on small diameters 
or around holes caused by magnetizing 
when using the magnetic flow method; 

c) Indications caused by abrupt changes of 
section, for example, indications on Ше 
outside diameter of a tube shaft caused by 
internal key way or splines; 

d) Magnetic ‘writing’ caused by the rubbing of 
another magnetized part during handling or 
the use of magnetized scriber; and 

e) Indications occurring at the interface of two 
metals of differing magnetic permeability 
which have been welded together. 


15.9.1 The most common types of imperfections, 
that are identified by magnetic particle inspection, 
are grinding cracks, cracks caused by incorrect heat- 
treatment, seams due to rolling flaws, subsurface 
inclusions and shrinkage cracks in casting. 


15.10 Demagnetization 


15.10.1 Ferromagnetic components which have 
been tested by magnetic particle flaw detection 
method, often remain magnetized for a considerable 
time after testing. This may be exceedingly 
troublesome if the component is to be built into 
machinery or is likely to operate in close proximity 
to sensitive electrical instruments. In the former case 
the local poles formed at projections and extremities 
will attract ferrous particles, causing excessive wear 
due to abrasive effects, or making machining 


19 


IS 3703 : 2023 


extremely difficult owing to the pick-up of metal 
chips, by clinging to the tool and causing scratching 
and other damage to the metal surface. Strong 
magnetic field may blow the weld metal as it is 
deposited. In aircraft construction, steel parts in the 
proximity of the aero plane compass should be 
demagnetized to eliminate any effect on the 
Demagnetization takes place 
automatically if the specimen is heated above the 
transformation temperature (Curie point). But, for 
the majority of specimens which are tested in 
finished condition, demagnetization methods which 
will not interfere with the metallurgical condition of 
the material will have to be used. However, 
complete demagnetization is difficult 
impossible to obtain, thus the process is limited to 
reducing the residual field in specimens that must be 
demagnetized to an acceptable level specified in 


compass. 


if not 


drawings specification or purchase order. For 
general engineering application interference caused 
by magnetism equal to or less than 0.1 x 10° T (1 G) 
is negligible; therefore it is considered as an 
acceptable level for the residual magnetism. 


15.10.2 For a longitudinally magnetized component, 
it is easy to measure the residual magnetism since 
flux leakage takes place at both the poles. However, 
a part may retain a strong magnetic field after having 
been circularly magnetized and exhibit little or no 
external evidence of this external field as the flux 
lines do not leave the part. Therefore, before 
demagnetizing circularly magnetized article, it must 
be magnetized longitudinally with а stronger 
longitudinal field so that the residual field will be in 
longitudinal direction. 


15.10.3 Demagnetization is usually accomplished 
by subjecting the specimen to a magnetizing force 
that is continually reversing in direction and 
decreasing in strength so that the hysteresis loop is 
reduced to virtually zero. A simple and effective 
method of accomplishing this is to insert the piece in 
the field of an alternating-current solenoid and 
gradually to withdraw it from the field. It is 
important that the demagnetizer be set up with its 
axis in a magnetic East-West orientation. 


15.10.4 Many modern flaw detectors are provided 
with continuous step less control for the A.C circuit 
and these may be used for demagnetization as 
follows: 


a) Current from the flaw detector may be passed 
through a coil of two or three turns of heavy 


IS 3703 : 2023 


cable wound round the specimen and 


gradually reduced to zero; and 


b) Alternatively, current may be passed directly 
through the specimen, as when testing by the 
current flow method, and reduced to zero by 
means of the control. 


15.10.5 Direct-current demagnetization is usually 
accomplished by repeated reversal of the current 
while it is being progressively weakened. 


15.11 Cleaning 


After testing and acceptance, all components shall 
be cleaned to remove all traces of detecting ink, 
contrast aid, if used and temporary marking, if 
applied, this may be carried out by wiping or 
washing with solvent like white spirit, or by 
complete immersion in approved degreasers agent. 


15.12 Preparation for Storage 


А suitable temporary protective, as agreed to 
between the contracting parties, may be applied to 
the component after cleaning to prevent corrosive 
attack. 


16 RECORDING OF TEST DATA 


The following data should be recorded at the time of 
each test for future reference: 


a) Name of organization and location and the 
date of test; 


b 


x 


Nomenclature, identity and dimensions of 
the part under test; 


с 


wm 


Operation stage as per process sheet (that is 
raw material, before or after heat treatment, 
before or after machining etc); 


d 


е 


М7 


Test procedure/written instruction use; 


wm 


Description of equipment, testing 
consumables and detection media used; 


f) Magnetization techniques, type of current 


and its values, prod spacing and L/D value 
used; 


ra 


Surface conditions on the job and viewing 
conditions on the job; 


8 


h 


жы 


Method of recording Ше indications as 
specified in 16; 


j) Nature and type of indications, statement of 
whether they meet acceptance criteria and 
test results; and 


20 


k) Name, qualification and signature of the 
personnel performing the test. 


17 RECORDING INDICATION 


17.1 When the examination of a specimen has been 
completed, flaws should be marked with a pencil, 
paint or some other suitable means. 


17.1.1 Where permanent records of the indications 
are required, these may be obtained either by taking 
photograph of the indications or by one of the 
following methods: 


a) The specimen should be allowed to dry 
completely. A piece of transparent adhesive 
tape should then be pressed over the defect 
indication, and immediately peeled off. This 
record may be preserved by covering the 
adhesive surface with transparent paper; and 


b 


mM 


A piece of tracing cloth is given an even 
coating of gum, allowed to become almost 
dry, and then pressed over Ше 
indication on the defective component. On 
stripping all the indications come away with 
the tracing cloth. When the latter is quite 
dry, it may be used for marking blue prints 
of the indications, if necessary. 


flaw 


18 EVALUATION OF 
PERFORMANCE/SENSITIVITY 


SYSTEM 


To evaluate the overall performance/sensitivity of 
the flaw detecting machine and medium, it is 
desirable that some form of test is conducted, 
preferably daily, before routine work is commenced. 
For this purpose, a test piece of some size and shape 
known to contain defects or an artificial test block 
may be used. 


18.1 Test Ring Specimen 


This specimen (see Fig. 10) should be fabricated 
from tool steel cut from annealed round stock having 
hardness in the range of 90 HRB to 95 HRB. Using 
a central conductor magnetizing technique overall 
performance and sensitivity of the magnetic flaw 
detector and the medium may be evaluated 
(see Table 2, 3 and 4). 


18.2 Magnetic Field Indicators 


A magnetic field indicator (see Fig. 11) may be used 
for checking the adequacy and direction of the part 
magnetization. When fixed on the surface of the part 
under test and magnetized simultaneously this 
indicator will indicate suitable flux or field strength 
if a clearly defined line of magnetic particles forms 
across the copper face. 


IS 3703 : 2023 


AEEA 
ааа еер 
EEST 


FiG. 10 RING SPECIMEN WITH ARTIFICIAL SUB-SUREACE DISCONTINUITIES 


EIGHT LOW CARBON STEEL PIE SECTIONS 
FURNACE BRAZED TOGETHER 


NONFERROUS HANDLE OF 
ANY CONVENIENT LENGTH 


BRAZE WELD OR MECHANICALLY 
ATTACH NONFERROUS TRUMNIONS 


COPPER PLATE 0-010 IN.THICK+ 0-00! IN. 
= ЕЕ. 


Fic. 11 MAGNETIC FIELD INDICATOR 


21 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Table 2 Advantages and Limitations of the Various Types of Magnetizing Current 
(Clause 18.1) 


SI No. Type of Current and their Use Advantages Limitations 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Direct Current (ОС) Maximum penetration of flux Difficult to demagnetize. 
Detection of both surface and ito object permitting Battery maintenance. 
Е іі eee indications of sub-surface Fixed voltage. Now-a- 
sub-surface discontinuities. Primarily di ee ; 
; iscontinuities. days rarely used in 
used for sub-surface and relatively industri 
small operations. таен 
1) Alternating Current (АС) AC results in a ‘skin effect’ that Shallow penetration of 
; : у, confines Ше magnetic field to flux making AC 
Detection of surface discontinuities. Е : 
N the surface of an art and thus ineffective for 
Extensively used for the 2 : ae 
Seer making it most sensitive for sub-surface 
demagnetization of parts after d : f di ри 
ОНОЙ, etecting | | surface discontinuities. 
алан адыр. discontinuities. High magnetic 
particle mobility is attributed to 
its pulsating 
characteristics.Relatively easy 
to demagnetize. 
iii) Half-Wave Rectified Alternating Higher flux densities for the Relatively difficult to 
(HWAC) same average current. Full demagnetize. 
Detection of both surface and sub- P спа of Пих mio ор Ject. 
: ща Additional particle mobility in 
surface discontinuities. Most ; Е ; 
Ве conjunction with dry powder. 
sensitive for sub-surface Р 5 
Е ӨРЕН ЖОО : Cab be easily obtained from AC 
discontinuities. Primarily used with са 
са À power supply by addition of 
prod: type examination r associated rectifier and switch. Suitable for 
with portable and mobile type field work s 
equipment. ` 
iv) Full-Wave Rectified Direct(FWDC) Current of very high magnitude Large power packs. Not 
7 ; such as 6 000 to 20 000 A are suitable for field work. 
Suitable for the detection of both ` | : 
easily obtained. Detection of 
surface and sub-surface 
) 22 22 ЕТЕР surface and sub-surface 
discontinuities. Primarily used for di о, : 
: я iscontinuities 15 possible. 
inspection of large components on wet 
horizontal or stationary power packs. 
Table 3 Ring Specimen Indication with Wet Particles 
(Clause 18.1) 
SI No. Type of Wet Suspension Magnetizing Minimum Number 
Particles Amperage (FWDC) of Sub-Surface Holes 
(1) (3) Indicated 
(2) (4) 
1) Fluorescent ог non-fluorescent 1 400 3 
2 500 5 
3 400 6 


22 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Table 4 Ring Specimen Indication with Dry Particles 
(Clause 18.1) 


SI No. Magnetizing Amperage Minimum Number of 
(FWDC) Sub-Surface Holes 
(1) Indicated 
(2) (3) 
i) 1 400 4 
ii) 2 500 6 
iii) 3 400 T 


23 


IS 3703 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


CHEMICAL COMPOSITION 


Non-Destructive Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


Organization 


Indira Gandhi 
Kalpakkam 


Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR), 


Arora Technologies Private Limited, Nerul, Navi Mumbai 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


BVG Nuclear Private Limited, Pune 


CSIR - National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Centre for Design and Manufacture, Bhabha Atomic Research 
Centre, Mumbai 


Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Ministry of 
Defence, Hyderabad 


Department of Space, Bengaluru 


Department of Space, Indian Space Research Organisation, 
Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikota 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


Electrical Research and Development Association, Vadodara 


Ferro Flux Limited, Ahmedabad 


24 


Representative(s) 


DR B. VENKATRAMAN (Chairperson) 


SHRI. MUKESH ARORA 
SHRI ALOK PANDEY (Alternate D 
MS PUSHPALAXMI VANNIYAR (Alternate П) 


SHRI AMIT SEN 
SHRI ALOK PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI R. ARUL PRABHU 
SHRI SHYAMSUNDER REDDY A. (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAKESH KUMAR MUNDA (Alternate П) 
SHRI B. K. SETHUPATHY (Alternate ІП) 


DR ARBINDA KUMAR 
DR PARITOSH NANEKAR (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK NAGESH YELGAONKAR 
DR TUSHAR GHATE (Alternate) 


DR SARMISTHA PALIT SAGAR 
DR ASHISH KUMAR PANDA (Alternate) 


DR PREMSHANKAR K. DUBEY 
DR NAVEEN GARG (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GUPTA 
SHRI LALIT MOHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH SRIVASTAVA (Alternate П) 


DR M. PHANI SURYA KIRAN 
SHRI A. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRIS. SARATCHANDRAN 
SHRI М. ARUMUGAM (Alternate) 


DR B. MUNIRATHINAM 
SHRIP. У. 5. KURMANATH (Alternate) 
SHRI V. RAMESH BABU (Alternate П) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI М. K. SHRIVASTAV (Alternate) 


DR G. S. GREWAL 
SHRIR. N. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRIS. L. SANKLECHA 
SHRIMANDAR VINZE (Alternate) 


Organization 


Gujarat State Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited, Vadodara 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Indian Society for Non-Destructive Testing (ISNT), Chennai 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


M.N. Dastur and Company Private Limited, Kolkata 


Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, 
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 
National Test House, Kolkata 


Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL), 


Mumbai 


P-Met High-Tech Company Private Limited, Vadodara 


Pradeep Metal Treatment Chemicals Private Limited, Thane 


Research Designs and Standards Organization (RDSO), 


Lucknow 


Satyakiran Engineers Private limited, New Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Tata Steel Limited, Kolkata 


Technofour Electronics Private Limited, Pune 


25 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRIA.S.SIKDAR 
SHRI K. R. SHETH (Alternate) 


DR VIKRAM DABHADE 
SHRI DIWAKAR D. JOSHI 
DR KRISHNAN BALASUBRAMANIAM 


(Alternate) 


DR K. V. RAJKUMAR 
SHRIMATI M. MENAKA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. D. PARANJPE 
SHRIP. B. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI G. S. KULKARNI 
SHRI HIMANSHU GUPTA (Alternate I) 
SHRI S. YUVARAJ (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI T. S. G. NARAYANNEN 
SHRI 8. K. JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI D. D. N. VERMA 
SHRI SHER SINGH 


SHRI B. KAMALESH KUMAR 
SHRI SWARUP ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI J. К. JAIN 
SHRI N. P. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMAL MEHTA 
SHRI P. K. PANCHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI D. J. V ARDE 
SHRI KALESH A. NERUKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI B. K. SAXENA 
SHRI B. L. JATAV (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI NAVITA GUPTA 
SHRI DINESH GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KULKARNI 
SHRI AKSHAY KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. BALAMURUGAN 
SHRI R. SHUMUGA SUNDARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVIN DHOLE 
SHRI BHARAT S. BIRADAR (Alternate 1) 
SHRI PRADEEP J. LAD (Alternate II) 


IS 3703 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJIV MAINI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR АМ) HEAD (METALLURGICAL 
ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SAAQIB RAAHI 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(METALLURGICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


26 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 05 (17966). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 23223 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, ГУ Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Хо. Е-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


