( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 7440 ( Part IL ) - 1974

Indian Standard
ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ANALOGUE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART II TELECOMMUNKATION AMPLIFIERS (AUDIO, VIDEO AND MULTICHANNEL)

Semiconductor
Chairman DR B. H. WADIA Members DR K. S. BALAIN

Devices

and Integrated Circuits ETDC 40

Sectional

Committee,

Representing Behram Wadia & Associates, Poona

DR B. R. MARATHE ( A/tern&e ) National Test House, Calcutta SHKI B. P. GHOSH Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore Da S. K. HAJELA SHRI B. S. GOVINDARAO ( Alternnte ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR G. C. JAIN DR Y. R. ANANTH PRASAD ( Alternate 1 The `Radio, Electronics & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. KAPUR Association ( RETMA ) SHRI S. Y. PHATAK (Alternate) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartSHRI G. B. MEEMAMSI ment of Communications ), New Delhi Directorate of Technical Development Production SHRI R. C. PANDEY ( Air), ( Ministry of Defence ) SHRI R. S. YADAV ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (Ministry of SHRIJ.PATTABIRAMAN Tourism & Civil Aviation ) Semiconductor Ltd, Poona SHRID. D.PRADHAN SHRI W. M. KABIR ( Alternate ) Electronic Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of SHRI P. S. RAJU Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad Directorate General of Inspection (Ministry of SHRI P. K. RAO Defence ) SHRI M. A. RANGANATH( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. R. SAVOOR Director General, IS1 ( Ex-n$icio Member ) S~IRIN. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secretary ) ( Continued on page 2 ) Q Copyright STANDARDS 1975 INSTITtJTION

Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR), Pilani

Research Institute

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7440 ( Part II ) - 1974
( Continucdfiom page 1 )

Panel for Integrated .Circuits, ETDC Convener
DRB.R. MARATHE Members

40 : P6

Representing Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani Research Institute

Semiconductors Ltd, Poona SHRI G. S. DHILLON SHRI B. S. RAJIJ (Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore DR S. K. HAJELA SHRI B. S. GOVINDA RAO ( Alternate ) Philips India Ltd, Poona SHRI R. B. LAL Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartSHRI G. B. MEEMAMSI ment of Communications 1. New Delhi Electronic Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of SHRI C. D. MURTHY Atomic Energy ) , Hyderabad General of Inspection (Ministry of Directorate SHRI P. K. RAO Defence ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHR~VIRENDRAMOHAN

2

IS : 7440 ( Part II ) - 1974

Indian Standard
ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS CIRCUITS OF ANALOGUE INTEGRATED

PART II TELECOMMUNICATION AMPLIFIERS (AUDIO, VIDEO AND MULTICHANNEL)

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 October 1974, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 This standard ( Part II ) deals with the essential ratings and characteristics and other information to be specified for audio amplifiers, video amplifiers and multichannel amplifiers for telecommunications and is prepared in accordance with IS : 7440 ( Part I )-1974*. 0.3 This standard is based on IEC Pub 147-IE ( 1973 ) Fifth Supplement to Pub 147-1 ( 1972 ) ` Essential ratings and characteristics ofsemiconductor devices and general principles of measuring methods, Part I Essential ratissued by International Electrotechnical characteristics `, and ings Commission. 0.4 The object of this standard is to specify clearly the properties of the device for the intended application and to facilitate comparison and choice It is anticipated that adoption of this standard between similar products. will ensure uniformity in the presentation of device data as well as certain minimum information. on these essential ratings, characteristics and other parameters of the device covered. 0.4.1 While the lists of ratings and characteristics have been kept at their minimum, a manufacturer may always give additional information at his discretion. 0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on semiconductor A list of standards so far prepared in this devices and integrated circuits. series is given on page 12. 0.6 In reporting the results of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960-F.
*Essential format. ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: Part I General

tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 7440( Part II ) - 1974

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) covers essential ratings and characteristics and other information to be specified in the case of audio-amplifiers, video amplifiers and multichannel amplifiers for telecommunication.
2. TERMINOLOGY,

GRAPHICAL

SYMBOLS

AND LETTER
shall apply.

SYMBOLS

2.1 The provisions
3. ASSIGNED

of 2 of IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972*

TYPE

NUMBER
of the device. The whenever possible.

3.1 A type number
number

shall be assigned for identification shall be prominently displayed on the device, OF THE INTEGRATED as required

4. DESCRIPTION

CIRCUIT in IS : 3700 namely, ( Part analogue of I )-1972* integrafunction

4.1 Information on the following shall be furnished: a) The category ted circuit. b) Function performed c) Technology, d) Constructional e) Material, 5. OUTLINES

of the integrated

circuit,

of the circuit-a general description by the analogue integrated circuit. such as bipolar, details, such as silicon. MOS, thin film, etc. hybrid, etc. such as monolithic,

AND

CONNECTIONS The following informa-

5.1 Details

of Outline and Encapsulation -

tion shall be given:

4

Reference to the outline covered in IS : 5000t or an outline drawing showing essential dimensions and tolerances, location of terminals and other information. metal case, plastic, etc. in the proper
Part I General

b) Type of encapsulation, such as Cl A drawing of the case with
sequence shall be given.
and *Essential ratings (Jirst revision) . characteristics

the leads identified
devices:

of semiconductor

TDimensions of semiconductor devices.

4

IS : 7440 (Part 6. BLOCK DIAGRAM AND TERMINAL CONNECTIONS

II ) - 1974

6.1 The block diagram and the identification of the connections shall be shown. When the encapsulation has metallic parts, any connection to them from external terminals shall be indicated. The connections with any associated external electrical elements shall also be stated.
6.2 As additional information, the complete electrical diagram may be reproduced, including significant parasitic elements, but not necessarily with indications of the values of the circuit components. 7. LIST

OF VOLTAGES
circuits operating conditions shall be chosen from the following list: 5.0, 6.0, 9.0, 12, 15, 18*, 24, for

7.1 The voltages used for stating the recommended
the integrated 1*3*, 1*5*, 3.0, 4.0, 4.5*, 100 volts.
NOTEoperation.

30, 48, and

The values marked with an asterisk are included keeping in mind battery

8. RATINGS 8.0 General

(LIMITING

VALUES

)

- If externally connected elements have an influence on the ratings, the limiting values for the ratings shall be given with the elements connected.
8.1 Electrical Ratings - The following ratings for voltages shall be specified under conditions mentioned against each: a) Power Sz@y 1) Maximum Voltage(s): value(s) and polarity(ies). supply where value of the voltage between a common and the substrate or earth, where appropriate. of the application of supply voltages, and currents

2) Maximum
terminal

3) The sequence appropriate. b) In/wt Terminal c)

VoZtuge(s) and/or Current(s) Voltage(s) and/or Current(s) -

Maximum Maximum

values. values. shall be

OutBut Terminal

8.2 Temperature specified:

Ratings

-

The following

temperature

ratings

a) Operating temperatures, minimum and maximum values of operating ambient or reference point temperature; and b) Storage temperatures, minimum 5 and maximum values.

IS : 7440 ( Part II ) - 1974

8.3 Power Ratings -' Maximum
operating given. temperature range,

value of power dissipation for specified mounting conditions,

over the shall be in

8.4 Mechanical Ratings - The mechanical ratings accordance with 9.1 of IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972*.

shall be specified

9. RECOMMENDED 9.1 The recommended
temperature range

OPERATING

CONDITIONS
the specified and tolerances operating for vol-

operating conditions within of the following shall be stated: values

a) Power Supplies - The polarities, tages and/or currents. b) Input Terminals:

1) Value(s) of the voltage(s) and/or current(s) of the input signal or of the impedance of the signal source; and 2) Value(s) of appropriate. c) Output Terminals: 1) Nominal value(s) of the voltage(s) and/or current(s) output signal and of the load impedance; and 2) Value(s) of appropriate. the bias on the output terminals, of the where external the bias on the input terminal(s), where

d) External Elements - The values and tolerances for the elements which shall be associated with the circuit. 9.1.1 range. Where

versus temperature

appropriate, the variation of the parameters specified in 9.1 shall also be stated over the specified temperature

10. ELECTRICAL 10.0 General

CHARACTERISTICS

10.0.1 The electrical
following:

characteristics

shall

be stated

in

terms

of

the

a) If external elements are essential for the operation of the circuit, the electrical characteristics shall include the effect of such external 8 elements.
*Essential ratings (Jirst revision ). and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I General

6

IS : 7440 ( Part II ) - 1974 b) If external elements are optional only, the electrical characteristics shall be given for the integrated circuit alone. The effect of adding specified external elements on the characteristics shall then be indicated as application data. 10.0.2 The electrical characteristics shall be stated at the reference point or ambient temperature of 25"C, the specific electrical conditions under which the device operates being also stated [ see also 11.3 of IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972* 1. -Typical 10.1 Power Consumption power consumption shall be stated. 10.2 Input stated: Characteristics The value following under stated conditions shall of be

characteristics

a) Input Impedance or Admittance: 1) In the case of high ( low ) impedance Typical and minimum ( maximum ) values of input impedance or typical and maximum ( minimum ) values of of input admittances, as function frequency in the specified frequency range under specified conditions The minimum return loss ( see Note) for the specified resistance in the specified frequency range under specified conditions

2) In the case of impe,dance matching

NOTE where

-?+R Return loss ( in dB ) = 20 log10 1~_~

z is the input impedance and R the specified resistance.

b) Input Bias Current ( Where Appropriate ) values under specified conditions.

Typical

and maximum ) ) Maximum Maximum

c) &#y Voltage Rejection Ratio ( Where Appropriate value over the operating temperature range. d) Ofiet value. Voltage and/or Current ( Where Appropriate

e) Mean Temjerature Appropriate ( Where temperature range.
*Essential ratings ( Jirst revision ) .

Coejicient of Ofset Voltage ) - Maximum value over

and/or Current the operating

and characteristics

of

semiconductor

devices:

Part

I General

7

IS : 7440 (Part 10.3 Output

II ) - 1974 Characteristics Impedance -

stated: a) O@ut 1) In the case of low ( high ) impedance

The

following

characteristics

shall be

or Admittance:

Typical and maximum ( minimum ) values of output impedance or typical and minimum ( maximum ) values of the output admittance, as a function of frequency in the specified frequenspecified and under cy range conditions The minimum return loss ( see Note ) for a specified resistance in the specified under specified frequency range, operating conditions
dB ) = 20 log10 5+R 5--R

2) In the case of impedance matching

NOTE -

Return loss ( in

where 5 is the output impedance and b)

R the specified resistance.

Maximum

Signal

Output:

1) Minimum value of the output signal current, voltage or power for specified values of the following: i) distortion, ii) load impedance, iii) signal frequency, iv) supply voltage(s), and v) adjustment of gain control ( if it exists ). 2) Minimum overload point under the same specified conditions, for multichannel amplifier.
NOTE - An amplifier is deemed to be overloaded when 1*O dB increase in the signal at its input results in the 20 dB increase in the third harmonic content of the signal at its output terminated with its rated impedance.
10.4 Forward Transfer shall be stated:

Characteristics

-

The following characteristics

8)

Minimum and Typical Values of Voltage Gain or Current Gain or Forward Transadmittance or Power Gain -For specified values of the

following: 1) Supply voltage(s), 8
2) Frequency,

IS : 7440 ( Part II ) - 1974 3) Load and source impedance(s), 4) Adjustment 5) Amplitude of gain control of the output ( if it exists ), signal at which the gain is measured.

NOTE- The parameter shall be measured at an input signal lower than the AGC threshold, if any.

b)

Cut-Off

Frequency -

3 dB points

( for audio

and video and

amplifiers

only ) , 1) Maximum 2) Minimum

value of low frequency, value of high frequency,

3 dB point; 3 dB point.

For amplifiers transmitting cut-off frequency only.

the dc component,

minimum

high

Gain - Maximum and minimum values of voltage amplification and/or current amplification and/or power-gain under specified conditions versus frequency, for example, as shown in Fig. 1. Phase Where appropriate, maximum and minimum phase and/ or group-delay ( envelope-delay ) under the conditions specified for gain versus frequency, for example, as shown in Fig. 2.

/-

__--- ----

- ------_

--.

-. \ \ \ \
\

I

/'
I

I
FREQUENCY

c

FIG. 1

MAXIMUMAND MINIMUM VALUES FOR GAIN VERSUSFREQUENCY
( for Multichannel Amplifiers ( for Video

10.5 Reverse Transfer Characteristics Only ) - Under consideration.

10.6 Interaction Between Amplifier and Supply Lines Multichannel Amplifiers and, Where Appropriate, for Amplifiers ) - Under consideration.

10.7 Noise - Where appropriate, maximum value of noise shall be specified in terms of noise factor or in terms of equivalent input voltage and/or for specified values of supply voltage(s), source resistance, current, frequency and band width. 9

IStf44O(Part

II)-1974
GROUP DELAY

t

\

\ \

I
I I \ \ \ \ \ I :

\

\
I \ \

I

It

\_e

,*---\.

_*'

'

FREQUENCY

-

FIG.

2

MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM VALUES ,FOR GROUP DELAY Distortion under specified conditions, especially of the

10.8 Distortion following:

4 Load impedance, b) Output signal level, C) Fundamental and component 4 Supply voltage(s), and
Adjustment e> below: of gain control

frequencies, ( if it exists ); shall be stated as given dis-

1) For 2)

all amjlafiers - Maximum tortion and where appropriate Maximum maximum

values of second harmonic. third harmonic distortion.

Audio amplifiers where appropriate

total harmonic distortion and value for intermodulation products.

3) Video and multichannel ampl$iers - Maximum value for intermodulation distortion for the second and where appropriate for the third and higher order products. 4) Di$erential phase and differential gain - Maximum and/or typical values of differential phase and differential gain under specified especially frequencies conditions; and levels of both lowfrequency signal and superimposed high-frequency signal and load impedance ( for video-amplifier only ) . for Video and Multichannel Amplifiers 10.9 Pulse Characteristics Only - Transition time and propagation delay time shall be stated. 10.10 Modulation of the Output Signals by Interfering Signals in the Supply ( for Multichannel Amplifiers Only ) - Where appropriate the effect of modulation of the output signals by the interfering signals in the supply shall be stated. 10

IS : 7440 (Part

II) - 1974

10.11 Effects of Variations of Supply Voltages and Temperatures on the Electrical Characteristics -Where appropriate the effects of variations of supply voltage and temperatures on the essential electrical characteristics specified in 10.2 (a), 10.2 (d), and 10.3 to 10.9 shall be stated over the recommended operating conditions of temperature and supply voltages as specified in 9. 11. MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND `OTHER DATA

11.1 Mechanical characteristics and other data required for the detailed mechanical design, assembly precautions, etc, shall be supplied as specified in 9.2 and 9.3 of IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972*. 12. ENVIRONMENTAL DATA data shall be stated in

12.1 Where appropriate, the relevant environmental accordance with IS : 6553-19711. 13. RELIABILITY DATA Under consideration.

14. CHARACTERISTICS 14.1 For characteristic

CURVES

curves, reference may be made to 10.

*Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor revision ) . tEnvironmenta1 requirements for semiconductor devices

devices:

Part

I General circuits.

(first

and integrated

11

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

SEMICONDUCTOR IS:

DEVICES

Part VII ) Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor devices: Set 1 )-1970 General Set 2 )-I970 Diodes Set 3 l-1970 Transistors Set 4 )-1969 Thyristors Integrated circuits and microelectronics Set 5 )-1971 Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part VIII )-I965 2032 art VIII Semiconductor devices :&se&al ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: 37oc General (first revision ) Part I )-1972 Low power signal diodes (Jrsr revision ) Part, II )-1972 Rectifier diodes (Jirst revision ) Part III )-1972 Low power small signal transistors Part IV)-1968 Power transistors Part V )-1968 Switching transistors Part VI )-1968 Reverse blocking triode thyristors Part VII )-1970 Voltage regulator and voltage reference diodes Part VIII)-1970 Variable capacitance diodes Part IX )-1972 etter symbols for semiconductor devices: 3715 General aspects Part I )-1971 Part II )-1971 Diodes Part III )-1971 Transistors Part IV)-1971 Thyristors Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: 4400 Part I )-1967 General Part II )-1967 Low power signal diodes Part III )-I968 Rectifier diodes Part VII )-1971 Reverse blocking triode thyristors Voltage regulator and voltage reference diodes Part VIII )-1970 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part IX Part IX/% 1 )-1974 Variable capacitance diodes, Section 1 For operating frequencies below 300 MHz Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: Part IX ( Part IX/Set 2 )-1974 Variable capacitance diodes, Section 2 For operation at frequencies above 6 1885
MHZ

441 l- 1967 Code of designation of semiconductor devices 5001 Guide for preparations of drawings of semiconductor devices and integrated circuits: Semiconductor devices ( Part I )-1969 Integrated circuits ( Part II )-1973 5469 Code of practice for the use of semiconductor junction devices: Applicable to all devices ( Part I )-1969 (Part II )-1973 Diodes Thyristors ( Part III )-1973 5500 Dimensions of semiconductor devices NOTE - Standards on dimensions of semiconductor devices are published in loose leaf form (individually priced ) and are supplied in an attractive binder (priced separately ). So far 28 standards have been published. 6553-1971 Environmental requirements for semiconductor devices and integrated circuits 7412- 197 4 Life testing of semiconductor devices Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: 7440 ( Part I )-1974 Part I General format Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: 7440 ( Part II )-1974 Part 11 Telecommunication amplifiers (audio, video and multichannel ) Essential ratings and characteristics of digital integrated circuits: Part 1 General 7441-1974 format

_._---

