(Reaffirmed 2003)

ISr775!l(PartVI)-1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PREPARATION OF METALLOGRAPHIC SPECIMENS
PART VI Metallography
Chairman SHRI K. V.
CEINNAPPA

LEAD AND ITS ALLOYS THEIR EXAMINATION Sectional

AND SMDC 27

and Heat-Treatment
International

Committee,

Representing Nickel ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Bombay Limited,

Members Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Durgapur SHRI N. V. RAQHWAN (Alternate) National Test Houae, Calcutta SHRI N. C. BAQOEI Indian Institute of Metals, Calcutta Saar S. N. BANEBJEE National Metallurgical Laboratory SHRI S. S. BAATNA~AR Jamsbedpur Guest, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah Da S. K. CHATTERJEE SHRI S. K. BAEU ( Alternate ) The Mysore Iron & Steel Ltd, Bhadravati SHRI DASARATHA SHRI B. HARIDASACEAR ( Al&mate ) Premier Automobilea Ltd, Bombay Sns~ D. M. DAVAR SHRI A. T. BORATE ( Alternate ) Dxz;rG DIRECTOR ( MET )-3, Ministry of Railways SHRI M. ANJ~NEYULU

( CSIR ),

CHEMIST & METALLUB~IST ( Altemate ) Directorate General of Supplier & Disposals SEBI A. K. GUHA ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SH~I P. C. MUSTAFI ( Alternate ) Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay SEBI H. A. JAISINQHANI SHRI A. R. RANADIVE ( Alternate ) Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune SHRI M. L. KATYAL Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur DR D. M. LAKHIANI SERI D. R. DASQUPTA ( A&-mate ) Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHBI N. MAJUMDAB SERI S. N. BOSE ( Altwnatc ) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi DR G. MUKHERJEE SHRI D. K. BAQCHI ( Alternate ) Ashok Leyland Ltd, Madras SRRI A. PADMANAEAN The Alloy Steel Producers' Association of India, SHRI B. M. PA1 Bombay SHRI S. A. MALWADE ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1976 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

I8 I 7799 ( Part VI ) - 1975 ( Cuntimtedfrom page 1 )
Members Dx P. S. PATREAL Tate RepIcsanting Engineering Jamshedpur & Locomotive Co Ltd,

S~rn J. C. KAPOOS ( Altewtats) Hindusten Motors Ltd, Uttarpara SH~I N. M. RAJU Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SXWI B. RAMA KRISHNA Sasr J. NAQESH BEAT ( Altemufe ) Ministry of SEBI V. RAMA SWAXY Defence ( DGI ), Department Defence Production Mukand Iron 8~ Steel, Bombay SEMI R. H. G. RAU Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHBI G. G. SAHA Textile Machinery Corporation Ltd, Belgharia SHEI H. N. SINon Indian Copper Information Centre, Calcutta DB L. R. VAIDYA~ATE Directorate General of Technical Development SHBI V. V. VIRBEAD~AYYA SHBI K. L. CEIATTEBJEE ( Altemute ) Murarka Engineering Works, New Delhi &a~ SVBHA~H WADHAVAN Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 Member) SHBI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director ( Strut & Met ) Secretay SHBI B. MVKHEBJI Deputy Director ( Met ), IS1

of

IS:7739(Part

VI)-1975

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PREPARATION METALLOGRAPHIC SPECIMENS
PART VI
THEIR

OF

LEAD AND ITS ALLOYS AND
EXAMINATION

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part VI) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 December 1975, after the draft finalized by the Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council.
0.2 The primary object of metallographic examination is to reveal the constituents and the structure of metals and their alloys by means of a Because of diversity in available equipment, wide variety microscope. of problems encountered, and the personal element, this standard gives for the guidance of the metallographer only those practices which experience has shown are generally satisfactory. 0.3 This standard is being issued in parts. This part covers polishing, etching and examination of lead and its alloys. The other parts of this code are as follows: Part Part Part Part I IL HI IV General features Electrolytic polishing Aluminium and its alloys and their examination Copper and its alloys and their examination Iron and steel and their examination Magnesium and its alloys and their examination Nickel and its alloys and their examination Gold, silver, platinum, palladium their examination and their alloys and

Part V Part VII Part VIII Part IX Part x Part XI 1. SCOPE

Tin and its alloys and their examination Zinc and its alloys and their examination

1.1 This standard (Part VI ) covers polishing,
of iead and its alloys.

etching

and examination

IS:7739(Part

VI)-1979 OF SPRCWENS of selection, size, cutting, cleaning and specimens are outlined in Part I of this

2. PREPARATION

2;O Recommended methods. mounting of metallographic standard.

2.1 The preparation of lead and lead alloy specimens is difficult because their softness results in surface flow and cold working which masks the true structure. Although it is generally agreed that a surface free of cold work is almost impossible to obtain by polishing, this is now neither necessary nor particularly advantageous for common leads and alloys with but small amounts of other elements in solution since recent developments in etching make the uniform removal of cold-worked material possible. Alloys containing hard constituents, however, present more difficulty because of uneven attack by etching solutions. 22 A number of methods for preparing specimens are in regular use, the choice for a given specimen generally depending upon the alloy, the size and shape of specimen and, perhaps, the available equipment or the operator's preference. It is always necessary, however, to remove sufficient metal to eliminate the effects of sawing, shearing, filing, or whatever means were used in securing the specimen. For the softer alloys, cutting or grinding, as described later, will be satisfactory but alloys containing hard constituents should be prepared with a microtome or its equivalent. 2.3 Lead cable sheathing and other specimens are often prepared on a machinist's lathe, using a sharply pointed tool shaped to cut, and not flow, the metal. Cutting speeds and feeds should be slow. Still another method is to use a wood plane with a very sharp blade, set to remove the thinnest possible shaving. Samples to be prepared this way are generally clamped between two pieces of wood and the whole mass shaved down together.

2.4 The methods described above are intended to produce a surface a&able for etching for low- and high-power examination without further treatment and, when properly done, wiik produce surprisingly good A fine microtome surface is especially suitable for very fine i results. work. A light etch will then produce a smooth surface. 2.5 Use a mill file to remove all traces of other working ( saw marks, etc ) and to secure a flat surface. The surface is then ground smooth by hand on lubricated emery paper backed with plate glass. Although papers of various degrees of fineness may be used, No. 0 and 000 papers are usually sufficient. A new paper about thirty times the area of the surfof solid specimens and eight times the diameter of tube specimens 4

IS27733 (Part

VI)-1973

should be used each time. Bumps or foreign particles on the paper are removed by scrapping with a straightedge, while an abundant supply of gasoline or a solution of paraffin in kerosine is used as a lubricant. Grinding, with the specimen pressed firmly against the paper, is continued until the emery is worn smooth and a bright surface-free of prominent scratches is obtained ( 5 to 7 minutes on each paper ). The specimen is etched p.fter first wiping it free of gasoline or, if another lubricant was Such surfaces will usually show used, cleaning in gasoline and wiping. sufficient, detail for examinatioc at the magnifications generally used for lead. If, after etching, it appears that further preparation is desirable grinding for about 5 minutes on No. 0000 emery paper may be helpful. (For details of grit numbers of abrasive papers, see IS : 715-1966* and IS: 28381964t. A comparative chart of grit npmbers of abrasive grains is given at Appendix A).
2.6 Polishing - Final fine polishing is not common practice with lead specimens. A suitable procedure is to polish on a wet clean, broad cloth liberally smeared with soap and using a water suspension of the finest levigated alumina. When a black smudge appears, polishing should be very carefully continued until it disappears and the surface is again bright. Scratches remaining after this operation are sometimes visible after etching but can be removed by alternately etching and polishing by hand on silk velvet well soaked with soap and alumina. 3. ETCHING REAGENTS

3.1 In Table 1 are given etching reagents commonly recommended for lead and its alloys. Etching of lead and lead alloys is not wholly independent of the method of preparatiofi, but in general the reagent used to remove thick layers of worked metal will work universally, while the others may present some difficulties. The optimum etching procedure is not only dependent on the method of preparation of the specimen, but also upon the exact composition or previous history or both. For complete elucidation of structure more than one etching reagent may be necessary, and flexibility of technique is desirable far good results. The proponents of the microtome method generally depend on a strong etchant or possibly careful swabbing to remove the Emphasis is placed on the condition of the layer of cold-worked metal. edge of the microtome knife in the determination of procedure, especially in the case of virgin leads and the softer alloys. When polishing is employed, the specimen is usually alternately polished on a velvet pad and lightly etched during the final stages until no further improvement is noted under the microscope. +Spec&ation for coated abraaiver, glue bond ( secondrhsbn ).
t+&cation
for waterproof silicon carbide paper.

5

TABIZ &JEIYO RBA~BET (2) Ammonium molybdats

3

BTClIUNG REAGEXTS FOR LEAD AND ITS ALLOYS ( clmue 3.1 )
ComPotlITror (3) HsMoO, ( 85 percent ) 100 g 140 ml NH,OH 240 ml H.0 60 ml FiigN;nd add to * :;a$1 HI0 ' acetic acid JPVtr 4 parts 16 parts '
RXYAUXS

IE. (11 i)

USE (5) Very Rapid etch. suitable for removing thick layers of worked metal

(4) Alternately swab specimen and wash in running water

ii)

hfixdacids

Gives excellent detail Use freshly prepared for photographing nolutionat4Oto &*C. Immerse for 4 to 30 minu tes depending on depth of worked m e t a 1 layer. Clean with wet cotton in running water Use freshly prepared solution at WC Swab with reagent No. 1 until structure is clearly visible. Immerse in reagmt No. 2 for about 6 minutes. Clean by swabbing in running water Used for polishing ing alternate and ctch-

iii)

Mixed acids in glycerine

~lacsd

acetic

acid

Glyc&ine iv) A m m on iu m mixed acids molybdate See reagents and 2 No. 1

1 part 1Prt 4 parts

Combines advantages of reagents No 1 and 2

V)

A c e ti c peroxide

acid-hydrogen

a) Glacial a c et i c acid HsOs ( 9 percent)

S parts 1 part

Etch 10 to 30 minutes depeniE!n depth of metal layer. Clean in HNO, (sp gr l-42), if necerury

Recommended for antimony alloyr up to 2 percent antimony

b) Ckcial

acetic acid

3 parts
1 part 2 parts 1 part 60 ml 40 ml

Etch for 6 to 15 seconds Etch for 8 to 15 seconds by immersion Electrolytic specimen platmum etching cathode, anode

For

HsOs ( 30 percent ) c) Glacial acetic acid H.0, ( 30 percent ) vi)

lead-antimony alloya

For pure lead and lead-calcium alloys Recommended for antimony alloys with over 2 percent antimony Foranti-friction metals Mawc;;;opic etc

Porchloric aid

zG;o` s

vii) viii)

sihernimte Niwkwid(l:l)

AgNOt ItO

5 to 10 g 95 to 90 ml $:I,

Use by swabbing Etch in boiling fofution for 5 to IO mmuter Alternate in acid running water and

,

etching for laminations,

ix)

Niwic add

HNO,

Pure lead

l The use of concentrated

reagents

is intended,

unless otherwise

specified.

18 : 7739 ( Part VI) - 1975 4. EXAMINATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF CONSTITUENTS

bright surface. This is generally accomplished by rinsing quickly and carefully in a full stream of running distilled water at or just below room temperature and quickly drying in a blast of air at or just below room temperature; excess liquid on the sides of the specimen may be removed by placing the surface gently on clean, dry blotting paper for Specimens etched in certain reagents are somewhat about 5 seconds. difficult to dry properly, while some of the lead alloys are quite susceptible to tarnish. Warm, humid atmospheres also present extreme difficulty and may require the use of an alkali potective film or examination while the specimen is submerged in water. The etched specimen should be preserved, if required, in a desiccator.

4.1 After etching, the specimen shall be properly dried to preserve the

