INATA Ah IS 1196 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


araa AAT РТ DAT — 
tifa «ат 


(ART TRI ) 


Laying Bitumen Mastic Flooring — 
Code of Practice 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.50 


© BIS 2023 


“тїї AS eat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Ч, 9 TR Me TH AMT, A fare - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Qe: чий РА 


October 2023 Price Group 6 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1958 and subsequently revised in 1968 and 1978. In the second revision of 
1978, due weightage was given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This was met by 
referring to BS CP 204 : 1965 ‘In-situ floor finishes’ issued by the British Standards Institution then. 


The Committee felt a need to revise the standard with a view to updating the standard based on experience 
gained in last four decades. In this revision, the following major changes have been incorporated: 


a) New materials have been added; 

b) Tables on susceptibility of floor finishes to attack and recommended thickness of mastic have been 
modified; 

c) Clause on isolating and re-melting has been modified; and 

d) New clauses for construction joints and precaution for laying have been added. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


This standard contributes to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9 ‘Industry, innovation and 
infrastructure’: build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster 
innovation. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1196 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


LAYING BITUMEN MASTIC FLOORING — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


(Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies the procedure for laying 
bitumen mastic flooring and its maintenance. 


1.2 This standard does not include provisions of acid 
resistant bitumen mastic. Details of floor finishes, 
fixings and adhesives when bitumen mastic is 
used as a damp-proofing base are not included 
in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contains provisions, 
which through reference in this text, 
constitute the provisions of this standard. At 
the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions 
of these standards: 


15 No. Title 
IS 334: 2023 Glossary of terms relating to 
bitumen and tar (third revision) 
IS 702 : 2022 Industrial bitumen — 
Specification (third revision) 
IS 1195:2002 Bitumen-mastic for flooring — 
Specification (third revision) 


IS 1322 : 1993 Bitumen felts for water-proofing 
and damp-proofing — 
Specification (fourth revision) 


IS 7193: 2013 Glass fibre base bitumen felts — 
Specification (second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 334 shall apply. 

4 GENERAL 

4.1 Necessary Information 

For efficient planning and execution of flooring 


work, detailed data and information as given below 
shall be taken in to account: 


a) The function which the bitumen mastic 
flooring has to fulfill; 


b) Type of traffic-light, medium or heavy; 


c) Wheeled conveyors, loads and rates of 
travel, types and widths of wheel or tyre. 
Crawler mounted vehicles leave permanent 
indentation on the mastic and can damage 
the mastic floor with their regular 
movement; 

d) Weight of standing loads, nature of load 
and bearing area; 

e) Maximum and minimum temperatures to 
which the bitumen mastic is to be 
subjected; 

f) Type of surface finish; 

g) Age, nature and present condition of the 
base over which the bitumen mastic is to be 
laid; 

h) Type and thickness of concrete screed to be 
laid on the base; 

j) Type of underlay, or separating layer, if 
any; 

k) Space available for plant and means of 
storing and hoisting materials; and 

m) Any other special requirements. 


5 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


5.1 Bitumen mastic is dustless, odourless, jointless 
and impervious to the transmission of moisture, 
either in liquid or vapour form. The surface is 
possible to be easily cleaned, to be made noiseless 
under traffic and resilient. Bitumen mastic is also 
durable. While it may carry heavy loads, application 
of concentrated point load may cause indentation. In 
designing the bitumen mastic flooring consideration 
shall be given to the anticipated service conditions. 
Bitumen mastic is, therefore, suitable for a variety 
of uses under a wide range of climatic and service 
conditions. 


5.1.1 Limitations of Use 


The surface of bitumen mastic is liable to become 
gradually soft ended by prolonged contact with 
greases, fats and oils. Contamination with such 
materials shall be avoided. 


5.1.2 Susceptibility of bitumen mastic floor finishes 
to chemical attack is given in Table 1. 


IS 1196 : 2023 


Table 1 Susceptibility of Bitumen Mastic Floor Finishes to Chemical and Temperature Attack 


(Clause 5.1.2) 


SI No. Agency Susceptibility to Attack 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Acids and vegetable Normal grades of bitumen mastic are subject to attack by acids, 
extracts other than oils but special grades are available to withstand attack by dilute solutions 
11) Alcoholic liquors Normal grades of bitumen mastic are subject to attack by certain 
alcoholic liquors and the use of special grades may be necessary in 
some situations, for example, breweries and distilleries 
111) Alkalis Alkali solutions of low concentration, at normal temperatures, have 
little or no effect on bitumen mastic. Alkali solutions above 38 °C, 
particularly of high concentration, will affect bitumen mastic 
iv) Brine (sodium and calcium Under normal conditions, bitumen mastic is unaffected by these 
chloride and sulphate salts) agencies 
v) Complex industrial liquids Laboratory tests are essential to ensure that a suitable grade of 
and radio-active materials bitumen mastic is used 
vi) Dairy products and milk Where hygienic conditions are maintained by adequate 
cleansing, a normal grade is suitable. Where churns are milk cans 
are handled, it is advisable to incorporate metal armouring in the 
floor surface, otherwise the floor will become indented and in these 
areas fats may accumulate and attack the mastic 
vii) Mineral, animal and Bitumen mastic floor finish is subject to attack by these oils, fats 
vegetable oils, fats and and greases 
greases 
Vili) Sugar, syrup, sugar Bitumen mastic is unaffected by dry sugar or solutions of 
solutions, etc low concentration at normal temperatures. Syrups, molasses 
and other concentrated solutions will affect bitumen mastic at all 
temperatures 
ix) Water Bitumen mastic is unaffected unless frequently in contact with hot 
water; under such circumstances, a high-temperature grade mastic 
should be used. Hot and cold water frequently discharged on to the 
floor may cause cracking. Continuous submergence of bitumen 
mastic surface under water at any temperature will cause its 
degradation 
x) Oxidizing agents Bitumen mastic is not suitable to be used where oxidizing agents 
are handled 
5.2 Thickness meeting the requirements as per IS 702, should be 


used for bitumen mastic. 


The total thickness to which bitumen mastic should 
be laid depends upon the traffic conditions to which 
the flooring will be subjected. Usually the bitumen 
mastic should be laid in one coat, but two-coat work 
may be used, depending on the thickness of floor 
finish. As a general guide the thicknesses as given 
in Table 2 are recommended. 


6 MATERIALS 


6.1 Bitumen mastic shall conform to the 


requirements given in IS 1195. 
6.2 Industrial Grade of Bitumen 
In case of industrial bitumen, grades 85/25 or 90/15, 


6.3 The bitumen mastic may be delivered to the site 
either in the form of blocks weighing about 25 kg or 
in molten condition in a mobile mixer or prepared at 
the site. Site preparation of the mastic is preferable. 


6.4 Surface Armouring 


Special types of metal armouring may be 
incorporated in bitumen mastic flooring for 
industrial purposes to increase resistance of 
abrasion. 


IS 1196 : 2023 


Table 2 Thickness of Bitumen Mastic for Different Service Conditions 


with impact 
Example: 


Heavy engineering, 
workshops, despatch 
yards, loading docks, 
goods platforms, 
loading platforms for 
trucks carrying milk 
bottles in dairy, etc 


(Clause 5.2) 
SI No. Examples of Service Type of Recommended Suggested Layout of the Flooring 
Conditions Flooring Thickness 
mm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Medium wear due to foot Light duty 15 to 20 
traffic 
15 -20 mm 
Example: MASTIC ASPHALT 
is ———— ISOLATING 
Small scale industries, жЕ 
such as those SAND AND CEMENT „ 
manufacturing ASPHALT IF REQUIRED 
electronic and BASE - CONCRETE 
. . STONE FLAGS 
electrical equipment ES QUARRY THES er 
Sees BOARDING 
9257 
BS 
by 
ў 
ii) Severe abrasion due to Medium duty 20 to 25 
continuous foot traffic 20 -25 mm 
MASTIC ASPHALT 
Example: 
MEMBRANE 
Passenger platforms, 
footpaths, workshops, SCREED OR LEVELLING 
COAT OF MASTIC 
etc ASPHALT IF REQUIRED 
BASE - CONCRETE 
STONE FLAGS 
QUARRY TILES 
BRICKS OR TIMBER 
BOARDING 
111) Severe abrasion combined Heavy duty 30 to 50 


30 - 50 mm 
MASTIC ASPHALT 


—=—— ISOLATING 
MEMBRANE 


SAND AND CEMENT 
SCREED OR LEVELLING 
COAT OF MASTIC 
ASPHALT IF REQUIRED 


BASE - CONCRETE 
STONE FLAGS 
QUARRY TILES 
BRICKS OR TIMBER 
BOARDING 


IS 1196 : 2023 


7 EQUIPMENT 


The equipment shall consist of a bitumen boiler, a 
mechanically agitated mixer called mastic cooker 
and other accessories. The equipment shall be set up 
as near the site of work as possible so as to avoid 
cooling of the molten material. 


8 CONSTRUCTION 


8.1 The base on which the bitumen mastic flooring 
is to be laid shall be adequately strong to receive the 
mastic and to carry the anticipated traffic over it. 


8.2 Preparation of the Base 


The base shall have a true, even and dry surface 
which has been slightly coarsened by means of a 
stiff broom or wire brush and should be free from 
ridges and hollows. A steel trowelled finish is not 
desirable. The levels of the base should be such that 
the specified thickness of bitumen mastic may be 
applied uniformly. If the finished floor is likely to 
have water or industrial liquids upon it, a straight fall 
of not less than 1 in 75 should be provided. 
Channels in the mastic layer should be avoided. 


8.3 Treatment of the Base 


The treatment of the base shall be decided by the 
designer in consultation with those responsible for 
the flooring. One of the following may be used: 


a) A screeded bed of cement concrete or lime 
concrete not less than 25 mm thick; or 

b) An isolating membrane ог underlay 
(see 8.4); or 

c) On metal or concrete floors, a thin priming 
coat of bitumen should be applied over a 
clean and dry surface. 


8.4 Isolating Membrane 


An isolating membrane may be provided to isolate 
the mastic asphalt from the base to allow for any 
relative movement between them. It also helps to 
prevent the formation of blisters and ‘blowing’ of 
asphalt. 


An isolating membrane conforming to Type 1 of 
IS 1322 is normally used where bitumen mastic up 
to 20 mm in thickness is laid. Where the base is in 
direct contact with the ground, glass fibre felt 
(see IS 7193) may be used as an alternative. 


Thickness of bitumen mastic exceeding 20 mm on 
new concrete are usually laid without an isolating 
membrane except in circumstances described in (b) 
below. Isolating membranes should be laid loose. 


a) An isolating membrane is essential: 


1) Ona timber base; 

2) Ona base of porous or open texture, 
such as no-fines ог light-weight 
concrete; 


3) Where the concrete surfaces contains 
fine cracks; 

4) Onaconcrete base which has received 
a surface treatment, such as sodium 
silicate solution; 

5) When concrete has been contaminated 
by foreign matter from industrial 
processes, such as oils, greases, sugar 
solutions or chemicals; and 

6) When the mastic is to be laid over a 
thermal insulating medium, for 
example, in cold stores. 


b) An isolating membrane may also be found 
necessary in circumstances arising 
immediately before or at the time of 
laying, such as the following: 


1) when the bitumen mastic cools too 
rapidly to allow it to be handled and 
properly finished. Premature cooling 
may be caused by the dissipation of 
heat through the base or by weather 
conditions, or both. It may also occur 
when it is necessary to transport the 
material far from the cauldron or 
mixer. Under these conditions, an 
isolating membrane may act as a 
thermal insulating medium to assist 
the retention of heat for a longer time 
after laying. 


8.5 Placing the Isolating Membrane 


The isolating membrane, when required should be 
laid loose with lapped joints. 


8.6 Setting Out 


The setting out of the floor area into bays is normally 
decided according to workable requirements. The 
arrangement of the bays depends upon the design of 
the floor and the number of spreaders engaged, so 
that the laying and finishing processes may both be 
easily controlled by the operatives. 


8.7 Re-melting at Site 


Re-melting is the term applied to the melting at the 
site or in a mobile mixer of the pieces of broken 
bitumen mastic blocks. The blocks shall be broken 
to convenient size not exceeding 60 mm cubes and 
loaded into the mechanically agitated mixer or 
mastic cooker at the site of work. The material shall 
then be carefully re-melted. At this stage any coarse 
aggregate preferably preheated shall be fed in 
successive portions until the complete charge is 
thoroughly incorporated. After all the coarse 
aggregate has been incorporated, the material shall 
be mixed continuously for a period of not less than 
one hour before laying is begun, and mixing shall 
be continued until laying operation is completed, so 
as to maintain the coarse aggregate in suspension. At 


no stage during the re-melting and mixing process, 
shall the temperature exceed 205 °C. 


Re-melting of mastic should be normally avoided at 
site. However, if it becomes necessary for 
re-melting, it will be carried out under standard 
procedure as stated above only after taking prior 
approval from the statutory authority/site in-charge 
who will carefully and critically examine the 
necessity of re-melting and will allow re-melting 
only after convincing justification. 


8.8 Laying 
8.8.1 Transport of Molten Material 


When the material is sufficiently molten to be 
workable, it should be carried in flat mortar pans, to 
the point of laying. To prevent the molten material 
from sticking to the pans they may be sprinkled 
inside with a minimum quantity of inorganic dust, 
such as limestone dust, cement, ash etc. Oil shall not 
be used. 


8.8.2 Spreading 


Bitumen mastic should generally be laid in bays in 
one coat. It should be spread to the specified 
thickness by means of suitable hand tools, gauges, 
straight edges and hand levels being used to ensure 
accuracy. The bitumen mastic should then be 
floated to a uniformly level surface by a heavy 
wooden float and should be free from roughness and 
imperfections. 


8.8.2.1 If 'blowing' occurs, the bubbles should be 
punctured and the area affected carefully made good 
while the mastic is still hot. 


8.8.2.2 Two-coat work should be treated in a manner 
similar to that for single-coat work, but care should 
be taken to arrange that the joints in successive 
layers are staggered. 


8.8.3 Surface Finish 


The type of surface finish required should be 
specified by the designer. The following are the two 


types: 


a) Matt finish — The surface should be 
rubbed in with sand during the final 
floating operation. The sand should be 
clean and free from foreign matter. All 
surplus material should be removed after 
rubbing is completed, and 


b) Polished finish — The surface should be 
finished with a float in a manner similar to 
that used for a matt finish but without the 
use of an abrasive. 


8.8.3.1 Immediately after completion of the laying, 
the bitumen mastic should be protected from 
damage till the material cools to the surrounding 
temperature. 


IS 1196 : 2023 


8.8.4 Slipperiness 


Bitumen mastic has reasonable slip-resistance, but 
frequent polishing tends to make it slippery. Where 
mastic is used as paving to stairs a suitable-non-slip 
safety nosing or inset should be incorporated in the 
tread. 


8.9 Junctions 


Special care should be taken in effecting proper 
junctions between new and previously laid sections 
of work. The contact edges of the previously laid 
mastic should be cleaned and warmed by additional 
applications of hot mastic. This procedure should 
also be adopted at junctions between the floor finish 
and skirtings, coves or fillets. 


8.10 Skirtings 


Skirtings should be executed in not less than two 
coats, particular care being taken to ensure proper 
adhesion of the first coat to the base. Special care 
should be taken at external angles to ensure the full 
thickness of the material. 


8.11 Protection of the Surface 


The newly laid surface should be protected from 
damage due to careless handling of construction 
equipment, spillage of oils, paints, chemicals, plying 
of vehicles, etc. Concrete or mortar shall not be 
mixed directly on the bitumen mastic surface. 


8.12 Construction Joints 


Wherever laying of mastic flooring requires to be 
left half way for its continuation for the next day, it 
creates a construction joint. Edge of the mastic 
flooring laid must be chamfered to give it a 45° 
surface with rough texture. If bitumen appears on the 
surface, sprinkling of small size coarse aggregates 
should be done on the surface to create rough texture 
to confirm necessary interlocking of existing surface 
with fresh mastic. Warming up of existing 
chamfered surface before starting next day’s work to 
bring its viscosity close to fresh mastic is preferred. 


Additionally, when the floor on which mastic is 
proposed to be applied is having joints, the viscosity 
of mastic is to be adjusted such as to make it more 
flow-able as compared to remaining quantum of 
mastic. 


It is essential to ensure that construction joints of 
mastic as explained above will not align with the 
joints of floor on which mastic is to be applied. 


8.13 Bringing into Service 


The mastic flooring should not be subjected to 
traffic until the material has cooled throughout to the 
temperature of the surrounding atmosphere. 


IS 1196 : 2023 


9 INSPECTION 


The work shall be inspected while in progress 
and after completion, special attention shall be paid 
to the following points: 


a) General condition of the base; 

b) Irregular surface of the base and correct 
laying of the underlay, when used; 

c) Cleanliness of plant for re-melting; 

d) Correct temperature of the mixture prior to 
laying; 

e) Use of the correct kind of dust to assist 
removal of mixture from the buckets; 

f) Making good all 'blows'; 

g) Correct thickness throughout; 

h) Removal of all asphalt bleed; 

j) Correctness of finished level and specified 
finish; and 

k) Correct pattern of decorative designs, if 
any. 


10 MAINTENANCE 
10.1 Cleaning 


The bitumen mastic surface requires relatively little 
maintenance, though attention is necessary to obtain 
maximum service. Superficial dirt may normally be 
removed by washing with warm water and suitable 
detergents. When hosing down, a constant water 
temperature should be maintained with the water 
temperature not exceeding 40 °C. Where there is 
much dirt on the floor, the additions of a small 
quantity of washing soda to the warm water may be 
desirable. After the dirt has been removed the floor 
should be mopped with clean water. It is essential 
that all oils, fats and greases spilled on the floor 
should be removed immediately. 


10.2 Repairs 


10.2.1 All repair work to a mastic asphalt surface 


must be performed by a specialist bitumen mastic 
contractor. 


10.2.2 When a damaged section has to be 
removed, it should be done carefully. Considerable 
damage may result from an attempt to cut away an 
affected area with the hammer and chisel or to soften 
it with a blowlamp. The correct method is to place 
hot mastic around and over the area concerned, and 
after this has had a sufficient softening effect, the 
area shall be carefully cut away and made good, with 
fresh bitumen mastic. In no circumstances, should a 
hammer and chisel be used to cut cold mastic 
asphalt. An angle grinder may, however, be used as 
an alternative. 


Cutting the damaged mastic in rectangular shape, 
removing damaged mastic and relaying fresh mastic 
fulfilling all standard parameters including 
thickness, temperature, etc is also a standard 
practice. 


10.2.3 When two-coat work is being restored or 
made good, the edge along the perimeter of the area 
shall be cut back not less than 75 mm to half the total 
thickness of the mastic, to form a lapped joint. 


11 PRECAUTIONS FOR LAYING 


11.1 Mastic asphalt is liable to be damaged at very 
low temperatures. So, flooring grades should not be 
laid in open or unheated buildings when the ambient 
temperature is below 10 °C or likely to fall below 
this value subsequent to laying. 


11.2 Rapid or uneven cooling caused by draughts of 
air from external opening must be avoided. 


IS 1196 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi 
- 110076) 


Acropolis Institute of Technology and Research, 
Indore 


Aludecor Lamination Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Ardex Endura India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Council, 


New Delhi 


Industry Development 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, 
Kolkata 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & Sanitaryware, 
Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA (Chairperson) 


DR SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI JAYANT AWASTHY (Alternate Т) 
SHRI DEEPSHIKHA SHUKLA (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI DEVESH KUMAR 


SHRI K. P. PAULSON 
SHRI GOPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
Ms NANDINI MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI VYANGESH CHOKSI 


SHRI P. R. SWARUP 
SHRI RAVI JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SINGH 
DR ACHAL KUMAR MITTAL (Alternate) 


DR PARAG MANGALBHAI SOLANKI 
DR PARVESH AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
DR ASHA T. ANIL (Alternate II) 


DR RAKESH KUMAR 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DWK) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR DAS 
SHRI AKHILESH MAURYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANISH MAHALA (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI SUDIPTA SAHA 
SHRI SUBHASHISH MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDIPTA SAHA 
SHRI P. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


IS 1196 : 2023 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar 


MAPEI Construction Products 
Bengaluru 


India Pvt Ltd, 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 


MYK Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


NTC Tiles LLP, Panchkula 


Paver and Block Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilm Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Research Designs and Standards 


Lucknow 


Organization, 


RMG Polyvinyl India Limited, Ghaziabad 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, New Delhi 


Steuler Industrial Solution (India) Private Limited 


In Personal Capacity (N96, Ground Floor, Mayfield 
Garden, Sector-51, Gurugram - 122018) 


Representative(s) 


DR GAURAV SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI HANUMANTHA КАЛ) S. N. 
SHRI RAVI JAGTAP (Alternate I) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KANDWAL (Alternate II) 


SHRIMATI RIVOO MAHENDRU 
SHRIMATI REMIKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH JETPARIA 
SHRI JERAM MADHAV KAVAR (Alternate) 


DR P. ARJUNAN 
SHRI N. RADHAKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT TRIVEDI 
SHRI SANJAY MUNDRA (Alternate I) 
SHRI AMIT SAGAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI D. V. S. PRASAD 
DR SOMIT NEOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI PREM CHAND GUPTA 
SHRI SUSHANT GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMBHANI 
SHRI MEHUL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND GOENKA 
DR E. SUNDARESAN (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR 
SHRI HARENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (WORKS) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH MOHAN 
SHRI A. N. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH GARG 
SHRI RAMAN DHYANI (Alternate) 


SHRI CHIRAG K BAXI 
SHRI BHARATBHAI D. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. D. MATHUR 


IS 1196 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)| 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI PRADEEP SINGH SHEKHAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 
AND 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CED 05 (21199). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


