( Reaffirmed 2003 )

ls : 12121- 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SODIUM CARBONATE, ANHYDROUS, PHOTOGRAPHIC GRADE
Photographic
Chairman SHRI B. V. RAMACHANDRA Members SHRI C. D. ANAND
Smu 0.

Materials

Sectional

Committee,
Rcpreseniing

CDC

44

India Photographic

Co Ltd, Bombay of Technical Development,

Directorate General New Delhi

SHRI V. N. BH~TNAQAR VISOTRONICS, Bombay, SHRI P. T. BHOPALE Photophone Industries Indra Ltd, Bombay SHRI U. V. SATHAYE ( Alternate ) SHRI K. V. DAMODARAN Satyadev Chemicals Pvt Ltd, Vadodara DR GEORQE KURIAN ( Alternoic ) SERI S. A. KHARKAR The New India Industries Ltd, Bombay COL S. R. KISHORE Survey of India, Dehra Dun SHRI B. V. KRISHNAN Films Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Bombay SHRI V. P. PARWAR ( Alternate ) SHRI T. J. LALEA Jay Photographic Papers, Bombay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI J. C. MAKANI SHRI K. M. MANDAL ( Alternote ) INSDOC, New Delhi SHRI K. S. NAQARAJAN SHRI S. K. PATEL Liberty Chemical Works, Bombay SBRI V. N. KAMAT ( Alternate I ) SHRI N. V. PILLAI ( Alfernatc II ) Agfa-Gevaert India Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. S. PATWA Armed Forces Film and Photo Division, New Delhi SHRI K. R. PRABHAKAR Hindustan Photo Films Mfg Co Ltd, Ootacamund SHRI T. R. RAMASASTRI SBRI T. BALACHANDAR ( Alfernafe ) Kesar Sugar Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. C. SBAH SHRI K. RAMANRUTTY ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( +-o#cio Member ) SHRI SATISH CH~NDER, Director ( Chem ) Secretary
DR R. K. B~JAJ Assistant Director ( Chem ), BIS

P. SAXENA ( Alfernate )

( Continued on page 2 )

@ Cofpright 1987
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Coplvright Act ! XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by anv means except with written permission of the oublisher sball be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 12121- 1987 ( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Photographic
Convener
SHRI B. V. RAMACHANDRA

Chemicals

Subcommittee,

CDC 44 : 3

Representing India Photographic Co Ltd, Bombay

Members SHRI K. DR SHRI S. SHRI T. SHRI R. V. DAMODARAN Satyadev Chemicals Pvt Ltd, Vadodara GEORGE KURIAN ( Alternate ) A. KHARKAI~ The New India Industries Ltd, Bombay J. LALKA Jay Photographic Papers, Bombay B. MEHTA India Film Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. R. NAYAK May & Bakers India Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. PATEL Liberty Chemical Works, Bombay SHRI V. N. KAMAT ( Alternate I ) DR N. V. PILLAI ( Alternate II ) SHRI R. S. PATWA Agfa Gevaert India Ltd, Bombay Hmdustan Photo Films Mfg Co Ltd, Ootacamund SHRI T. R. RA~~ASASTRY SHRI T. BALACHANDAR ( Alternate ) SHRI PALANIAPPAN RAMASWAMY Gemini Colour Laboratory, Madras Vijaya Productions Pvt Ltd, Madras SHRI B. N. K~NDA REDDI SHRI V. DINAKARA REDDI ( Alternate ) Kesar Sugar Works Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. C. SHAH DR S. SIDDHAN Colour-Chem Ltd, Bombay Sonawala Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. G. S~N.~WALA SHRI R. G. TFX.~K.~R ( Alternate)

IS : 12121- 1987

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR SODIUM CARBONATE, ANHYDROUS, PHOTOGRAPHIC GRADE

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 June 1987, after the draft finalized by the Photographic Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 This Indian Standard is one of a series of specifications for photoused in the processing of graphic grade chemicals which are commonly These specifications have been sensitized photographic materials. prepared to establish criteria of purity which will provide a practical and economical grade and prevent possible faulty processing which might be caused by chemicals of inferior quality and to furnish manufacturers, suppliers and processors with reliable and readily available specifications for photographic chemicals of satisfactory quality. 0.3 Sodium carbonate, anhydrous is used in the processing of sensitized It has the chemical formula Na&Os and photographic materials. molecular mass 106. 0.4 Specifications for sodium carbonate, anhydrous are covered under IS : 296 which was first formulated in 1951 and subsequently revised It was further revised in 1974*. This standard is presently in 1965. once again under revision and in this revision the requirements for the photographic grade, which were earlier covered under this standard The photographic grade of the material has been have been deleted. covered in the present standard. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, off in accordance with expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.
*Specification for sodium carbonate. anhl,drous ( second r&ion iRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). ).

3

IS : I2121 - 1987 1. SCOPE
prescribes requirements and methods of sampling 1.1 This standard carbonate, anhydrous, photographic grade used in and test for sodium _ the processing of sensitized photographic materials. 2. REQUIREMENTS

2.1 Description
granular

- The material shall be in the form of free flowing, white powder, free from lumps and external visible impurities.

2.2 Solution in Water - 20 g of material dissolved in 100 ml of distilled water at room temperature shall give a clear and colourless solution free from sediments other than a slight flocculence. 2.3 The material shall also comply with the Table 1 when tested according to the methods Reference to the relevant clauses of Appendix Table 1.
TABLE 1

requirements given in given in Appendix A. A is given in co1 4 of

REQUIREMENTS FOR SODIUM CARBONATE. PHOTOGRAPHIC GRADE REQUIREMENTS

ANHYDROUS.

SL NO.

CJUR.4CTERISTICS

METHOD OB TEST, REFERENCE, CLAUSE No. I? APPENDIX A (4) A-2 A-3 A-4 A-5 A-6 A-7 A-8

(1) 9 As;;ss

(2) (as;asCOs ), percent by

(3) 98.5 0.3 0.001 0~001 0.2 0.2 To pass the test

ii) iii) iv) v) vi)
vii)

Ch:;si/;=(x,, Cl ), percent by , Iron ( as Fe ), percent by mass, Max Heavy metals ( as Pb ), percent by mass, Max Bicarbonates ( as NaHCOs cent by mass, Max Free alkali ( as NaOH by mass, Max Reaction nitrate to ), per-

), percent silver

ammoniacal

3. PACKING

AND MARKING
The material shall be packed in air-tight containers lining, or as agreed to between the purchaser and the 4

3.1 Packing with polyethylene supplier.

IS : 121213.2 Marking
legibly

1387 .

- Each container shall be securely and indelibly with the following information:
of the material; of the material and trade-mark, number; in the package;

closed

and

marked

a) Name b) Mass c) Name

if any, of the manufacturer; and with the Standard Mark.

dl Lot or batch 3.2.1 The containers

e) Date of manufacture. may also be marked

NOTE - The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised Standard marked products and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark mav be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

4. SAMPLING

4.1 The method
and criteria

of drawing representative test for conformity shall be as prescribed

samples of the material in Appendix B.

APPENDIX ( Clause 2.3 )
METHODS OF TEST FOR SODIUM ANHYDROUS, PHOTOGRAPHIC A-l. A-l.1 QUALITY OF REAGENTS

A
CARBONATE, GRADE

pure chemicals Unless specified otherwise, ( see IS : 1070-1977" ) shall be us@d in tests.
NOTE -`Pure chemicals shall which affect the results of analysis. mean chemicals that

and

distilled

water
impurities

do not contain

A-2.

DETERMINATION

OF ASSAY

A-2.1 Reagents A-2.1.1
indicator

Methyl

Orange Indicator -

Dissolve

0.1

g of

methyl

orange

in 100 ml of water.
use ( second revision ).

*Specification for water for general laboratory

5

IS : 12121 - 1987 - Weigh accurately about 1 g of the material A-2.2 Procedure dis<olve in 50 ml of water. Titrate slowly with 1 N hydrochloric using methyl orange as an indicator. A-2.3 Calculation ), percent by mass = 5.3 `$ and acid

Assay ( as Na&Os where

V = volume in ml of standard hydrochloric titration, Jv = normality of standard hydrochloric acid, M = mass in g of material A-3. A-3.1 DETERMlNATION Reagents Dilute Nitric Acid Calcium Carbonate approximately precipitated. 5 percent 0.01 N. OF taken for the test. CHLORIDE

acid and

used

in

A-3.1.1 A-3.1.2 A-3.1.3 A-3.1.4

4 N and free from chlorides.

Potassium Chromate Indicator Standard Silver .Nitrate Solution -

solution.

A-3.2 Procedure - Take about 0.5 g ofaccurately weighed sample Add dilute nitric into a conical flask and dissolve in 10 ml of water. Avoid excess acid. acid in small portions to neutralize the carbonate. Add precipitated calcium carbonate in small portions until a small amount of it remains after thorough shaking. Add 10 drops of potassium Titrate against standard silver nitrate chromate indicator solution. solution till the reddish brown tinge persists after brisk shaking. A-3.3 Calculation Chlorides where V = volume titration, N = normality A-4. A-4.1 DETERMINATION Apparatus Kessler Cylinders 50 ml capacity. 6 in ml of standard silver silver nitrate solution and used in ( as Cl ), percent by mass = 3.546 g

of standard OF IRON

nitrate -solution,

M = mass in g of the material

taken

for the test in A-3.1.

A-4.1.1

3s : 12121 - 1987 A-4.2 Reagents Hydrochloric Acid approximately 15 percent ( m/v ).

A-4.2.1 A-4.2.2 A-4.2.3 A-4.2.4

Ammonium Persulphate Potassium Thiocyanate Solution approximately 5 percent. ( v/v ).

Dilute Sulphuric

Acid -

approximately

10 percent

A-4.2.5 Standard Iron Solution - Dissolve 0.702 g of ferrous ammonium acid sulphate [ FeS04 ( NH, )2 SO4.6H20 ] in 10 ml of dilute sulphuric Dilute 100 ml of the solution again and dilute with water to I 000 ml. to 1 000 ml. One millilitre of the diluted solution contains 0.01 mg of iron ( as Fe ). - Weigh accurately about 1 g of the material and A-4.3 Procedure Add about 5 ml of hydrochloric acid dissolve in about 20 ml of water. Dissolve the residue in 20 ml of water. Add and evaporate to dryness. CocJ and 30 mg of ammonium persulphate and boil to oxidize the iron. transfer to a Nessler cylinder; add 5 ml of potassium thiocyanate solution, Carry out a control dilute with water to the 50-m] mark and stir well. using 1 ml of standard iron solution in test in another Nessler cylinder, place of sample and the same quantities of other reagents in the same Compare the intensity of total volume as of the reaction mixture. colour produced in the cylinders after 5 minutes. A-4.3.1 The limit prescribed in Table 1 shall be taken as not having been exceeded if the intensity of colour produced in the test with the material is~not greater than that produced in the control test. A-5. A-5.1 DETERMINATION Apparatus &`esslerCylinders 50 ml capacity. OF HEAVY METALS

A-5.1.1 A-5.2

Reagents Dilute Hydrochloric p-Nitrophenol Acid approximately 5 N, and 1.99 ( v/v).

A-5.2.1 A-5.2.2 A-5.2.3 A-5.2.4

Indicator

Solution -

0'25 percent. 1 : 99 ( v/v ).

Dilute Ammonium Hydroxide Hydrogen Sulphide Solution -

saturated.

A-5.2.5 Standard Lead Solution - Weigh accurately 1.60 g of lead Dissolve nitrate and add 50 ml nitric acid of analytical reagent grade. in water and make up the solution to 1 OOO-ml mark. From this, pipette out 10 ml of the solution and dilute it with water to 1 000 ml. One millilitre of this solution contains 0.01 mg of lead ( as Pb ). 7

IS : 12121- 1987

A-5.3 Procedure

- Weigh accurately 1 g of sample and dissolve in 20 acid ( 5N ). Evaporate to ml of water. Add 5 ml of hydrochloric dryness. Dissolve the residue in 20 ml of water. Add 1 drop of pnitrophenol indicator solution and then add, dropwise, dilute ammonium hydroxide until the solution turns yellow. Add dilute hydrochloric acid ( 1 : 99 ) dropwise until the solution becomes colourless and then add 0.5 ml in excess. Transfer to a Nessler cylinder; add 5 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution, dilute to 50 ml mark and shake well. Carry out a control test using 1 ml of standard lead solution, in place of the material Compare intensity of the and the same quantities of the other reagents. colour produced in the two Nessler cylinders. A-5.3.1 The limit prescribed in Table 1 shall be taken as not having been exceeded if the intensity of colour produced in the test with the material is not greater than that produced in the control test. A-6. A-6.1 DETERMINATION Reagents Barium Chloride Solution 1 M, neutral to phenolphthalein. OF BICARBONATES

A-6 .l.l

A-6.1.2 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution - Dissolve 0`1 g of phenolphthalein in 50 ml of rectified spirit conforming to IS : 323-1959*, and dilute to 100 ml with water. A-6.1.3 Standard Sodium I;lydroxide Solution 0.1 N. material into a water, stopper chloride soluand swirl. If sodium hydrocolour which

A-6.2 Procedure - Weigh accurately about 2 g of the 125-ml conical flask. Add 30 ml of carbon dioxide free the flask and dissolve the material. Add 25 ml of barium tion and 10 drops of phenolphthalein indicator. Stopper the solution is colourless ( see Note ), titrate with standard xide solution till the first appearance of a faint pink persists for 30 seconds
NOTE If the solution becomes pink, report bicarbonates

as absent.

A-6.2.1 prescribed hydroxide A-7. A-7.1

The material shall be taken to have not exceeded the limit in Table 1 if not more than 0'5 ml of standard sodium solution is required in the test. OF FREE ALKALI

DETERMINATION Reagent Standard

A-7.1.1

Hydrochloric

Acid ),

0.1 N.

*Specification

for rectified

spirit ( w&d

8

IS:l2121A-7.2

1987

Procedure - If the solution has a pink colour after the addition of the indicator in A-6.2, titrate with standard hydrochloric acid to a colourless end point.
A-7.2.1 The material shall be taken to have not exceeded the limit prescribed in Table 1, if not more than 1 ml of standard hydrochloric acid solution is required in the test. A-8.

TEST FOR REACTION NITRATE Reagents
Concentrated

TO AMMONIACAL

SILVER

A-8.1

A-8.1.1

Ammonium Hydroxide

-

20 percent

( m/m ). by mixing 10 percent equal silver

A-8.1.2 Ammoniacal Silver Xtrate Solution - prepared volumes of concentrated ammonium hydroxide and nitrate solution,

A-8.2 Procedure - Dissolve 1'00 g of the material in 20 ml of water. Add 10 ml of freshly prepared ammoniacal silver nitrate solution, and mix well. Let it stand for 2 minutes and compare with a blank prepared simultaneously by adding 5 ml of concentrated ammonium hydroxide to a solution of 1 g of the material dissolved in 25 ml of water. A-8.2.1 The material shall be taken to have passed the test if the intensity of any colour or precipitate produced with the material is not greater than that produced in the blank test. CAUTION Dispose off all test solutions and rinse the apparatus immediately. Explosive compounds be formed on standing. used may

APPENDIX ( czause 4.1 )
SAMPLING B-1. GENERAL B-1.0 In B-l.1
drawing shall be observed. Samples

B

OF SODIUM CARBONATE, ANHYDROUS, PHOTOGRAPHIC GRADE REQUIREMENTS
samples, the

OF SAMPLING
precautions place. and directions

following

shall not be taken

in an exposed

B-l.2 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material being sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples from adventitious contamination. 9

IS : 12121- 1987 B-l.3 To draw
selected means. other a representative sample, the contents of each container for sampling shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible by suitable shall be placed in clean, dry and air-tight containers on which the material has no action. glass or

B-1.4 The samples
suitable

B-l.5 The sample containers filled by the sample.

shall be of such a size that they are nearly

B-l.6 Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight after filling, and marked with full details of sampling, the date of sampling and the year of manufacture of the material.

B-2. SCALE

OF SAMPLING

B-2.1 Lot - In any consignment of the material, all the containers of same size and drawn from a single batch manufacture shall constitute a lot. If a consignment is known to consist of different batches of manuthen the containers belonging to facture or different sizes of containers, the same batch and size shall be grouped together and each such group shall constitute a separate lot.

of

B-2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to the requirements of The the specification, tests shall be carried out for each lot separately. number of containers ( n ) to be selected for this purpose shall depend on with Table 2. the size of the lot ( A') and shall be in accordance

TABLE
LOT SIZE
N (1)

2

SCALE

OF SAMPLING
NUMREROFCONTAINERS
~0 BE SELECTED n (`4

Up

EO

25 50

3 4 5 7

26 to

51 to 100 101 and above

B-2.3 These containers shall be selected at random order to ensure randomness of selection, random given in IS : 4905-1968" may be followed.
*Methods for random sampling.

from the lot and in sampling procedure

10

IS : 12121- 1987 B-3. TEST SAMPLES B-3.1 Preparation AND REFEREE SAMPLE

of Test Samples

B-3.1.1 Draw with an appropriate sampling instrument, a small portion of the material from different parts of each container selected. The total quantity of the material drawn from each container shall be sufficient to conduct the tests for the characteristics given in Table 1 and should be about 400 g. B-3.1.2 Thoroughly mix all portions of material drawn from the same Out of these portions, a small but equal quantity shall be Container. taken from each selected container and shall be well mixed up together so as to form a composite sample weighing not less than 800 g. This composite sample shall be divided into three equal parts, one for the another forthe supplier and the third to be used as referee purchaser, sample.
B-3.1.3 The remaining portion of the material from each container ( after a small quantity needed for the formation of composite sample has been taken ) shall be divided into three equal parts, each part weighing not less than 50 g. These parts shall be immediately transferred to thoroughly dried bottles which are then sealed air-tight with stoppers and labelled with all the particulars of sampling given under B-1.6. The material in each such sealed bottle shall constitute an individual test sample. These individual samples shall be separated into three identical sets of samples m such a way that each set has an individual test sample representing each container selected. One of these three sets shall be sent to the purchaser, another to the supplier and the third shall be used as a referee sample. B-3.2 Referee Sample The referee sample shall consist of the sample ( see B-3.1.2 ) and a set of individual samples composite ( see B-3.1.3 ) marked for this purpose and shall bear the seals of the purchaser and the supprier. These shall be kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier and shall be used in case of dispute between the two.

B-4. NUMBER

OF TESTS
), percent by mass,

B-4.1 Tests for determination of assay ( as Na&Oa shall be conducted on each of the individual samples.
B-4.2 Tests for all other characteristics ed on the composite sample. given in Table

1 shall be conduct-

11

IS : 12121 - 1987 B-5. B-5.1 CRITERIA For FOR CONFORMITY Samples - From the individual and range ( R ) shall be calculated,

assay, the average (2) Average ( X ) Range ( R )

Individual

test results of where

Sum of test results Number of tests between the maximum values of test results. and minimum

= difference

The lot shall be considered to havz passed the requirements of assay content if the value of the expression ( X - 0.6 R ) is greater than or equal to the minimum value specified in Table 1. B-5.2 For Composite Sample - The test results on the composite sample shall meet the requirements specified in Table 1. B-5.3 The lot shall be declared as conforming standard if B-5.1 and B-5.2 are satisfied. to the specification of this

12

