**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1448-75 (1968) : Methods of test for petroleum and its 
products, Part 75: Odour of liquefied petroleum gases [PCD 
1 : Methods of Measurement and Test for Petroleum, Petroleum 
Products and Lubricants] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^yj i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 1448 [P:75J- 1968 

j»| ( Reaffirmed 1980 ) 

!U Adopted: 22 Novtmbtr 1968 

Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2003) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR 
PETROLEUM AND ITS PRODUCTS 
[P:75] 
ODOUR OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES 

( Second Reprint MARCH 1985 ) 

UDC 665-725 : 543926 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This method prescribes the procedure for the evaluation of the odour of 
liquefied petroleum gases ( LPG ). 

2. OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 

2.1 The sample is diluted with air to 20 percent of its lower explosive limit 
• ( LEL ). The odour is assessed personally and recorded in terms of the 
degree of intensity. 

3. APPARATUS 

3.1 The apparatus ( see Fig. 1 ) shall consist of the component parts as 
described in 3.1.1 to 3.1.4. 

3*1.1 Air Purifying and Regulating System — consisting of a suitable com- 
pressed air supply connected to: 

a) Needle valve A; 

b) Bottle — 250-ml, containing 98 percent sulphuric acid; 

c) Empty bottle — 250-ml; 

d) Packed tower — containing activated charcoal which is covered by a 
mat of glass wool to prevent carry-over of fine dust; 

e) Water manometer — having a range of about 15 cm, connected to the 
air line by means of a T-piece; and 

f ) Orifice — with an internal diameter of 2 mm, so that a head of 10 cm 
on the manometer will be produced by a suitable flow of air. 

© Copyright 1969 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG, ' NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 1 January 1969 



AIR 



K> 




ORIFICE 



-96 PERCENT EMPTY 

SULPHURIC ACID BOTTLE 



AIR PURIFYING AND REGULATING SYSTEM 




GAS MIXING, SAMPLING 
AND ASSESSING SYSTEM 



STORAGE BOTTLE 



VI 



i 



VI 



Fig. I Flow Scheme for Odour Test of I.FG 



!S»!448{P:75]*!M8 

3.1.2 LPG Regulating System — consisting of: 

a) Storage container or bomb — containing the sample, 

b) Reducing valve — capable of giving an outlet pressure of 
s 035 kgf/cm, and 

c) Needle valve B. 

3.1.3 Gas Mixing, Sampling and Assessing System — consisting of: 

a) Mixing vessel — 1 000 ml, wide-neck, fitted with a rubber bung 
carrying two glass tubes extending slightly below the centre of the 
flask and inclined inwards to impart a swirling motion to the 
incoming gases; 

b) Exit tube — wide-bore ( S mm ), passing upwards through the bung 
and connected to a filter funnel 10 cm in diameter, which is used as 
a nose-piece; and 

c) Capillary tube — with a bore of 1 mm entering the side of the exit 
tube at a point just above the rubber bung. 

3.1*4 Explosimeter — with a graduated scale calibrated to read in percent- 
age of lower explosive limit. 

3.1.4.1 The explosimeter shall be calibrated before use as recommended 
by the manufacturer. 

Note — Wherever possible, all connections should be made by glass- to-glass joints, 
rubber connections being restricted to a minimum. 

4. TEST CONDITIONS 

4.1 Tests for the assessment of the odour level shall be carried out by three 
persons in a room free from pronounced odours. These persons shall spend 
at least 5 minutes in the open air before attempting an assessment and shall 
not take more than 3 breaths to determine the odour IcvcL 

5. PROCEDURE 

5.1 Place the apparatus under a well-ventilated hood and connect the 
compressed air supply. With the needle valve A fully open, adjust the flow 
untii a pressure head of about 15 cm is indicated on the manometer. 
Adjust the needle valve A to give a pressure head of 10 cm. Purge the 
apparatus with air for at least 5 minutes and, in any case, until no smell is 
detectable. 

5.2 Connect the LPG sample container through the reducing valve to the 
apparatus. Close the gas control needle valve B and open the container 
valve fully, 

5.3 Connect the explosimeter to the appropriate point and test to ensure that 
it reads zero when no LPG is entering the system. Testing continuously 



f$:14«[r:75]-196S 

with the explosimeter, bring the concentration of LPG in the mixed gas 
stream up to 20 percent of LEL by manipulation of the gas control needle 
valve C. Do not make any alteration to the air supply, \yhen stable 
conditions have been obtained, allow the apparatus to flush for 2 minutes. 

5.4 Then let 3 observers enter in turn anid inhale the mixture issuing from the 
filter funnel* Properly ventilate the hood between successive observations* 
Let the observers assess the odour levels with the help of the scale given 
below and record the average of the 3 observations : 

Level Description 

No detectable odour 

1 Very faint, but positively 

perceptible odour 

2 Easily detectable odour 

6. REPORTING 

6.1 Report to the nearest whole number the average odour level. 



Seema Of j sot Press, Oe\h\, India 



