**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 970 (1988) : Method for Determination of Colour Fastness 
Textile Materials to Degumming [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of 
Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 970 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DEGUMMING 

( Second Revision ) 

First Reprint FEBRUARY 1991 
UDC 6770I6-474: 535-685-4 



© Copyright 1989 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

<^' 1 March 1989 



IS : 970- 1M8 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS OF 

TEXTILE MATERIALS TO DEGUMMING 

( Second Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0(1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) 
was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 20 July 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 
0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 
and revised in 1980. It has again been revised 
to align it with ISO 105/X - 1984 Textiles— Tests 
for colour fastness X08 Colour fastness to de- 
gumming', issued by the International Organi- 
zation for Standardization (ISO) and also to 
incorporate changes in line with other similar 
standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of 
considerable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of the shade of the dyestuff used but also 
upon the nature of the fibre and the method of 
dyeing or printing employed; the same colouring 
matter, when used in dyeing or printing different 
fibres or when applied by different methods upon 
the same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for 
determining colour fastness of textile materials 
to different agencies likely to effect change in 
colour is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for deter- 
mination of colour fastness of textile materials 
of all kinds except loose fibres, to the action of 
soap solution such as those used in removing 
natural gum from raw silk. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of textile in contact with adjacent 
fabrics is treated with soap solution, rinsed and 
dried. The change in colour of the specimen 
and the staining of the adjacent fabrics are as- 
sessed with grey scales. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine the conformity of a 
lot of coloured textile material to a specification 
shall be selected so as to be representative of the 
lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance Avith the relevant 
material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fast- 
ness of the material in the lot shall be held to be 
representative of the lot. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Conical Flask — of 500 ml capacity with 
a water cooled 'finger' condenser fitting loosely 
in the neck. 



4.2 Two Adjacent Fabrics — 10 x 4 cm, one 

piece made of raw silk, the other made of the 
same kind of fibre as that of the textile to be 
tested or that predominating in the case of blends. 

4.3 Grey Scales for Evaluating Change in Colour 
and Staining 

5. REAGENTS 

5.1 Quality of Reagents — Unless specified other- 
wise, pure chemicals shall be employed in the 
tests and distilled water {see IS : 1070-1977*) 
shall be used where the use of water as a reagent 
is intended. 

Note — *Pure chemicals* shall mean chemicals that 
do not contain impurities which affect the t^t results. 

5.2 Soap Solution — The soap solution shall 
contain 7 g of soap per litre of distilled water. 
The soap shall conform to the following require- 
ments based on dry mass and shall npt have 
moisture regain more than 5 percent. The soap 
shall be free from optical brightening agents: 



Si 
No, 



Characteristic 



i) Free alkali, calculated as 
NagCOs, Max 



^Specification for water for general 
( second revision ). 



Requirement 

3g/kg 

laboratory use 



IS:970-1988 



4' 



SI 
No. 



Characteristic 



Requirement 
Ig/kg 



ii) Free alkali, calculated as 

NaOH, Max 
iii) Total fatty matter, Min 850 g/kg 

iv) Titre of mixed fatty acids WC 

prepared from the soap. Max 

v) Iodine value, Max 50 

5.3 Sodium Carbonate — Anhydrous (NagCOg ). 

6. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 

6.1 If the textile to be tested is a fabric, place a 
specimen of 10 x 4 cm between two adjacent 
fabrics of the same sizt {see 4.2) and sew along 
all four sides to form a composite specimen. 

6.2 If the textile to be tested is a yarn, knit or 
weave it into the fabric and treat it as prescribed 
in 6-1, or form a layer of parallel lengths of it 
between two pieces of adjacent fabrics ( see 4.2 ) ; 
the amount of yarn taken being approximately 
equal to half the combined mass of the adjacent 
fabrics. Sew along all four sides to hold the 
yam in place and to form a composite specimen. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Treat the composite specimen in the flask 
{see 4.1) for 10 minutes under reflux with a 
lightly boiling soap solution {see 5.2) at liquor 
ratio of 100 : 1. 

7.2 After 10 minutes, add 0-5 g/1 of anhydrous 
sodium carbonate to the boiling soap solution, 
and keep boiling lightly for 110 minutes ( 2 hours 
in all). 



7-3 Remove the composite specimen from the 
soap solution, rinse t\yice In cold distilled water 
and then for 10 minutes in cold running tap water. 
Squeeze it thoroughly, open out the composite 
specimen by breaking the stitching on all sides 
except one of the shorter sides and dry it by 
hanging it in air in shade at a temperature not 
exceeding 60°C, with three parts in contact only 
at the remaining line of stitching. 

7.4 Evaluate the change in colour of the treated 
test specimen by the method prescribed in IS : 
768-1982* and the degree of staining of two 
pieces of the adjacent fabrics by the method pres- 
cribed in IS :769- 1982t. 

Note 1 — Treated test specimens and pieces of adja- 
cent fabrics should have cooled after drying and should 
have regained their normal moisture content before 
evaluation. 

NoTX 2 — In case of doubt in assessment of the colour 
fastness ratings by a single observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall average 
rating should be reported. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 The report shall include the following infor- 
mation : 

a) Type of material, 

b) The numerical ratings for change in colour 
of the test specimen, and 

c) The numerical ratings for staining of the 
two adjacent fabrics. 



♦Method for evaluating change in colour {first revision ). 
-[■Method for evaluating staining {first revision). 



Printed at Dec Kay Printers, New Delhi, India 



