**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8706 (1978) : Safety features for alternating current 
ground power units for aircraft servicing [TED 14: Aircraft 
and Space Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



* 



Indian Standard 



IS ; 8706- 1978 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



SAFETY FEATURES FOR 

ALTERNATING CURRENT GROUND 

POWER UNITS FOR AIRCRAFT-SERVICING 



UDC 6Zl'3ll + 4"025 : 621-78 : Gi!9'13y 




© Copyright 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
\NAK lll£AVA\' r 9 BAHADUR AH AH 7. AVAIL MARG 
NEW DELHI 1 10(102 




April 1978 



IS i 8706 - 1978 



Indian Standard 



SAFETY FEATURES FOR 

ALTERNATING CURRENT GROUND 

POWER UNITS FOR AIRCRAFT-SERVICING 

Aircraft Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC 55 

Chairman Representing 

Gp Gapt P. Gopalak Aeronautical Development Establishment ( Ministry 

of Defence ), Bangalore 

Members 

Sqk Ldr G. B. Singh ( Alternate to 
Gp Gapt P. Gopalan ) 
Shri H. V. Badrinath Wireless Planning & Coordination Wing ( Ministry 

of Communications ) ( New Delhi 
Shri S. Balakrishna National Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bangalore 
ShriU. C. Banerjee Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi 

Shri M. S. Ekbote ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Bastt Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Wg Gdr H. R. Seetharam ( Alternate ) 
Wo Cdr H. S. Bhatia Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 
Shri H. C. Pande ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Dakshina Murthy Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 
Shri M. Dey Indian Cable Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. V. R. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Ghosh Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Shri Ram Kumar Gupta Delton Cable Industries Pvt Ltd, Delhi 

Shri P. Mukundan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R K. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development 

(DGTD), New Delhi 
Shri D. P. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Narasimhan Civil Aviation Department, New Delhi 

Dr Vepa Narayana Murthy Indian Space Research Organization, Trivandrum 
Shri A. Purshotam International Airports Authority of India, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. S. Jayaram ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1978 ' 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 8706 -1978 



( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members 
Dr S, C. Raisingbani 
Shbi N. K. Sengufta 



Representing 

Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 

National Committee on Science & Technology, 

New Delhi 
Air India, New Delhi 



SHBI M. N. SoMAStTNDARAM 

Shri A. I. Hyber ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretaries 

Shri Vijai 
Deputy Director (Elec tech), ISI 

Shri H. C. Duneja 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



IS : 8706 - 1978 

Indian Standard 

SAFETY FEATURES FOR 

ALTERNATING CURRENT GROUND 

POWER UNITS FOR AIRCRAFT-SERVICING 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 January 1978, after the draft finalized by the Aircraft 
Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 Alternating current ground power units intended for use ivith 
aircrafts, which are subject to civil or military airworthiness require- 
ments of India shall be subject to inspection and any directives issued 
from time to time by such statutory authorities. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the safety features for alternating current 
ground power units for aircraft-servicing and pre-flight preparation. 

2. SAFETY FEATURES 

2*0 General — The ground power unit shall be robust in construction 
and capable of withstanding mechanical shocks and hard wear in use. 
Materials/components used shall be capable of withstanding continuous 
exposure to the extremes of temperature, humidity, sun, snow, solar- 
radiation, noise and exhaust of aircraft, etc, to which the unit is likely to 
be subjected in the course of its service and operation. Components of 
the unit shall meet the dimensional and other requirements of the 
relevant Indian Standards. All contacts in the unit shall be detachable 
and capable of being replaced easily. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 8706 - 1978 

2.1 Phase Sequence — Clear indications of phase sequence ( in the 
case of multiphase supply ) as given in IS : 7854-1975* shall be 
permanently marked on the ground supply sockets and plugs, adjacent 
to the terminals. The markings shall be recessed. 

2.2 Power/Voltage — The ground supply unit shall have adequate 
power rating for all essential requirements for aircraft-servicing and 
pre-flight preparation. 

2.3 Voltage Control — The ground power units shall be capable of 
working continuously to develop the rated voltage within standard 
tolerance permissible for aircraft busbars, under all environmental 
conditions mentioned in 2.0. The voltage of the aircraft attachment 
terminals at the end of voltage servicing loads shall be maintained 
within a value of ± 2*5 percent of the nominal value. 

2.4 Frequency Control — The frequency shall be maintained between 
380 and 420 Hz. 

2.5 Parallel Operation — The ground supply generator, where 
necessary shall be capable of being paralleled with the main aircraft 
generating system to enable the engines to be started and the aircraft 
generators to come on line without any break in the continuity of supply. 

2.6 Overvoltage Protection — A protective device shall be incorpo- 
rated in the unit to automatically cut-off the main supply if an 
overvoltage exceeding 115 percent of the normal busbar maximum 
voltage occurs at any time. There shall also be no fortuitous operation 
of the device at voltages below this figure. 

2.7 Under Voltage Protection — Means shall be provided to prevent 
inadvertant closure of the main switch until the ground generator voltage 
has attained at least 90 percent of the minimum permissible busbar 
voltage. 

"2.8 Reverse Current Protection — Means shall be provided to 
safeguard against the flow of reverse current from the aircraft to the 
unit and there shall be no possibility of the generator motoring the 
prime-mover under any circumstances or of the ground supply generator 
being re-energized by reversed current or excess voltage. 

2.9 Emergency Safety Trip — The ground power unit shall be 
provided with a prominently located tripping device (coloured red for 
easy identification and within easy reach ) to enable the operator to 
instantaneously switch-off the main supply in the event of an emergency. 

^Specification for voltages and frequency for aircraft electrical systems. 



IS t 8706 - 1978 

The main switch and tripping device shall be designed in such a manner 
that an operator cannot inadvertantly override the safety features. 

2.10 Anti-arcing Protection — Means shall be provided to ensure that 
the main supply switch cannot be closed until the connection of the 
ground supply unit to the aircraft has been made and preferably that, 
upon removal, the switch shall open before the main contacts are 
disconnected. 

2.11 Panel Indication — Suitable instruments like voltmeters, 
ammeters, frequency meters, synchroscope, etc, of first grade accuracy 
shall be provided on the panel of the ground power unit. It shall be 
ensured that their readings are clearly visible at all times of the day and 
night ( for example, through provision of suitable panel-lighting lamps ). 
A flashing light at the top shall indicate whenever the unit is f ON\ Two 
parking lights one each at the front and rear of the unit shall also be 
provided. 

2.12 Earthing — The chassis of the ground power unit shall be 
effectively grounded through suitable means, for example, through one 
or more non-ferrous earthing chains. 

2.13 Ground Supply Socket — The ground power unit sockets for 
aircraft plugs shall comply with IS : 7915-1976*. 

2.13.1 They shall be robust in construction and capable of with- 
standing heavy mechanical shocks and hard wear and tear in use. The 
materials shall be resistant to the action of aviation fuels, lubricating 
oils, hydraulic fluids, cleaning fluids, humidity, ice, sun, snow, solar- 
radiation, etc. 

2.13.2 The manufacturer shall declare the maximum and minimum 
temperatures which the sockets can withstand without damage or 
deterioration of the seal. This range shall not be less than —20° to + 90°. 

2.14 Fire Prevention — All units using internal combustion engines 
shall incorporate an efficient spark arrester in the engine exhaust system. 
All ground supply units shall be provided with a fire-extinguisher 
adequate to deal with any fire supported by any breakage in the fuel 
pipe line of the unit. 



♦Dimensions for connections for aircraft ground electrical supplies. 



IS: 8706 -1978 

3. DATA 

3.1 The following data shall be clearly displayed on the unit: 

a) Terminal voltage or voltages and frequency, 

b) Continuous rating of the unit, 

c) Temperature range in which the unit can be safely operated 
continuously, 

d) Permissible one minute peak-output in amperes and volts, 

e) -Reference to this Indian Standard, and 

f) Safety precautions. 



