( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard

ENVIRONMENTAL LABELS AND DECLARATIONS-- SELF-DECLARED ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS (TYPE II ENVIRONMENTAL LABELLING)

ICS

13.020.50

@ BIS 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

December

2003

Price Group

9

Environmental

Management

Sectional Committee,

CHD 34

NATION-AL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with 1S0 14021 :1999 `Environmental labels and declarations -- Self-declared environmental claims (Type II environmental Iabeiling' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Environmental Management Sectional Committee and approval of the Chemical Division Council. The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without

deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is A.-.. .- +,. 6LA $-11 -..,:--LU LIIG IUIIUVVIIILJ. particularly UldWll a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appears referring to this standard, they should

b)

Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is to use a point (.) as the-decimal marker.

CROSS REFERENCES In this adopted standard reference appear to certain international Standards for some of which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

ISO 7000 Graphical symbols for use on equipment-- Index and synopsis

No IS exist

ISO 14020:1998 Environmental labels and declarations--General principles

lS/lSO 14020:1998 Environmental labels and declarations-- General principles

Identical

1S/1S0

14021

: 1999

Introduction
The proliferation of environmental claims has created a need for environmental
that consideration Iabelling standards which require be given to all relevant aspects of the life cycle of the product when such claims are developed.

Self-declared environmental claims may be made by manufacturers, importers, distributors, retailers or anyone else likely to benefit from such claims. Environmental claims made in regard to products may take the form of statements, symbols or graphics on product or package labels, or in product literature, technical bulletins, advertising, publicity, telemarketing, as well as digital or electronic media, such as the Internet. In self-declared environmental claims, the assurance of reliability is essential. It is important that verification is properly conducted to avoid negative market effects such as trade barriers or unfair competition, which can arise from unreliable and deceptive environmental claims. The evaluation methodology used by those who make environmental claims should be clear, transparent, scientifically sound and documented so that those who purchase or may potentially purchase products can be assured of the validity of the claims

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

Indian

Standard

ENVIRONMENTAL LABELS AND DECLARATIONS SELF-DECLARED ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS (TYPE II ENVIRONMENTAL LABELLING)
1 Scope

--

This International Standard specifies requirements for self-declared environmental claims, including statements, symbols and graphics, regarding products. It further describes selected terms commonly used in environmental claims and gives qualifications for their use. This International Standard also describes a general evaluation and verification methodology for self-declared environmental claims and specific evaluation and verification methods for the selected claims in tfis standard. This International Standard does not preclude, override, or in any way change, information, claims or Iabelling, or any other applicable legal requirements. legally required environmental

2 Normative

references

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. For dated references, subsequent amendments to, or revisions of, any of these publications do not apply. However, parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. For undated references, the latest edition of the normative document referred to applies. Members of ISO and IEC maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. ISO 7000, Graphical symbols for use on equipment --- Index and synopsis. ISO 14020:1998, Environmental labels and declarations -- General principles.

3 Terms and definitions
For the purposes of this International Standard, the following terms and definitions apply. 3.1 General terms

3.1.1 coproduct any two or more products from the same unit process [ISO 14041:1 998] 3.1.2 environmental aspect element of an organization's

activities or products that can interact with the environment

3.1.3 environmental claim a comPonent statement, symbol or graphic that indicates an environmental aspe,ct of a product

or packaging

NOTE An environmental claim may be made on product or packaging labels, through product literature, technical bulletins, advertising, publicity, telemarketing, as well as through digital or electronic media such as the Internet.

1

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

3.1.4 environmental claim verification confirmation of the validity of an environmental assurance of data reliability 3.1.5 environmental impact any change to the environment, activities or products 3.1.6 explanatory statement any explanation which purchaser, potential

claim using specific

predetermined

criteria and procedures

with

whether

adverse or beneficial,

wholly or partially resulting from an organization's

is needed

or given so that an environmental

claim

can be properly

understood

by a

purchaser or user of the product

3.1.7 functional unit quantified -performance [1s01 4040:1 997]

of a product system for use as a reference unit in a life cycle assessment

study

3.1.8 life cycle consecutive and interlinked resources to final disposal [1s01 4040:1 997]

stages of a product

system,

from raw material

acquisition

or generation

of natural

3.1.9 material identification words, numbers or symbols used to designate composition of components of a product or packaging NOTE 1 A material identification symbol is not considered to be an environmental claim.

NOTE 2 References [4] through [7] in the Bibliography give examples of International Standards, national standards and industry publications dealing with material identification symbols. 3.1.10 -packaging material that is used to protect or contain a product during transportation,

storage, marketing or use

NOTE For the purposes of this International Standard, the term "packaging" also includes any item that is physically attached to, or included with, a product or its container for the purpose of marketing the product or communicating information about the product. 3.1.11 product any goods or service 3.1.12 qualified environmental claim environmental claim which is accompanied

by an explanatory

statement that describes the limits of the claim

3.1.13 self-declared environmental claim environmental claim that is made, without independent third-party distributors, retailers or anyone else likely to benefit from such a claim

certification,

by manufacturers,

importers,

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

3.1.14 upgradability characteristic of a product that allows its modules or parts to be separately repiace the entire product 3.1.15 waste anything

upgraded

or replaced without having to

for which

the generator

or holder

has nc further

use and which

is discarded

or is released -to the

environment 3.2 Selected terms commonly used in self-declared environmental claims claim, are given in

Requirements clause 7.

for the usage of the terms listed below, in the context of making an environmental

Compostable Degradable Designed Extended Recovered Recyclable Recycled content material material for disassembly life product energy

7.2.1 7.3.1 7.4.1 7.5.1 7.6.1 7.7.1 7.8.1.1 a) 7.8.1.1 a) 1) 7.8.l.l.a) 7.8.1.1 b) material 7.8.1.1 7.9.1 7.10.1 7.11.1 7.12.1.1 7.12.1.2 7.13.1
C)

Pre-consumer Post-consumer Recycled Recovered Reduced Reduced Reduced Reusable Refillable Waste reduction

2)

material [reclaimed] energy resource

consumption use

water consumption

4 Objective

of self-declared

environmental

claims

The overall goal of environmental labels and declarations is, through communication of verifiable, accurate information, that is not misleading, on environmental aspects of products, to encourage demand for and supply of those products that cause less stress on the environment, thereby stimulating the potential for market-driven continual environmental improvement. The objective of this International anticipated that benefits will be: a) b) Standard is to harmonize the use of self-declared environmental claims. It is

accurate and verifiable environmental increased products; prevention

claims that are rrot misleading; environmental improvements in production, processes and

potential for market forces to stimulate

c) d)

or minimization

of unwarranted confusion;

claims;

reduction in marketplace

3

1S/1S0

14021

: 1999

e) f)

facilitation increased choices.

of international opportunity

trade; and potential purchasers and users of the product to make more informed

for purchasers,

5 Requirements
5.1 General

applying

to all self-declared

environmental

claims

The requirements set out in clause 5 shall apply to any self-declared environmental claim made by a claimant, whether it is one of the selected claims referred to in clause 7 or any other environmental claim. 5.2 Relationship to ISO 14020

In addition to the requirements of this International Standard, the principles set out in ISO 14020 shall apply. Where this International Standard provides more specific requirements than ISO 14020, such specific requirements shall be followed. 5.3 Vague or non-specific claims

An environmental claim that is vague or non-specific or which broadly implies that a product is environmentally beneficial or environmentally benign shall not be used. Therefore, environmental claims such as "environmentally safe", "environmentally friendly", "earth friendly", "non-polluting", "green", "nature's friend" and "ozone friendly" shall not be used. NOTE 5.4
This list is illustrative and not exhaustive

Claims

of "... free"

An environmental claim of "... free" shall only be made when the level of the specified substance is no more than that which would be found as an acknowledged trace contaminant or background level.
NOTE Attention is drawn to the requirements of 5.7 k) and 5.7 p).

5.5

Claims

of sustainability

The concepts involved in sustainability are highly complex and still under study. At this time there are no definitive methods for measuring sustainability or confirming its accomplishment. Therefore, no claim of achieving sustainability shall be made. 5.6 Use of explanatory statements

Self-declared environmental claims shall be accompanied by an explanatory statement if the claim alone is likely to result in misunderstanding. An environmental claim shall only be made without an explanatory statement if it is valid in all foreseeable circumstances with no qualifications. 5.7

Specific

requirements
in 5.7. Such claims,

Self-declared environmental claims and any explanatory statements are subject to all requirements including any explanatory statement: a) b) c) d) shall be accurate and not misleading; shall be substantiated and verified; context or setting;

shall be relevant to that particular product, and used only in an appropriate

shall be presented in a manner that clearly indicates whether the claim applies to the complete.product, to a product component or packaging, or to an element of a service;

or only

4

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

e)
f) 9) h)

shall be specific aslo the environmental

aspect or environmental

improvement

which is claimed; change;

shall not be restated using different terminology shall be unlikely to result in misinterpretation;

to imply multiple benefits for a single environmental

shall be true not only in relation to the final product but also shall take into consideration all relevant aspects of the product life cycle in order to identify the potential for one impact to be increased in the process of decreasing

anothe~
NOTE This does not necessarily mean that a life cycle assessment should be undertaken.

0

shall be presented in a manner which does not imply independent third-party organization when it is nat;

that the product

is endorsed

or certified

by an

j)

shall not, either directly or by implication, suggest an environmental improvement which does not exist, nor shall it exaggerate the environmental aspect of the product to which the claim relates; shall not be made if, despite the claim being literally true, it is likely to be misinterpreted misleading through the omission of relevant facts; shall only relate to an environmental product; aspect that either exists or is likely to be realized, by purchasers or is

k)

1)

during the life of the

m)

shall be presented in a manner that clearly indicates that the environmental claim and explanatory statement should be read together. The explanatory statement shall be of reasonable size and in reasonable proximity to the environmental claim it accompanies; shall, if a comparative assertion of environmental clear the basis for the comparison. In particular, recently any improvement was made; superiority or improvement is made, be specific and make the environmental claim shall be relevant in terms of how

n)

o)

shall, if based on a pre-existing but previously undisclosed aspect, be presented in a manner that does not lead purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the product to believe that the claim is based on a recent product or process modification; shall not be made where they are based on the absence associated with the product category; of ingredients or features which have never been

P)

q)

shall be reassessed and updated as necessary to reflect changes circumstances that could alter the accuracy of the claim; and shall be relevant to the area where the corresponding environmental

in technology,

competitive

products or other

r)

impact occurs.

NOTE A process-related claim can be made anywhere, so long -as the environmental impact occurs in the area where the production process is located. The size of the area will be determined by the nature of the impact. 5.8 5.8.1 Use

of symbols to make environmental claims
environmental claim is made, the use of a symbol is optional. and capable of being

When a self-declared

5.8.2 Symbols used to make an environmental claim should be simple, easily reproducible positioned and sized to suit the product to which the symbol is likely to be applied. 5.8.3 Symbols used for one type of environmental including symbols for other environmental claims. claim should be' easily distinguishable

from other symbols,

5.8.4 A symbol used to express implementation of an environmental management system shall not be used in such a way that it could be misunderstood as an environmental symbol indicating the environmental aspects of a product.

5

1S/1S0

14021

: 1999

5.8.5 Natural objects shall be used only if there is a direct and verifiable ~laimed.

link between the object and the benefit

NOTE There are many advantages to be gained by the use of the same symbol to denote the same environmental aspect on competing products. AS new symbols are developed, claimants are encouraged to adopt a consistent approach and not to discourage the use of the same symbol to denote the same environmental aspect by others. In selection of a new symbol, due consideration should be given so as not to violate the intellectual property rights (e.g. registered designs) of third parties.

5.9 5.3.1
such

Other information

-or claims symbols to communicate information

Words, numbers or symbols may be used in addition to environmental
as material identification, disposal instructions or hazard warnings.

5.9.2 Words, numbers or symbols used for non-environmental claim purposes shall not be used in a manner that IS likely to be misunderstood as making an environmental claim. 5.9.3 An environmental symbol as described company or corporate position. 5.10 5.10.1 in 5.10 shall not be modified to relate the symbol to a specific brand,

Specific
General

symbols

The selection of specific symbols for this International Standard is based on their existing wide use or recognition. This should not be taken to imply that environmental claims represented by these symbols are superior to other environmental claims. Only the Mobius loop is included at present. Other.specific symbols which are not provided for in this International Standard will be introduced at an appropriate time. "5.1O.2 The Mobius loop 5.10.2.1 The Mobius loop is a symbol in the shape of three twisted chasing arrows forming a triangle. Whenever it is used to make an environmental claim, the design shall meet the graphical requirements for ISO 7000, Symbol No. 1135. There should, however, be enough contrast so that the symbol is clear and distinguishable. Some examples of the form of the Mobius loop are provided in Figure 1. Clause 7 provides detailed requirements concerning the use and applicability of the Mobius loop. 5.10.2.2 The Mobius loop may apply to the product or the packaging. If there is any potential for confusion about whether it applies to the product or the packaging, the symbol shall be accompanied by an explanatory statement. 5.}0.2.3 If a symbol is used for claims of recyclable or recycled content, then that symbol shall be the Mobius loop subject to the requirements of 7.7 and 7.8. 5.10.2.4 7.8. The Mobius loop shall only be used for claims of recycled content and recyclable, as described in 7.7 and

Figure 1 -- Examples

of the Mobius loop

6

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

6 Evaluation
6.1
The

and claim verification
of the claimant
for-evaluation

requirements

Responsibilities
claimant shall

be responsible

and provision of data necessary

for the verification

of self-declared

environmental

claims.

6.2

Reliability

of evaluation

methodology
measures

6.2.1 Prior to making the claim, evaluation results necessary to verify the claim.

shall be implemented

to achieve

reliable and

reproducible

6.2.2 The evaluation shali be fully documented and the documentation retained by the.claimant for the purpose of the information disclosure referred to in 6.5.2. This sha~l be for the period that the product is on the market, and for a reasonable period thereafter, taking into account the l~fe of the product.
NOTE For guidance on reproducibility and reliability, see references [8] through [11] in the Bibliography.

6.3 6.3.1
a) .b)

Evaluation Comparative

of comparative

claims against one or more of the following:

claims shall be evaluated own prior process; own prior product; process; or product.

an organization's
an organization's

c) d)

another organization's another organization's

The comparison

shall only be made: standard or recognized test method (as setout supplied in 6.4); and by the same or another producer, currently or

-- --

using a published

against comparable products serving similar functions, recently in the same marketplace. Comparative quantified claims involving the environmental

6.3.2
a)

aspects of the product's life cycle shall be:

and calculated

using the same units of measurement; unit; and time interval, typically twelve months.

b) c) 6.3.3 a)

based on the same functional calculated over an appropriate

Comparative percentages,
NOTE

claims may be based on: in which case they should be expressed
example is provided

as absolute differences;
measurements

or

The following

to clarify how relative

could be handled:

For a change from 10 % to 15 Y. recycled content, the absolute difference is 15 `X. � 10 YO = 57., in which case, a claim of an additional 5 Y. recycled content could be made; however, a claim of 50 % increase, while accurate, could be misleading.

b)

absolute NOTE

(measured) The following

values, example

in which is provided

case

they should

be expressed

as relative

improvements.

to clarify how absolute

measurements

could be handled:

1S/1S0

14.021

:1999

For an improvement

that results in a product

lasting

1-5 months

instead

Of

the previous 10 months, the relative difference

is
15 months � 10 months 10 months in which case, a claim of 50 % longer life could be made. If one of the values is nil, the absolute difference strould be ~, O. = so ~0

used. 6.3.4 As there is a high risk of confusing an absolute claim with a relative claim, the claim should be worded to be clear that it is a claim of absolute difference and not a claim of relative difference. 6.3.5 6.4 Improvements Selection related to a product and its packaging shall be stated separately and shall not be aggregated.

of methods

Methods for evaluation and claim verification shall follow, in order of preference, International Standards, recognized standards that have international acceptability (these may include regional or national standards) or industry or trade methods which have been subjected to peer review. If there are no methods already in existence, a claimant may develop a method, provided it meets the other requirements of clause 6 and is available for peer review.
NOTE selected Some typical International and national standards, as well as some claims are listed in the Bibliography (references [12] through [66]). specific industry methods relevant to some

6.5

Access

to information

6.5.1 A self-declared environmental claim shall only be considered verifiable if such verification can be made without access to confidential business information. Claims shall not be made if they can only be verified by confidential business information. 6.5.2 The claimant may voluntarily release to the public the information necessary for verification of an environmental claim. If not, the information necessary to verify the claim shall be disclosed, upon request, at a reasonable cost (to cover administration), time and place, to any person seeking to verify the claim. 6.5.3 The minimum following: a) b) c) d) e) f) identification documenta~ information required to be documented and retained in accordance with 6.2 shall include the

of the standard or method used; evidence, if verification of the claim cannot be made by testing the finished product;

test results, where these are necessary for claim verification; if testing is carried out by an independent party, the name and address of the independent of 5.7 h) and 5.7 r); party;

evidence that the claim conforms with the requirements

if the self-declared environmental claim involves a comparison with other products, then a description of the method used, the results of any tests of those products, and-any assumptions made shall be clearly stated; NOTE Further requirements for comparative claims are set out in 5.7.

9)

evidence that the claimant's evaluation gives assurance of the continuing accuracy of the self-declared environmental claim during the period over which the product is on the market, and for a reasonable period thereafter, taking into account the life of the product.

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

7 7.1

Specific
General

requirements

for selected

claims

7,1.1 Clause 7 provides interpretation and usage qualifications for selected terms commonly used in self-declared environmental claims. The onus on a claimant to follow the principles set out in this clause shall not be diminished by substituting hke terms. Clause 7 supplements, but does not replace, `the requirements in other clauses of this International Standard. 7.1.2 It is not intended to imply that the claims in clause 7 are superior to other environmental claims. The principal reason for their selection has been their current or potential wide use, not their environmental importance. These claims can be applied, when relevant, to the stages of manufacturing and distribution, product usage and product recovery and disposal. NOTE
The terms dealt with in clause 7 have been arranged 7.2 Compostable 7.3 Degradable 7.4 Designed 7.5 Extended 7.6 Recovered for disassembly life product energy in alphabetical order (in English), as set out below:

7.7 Recyclable 7.8 Recycled content energy consumption resource use

7.9 Reduced 7.10 Reduced 7.11 Reduced 7,12 Reusable

water consumption and refillable

7.13 Waste reduction

7.2 7.2.1

Co!npostable
Usage of term component that -allows it to biodegrade, generating a

A characteristic of a product, packaging or associated relatively homogeneous and stable humus-like substance. 7.2.2 Qualifications

7.2.2.1 A compostability packaging that: a) b) negatively

claim shall not be made for a product

or packaging

or a component

of a product

or

affects the overall value of the compost as a soil amendment; in concentrations harmful to the environment at any point during decomposition or

releases substances subsequent use; or significantly composted.

c)

reduces the rate of comporting

in those systems in which the product or component

is likely to be

7.2.2.2 a)

All compostability

claims shall be clearly qualified as follows.

The claim shall specify whether the type of comporting facility or process in which the identified component is compostable is a home-comporting facility .or an on-site or central comporting facility, unless the product is compostable in all types of comporting facilities, in which case no qualification is necessary.

9

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

b)

If the entire
If the user provided.

product is not compostable, the claim of the product is required to separate

shall identify specifically which components are compostable. those components, clear direction on how to do so shall be

c)

If problems or risks are associated with introducing the product into either a home-comporting facility or on-site or central comporting facilities, then the claim shall identify which of these types of facility are capable of comporting the product. If a compostability claim refers to home comporting, the following additional requirements shall apply.

7.2.2.3 a)

If significant preparation or product modification is necessaty to ensur- satisfactory compostability, or if significant additional treatment of the finished compost is required as a direct result of the comporting of the product or component, the compostability claim shall not be made. If home comporting of the product or component would require materials, equipment (other than a comporting unit) or specialized skills that are unlikely to be available in most households, the claim of home compostability shall not be made. claim is dependent on processes or facilities other than home composers, then the

b)

7.2.2.4 If a compostability following shall apply. a)

Such facilities for the purpose of comporting the product or packaging shall be conveniently available to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers and users where the packaging or product is sold. If such facilities are not conveniently available to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the product, explanatory statements shall be used which are adequate to convey the limited availability of these facilities. General qualifications, such as "Compostable of facilities are not adequate. Evaluation methodology in accordance with clause 6. where facilities exist", which do not convey the limited availability

b)

c)

7.2.3

Evaluation 7.3 7.3.1

shall be undertaken

Degradable
Usage of term that, with respect to specific conditions, allows it to break down to a

A characteristic of a product or packaging specific extent within a given time.
NOTE mechanical

Degradability is a function of susceptibility to changes in chemical properties lead to the disintegration of the product or material.

structure.

Consequent

changes

in physical

and

7.3.2

Qualifications qualifications refer to all types of degradation, including for instance biodegradation and

7.3.2.1 The following photodegradation. a)

Claims of degradability shall only be made in relation to a specific test method that includes maximum level of degradation and test duration, and shall be relevant to the circumstances in which the product or packaging is likely to be disposed. A degradable claim shall not be made for a product -or packaging, or component releases substances in concentrations harmful to the environment. Evaluation methodology in accordance with clause 6. of a product or packaging, that

b)

7.3.3

Evaluation

shall be undertaken

10

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

7.4 7.4.1

Designed

for disassembly

Usage of term
of a product's design and parts that enables the product recycled, to be taken recovered apart

A characteristic

at the end of its useful life in such a
or, in some other way, diverted

way that allows components from the waste stream. 7.4.2 Qualifications

to be reused,

for energy

7.4.2.1 A claim of designed for disassembly components or parts to be reused, recycled, stream.

shall be accompanied by an explanatory statement that specifies the recovered for energy or, in some other way, diverted from the waste

7.4.2.2 If a claim of designed for disassembly accompanies another relevant requirements applying to the other claim shall also be followed.

claim, such as a claim of recyclable,

the

7.4.2.3 All claims that a product is designed for disassembly shall specify whether the disassembly by the purchaser or user, or whether it is to be returned for disassembly by specialists. 7.4.2.4
a)

is to be done

If a special process is required to disassemble

the product, then the following shall apply. proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers

Collection or drop-off facilities shall be available to a reasonable and users of the product where the product is sold.

b)

If such facilities are not conveniently available to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the product, explanatory statements shall be used which are adequate to convey the limited availability of these facilities. General qualifications, such as "Can be disassembled availability of facilities are not adequate. where facilities exist", which do not convey the limited

c)

7.4.2.5 Products designed for disassembly by the purchaser, potential purchaser or user of the product shall have accompanying information on disassembly tools and methods used. 7.4.2.6 A claim that a product is designed to be disassembled product shall only be made if: a) b) specialized tools or expertise are not required; and on the method of disassembly and reuse, recycling, recovery or disposal of the parts is by the purchaser, potential purchaser or user of the

clear information provided.

NOTE

Further guidance

on provision

of consumer

information

is given in lSO/lEC Guide 14.

7.4.2.7 Products designed for disassembly by specialists facilities needed to carry out the disassembly. 7.4.3 Evaluation
shall

shall have accompanying

information

on equipment

and

methodology in accordance with clause 6.

Evaluation

be undertaken

7.5 7.5.1

Extended

life product

Usage of term feature, that

A product designed to provide prolonged use, based on either improved durability or an upgradability results in reduced resource use or reduced waste.

11

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

7.5.2

Qualifications life shall be qualified. As extended life claims are comparative claims, the

7.+5.2.1 All claims regarding extended requirements of 6.3 shall be met.

7.5.2.2 Where a claim of extended life is based upon an upgradability feature, specific information achieve the required upgrade shall be provided. An infrastructure to enable upgrading shall be available.

on how to

7.5.2.3 Extended life claims that are based on the improved durability of the product shall state the extended life period or the percentage improvement and the measured value (e.g. repetitive number of operations before breakage) or reasoning that supports the claim. 7.5.3 Evaluation methodology life period shall be

Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with clause 6. In addition, the average extended measured in accordance with appropriate standards and statistical methods, as outlined in 6.4,

7.6
7.6.1

Recovered

energy,

Usage of term of a product that has been made using energy recovered from material of as waste but instead has been collected through managed processes. or energy that would have

A characteristic been disposed NOTE
7.6.2

In this context, the product can be the recovered energy itself. Qualifications energy, the energy used

[n order for a claim to be made that a product has been manufactured using recovered shall meet the following qualifications and shall be evaluated in accordance with 7.6.3. a)

Energy recovery from waste materials refers to the collection and conversion of waste material into useful energy. This includes any collection and conversion of waste materials from industry, home, business or public service facilities. Before a claim of recovered energy can be made, the claimant environment resulting from this activity are managed and controlled. shall ensure that adverse effects on the

b)

c) 7.6.3

The type and quantity of waste that has been used for recovery shall be stated. Evaluation-methodology shall be undertaken in accordance using the following method: with clause 6. In addition, evaluation of recovered energy shall be

Evaluation calculated a) b)

The claim shall only be made if R � E >0. A claim of net recovered energy shall be expressed as follows: (R -E) (R- E)+ F'x'OO

Net recovered energy (%) =

where P R E is the amount of energy from primary sources used in the manufacturing is the amount of energy resulting from the energy recovery process; is the amount of energy from primary sources used in the energy recovery the recovered energy. process to recover or extract process to produce the product

12

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

7.7 7.7.1

Recyclable Usage of term that can be diverted from the waste stream processed and returned to use in the form of

A characteristic of a product, packaging or associated component through available processes and programmed and can be collected, raw materials or products.

Material recycling is only one of a number of waste-prevention strategies. The choice of a particular strategy will NOTE depend on circumstances and account should be taken of differing regional impacts in making this choice. 7.7.2 Qualifications

If collection or drop-off facilities for the purpose of recycling the product or packaging are not conveniently available to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the product in the area where the product is sold, then the following shall apply. a) b) c) A qualified claim of recyclability shall be used. convey the limited availabdity of collection facilities. where facilities exist", which do not convey the limited

The qualified claim shall adequately

Generalized qualifications, such as "Recyclable availability of collection facilities are not adequate. Use of a symbol

7.7.3 7.7.3.1 7.7.3.2 7.7.3.3 claim. 7.7.3.4 7.7.3.5 7.7.4

When a recyclable claim is made, the use of a symbol is optional. If a symbol is used for a recyclable claim, it shall be the Mobius loop, as described The Mobius loop, as described in 5.10.2, without a percentage in 5.10.2.

value shall be taken to be a recyclable

The use of an explanatory

statement

is optiona~,

subject

to 5.6.

An explanatory Evaluation

statement

may include material identification.

methodology in accordance with clause 6. The information referred to in 6.5 shall include

Evaluation shal! be undertaken evidence of the following.
a) The collection,

conveniently product. b) c) 7.8 7.8.1 7.8.1.1 a)

sorting and delivery systems to transfer the materials from the source to the recycling facility are available to a reasonable proportion of the purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the

The recycling facilities are available to accommodate

the collected materials.

The product for which the claim is made is being collected and recycled.

Recycled

content

Usage of terms Recycled content and its associated content terms shall be interpreted as follows:

Recycled

Proportion, by mass, of rec cled material in a product or packaging. Only pre-consumer and post-consumer materials shall be consider J d as recycled content, consistent with the following usage of terms.

13

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

1) Pre-consumer

material

Material diverted from the waste stream during a manufacturing process. Excluded is reutilization of materials such as rework, regrind or scrap generated in a process and capable of being reclaimed within the same process that generated it. 2) Post-consumer material

Material generated by households or by commercial, industrial and institutional facilities in their role as end-users of the product which can no longer be used for its intended purpose. This includes returns of material from the distribution chain. b) Recycled material process

Material that has been reprocessed from recovered [reclaimed] material by means of a manufacturing and made into a final product or into a component for incorporation into a product. c) Recovered [reclaimed] material

Material that would have otherwise been disposed of as waste or used for energy recove~, but has instead been collected and recovered [reclaimed] as a material input, in lieu of new primary material, for a recycling or a manufacturing process.
NOTE 1 A diagrammatic representation of a material recycling system is given in annex A.

For the purposes of this International Standard, the expressions "recovered material" and "reclaimed material" NOTE 2 are treated as synonyms; however, it is recognized that, in some countries, one or other of these expressions may be preferred for this application. 7.8.1.2 Material recycling is only one of a number of waste-prevention strategies. The choice of a particular strategy will depend on circumstances and account should be taken of differing regional impacts in making this choice. Consideration shall be given to the fact that a higher percentage of recycled content does not necessarily should be' used with imply a lower environmental impact. Because of this, the recycled content claim, in particular, discretion.
NOTE 7.8.2 Attention is drawn to the requirements of 5.7 h).

Qualifications Where a claim of recycled content is made, the percentage of recycled material shall be stated. shall be separately stated -and shall not be

7.8.2.1

.7.8.2.2 The percentage aggregated. 7.8.3 7.8.3.1 Use of a symbol

recycled content for products and packaging

When a claim of recycled content is made, the use of a symbol is optional.

7.8.3.2 If a symbol is used for a recycled content claim, it shall be the Mobius loop accompanied by a percentage value stated as "X O/.", where X is the recycled content expressed as a whole number calculated in accordance with 7.8.4. The percentage value shall be located either inside the `Mobius loop or outside and immediately adjacent to the Mobius loop. Examples of acceptable locations of the percentage value are shown in Figure 2. The Mobius loop with a percentage value, stated as "X 0/0", shall be taken to be a recycled content cla!m. 7.8.3.3 If the percentage or "greater than X O/O". 7.8.3.4 recycled content is variable, it may be expressed with statements such as "at least X %",

The use of an explanatory

statement

is optional, subject to 5.6.

14

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

7.8.3.5

Where a symbol is used it may be accompanied

by material identification.

Figure 2 -- Examples

of acceptable

locations of percentage value when using the Mobius loop to make claims about recycled content

7.8.4

Evaluation

methodology

7:8.4.1 Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with clause 6. In addition, recycled content shall be expressed quantitatively as a percentage, calculated as shown below. As there are no methods available for directly measuring recycled content in a product or packaging, the mass of material obtained from the recycling process, after accounting for losses and other diversions, shall be used.

x(%) = ; x 100
where X A P
NOTE

is the recycled content, expressed
is the mass of recycled

as a percentage;

material;

is the mass of product.
For further clarification on the calculation of recycled material, reference maybe made to annex A.

7.8.4.2 Verification of the source and quantity of the recycled purchasing documentation and other available records. 7.9 7.9.1 Reduced energy consumption

materials

may be carried out through

the use of

Usage of term in the amount of energy associated with the use of a product performing the function for which it was when compared with the energy used by other products performing an equivalent function.
Claims of reduced energy consumption are commonly expressed as energy-efficient, energy-conserving or energy-

Reduction conceived
NOTE saving.

7.9.2

Qualifications shall be qualified. -As reduced energy consumption is a

7.9.2.1 All claims regarding reduced energy consumption comparative clain~, the requirements of 6.3 shall be met.

7.9.2.2 Claims for reduced energy consumption shall be based on the reduction in energy consumption in the use of products and delivery of services. It shall not include reduction of energy in the processes used to manufacture the product.

15

1S/1S0

14021

: 1999

7.9.3

Evaluation

methodology

shall be undertaken in accordance with clause 6. in addition. reduced enermr consumption shall be in accordance with established standards and methods for each product, and ~h"e aVerage value should The selection of methods shali be in accordance with 6.4. be calculated by statistical processing.
measured

Evaluation

7.10 7.10.1

Reduced

resource

use

Usage of term energy or water used to produce or di&ibute a product or packaging or

in the amount of material, A reduction specified associated component.
NOTE Claims of reduced dealt with in 7.9 and 7.11. resource

use relatirrg to energy and water usage in the product

usage phase of the life cycle are

7.10.2 7.10.2.1 7.10.2.2

Qualifications
Resources include

energy and water resources in addition to raw materials. reduced resource use shall be qualified. use for products and packaging shall be separately stated and shall not be

All claims regarding

7.10.2.3 Reductions aggregated. 7.10.2.4 resource

in resource

Reduced resource use claims shall be expressed in terms of reduction use is a comparative claim, the requirements of 6.3 shall be met. resource use claims are made, the type of resource

percentage

(%), As reduced

7.10.2.5 If reduced statement.

shall be stated

in an explanatory

7.10.2.6 If an increase in consumption of other resources occurs as a result .of the claimed use, the increased resource and percentage shall be stated in an explanatory statement,

reduction of resource

7.10.2.7 When a resource reduction has been achieved, for an initial twelve-month period, a claim may be based on an estimated calculation of reduced resource based on the design or distribution of products or production process. 7.10.2.8 7.? 0.3
Evaluation consumed

A change in resource use shall be expressed separately for each resource. Evaluation
shall

methodology
in accordance with clause 6. In addition, except as allowed for in 7.10,2.7, the

be undertaken

per production unit shall be obtained by dividing the gross input of resources during a twelvemonth period by the gross production in the same twelve-month period. Reduced resource use rate percentage (r7 %) shall be obtained by the following formula.
resource

u(%)=

@Llocl [

where U I IV is the reduced resource use per production is the initial resource use, expressed unit, expressed as a percentage; resource per production resource per production unit; unit.

as consumed

is the new resource use, expressed as consumed

16

lS/iSfl

14021

:1999

7.11 7.11.1

Reduced

water

consumption

Usage of term in the consumption of water associated with the use of a product performing when compared with the amount of water used by other products performing
Claims of reduced water usage are commonly expressed as water-efficient,

Reduction conceived
NOTE

the function for which it was an equivalent function.
or water-saving,

water-conserving

7.112

Qualifications shall be quaiified. As reduced water consumption is a

7.11.2.1 All claims regarding water efficiency or reduction comparative claim, the requirements of 6.3 shall be met.

7.11 .2.2 Claims for reduced water consumption shall be based on the reduction in water consumption the product. It shall not include reduction of water in manufacturing processes of the product. 7.11.3 Evaluation methodology

in the use of

Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with clause 6. In addition, water consumption shall be measured in accordance with established standards and methods for each product, and the average value should be calculated by statistical processing. The selection of methods shall be in accordance with 6.4. 7.12 7.12.1 7.12.1.1 Reusable and refillable

Usage of terms Reusable within i% life cycle a

A characteristic of a product or packaging that has been conceived and designed to accomplish certain number of trips, rotations or uses for the same purpose for which it was conceived. 7.12.1.2 Refillable

A characteristic of a product or packaging that can be filled with the same or similar product more than once, in its original form and without additional processing except for specified requirements such as cleaning or washing. 7.12.2 Qualifications can

7.12.2.1 No product or packaging shall be claimed to be reusable or refillable unless the product or packaging be reused or refilled for its original purpose. 7.12.2.2 a) b) A claim that a product
or packaging is reusable or refillable shall be made only where:

a programme

exists for collecting the used product or packaging and reusing or refilling it; or

facilities or products exist that allow the purchaser to reuse or refill the product or package.

7.12.2.3 If programmed for collecting the used product or packaging, or facilities for the purpose of reusing or refilling it, are not conveniently available to a reasonable proportion of purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the product in the area where the product or packaging is sold, then the following shall apply. a) b) c) A qualified claim of reusability or refinability shall be used. The qualified claim shall adequately convey the limited availability of collection programmed or facilities.

Generalized qualifications, such as "Reusable/refillable where facilities exist", which do not convey the limited availability of collection programmed or facilities are not adequate.

17

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

7.12.3

Evaluation

methodology with clause 6. In addition, the information referred to in 6.5 shall

Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance include evidence of the following. a) b) c)

The product for which the claim is being made is being refilled or reused. That reuse or refilling facilities are available to accommodate the product for which the claim is being made available to a reasonable proportion of the

The facilities required to reuse or refill the product are conveniently purchasers, potential purchasers and users of the product.

7.13
7.13.1

Waste reduction
Usage of term (mass) of material entering the waste stream as a result of a change in the product,

Reduction in the quantity process or packaging.
NOTE Waste

may include discharges

to air and water as well as solid waste from manufacturing

or treatment

processes.

7.13.2

Qualifications shall be qualified. As waste reduction is a comparative claim, the

7.13.2.1 All claims regarding waste reduction requirements of 6.3 shall be met.

7.13.2.2 Waste reduction of products and packaging distribution, use and disposal stages. 7.13.2.3 reduction

may include reduction

in waste generated

in the production,

Reduced waste claims may include not only the reduction in mass through waste treatment processes.

in water content of solid waste but also the

7.13.2.4 Calculations of process waste reduction shall not include in-process rework, regrind or scrap materials generated within the process and capable process that generated it. 7.13.2.5 purpose, 7.13.3

re-utilization of materials. such as of being reused within the same

Waste generators who transfer wastes to other users that intend to utilize the waste for a constructive other than to put it into the waste stream, may make a claim of waste reduction. Evaluation methodology

Evaluation shall be undertaken in accordance with clause 6. In addition, reduced waste amount may be calculated from material balance sheets, as well as from the-actual measurement of waste.

.1 S/1S0

14021

:1999

Annex
(informative)

A

Simplified diagrammatic

representation

of a recycling system

vF
Energy generation

Other use or sale

0

Other use or sale

Primary material

(B)

T

G
`w
Recycled content of product (X%) = (A/P)

Manufacturing process

u

disposal

t)

Frnat product

(P) (P= A+B)

x 100

Some recovered (reclaimed) materials may go directly to a manufacturing process, which includes the recycling process, without having a separate operation called the "Recycling process", in the system. When this is done, coproducts and waste are still likely to be generated in that manufacturing process. These coproducts and waste shall be accounted for when determining the mass of recycled material to be used in the formula for calculating
recycled content.

NOTE This diagram represents a simplified example of a recycling system and is intended to provide information for clarity on recycled content calculations. For more complete examples refer to lSO/lR 14049, Erwiromnenta/ management -- Life eye/e assessment -- Examples for the application of 1S0 14041.

Figure A.1 -- Simplified

diagrammatic

representation

of a recycling

system

19

1S/1S0

14021

: 1999

Bibliography

[1] ISO 14040:1997,
[2]

Environmental management management

-- Life cycle assessment -- Life cycle assessment

--Principles --

and framework. definition and

ISO 14041:1998, Environmental inventory analysis.

Goal and scope

[3]

lSO/lEC Guide 14:1977. Product information for consumers.

Examples
flefe~ences identification.

of standards for material identification
[4] through [7] give examples of standards

symbols
and industry publications which deal with material

These are only examples and this is not intended to be an exhaustive

list.

[4] [5]

ISO 11 469:? 993, Plastics -- Generic identification IEC 61429:1995, Marking of secondary

and marking of plastics products. with the international recycling symbol ISO 7000-

cells and batteries

1135.
[6] Technical Bulletin No. PBI-24-I 988 Revision 2, October 1, 1990 Vo/untary Guidelines -- Plastic Bott/e Materia/ Code System: Me/d Modification Drawings, The Society of the Plastics Industry, Inc. (SPI). Technical Container Bulletin No. RPCD-1 3-1989 Revision 1, October 1. 1990 Vo/untarv Guidelines -- Riuid FYastic Material Code System: Mold Modification Drawings, The Society of the'Plastics Industry, l~c (SPI).

[7]

Quality assurance

of testing and claim verification

data

References [8] through [11 ] give examples of standards which can provide useful information and guidance regarding the collection of reliable data that can then be used for claim verification. These are only examples and this is not intended to be an exhaustive list. [8] [9] ISO 9004-1:1994, lSO/lEC Qua/ity management and qua/ity systems eiements -- Part 1: Guidelines. for the competence of calibration and testing laboratories. data co//ection and

Guide 25:1990, Genera/ requirements

[1 O] ANSVASQC E4-1 994, Specifications environmenta/ technology programs.

and guidelines

for qua/ity systems

for environments/

[11 ] EN 4-5001:1989, Genera/ criteria for the operation of testing /laboratories.

Examples

of standards

for testing and claim verification

References [12] through [66] list standards and industty methods which could be considered for use when collecting various data necessary for claim verification. The list is not exhaustive and is only intended to provide an illustration of the types of standards that could be considered when selecting methods for testing and verification of selfdeclared environmental claims. The methods in this list should only be used where the method chosen meets-the clause 6 of ISO 14021, as they apply to the particular claim being made. a) Recycled content Standard Guide for Validating Recycled Content in Packaging Paper and Paperboard. for marking of recycled paperboard. relevant requirements set out in

[12] ASTM D5663-95,

[13] BS 7500:1995,

Specification

20

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

[14] AS 4082-1992, [15] PBI 27-1993,
Production, b)

Recyc/ed paper -- G/ossary of terms. to Quantify /J/ant Usage of Recyc/ed P/asfics in P/astic f30tt/e

Technical Bulletin -- Profoco/ The Plastic Bottle Institute. use Standard

Reduced resource

[16] ASTM D5833-95,

Gu;de for Source Reduction, for Source

Reuse, Recycling and Disposal of Steel Cans. Reuse, Recycling and Disposal of Solid and

[17] ASTM D5834-95, Standard Guide Corrugated Fiberboard (Cardboard). c) Degradability

Reduction,

[18] ISO 7827:1994, Water qua/ity -- Evacuation in an aqueous medium of the "u/timate" aerobic biodegradability organic compounds -- Method by analysis of dissolved organic carbon (DOC).

of

[19] ISO 9408:1999,
aqueous

Water qua/ity -- Evaluation of ultimate aerobic biodegradability medium by determination of oxygen demand in a closed respirometer. aerobic biodegradafi/ity

of organic

compounds

in

[20] ISO 9439:1999, Water qua/ity -- Evacuation of u/timate aqueous medium -- Carbon dioxide evolution test.

of organic

compounds

in

[21 ] ISO 10707:1994, Water quality -- Evaluation in an aqueous medium of the "ultimate" aerobic biodegradability of organic compounds -- Method by analysis of biochemical oxygen demand [c/osed-bottle test]. [22] ISO 14851, Determination of the u/timate aerobic biodegradabi/ity of p/astic materia/s in an aqueous medium -- Method by measuring the oxygen demand in a closed respirometer. [23] ISO 14852, Determination of the ultimate aerobic biodegradability Method by analysis of evolved carbon dioxide. of plastic materials in an aqueous medium --

[24] ISO 14853, Determination of the ultimate anaerobic biodegradability medium -- Method by measurement of biogas production.

of plastic

materials

in in

aqueous

and disintegration [25] ISO 14855, Determination of the ultimate aerobic biodegradability controlled comporting conditions -- Method by analysis of evolved carbon dioxide. [26] OECD 301, Guideline [27] ASTM D3826-91, tensi/e test. for testing of chemicals. degradation end point in degradable polyethylene

of plastic materials

under

Determining

and polypropylene

using a

[28] ASTM D5071 -91, Standard practice for operating of photodegradable plastics. Operating [29] ASTM D5208-91, photodegradable plastics. fluorescent

xenon arc type exposure

apparatus

with water for exposure

ultraviolet

(UV)

and

condensation

apparatus

for

exposure

of

[30] ASTM D5209-92, Test method for determining of municipal sewage sludge.

the aerobic biodegradation

of plastic materials

in the presence

[31 ] ASTM D521 O-92, Test method for determining presence of municipal sewage sludge. [32] ASTM D5247-92, microorganisms. Test method for determining

the anaerobic

biodegradation

of plastic

materials

in the

the aerobic biodegradability

of degradable

plastics

by specific

[33] ASTM D5271 -93, Test method for determining s/udge -waste water treatment system.

the aerobic biodegradation

of plastic materials

in an activated-

21

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

[34] ASTM D5272-92, [35] ASTM D5338-93,

Outdoor exposure testing of photocfegradab/e Test method for determining aerobic

p/astics. of plastic materials under controlled

biodegradation

cornposting

conditions.

[36] ASTM

D5437-93,

Weathering

of plastics under marine floating exposure. compost environment. plastics. of plastic materials under

[37] ASTM D5509-96,

Standard practice for exposing plastics to a simulated

[38] ASTM D551 o-94, Standard practice for heat aging of oxidatively [39] ASTM D5511 -94, Standard test method for determining high-solids anaerobic digestion conditions. [40] ASTM D551 2-96, Standard externally heated reactor. [41] ASTM D5525-94, practice for exposing

degradable

anaerobic

biodegradation

plastics

to a simulated

compost

environment

using

an

Standard practice for exposing plastics to a simulated for determining anaerobic

active landfill environment. of plastic materials under

[42] ASTM D5526-94, Standard test method accelerated landfill conditions.

biodegradation

[43] ASTM D5988-96, Standard test method for determining residual plastic materials after comporting. [44] ASTM D6002-96,
[45] ASTM D6003-96,

aerobic biodegradation

with oil of `plastic materials

or

Standard guide for assessing

the compostabi/ity of environmentally degradable

plastics

municipal

Standard test method for determining weight loss from p/astic materia/s exposed to simdated solid waste (MS W) aerobic compost environment. of plastics -- Part 2: Testing of the complete biodegradability of

[46] DIN V 54900-2, Testing of the compostability p/astics in /aboratory tests. [47] DIN V 54900-3, Testing of the compostability and testing of qua/ity of the composts. [48] DIN V 54900-4, compQsts. d) Testing of the compostabi/ity

of plastics -- Part 3: Testing under practice-relevant

conditions

of po/ymeric

materiak

-- Part 4: Testing of the ecotoxicity

of the

Energy and water consumption the performance of electric dishwashers. use -- Methods for measuring

[49] IEC 60436, Methods for measuring [50] IEC 60350, Electric performance. cooking

ranges,

bobs, ovens and grills for household

[51 ] IEC 60379, A4efhods for measuring [52] IEC 60531, Household [53] IEC 60675, Househo/d

the performance

of e/ectric storage water-heaters

for househo/d purposes. performance.

electric thermal storage room heaters -- Methods for measuring e/ectric direct-acting room heaters -- Methods for measuring use -- Methods for measuring

performance. the performance.

[54] IEC 60456, C/othes washing machines for househo/d [55] IEC 61121, Electric tumble dryers for household [56] IEC 60530, Methods for measuring [57] IEC 60661, Methods for measuring

use -- Methods for measuring

the performance. and similar use.

the performance the petiormance

of electric kettles and jugs for household of electric househo/d coffee makers.

22

1S/1S0

14021

:1999

[58] IEC 60705, Household

microwave

ovens -- Methods for measuring performance. appliances -- Refrigerators with or without low-temperature compatiment --

[59] ISO 7371, Househo/d refrigerating Characteristics and test methods. [60] ISO 8187, Household refrigerating

appliances

-- Refrigerator-freezers

-- Characteristics

and test methods.

refrigerator-freezers, frozen food [61 ] ISO 8561, Household frost-free refrigerating appliances -- Refrigerators, storage cabinets and food freezers cooled by interns/ forced air circulation -- Characteristics and test methods. [62] ISO 5151, Non-ducted air conditioners and heat pumps -- Testing and rating for performance.

[63] ISO 13253, Ducted air-conditioners [64] ISO 13256 (all parts), [65] ISO 15042 (all park), performance. Water-source

and air-to-air heat pumps -- Testing and rating for performance. heat pumps -- Testing and rating for performance. air-conditioners and air-to-air heat pumps -- Testing and rating for

Multiple split-system

[66] ISO 5801, Industrial fans -- Performance

testing using standardized

airways.

23

Bureau

of Indian

Standards institution established under the Bureau
of hdian

BIS is a statutory harmonious

Standards

Act, 1986 to promote certification of

development

of the activities

of standardization,

marking

and quality

goods and attending Copyright BIS has the copyright of implementing designations. Review

to connected

matters in the country.

of all its publications.

No part of these publications details, such as symbols to the Director

may be reproduced and sizes,

in any

form without the prior permission the standard, Enquiries

in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary type or grade BIS. be addressed (Publication),

relating to copyright

of Indian

Standards Standards are also

Amendments no changes

are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. a standard along with amendments are needed; if the review indicates that changes

reviewed periodically;

is reaffirmed when such review indicates that are needed, it is taken up for revision. or

Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed
Amendments Amend No.

from Dot: No. CHD 34 (1 147).
Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216:22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892 COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross .Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 : AHMEDABAD. GHAZIABAD NALAGARH. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR.

GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNO.W. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUFJE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

