IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 ( 1986 )

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE CHARACTERISTICS OF OVERHEAD POWER LINES AND HIGH VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT
PART 3 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR MINIMIZING NOISE THE GENERATION OF RADIO

UDC

621.391*823 : [ 621.396 1 : 621.315.1 : 006-76

@ RIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
RHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 HAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAIH I IO002 ZAFAR MARC

February

I993

Price Group 7

Electromagnetic

Compatibility

Sectional

Committee,

LT 22

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) which is identical with CISPR Pub 18-3 ( 1986 ) `Radio interference characteristics of overhead power lines and high-voltage equipment : Part 3 Code of practice for minimizing the generation of radio noise', issued by the International Special Committee on Radio Interference ( C.1.S.P.R ) of the International Electrotechnical Commission of the Electro( IEC ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation magnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee ( LTD 22 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of C.I.S.P.R. standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical with those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear, referring should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) For the purpose of this standard, only the metric dimensions shall apply. to this standard, given in C.I.S.P.R. they Pub

In the adopted standard, reference appears to certam International Standards for which an The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in Indian Standard also exists. its place is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated. International Standard CISPR Pub 18- 1 Corresponding Indian Standard IS 12233 ( Part 1 ) : 1987 Electromaginterference characteristics of netic overhead power lines and high-voltage : Part 1 Description of equipment phenomena Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent

The concerned Technical Committee has examined the provision of CISPR Pub 18-2 referred in this adopted standard and has decided the it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. This Indian Standard is being issued in three parts as follows: Part 1 Description of phenomena Part 2 Methods of measurement and procedure for determinmg limits Part 3 Code of practice for minimizing the generation of radio noise. Only the English language it in this Indian Standard. text in the International Standard has been retained while adoptmg

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 ( 1988 )

Indian Standard

ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE CHARACTERISTICS OF OVERHEAD POWER LINES ANil HIGH VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT
PART 3 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR MINIMIZING NOISE THE GENERATION OF RADlO

SCOPE

This publication applies to radio noise from overhead power lines and high-voltage equipment which may cause interference to radio reception, excluding the fields from power line carrier signals. The frequency range covered is 0.15 ~Hz to 300 MHz.

1.

Practical design of overhead power lines and associated equipment in order to controi interference to radio and television reception
Introduction

1.1

This clause provides guidance on the techniques that may be. applied during the design, construction and operation of high voltage overhead power lines and associated equipment in order ta keep the various types of radio noise described in this publication within acceptable levels. 1.2
Corona on coriductors

During line design, consideration should be given to the geometric parameters of the line, in order to ensure that radio noise due to conductor corona will not exceed a specified acceptable level. The most important parameters are conductor diameter and number of conductors per phase. Others that could be varied, such as distance between phases, height of conductors above ground or spacing of sub-conductors in the bundle, have a smaller effect. In practice they are usually determined by mechanical or insulation requirements. The quantitative laws that determine the level of radio noise caused by conductor corona are discussed in Sub-clause 5.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-l : Radio Interference Characteristics of Overhead Power Lines and High-voltage Equipment, Part 1: Description of Phenomena, and in Clause 2 below. These laws normally apply to both stranded and smooth conductors, since the surface unevenness caused by stranding does not, in general, substantially change the noise level, especially when conductors are damp or wet. The existence of scratched or broken strands or deposits of extraneous substances such as dirt or insects on the surface,, on the other hand, may lead to severe localised corona discharges, due to high local voltage gradients. This may considerably increase the noise level of the line. For these reasons it is necessary to avoid damage to the conductor surface during construction. It should be handled with great care in transportation and erection and suitable techniques should be

1

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 ( 1986 )

used to avoid contact of the conductor with the ground or other objects during stringing. It is also advisable to avoid external greasing of the conductor for protection during transportation and tensioning; when the conductor is loaded, the increase in temperature, especially in hot weather, will cause this grease to run to the outside, gathering dirt and leading to areas with high local gradient and consequent radio noise. When the steel core or inside layers are greased for corrosion protection, a type of grease should be selected that will not migrate to the surface of the conductor even at the highest temperature.

I .3

Coronu on metul$ttings Radio noise due to corona on metal fittings, such as suspension clamps, dead-end clamps, yokes, guard rings, horns, spacers, etc., can be controlled. Appropriate shapes and dimensions may be specified during the design stage in order to avoid ptimts of high voltage gradient. All edges and corners should be well rounded, bolt heads should be rounded or shielded and sharp points and protrusions should be avoided. It is also important that the protective galvanized finish on fittings be smooth, particularly at points of maximum voltage gradient.

Guard devices are sometimes installed to protect an insulator string from the destructive effects of a power arc and to improve the distribution of the potential along the string. They also contribute to the reduction of the level of radio noise from the conductor clamps, since they screen sharp points or protrusions on the clamps. The type and dimensions of the guard devices should be chosen in such a way that they do not themselves produce radio noise. For example, the use of simple horns should be avoided at voltages exceeding about 150 kV, and the diameter of tubes forming guard rings should be sufficiently large to ensure that no corona occurs during rain. In the ultra high voltage range, 750 kV and above, experience is limited. Present knowledge seems to indicate, however, that it may be relatively difficult to design guard rings suitable for rainy conditions, even if they are made of multiple tubes. In which case, it may be necessary to devise special arrangements for the yoke so that the string is screened directly by the conductor bundle and is protected from power arcs by suitable devices on the sub-conductors of the bundle. As in the case of conductors, it is important to avoid damage to the fittings during manufacture, transportation, construction and maintenance by handling them with great care at all times. 1.4 1.4.1 Surface dischargrs on insu1mtor.s Clcun or slighrlv
polluted inLsulcrlor.r

The radio noise produced

by these insulators

under dry conditions

can bc controlled their- gcomctry

by:

the use of insulntors of suitable design, especially as regards characteristics of the material at the more critical areas, or the use of guard dcviccs dcsigncd to improve the distribution the insulator or along the insulator string.

and the

of voltage on the surface 01

2

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CISPR Pub 18-3 (1986)

In insulator design, the use of conducting glaze, for example, improves the distribution of the surface voltage gradient on the insulator. In the design of a guard device, a metal ring as close as possible to the insulator, or to at least the first two or three insulators at the line end of an insulator string, may considerably improve the voltage distribution on the insulator or along the insulator string and reduce radio noise. The ring, however, must remain compatible with other requirements such as insulation withstand, protection of the insulators from power arcs, screening of the clamps, etc. (see Sub-clause 1.3).

The radio noise produced in damp weather, fog or rain is usually more difficult to control than the noise under dry conditions. It is, however, seldom a critical factor in line design, since the increase in noise due to water droplets on the insulators is usually less important than the corresponding increase in noise produced by the conductors.

1.4.2

Very polluted

insulutors

Under dry conditions, in addition to the phenomena that cause noise on a clean insulator, other phenomena of the corona type may occur due to surface unevenness created by pollution deposits, as mentioned in Sub-clause 6.1 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication IX-I. Under these conditions even careful design of the various parts of an insulator may be of little benefit. Stress control devices suitable for improving the voltage distribution on the insulator or along the insulator string, however, may considerably improve the radio noise performance. When the polluted insulator surface is wet, radio noise is generated by sparks across the dry bands, created by the leakage currents, as discussed in Sub-clause 6.1 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-l. Occasionally, this noise has very high frequency components. It may affect both sound and television reception and is difficult to control. The only practical remedy is to limit the leakage current activity on the surface of the polluted insulator. This may be achieved by :
a) diminishing

creepage

the voltage stress on the insulator - for example path than is necessary for electrical withstand;

by using a longer surface

h) using special types of insulators such as those made of organic material or coated with semi-conducting glaze, or designs with a longer creepage path such as fog type units, special shapes, etc. ;
c) coating
I .5 Sparks

the insulators

with silicone grease.
due to bad contucts, commutution qJ@r.ts

and unicw~sparks

Remedial measures for eliminating or reducing these types of radio noise are described Clause 3 below and in Sub-clause 8.4 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-1 respectively.
1.6 Dt$?ct.s (J~I power iirws and rcssociatr~d ct{tri&lnKvzI in serviw

in

Even if all possible precautions have been taken during design and construction of a po,wer lint or substation to keep radio noise within acceptable limits, defects may occasionally occur during operation, resulting in intolerable noise. This may be caused by breakage of strands on the conductors, damage to clamps or insulators or accumulation of pollution on conductors and insulators. In general, these defects must be eliminated in order that the power system may operate properly, whether or not they are sources of radio noise. In fact, the occasional noise caused by such defects may result in detection and location of potential power system faults.

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 (1986)

These abnormal noise sources may be located by various instruments such as radio noise measuring sets, television receivers or ultrasonic and optical detectors. Location will often be easier when the noise affects television reception, since at very high frequencies longitudinal attenuation along the line is very high. When only low and medium frequency radio broadcasts are affected, location of the noise source may require the recording of the longitudinal attenuation of the radio noise field, combined with optical or ultrasonic devices, as discussed in Clause 3. \

2.

Methods of prediction of the reference level of an overhead line Introduction This publication has been written to provide the engineer in the field with the theoretical and practical background necessary to deal with radio interference problems. Technical aspects have been dealt with in Part 1 and many of the aspects discussed are dealt with in this clause in a simplified manner to bring together the theoretical,and practical issues.

General The reference level of a line is the strength of the radio noise field at a reference frequency of 500 kHz and at a distance of 20 m from the nearest conductor of the line. Where the voltage gradient in the air at the surfaces of the conductors of a normal line is greater than about 12-14 kV/cm, depending on conductor diameter, the radio noise performance of the line is determined by the performance of the conductors. The number and diameter of the conductors per phase of a proposed line are often decided by the current-carrying capacity required or by economic considerations and usually a prediction of the reference level is required for a particular weather condition. If a line is designed with the conductors at a high surface gradient very little can be done to reduce the noise level once the line has been constructed. Figure B12 of Appendix B of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-1 gives the correction to be applied to a radio noise level relating to a measurement frequency other than 500 kHz. Where the voltage gradient in the air at the surfaces of the conductors of a line is less than about 12 kV/cm, the radio noise level is usually determined by the insulators and fittings. In this case the radio noise performance of.the line is inherently good and it is usually desirable to.preserve this good quality by selecting insulators and fittings of a matching quality. Most of the methods of prediction or predetermination are concerned with the conductor noise and do not apply to lines where the conductors are at a low surface gradient. None of the methods applies to sparking sources at loose or imperfect contacts.

2.1.

Correlation of datu given elsrw~herr in this puhlicution a) Methods relating to noise from conductors Sub-clause 5.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-1 gives a survey of methods of prediction or predetermination, both analytical or semi-empirical and empirical or comparative. The analytical method relies on the results of measurements carried out on a short length of

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 ( 1986 )

sample conductor in a test cage andihvolves highly complex analyses. The sample conductor can be tested with any desired surface condition and the radio noise voltage measured by a circuit given in Sub-clause 1.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-2: Radio Interference Characteristics of Overhead Power Lines and High-voltage Equipment, Part 2: Methods of Measurement and .Procedure for Determining Limits. However, a reliable prediction of the reference level due to conductor corona can be calculated only from the wet test since in this case the number of individual corona sources per unit length is sufftciently high to represent a statistically satisfactory sample. For dc. lines, rcfercnce should be made to Sub-clause 8.2 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-I for the calculation of the noise level.

The simple comparative formulae referred to in Sub-clause S.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-t rely on the results of radio noise field strength measurement carried out on an existing line of similar design. These formulae take into account the effects ofany diffcrcnce between the reference and proposed lines such as the diffcrcnces in surface voltage gradient or conductor diameter. If the design of the reference and the proposed lines are similar and the operating conditions, such as air pollution, etc., are also similar a fairly accurate prediction may be obtained of the relerence level to bc expected from the proposed line due to conductor corona. The effects of weather may also be determined by taking measurements on the reference line in a variety of weather conditions.

In Sub-clause 5.4 and Appendix B of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-l is,given a catalogue of radio noise field strength profiles resulting from conductor corona for certain designs of single circuit overhead line. These profiles are correct when the values of the voltage gradient in the air at the surfaces of the conductors of the lines are suflicicntly high to produce radio noise and the values of the field strength, at a mcasuremcnt frequency of 500 kHz, are given for both heavy rain and average fair weather conditions; the heavy rain conditions producing a higher field strength of hetwcen 17 dB and 25 dB. The profiles show the attenuation of the field with distance normal to the lines for distances out to 150 m.

h) Method reluting to noixe jiom insulutors undior fittings Sub-clause 6.2 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-l gives a correlation between the radio noise voltage generated by a fitting or component of a line, when measured in accordance with the procedure given in Sub-clause 1.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-2, and the level of the reference field. This correlation applies where the line has a single noise source, for example a broken insulator, or where multiple sources are uniformly distributed along the line. The method, which includes a semi-empirical formula, is particularly useful where the conductors of a proposed line are to operate at a low surface gradient and a prediction is required of the reference level to be expcctcd from the insulators of the line. When the mcasuremcnt procedure given in Sub-clause 1.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication IX-2 is carried out on insulators they arc usually in :I clean and dry condition. since this condition is normally specified, but the procedure is not restricted to measurcmcnts on clean and dry objects and specially polluted sample insulators could be tested when damp and when dry and the results inserted into the formula to predict the refcrcnce lcvcl of :i proposed line.

5

IS`12233 (Part3): 1993 CISPR Pub 18-3 ( 1986)

c) Methods relating to agkregutr noise,from

the conductors, insulators and/or fittings

Sub-clause 5.2 of C.I.S.P.R. Pubjication 18-l gives information on the use of test lines. Where conditions relating to a new design of line are qch that they cannot be related to data available from an existing line the expected performance is sometimes studied on a relatively short test line. Such tpt link studies are particularly useful when a new system, for operation at a much higher voltage than hitherto; is in the planning stage. The radio noise performance of the experimental line is monitored in a range of weather and atmospheric conditions so that the performance of the proposed line can be assessed under the conditions which it will experience in service. This could also include the'effects of insulator pollution. Other important data, such as corona loss and acoustic noise performance, can also be obtained from the test lint at the same time. In Clause 2 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-Z is given a method whcrcby the reference level of a line may be found which will protect a given broadcast signal strength at a given distance from the line for X0% of the time with 80% confidence.

2.2

CIGAR,?? formula Relating to noise from conductors A simple direct formula has also been evolved for predicting the level of the radio noise field to be expected from the conductors of a line. The formula, which is empirically based, gives the most probable level to be expected from aged conductors in dry weather at a distance of 20 m from the nearest conductor at a measurment frequency of 500 kHz. The formula is derived from lines operating at voltages between 200 kV and 765 kV and at maximum, voltage gradients between 12 kV/cm and 20 kV/cm. Strictly, the formula gives the noise from one phase conductor or bundle of a lint and the effects of the other conductors may be taken into account by a summation process; however, for a number of designs of lines within these ranges, it is found that on'ly a small error is introduced if only the conductor producing the highest noise at the measuring poini. of a three-phase lint is considered; usually-this is the . nearest conductor but not necessarily so in all casts. The formula
where: B L Km,a =

is: E = 3.5gmar + 12r ~ 30 (dB/I pV/m)

radio notsc licld strength at a distance of 20 m from maximum voltage gradient at the conductor surface, radius of conductor or sub-conductor. in ccnlimctrcs

ncarcsl conducldt%f proposed line m ktlovnlls r.m.s. per ccnlimetrc

r

z

This matter is considered 2.3 Determination of'8OX~ level

in more detail in Appendix

A.

The 80% level For a line may be predicted by calculation [ 16, WI* or, if the lint exists, the 80% level may be determined with a high degree of conlidence, by mcasurcmcnt. Methods of determining the 80% level are as follows:

6

IS 12233 (Part3):
CEPR

1993

Pub 18-3 ( 1986 )

1) For an existing line the 80% level may be determined,
from the all-weather one year. distribution curve obtaintd

with a high degree of confidence, by measurements made over a period of

2) If the all-weather distribution

curve is not available, or in the case of a proposed line, the results of measurements made on a line of similar design in a similar climate and pollution environment could be used. From the figures given in Sub-clause 4.2 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-l it is seen that, on average, the 80% level for a line is 10 dB greater-than the 50% level. Therefore, if the 500/u level is known the 80% level may be estimated. l'he 80% level may be predicted by adding 5 dB to 15 dB, depending on the climate, to the fair-weather level estimated from the simple formula given in Sub-clause 2.2 above.

3)

4)

2.4

Conclusions The particular method of prediction to use in the case of a particular proposed line will depend on whether the interest is in conductor corona or noise due to insulators and/br fittings, that is whether the conductors are to operate at a voltage gradient greater than about 14 kVfcm or less than about 12 kV/cm. For voltage gradients in between these values both the conductors and the instilators may contribute to the noise level of the proposed line. The simple comparative formula referred to in Item a) of Sub-clause 2.1, the catalogue of radio noise field strength profiles referred to also in Item u) bf Sub-clause 2.1 and the CIGRl? formula given in Sub-clause 2.2 are all simple to use and, provided they are used within their inherent limitations, they should give reasonably accurate indications of the reference level to be expected from the conductors of a proposed line. It should be borne in mind that owing to the variable nature of radio noise and its dependency on the effects of weather, atmospheric conditions, pollution, etc., it is often difficult to measure the reference level of a line with any high degree of accuracy and reproducibility.

The method referred to in ltem h) of Sub-clause 2.1 relating to noise from insulators and/or fittings has not, as yet, become established practice for the case of'specially polluted test insulators but the method would appear to have promise for this case. If a test line, referred to in Item c) of Sub-clause 2.1, is available, together with the time required to carry out experimental work, the likely reference level from a proposed line may be obtained with a good degree of accuracy for the particular conductor, insulators and fittings proposed.

3.

Preventive detection

and remedial and location

measures

to minimize

radio noise generated

by bad contacts

and their

Radio noise generated by sparking at bad, that is loose or imperfect. contacts occurs mainly in dry weather since in wet wcathcr the comparatively sm;lll gaps involved usually became bridged with moisture.

7

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CISPR Pub 18-3 (1986) 3.1 Preventive and remedial measures

When constructing
b)

high voltage equipment

it is important tightened, and potential.

a) to ensure that all fixing bolts are securely

to bond conducting

elements, as far as is possible, either to earth or conductor

On distribution lines, bonding adjacent metal surfaces is important but bonding to earth or conductor potential is not required for spark suppression. If bonding to one side is not possible (for example at the pin and clevis, or ball and socket, couplings of an insulator string), the adjacent conducting elements should have good metal-to-metal contact and the whole assembly should be well insulated from other metallic parts of the equipment. It should be borne in mind that even when equipment is new, galvanized metallic parts can have a corrosion coating of zinc carbonate. When the surfaces have weathered, additional oxides and sulphides may be present and an imperfect contact may result leading to the possibility of gap-type discharges. The phenomenon may occur when suspension insulator strings have inadequate mechanical loading.

The following
a)

preventive

and remedial

measures

have been found to be effective:

Conductive grease and paste

A quick and economical method is the application of conductive grease to the socket or clevis area of insulators. This is a temporary cure, however, and it is necesffryto re-apply the grease at a later date. The use of a copper paste, instead of conductive grease, promises to be a more lasting remedy but care must be taken to ensure that the grease or paste does not find its way on to an insulating surface. Ordinary, corrosion. non-conductive grease applied to freshly galvanized surfaces will inhibit

b) Bonding brush

The application of a bonding brush, with stainless steel bristles, is a temporary cure, lasting for some three to five years, by providing metal-to-metal contact in the pin and clevis, or ball and socket, area.
c) Bonding clip

Where pin and clevis type insulators are used, bonding clips can easily be installed in the pin and clevis area. It is especially important that these be installed in the conductor clamp connection with the line end insulator. There are several types of clip suitable for insertion between ball and socket which maintain suff'icient pressure to break down the oxide film.
d) Permanent bonding

The best results are likely to be obtained with a permanent flexible bond across each individual metallic link of the insulator string, together with bonds from the earth end insulator to the cross-arm and from the conductor clamp to the line end insulator. The bonds should consist of stranded stainless steel or copper cable and can either be welded or fastened by screws. The cable should have a plastic covering to prevent bird caging of broken strands.

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 (1986)

e) Metal weights for insulator strings with inadequate mechanical loading In order to ensure good contact between the caps and pins of adjacent insulator units, the strings should be loaded with metal weights which are well-rounded to prevent corona discharges. f) Spring and plastic washers If a wooden construction is used there is some merit in using spring or plastic washers. The spring washers are capable of preventing loose hardware on poles and cross-arms due to wood shrinkage. A plastic washer of acetate or nylon also improves tightness of the nuts. Where these "shakeproof'-type nuts or plastic washers are used, care should bc taken to ensure that there are no insulating gaps between metallic parts. Such a washer is generally used only between a nut and a wood pole or arm.

g) Single insulator The use of a single insulator has the advantage of having fewer possibleradio noise sources.

h) Pin-type insulators with condinting

gluze

With pin-type insulators, sparking may occur on the surface where the conductor rest: in the top groove and at the tie-wire or stirrups in the side groove of the insulator. This problem may be overcome by using conductive paints or metallization of the insulator surface in the area of contact. These metallizing agents are effective only if applied together with the glaze during manufacture of the insulator. In the case of pin-type insulators, if the pin screws directly into a threaded hole in the porcelain, the porcelain threads should be treated with conductive paint. As an alternative, a threaded metal insert can be cemented into the pin-hole; although the best solution is to purchase insulators with the pin-hole glazed during manufacture. If a PVC insulated conductor is used, there is a possibility of local discharges occurring at the supporting insulators. These discharges can be avoided by wrapping the PVC with semi-conducting tape. For an 11 kV line, the tape should extend for 600 mm on either side of the insulator. i) Plastic ~fasteners and insulated stuples The use of plastic fasteners or insulated staples to secure the earth wire to a wood pole will avoid sparking between the earth wire and its fasteners, particularly if the fasteners became loose or corrosion is present. 3.2 Methou's of detecting and locating bud contacts When bad contacts are present in a power line or substation, the detection and exact location of the radio noise source(s) are more important than the measurement of the resulting field strength. Practical methods for the detection and location of these bad contacts arc described below. Measurements and observations should normally be made in dry weather. Since a high voltage power line and associated equipment is often the source of diflerent radio frequency fields, it is necessary to trace the radio noise by starting at the disturbed receiver. The first step in the investigation is to obtain an aural and/or visual indication 01 the radio noise, by using a loudspeaker or headphones and an oscilloscope or television receiver.

IS12233(Paft3):1993 CEPR Pub 18-3 (1988)

When tracing the source(s) of radio noise due to bad contacts it is better to observe the noise at the highest frequency perceptible because of the more rapid attenuation along the line. Whilst it is preferable that the apparatus used for tracing should cover the whole radio noise frequency range, few instruments are available that cover this spectrum. Few have been designed specifically for the location of sources of radio noise and, accordingly, it may be necessary to modify commercial apparatus to make it suitable. `The following apparatus will be found useful for locating bad contacts: a) A general coverage

receiver (a.m.) tunable from at least 500 kHz to 18 MHz.

b) A v.h.f. field strength measuring set fitted with a two-element broadband aerial and a v.h.f. pre-amplifier. The audio output should be amplified sufficiently to feed a loudspeaker and an oscilloscope. c) An oscilloscope with sufficient intensity for use in full daylight, when used with a viewing hood, and a sweep frequency of approximately 500 Hz. .
d) A u.h.f. field strength measuring

set fitted with two interchangeable Yagi aerials: one array for 500 MHz and the other for 800 MHz. A moderate level audio output is required for a loudspeaker. R.F. preamplification is required and i.f. gain control is desirable. The whole assembly should be able to be carried by one man. detector covering the frequency range m.f. to v.h.f. but without

e) A small radio frequency automatic gain control. f)

A small a.m. broadcast radio receiver without manual or automatic gain control and enclosed in a metal box. The receiver aerial can either be telescopic, to allow for variation in r.f. sensitivity, that is to adjust the r.f. gain, or, preferably, a ferrite rod mounted inside the metal box opposite a slot of similar length in the box side. The box is mounted at one end of an insulating tube, a few metres in length and having a diameter of approximately 3 cm to 6 cm. The output of the receiver loudspeaker is directed into the bore of the tube while, at the other end, a microphone is arranged to pick up the noise signal. The microphone qutput is then fed into an amplifier which feeds headphones or a loudspeaker. This arrangement allows the receiver to be placed near to the source of the disturbance and, with care, can be used even when the radio noise is generated by high voltage equipment. The insulating properties of the tube and its length shall be such as to ensure observance of the safety rules appropriate to the system voltage.

g) A sensitive sources are particularly be borne in

ultrasonic detector with a parabolic reflector. In situations where the noise numerous and are close together, for example in a substation, this can be a useful instrument, but its use is restricted to dry weather conditions. It should mind that this instrument is also sensitive to corona sources. for locating a radio noise source or sources generated by bad

A suggested procedure contacts is as follows: i)

Using the investigation apparatus, obtain an aural and/or visual identification of the noise signal at the disturbed receiver. Determine the frequency range of the noise by scanning the relevant part of the r.f. spectrum. If broadband noise appears, use the highest when moving along a power line, that the and higher frequencies, then the source is of the source the noise signal should be possible frequency for tracking. If it is found, noise can be detected at progressively higher being approached. In the immediate vicinity detected throughout most of the broadcast

ii)

10

IS 12233 ( Part 3 ) : 1993 CISPR Pub 18-3 (1988)

frequency bands. When the higher frequencies start dropping off, the source has been passed. Along the pdwer line nulls may occur, at certain positions and at certain frequencies, due to standing wave patterns. For wood pole lines, a sledge hammer can be useful. If the base of the pole is struck with the hammer, noise due to bad contacts on that particular pole may either increase drastically or disappear temporarily. This assists in localizing the wood pole associated with the noise source.

A ,further method*for locating bad contacts, particularly in a substation where several joints can be involved, is to direct a very fine water jet at each suspect metal joint in turn. To provide a high degree of insulation, a small volume of water, in a plastic container, is mounted at the end of a long rod or pole of insulating material. Two pipes enter the container, one which terminares in a nozzle to provide the fine water jet and the other which carries compressed air, via a valve, from the ground. The operator on the ground controls the water jet by means'of the compressed air. After having located a bad contact, a similar device is often used to inject grease, of suitable consistency, into the defective joint. iii) If narrow band noise is detected, triangulation will best identify the source. Even here, however, at the source's location, the sparking noise will be detected over a broad range to 100 MHz. Narrow band noise may result from gap-type discharge causing resonance in a fitting or component. If more than one noise signal exists, it may be necessary to use the oscilloscope to distinguish the sources. To determine if a noise source is due to bad contacts (sparking) or corona, the following information may be helpful: a) oscilloscope or television pictures usually give clear indications; b) noise above 30 MHz in fair weather is due to sparking; c) if the noise occurs only in fair weather, d) noise due'to sparking v) predominates it is probably due to sparking;

iv)

over corona

noise on lines below about 70 kV.

If the investigation indicates that the source is in a substation, a radio frequency detector, as described in Item e) of Sub-clause 3.2, or a small a.m. portable radio receiver, without automatic gain control, should bc used. The receiver should be placed near to the control wiring and earth connection of each item of plant, in turn, so that the wiring may act as an aerial for the noise source. In the case of a power line, when the tower involved has been identified, the measuring set described in Item d) of Sub-clause 3.2 should be used to obtain further bearings. The tower should be scanned using both horizontal and vertical polarization of the aerial to determine whether or not the structure contains a source. If no noise field is detected, a further check should be made by tuning some 10 MHz above and below the measurement frequency (a null may occur at a particular frequency).

vi)

vii) The last step to pinpoint the source should be carried out with the apparatus described in Itemf) of Sub-clause 3.2. It may be helpful to scan the insulators, either on the towers or in the substation, to prove that they are noise-free. viii) Low-level acoustic noise is often associated with sparking and gap-type discharges and the very narrow beam width, of a sensitive ultrasonic detector, fitted with a parabolic reflector, will often be found useful in locating the source.

11

IS12233(Part3):1993 CISPR Pub 18-3 (1988)

APPENDIX A
CIGRE FORMULA FROM FOR PREDICTING THE CONDUCTORS THE RADIO NOISE FIELD STRENGTH OF AN OVERHEAD LINE

This simple formula will give the most probable radio noise field strength and the summation of fields made by a C.I.S.P.R. meter at a frequency of 500 kHz and at a direct distance of 20 m from the nearest conductor with the aerial 2 m above ground. The elementary formula for a single phase line is: E=3.5gmax+
where:
E = radio noise field strength, in dB/I pV/m gm,, = maximum voltage gradient at the conductor r = conductor radius, in centimetres.

12r-30

-

(AlI

surface, in kV,,/cm

Precise calculation of the maximum voltage,gradient at the conductor because of its important effect on the radio noise level. A calculation Appendix A of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-1. For single-circuit three-phase lines the previous formula

surface is recommended method is suggested in to:

can be expanded - 30 - 30 - 30

E, = 3sg,,, & = 3.5g,,,, E3 = 3.5g,,,,
where D,, D2 and D, are the direct distances,

, + 12r, - 33log,,$

+ 12r* - 33log,,$ + 12r, - 33log,,$

in metres, from the phase conductors

to the measuring

set aerial.

These formulae can also be used to determine other than the 20 m reference distance.

the radio noise field strength at measuring

positions

The summation of these three fields is made in the following way: if.one of the fields is at least 3 dB greater than each of the other two, they are both neglected, otherwise, we have: E=Ea+Eb+ 2
where Eu and E/I are the two highest among the above three values.

1.5

For a double circuit line, the radio noise field produced by each,of the six conductors as above at the measuring position. The fields produced by the phases corresponding then added quadratically and the three resulting fields are summated as above.

is calculated in time are

It should be noted that this method will give the most probable noise level of a line in dry weather at 500 kHz. To obtain the level at a frequency different from 500 kHz, the correction shown in Figure B12 of Appendix B of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-1 should be used. If calculations have to be made for distances different from 20 m, then the formula in Sub-clause 2.3 of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-2 should be used.

12

IS 12233 ( Part 3) : 1993 CISPR Pub 18-3 (1986)

The radio noise level for weather conditions other than mean dry, fair weather can be estimatea using Figure B13 of Appendix B of C.I.S.P.R. Publication 18-1. The effect of altitude ,can be taken into account by using the' following expression:

where E, is the radio noise field strength, in dB/l pV/ m, at altitude a, in metres and E,, is the radio noise field strength, dB/l pV/m, at altitude n in metres.

in

13 Printed at Dee Kay Printen, New Delhi, India

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Aer, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

G*, 1

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

No part of thes: publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ). BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standaIds as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition bv referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and `Standards Monthly Additions'. comment; on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : Nb LTD 2~ ( 1348 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text AfFected

I

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANL)ARDS 110002

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams ( Common

: Manaksansthr

to all

Offices )

Regional Offices :
Central

Telephone Shah Zafar Marg 37 84 99, 37 86 26. I 53 38 43, I 53 23 84 331 01 31 c 331 1375 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHl I 10002
: l/14 C. 1.

Eastern

T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054
: SC0

Northern

445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

160036

Southern Western

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya,

IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

235 02 16, 235 04 42 I 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78 58 6327892 I 6327891,

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. FARIDABAD. GHAZI ABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. India

