( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1s : 10434- is&3

Indiaa Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PRESENTATION OF TRANSLATIONS
Documentation
Chairman DR V. A. KA~IATH Members SHRI M. K. RAUHAVENDRA RAO ( Alternate to Dr V. A. Kamath ) Social Science Documentation Centre ( Indian SHRI S. P. AURAWAL Council of Social Science Research ), New Delhi Indian Association of Special Libraries & InforSHRI S. R. BANERJEE mation Centres, Calcutta SHRI S. B. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Central Secretariat Library, New Delhi SHRI S. C. BISWAS SHRI B. G. SUNDER SINGH ( Alternate j Pubk;;ionnli Information Directorate ( CSIR ), SHRI Y. R. CHADHA SHRI R. N. SHARNA SHRI N. R. R. CHARI SHRI C. DABRAL National Archives of India, New Delhi National Medical Library ( Directorate General of Health Services ), New Delhi Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence SHRI D. C. DATTA and Statistics, Calcutta Da ( Kad ) JAYATI RAY ( Alternate ) Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi] SHRI N. D. DATTA BANIK Central Hindi Directorate ( Ministry of EducaDIRECTOR tion ), New Delhi SHRI D. N. PANT ( Alternate ) Hindustan Photo Films Mfg Co Ltd, Ootacamund SHRI S. GUNASEELAN SHRI S. LAKSHMINARASIIHAN ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( D-8 Anand Niketan, New SRRI R. C. GUPTA Delhi ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI L. J. HARAVU &UT INDIRA SUBBARAM ( Alternate ) Department of Library & Information Science, PROF K. A. ISAAC Trivandrum University, Trivandrllm Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi PROF P. N. KAULA Computer Centre, University of Delhi, Delhi DR N. Cl. KHANDEKAR ( Continued on jage 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1984 INSTITUTION (Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic

Sectional Committee, EC 2
Representing Research Centre, Bombay

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1S : 10454 - 1983
( Continued from page 1 ) Members DR A. LAHIRI SHR~ HARJIT Smaa PROF P. B. MANILA ( Alternate ) Refiresenting Department of ( Government Science and Technology of India ), New Delhi

Department of Library Science, University of Delhi, Delhi SHRI M. M. KASHYAP ( Alternote ) Defence Scientific Information & Documentation SFIRI S. S. MURTHY Centre ( Ministry of Defence ), Delhi SHRX R. M. CEITNIS ( Alternate ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New SHRI T. A. V. MURTHY Delhi SHRI A. Saorn ( Alternate ) National Library, Calcutta SRRI M. N. NA~ARAJ Documentation Research & Training Centre, PROF A. NEELAME~HAN Bangalore DR G. BHATTACI~ARYYA ( Alternate ) Central Machine Tool Institute, Bangalore SHRI V. S. PRABHAKAR RAO SHRI K. N. VA~UDEVA RAO ( Alternate ) Indian National Scientific Documentation Centrc *SHRI T. S. RAJAGOPALAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI B. GUHA ( Alternate ) Electronics Commission ( Information Planning DR M. P. RAVINDRA and Analysis Group ), New Delhi Indian Library Association, New Delhi SHRI J. L. SARDANA SHRI 0. P. TRIEHA ( Alternate ) Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi DR K. C. SEAL National Aeronautical Laboratory SHRI M. N. SEETHARA~AN ( CSIR ), Bangalore SHRI B. GARUDADWAJAN ( Alternate ) Institute of Pathology ( ICMR ), New Delhi DR S. SRIRA~,~ACHARI DR G. V. SATYAWATI ( Alternate ) Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore SHRI P. SUDARSAN DR S. K. DUTTA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SERI GURCHARAN SINCZH, Director ( Pub ) Secretary SMT PARMINDER BAJAJ Assistant Director ( Pub ), ISI

lShri T. 6. Ibjagopalan was

theChairman

for

the meeting in Which this standard ww finalized.

2

lS:.lO454 -1983~

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PRESENTATION OF TRANSLATIONS
0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD
Institution Sectional

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards on 3 1 March 1983, after the draft finalized by the Documentation Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee.

0.2 In recent years translations of documents of various categories have been gaining importance as sources of information and means of informaThis is particularly true of scientific and technical tion exchange. documents. Among the factors which have lent increasing importance to translations are the need for rapid and wide exchange of information among scientists and technologists working in different parts of the world, growing volume of international trade and the rising tempo of bilateral and\ multilateral agreements for technical collaboration among different countries. A new dimension has been added to the problem as a result of the emergence of a number of additional languages as carriers of useful Equally important in a country like India is the factor where information. a document is required to be translated not only into and from an international language like English, but also into and from various local languages. 0.2.1 In effecting translation of a document, it has to be noted that even though a translated work is meant to be used independently, it is chronologically secondary in relation to the original work. As such while preparing translations, attention is required to be paid to the inclusion of various elements of information so as to facilitate information retrieval work, identification of original and translated works and avoidance of duplication of effort in translation. Simultaneously, attention is required to be paid to style and presentation for promoting wel!-established conventions pertaining toaspects like para-to-para conformity between the original and the translated texts, use of abbreviations, footnotes, tabular matter, etc. 0.3 To maintain international coordination and uniformity of practice, this standard is based on ` IS0 2384-1977 Documentation-Presentation of translations ' issued by the International Organization for Standardization; and its requirements are technically equivalent to the IS0 Standard.

3

IS : lo454 - 1983
In addition, elements for translation of technical reports have been included as a separate item, and examples for the various types of translations have also been provided.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard sets out rules to ensure that translations of published and unpublished documents are presented in a prescribed which will simplify their use by different categories of users. 2. TYPES OF TRANSLATIONS 2.1 This standard applies to the translation of all documents, translation is complete, partial or abridged. It does not apply Types of translations which can be used as a guide to all comprise translation of a book or other separately issued (- see 3.1 ), translation of a periodical or other serial publication translation of a contribution or an article ( see 3.3 ), translation cal reports ( see 3.4 ), and translation of standards, patents documents ( see 3.5 ).
3. IDENTIFICATION whether the to abstracts. other types, publication ( see 3.2 ), of techniand similar both form

PRESENTATION

ELEMENTS TO BE INCLUDED OF A TRANSLATION

IN

THE

3.0 The elements

required for identification of a translated work conform to the requirements of IS : 2381-1978* and shall be given in the title page heading, preferably in the order indicated below. Elements in italics shall be given only if translation or the original document admits of them.
NOTE - Identification elements to be given in the title leaves of a book should comply with IS : 792-1964t. ~For the presentation of periodicals, it is recommended that reference be made to IS : 4-1963$ and for textbooks to IS : 7400-19743.

3.1 Translation

of a Book or Other Separately Issued Publication
details indivi-

3.1.1 Elements Relating to the Translation
a) Name(s) of author(s) with initial(s), forename(s) or other of identification: chief editor, science editor or publisher, dual or corporate author of the original publication; b) Title of the translated work or translation

of the title of the work;

*Recommendations for bibliographical references: Essential and supplementary elements (first revision ) . TSpecification for title-page and back of title-page of a book ( revised ). fGuide for layout of learned periodicaIs ( revised ). : �Guide for preparation and production of textbooks.

4

IS : 10454 - 1983 If partial or Type of translation: complete, partial or abridged. Parts not transabridged, the parts translated should be stated. lated should be indicated as far as possible; Organization responsible for the translation, tor(s), chief editor, science editor or publisher name(s) of translaof the translation;

e) Publisher,

place and date of publication of the translation or, if not published, identification and address of those responsible for the translation; standard book number rights ( ISBN ( see 18 ); ) ( see IS : 8310. 1977* );

f > International 9) h) 3
3.1.2 Mention Language Translation Elements

of exclusive

translation and

of the translation; Relating

of title of collection of series. to the Original language; of publication in the original language; Document Only

a) Title in the original b) Place(s) and date(s)

c) Edition number; of the original d) Publisher(s) c) Language of the original f 1 ISBN; and 9) 3.1.3
NOTE An example

publication;

publication;

Title of collection or series, and the numbering within collection or series.
is given in Appendix A.

Elements

Relating

to an Intermediate

Translation language; language;

a) Title

of the publication number;

in the intermediate

b) Date and place of publication c) Edition d) Publisher f) ISBN. of a Periodical Relating in the intermediate language; and

in the intermediate language;

e) Intermediate Translation 3.2.1 Elements a) Title

3.2

or Other

Serial Publication

to the Translation in the language of translation; If partial or

of the serial,

complete, partial or abridged. b) Type of translation: abridged, the parts translated should be stated;
*Guide for standard book numbering.

5

fS : 10454 - 1983

4 4

Organization responsible for the translation, and name of chief editor, science editor translation; Year of translated responsible publication and and pagination; number

name of translator(s) or publisher of the issue and part

of volume,

e) Publisher(s) f 1 Key
9) h) j) k)
International 19821_ ); Language Place(s)

or, if not published, for the translation; by the ISDS* serial standard

identification ); ( ISSN

and address of those

title ( established

number

) ( see IS : lOlOl-

of the translation; and date(s) of publication of the translation; and ( such as, source,

Information about how the translation can be obtained identiJication number, date and price ). to the Original Document Only

3.2.2 Elements Relating

a) Title of serial, in the original language; number of volume, issue and part, identificab) Year of publication, tion or other bibliographic elements if different from those of the translation; c) Language of the original document; of the ,,riginal document d) Pagination pagination of the translation; e> Key title ( established by the ISDS* ); f 1 International standard serial number in parenthesis after the

( ISSN if

); and this is necessary for

9) Place of publication ?f the original document identifying the periodical or serial jublication.
NOTE:An example is given in Appendix B.

3.3

Translation 3.3.1 a) Elements

of Contribution Relating

or an Article

to the Translation

Name(s) of author(s) with initial(s), forename(s) or other details of identification: chief editor, science editor or publisher; individual or corporate author of the original document; Translation -F of the title of the article;

b)

Serials Data System. TGuide for International standard serial numbering ( ISSN ). *International

6

IS: c) Type of translation: complete, partial or abridged. abridged, the parts translated should be stated;

10454 - 1983 If partial or

d) Organization responsible for the translation, name(s) of the translator(s) and of the chief editor, science editor or publisher of the translation; e) Information about how the translation can be obtained as, source, identification number, date and price ); f ) Language of the translation; of the translation; g) Place and date of publication ( such

h) If the publication is not a translation of articles taken from a periodical, the type of this document should be stated, for example, paper presented at a certain conference, etc; and j ) If the publication be stated. 3.3.2 a) Elements Title Relating is the translation to the Original in the original of a preprint, this fact should

Document Only language; language; pagination

of article,

b) Title

of serial, in the original

c) Year of publication, number of volume, issue or part, and other details of bibliographic identification; and d) Language e) ISSN of the original and of the original document if this is contribution or article; or ISBN;

f ) Place qf publication identifying the serial.
NOTE An cxamplc

necessary for

is given in Appendix C.

3.4

Translation 3.4.1 Elements

of Technical Relating

Reports

to the Translation with initial(s), forename(s), chief editor, science editor, corporate ), compiler of the of the title of the work;

a) Name(s) of author(s)/complier(s) or other details of identification: publisher, author ( individual or original publication; b) Title of the translated c) Name and address of the sponsoring

work or translation organization;

d) Organization responsible for the translation, names(s) of translator(s), chief editor, science editor or publisher of the translation; e) Publisher, place and date of publication or, if not published, identification and address of those responsible for the translation; 7

IS : 10454 - 1983 f) Type of translation: complete, partial, or abridged. or abridged, the parts translated should be stated. translated should be indicated as far as possible; g) Language j ) Translation k) Mention m) 3.4.2 of the translation; and/or ISBN, of the original; rights ( see 18 ); and ( such as, qf title of collection of series; of exclusive translation h) identification If partial, Parts not

Information about how the translation can be obtained source, identification number, date and price ). Elements Relating to the Original language; of publication in the original Document Only

a) Title

in the original and date(s) number;

b) Place(s) c) Edition e) Language f) g) 3.4.3 a)

language;

d) Publisher(s) Identification

of th e original of the original number

publication; and within collection or series.

document;

and/or ISBN;

l- i tl e o f co 11 ec t ion or series, and the numbering
An example is given in Appendix D.

NOTE -

Elements Title

Relating

to an Intermediate

Translation language; language;

of the publication number;

in the intermediate

b) Date and place of publication c) Edition d) Publisher f) 3.5 in the intermediate language; number and

in the intermediate language;

e) Intermediate Identification Translation 3.5.1
a)

and/or ISBN. Patents and Similar Documents

of Standards,

Elemenls Type

Relatirlg to the Translation

of document; of publication; identification number; or grantees, indivi-

1,) Country c) Complete

d) Name(s) of the country(ies) of the applicants dual or corporate ( for patents only ); e) Translation f) of the title; data ( for patents only ); Full expansion

8

IS:10454

- 1983

8)

Number, Aiimber Number

date and country of the application; and date ofjling; and date of convention priority;

Date m>

4 3 4 4

Number and date of publication; of patenting; &umber of claims;

P) International patent classification; 9) National or internal class$cation;

r)
s)

Name(s)

and initial(s)

ofthe inventor(s);
name of translator(s) or publisher of the

Organization responsible for the translation, and name of chief editor, science editor translation; Language of the translation; of the translation; to the Original and

t)
3.5.2

u) Date of publication v) Pagination. Elements Relating a) Title b) Name ment; d) Price. respectively.
NOTE -

Document Only of the original docu-

of the document; of the issuing authority/publisher(s) document; and

c) Language

of the original

Examples for standards and patents are given in Appendix E and F

4. PRESENTATION

4.1 Subdivisions

of the origina~l text into clauses, stib-clauses and paragraphs Differences in and their numbering shall be respected in the translation. content between the translation and the original document should be stating wha.t the differences are: omissions, corrections, mentioned, abridgements or additions to parts of the text, to the index or to the bibliography. 5. NOTES,

FOOTNOTES

AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL

REFERENCES

5.1 The titles of the works and articles cited in notes, footnotes and bibliographical references or in translator's notes may be translated, in which case it is recommended that the citation in the original language should follow in parenthesis. Translator's comments may either be given at the foot of They should be preceded by the page or be appended to the translation. phrase in the language the words ` Translator's note ' or a corresponding of the translation. 9

IS :- 10454 - 1983 6. FORMULAE, 6.1 Formulae,
in the original

EQUATIONS,

SYMBOLS

AND UNITS
preferably be given as in a

equations, symbols and units should text, without being translated. of a symbol or index

6.2 Any modification translator's note.

should

be mentioned

6.3 If the conversion of units is undertaken, values in the original units should be supplied in parenthesis after the values obtained as the result of the conversion. 6.4 I-n every case the of IS : 1890-1983*. 7. ILLUSTRATIONS, translation should comply with the relevant parts

LEGENDS

AND

TITLES

OF

ILLUSTRA-

TIONS AND TABLES 7.1 Illustrations should preferably be presented as and where they appear in the original text. If the method of reproduction leads to an illustration being moved, a reference should be given at the appropriate place in the translation.
7.2 The test accompanying illustrations and other matter ) should be translated in full. 7.3 If the illustrations text and notes that marked. tables ( titles, legends and

or tables are reproduced from the original, all the go with them should be translated and suitably

8. TRANSLITERATION 8.1 If a translation
is printed in a script different from that used in the original, the titles of the publication and names of authors and organizations should be transliterated in accordance with the appropriate standard practice accepted nationally/internationally. 9. NAMES

AND SYMBOLS

OF ORGANIZATIONS

9.1 The

names of organizations should be given as they appear in the text and notes, unless an equivalent exists in the language of translation. If this is not the case, a translation or abbreviation of an organization's name and symbol may be given in parenthesis the first time they appear in the text. In bibliographical references, the names of organizations are to Translations of names may be given be given in the original language. in parenthesis.
*Quantities, units and symbols ( issued in 13 parts ).

IS : 10454- 1983 10. ABBREVIATIONS 10.1 Abbreviations used in the original text should be given in their If there is no equivalents in the language of translation, if they exist. known equivalent, the expression represented by the abbreviation should, if possible, be explained the first time it appears in the text. 11. TERMINOLOGY 11.1 As the terminology of the science of profession concerned should be used in the translation, the translator should choose appropriate equivaIt is recommended that the original lents for new concepts or terms. term should follow the translation of such concepts or terms in parenthesis.
If the terminology stated. 12. IDENTIFICATION 12.1 Details helping OF AUTHORS of: Jr for of the conforms to a particular standard, this should be

identification

a) an individual author ( or individual authors ) such as Junior, Sr for Senior, should be given in the language translation, if the equivalent is sanctioned by usage;

b) an individual author's ( or individual authors' ) title and qualifications should be given in the language of the translation, if the equivalent is sanctioned by usage; c) an author's ( or authors' ) authority, such as ` Member Academy of Sciences ' should be given in the language translation; and of the of the

d) an author's ( or authors' ) part in the preparation of a document, such as chief editor, science editor or publisher, should be given in the language of the translation,
NOTE - For other similar problems, latest editions of any standard cataloguing code may be used, such as Ranganathan's Classijed Catalogue Code or Anglo-American Cataloguing Rules ( AACR ).

13. RETRANSLATION
13.1 When a translation be made both to the publicatio n. 14. GEOGRAPHICAL is made of another translation, intermediate translation and NAMES reference should to the original

14.1 Geographical names should be kept in the language of the original document, unless an equivalent of these names exists in the language of the translation, such as India - Inde - Indien.

IS:10454

- 1983
references, geographical names are to be given in

14.2 In bibliographical the original language.
15. DATES

15.1 The date(s) of the original publication should be quoted in the language of the translation, for example, June 1958, Autumn 1973. If a publication is dated according to an era different from that used in the language of the translation, for example the Saka era, the corresponding year according to the Gregorian calendar should be given in parenthesis. 16. TRANSLATIONS

OF SERIAL

PUBLICATIONS

16.1 Publishers of serials should avoid using titles other than the original title or its translation, if that is valid and authorized. They should also use volume, issue and part numbers in the translation which coincide with corresponding parts of the original document. The year of publication of the original should appear before the year of publication of the translation, for example original published in May 1937 ( translated October The pagination of the translation should be followed by the 1940 ). pagination of the original publication in parenthesis.
17. NAME(S)

OF TRANSLATOR(S)

17.1 The

translator's name should always appear among the essential elements for identifying a translation ( in accordance with the advice of the International Federation of Translators and Recommendation No. 5 adopted by UNESCO* ). 18.

AUTHORITY

TO PUBLISH

OR TO COPY A TRANSLATION
or copy, with or without exclusive to the original document inthe

18.1 A statement of authority to publish rights, should accompany the reference heading of the translation.

*With

the exceptions

of translations

of patents

and similar documents.

22

IS:10454 - 1983

APPENDIX ( czause 3.1 )
EXAMPLE OF THE TITLE

A

PAGE OF A TRANSLATED

BOOK

ELECTRODEPOSITION OF METALS AND INHIBITING ADSORPTION

A. T. VAGRAMYAN
AND

M. A. ZHAMAGORTSYANTS

Complete

translation

done at the Indian Centre, New Delhi

National

Scientific

Documentation

by S. K. Chadhz

Published Standards

for the U. S. Department and the National National Science Scientific

of Commerce, Foundation, Documentation

National Centre,

Bureau of D. C. New Delhi

Washington,

by the Indian

1974

13

IS:10454

- 1983 BACK OF THE TITLE PAGE

Translation of ELEKTROOSAZHDENIE INGIBIRUYUSHCHAYA Moskva, 1969 IZDATEL'STVO ( Russ ) NAUKA METALLOVI ADSORBTSIYA

___

14

1s : 10454- 1983

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.2 )
EXAMPLE OF TITLE PAGE A PERIODICAL OR OTHER

B

OF A TRANSLATION OF SERIAL PUBLICATIONS

STEEL IN USSR
January 1972 Volume 2 Number 1

A selection Vysshikh

of translated Uchebnykh

material Zavedenii

from Stal' and Izvestiya Chernaya Metallurgiya

15

k3 : 10454- 1983 EXAMPLE OF BACK OF TITLE PAGE OF A TRANSLATION A -PERIODICAL NOROTHER SERIAL PUBLICATIONS OF

STEEL January Published

IN THE

USSR 2, Number and Steel 1, p l-81 Institute by arrangement London with

1972, Volume by the Iron

the Department Production Translators: L. D.

of-Education

and Science,

Editor Major

G. Salzamann J. H. Dixon, Leadly, W. Dr S. Klemantaski, F. Palmer and R. R. &well, Feather

Hewitt;

A. J.

Editorial

Consultant of

: H. F. Cleere
material Zavedenii in Russian from Stal' Chernaya and Izvestiya Metallurgiya

A selection Vysshikh January

translated Published

Uchebnykh 1972.

by Metallurgiya,

MOSGOW

L

IS : 10454- 1983

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.3 )
EXAMPLE OF THE HEADING TRANSLATION

C

OF THE FIRST PAGE OF A

OF AN ARTICLE

S. K. SVANBAEV: Cocidia in Pigs and Cattle of

Kazakhstan
( Complete translation ) Translated at the Indian National Scientific Documentation Centre ( INSDOC ), N ew Delhi 110067 ( India ) by Shri S. K. Chadha. Available from INSDOC, Translation No. TT 72-51147, Ott 1975, Rs 20 Koktsidii svinei i krupnogo rogatogo skota v Kazakhstane, Akademiya Nank Kazakhskoi SSR, Trudy Instituta Zoologii, 1967; 28 (2); 93-128. 5ill ( Russ )

-

17

IS I 10454 - 1983

A-PPENDIX ( Clause 3.4 )
EXAMPLE SHOWING HEADING

D

OF FIRST PAGE REPORT

OF

A TRANSLATION

OF A TECHNICAL

M. AKIO: A Study of Dynamic Behaviour of Bridge Girder for High Speed Railway
Japanese No. 1074, Translated No. TR Kosoku Konkyu. 1074. National March at 25316, Tetsudo Nikon Railway, 1976 available New from Delhi 1982. Hashigeta March the Indian National ), Scientific Translation Railway Technical Research Report

and

Documentation

Centre,

1 lCC67 Partial No, 1976

( India

2nd September Ni Okaru Tetsudo,

translation Doteki ( Japanese Oto Ni Kansuru Kenkyu ) Hokoku,

Nikon Kokuyu Kokuyu

Tetsudo,

Tetsudo

Gijutsu

1s : lo454 - 19&I

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.5 )
EXAMPLE OF THE TITLE OF PAGE A STANDARD

E

OF A TRANSLATION

STANDARD
NF E44 190 1975 May

TRANSLATION
Instructions for Mounting and

Pumps -

Installation. Translated 9 Bahadur Translated De Montage Association at the Indian Standards Institution 110002 Notice ( AFNOR ) Paris ( F )

Shah Zafar Marg,

New Delhi

from NFE 44-190 Pompes Et D' Installation. Francaise De Normalisation

19

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.5 )
EXAMPLE SHOWING HEADING

F

OF FIRST

PAGE

OF

A TRANSLATION

OF A PATENT

Patent

German

Patent

No. 744682 March 1983 Darmstadt ) fermentation of low-sugar

Translation Otto Von Method

No. 26665, Keussler

1

( E. Marck

and equipment

for the continuous alcohol.

fermentable Patent

liquids for obtaining

filed on 22 March

1940 and patented

on 12 May

1943.

Class 6b Group Translated New Delhi Verfahren Vergarung

1601. 5 p, 2 illus. National ) zur ununterbrochenen Garflussigkeiten Reichsparentamt. anf Alkohol. ( Ger ) Scientific Documentation Centre, i

at the Indian 110012 ( India

I

und Einrichtung von zuckerarmen Reich

Issued by Deutsches

-- --___

-.

20

