IS : 4204 - 1967 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY FOR CAUSTIC SODA
(Fourth Reprint MAY 1993)

UDC 661*322 ; 614.8

0 BUREAU
MANAK

Copyright 1967 INDIAN STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

OF
BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 3

November 1967

AMENDMENT NO.1 OCTOBER 2010

TO
IS 4264 : 1967 CODE OF SAFETY FOR CAUSTIC SODA
(Page 8, clause 7.3) - Add the following at the end:
<Alternatively flakes should be packed with HDPE bags/container with HDPE liner. '

(CHD 8)
Rcprography Unit. SIS. New Delhi, India

IS : 4264 - 1967

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY FOR CAUSTIC SODA
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CDC 18
Chairman
SHRI

Rcjwesenting Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, Employment & Rehabilitation ), Bombay

N. S. MANKIKER

Alembers SKRI J. D. ADHIA SnaI S. hi. Macxxru~u SHRI S. K. BORKAR Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Bombay ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of Health ), New Delhi SHRI P. S. RXUACHAXDRAN( Altnnafe) Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute SHRI J. hl. DARE ( CSIR ), Nagpur DIRECTOR, TRAFFIC Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways), New Delhi DEPTH ( GENERAL ) Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals &in: J. M. GUHA SHN JOGINDERSINCH
SHRI

DR G.JAYARAMA RAO DRJAGDISHSHANKAR
S. N. L~WIRI

(klfematc)

Atomic Energy Establishment Trombay, Bomba) Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Department of Explosives ( Ministry of Works and Housing )

hlanufacturers' Indian Chemical Association, Bombay Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi DR V. C. MANKODI DR B. N. CHAKRAVARTY( Aftemotc ) SRRI M. N. Kmma (A&mate) Ministry of Defence ( DGL ) ti c. N. K. hfURTHY SHRI R. S. AcARWAL ( Altcmatr ) Ministry of Defence ( R 8; D ) SHRI NARENDRASZNCH DR K.J. BALAKRISHXA (.4~fcrnale) Indian Institute of Petroleum ( CSIR ), Dehra Dun &P~ENTATIVE TheaWestern India Match Company Ltd, Bombay ~;&;p?,N,NL20PAL Director General, IS1 ( &o&o Member ) Director (&em )
SURI G. G. hkNI.4~

SHR~ S. C. ROY ( Altema& )

DR A. K.

BHATTACHARYA

Deput? Director ( Chcm),

ISI (

Continucdon pup

2)

BUREAU OF MANAKBHAVAN,9

STANDARDS INDIAN BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC+ NEW DELHI 110002

ls:4264-1967 (Confinwdfrom~agr
1)

o
CDC 18 : 4

Industrial Chemical Hazards Subcommittee,
Convent7 SXRI S. R. BHISE Rcpresnting

Directorate General of Factory Advice Service 6. Labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, Employment & Rehabilitation), Bombay

Members Hindustan Organic Chemicala Ltd. Bombay SWRIJ. D. ADNIA SWRI S. M. MACHIRAJU (A&m&~ &ntral Public Health Engineering .Rcacarch SHRIJ. M. DAVE Institute ( CSIR 1, Nagpur DIRECTOR, TR4pplC Railway Board ( Mimstry of Railways ) DEPVIY Association, Manufacturers' Indian Chemical Bombay Factoria Ordnance Directorate General of SHRI 0. P. GUPTA _, ( Ministry of Defmce ) SHRI S. C. DAS GUPTA I Alfmmc 1 &so Standard Eastern Inc, Bombay . Snnx S. JAGANNATHAN SHRI K. 1'. VIJAYARAOWAVAN ( AIfernafc ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SWRX JOGINDERS~NGH New Delhi Amar Dye-Chcm Limited, Bombay Snru G. A. KULKARNI Department of Explosives ( Ministry of Works and SHRI S. N. LAIURI Housing ) SHRI S. C. ROY ( Alumaft ) Union Carbide India Limited,. Calcutta DR U. C. PATEL 1). Waldic and Company Limited, Calcutta SHRI K. C. %GHAVAN DR R. CHATTERJEE( Aftcrnafc ) The D. C? M. Chemical Works, New Delhi SHRI M. L. SETH SHRI L. R. GA~TAM ( Alternate) D! ??%&I\I . .

Panel for Drafting Safety Codes for Hazardous Clmemicals, CD6 18:4: 1
Convener SHRI M. L. SETH Mcmbrrs SHRI L. R. GA~TAM ( Alttmatc to Shri M. L. Seth) SHRI S. K. BABLT Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited, Sindti SWRX B. N. `hAKRAVAR-`Y Hindustan Steel Limited, Rancbi DR K. VI~WANAT~+N NAYAR Fertilizers and Chemicals Tra~ncor~ Limit& Alwaye The D. C. M. Chemical Works, New Delhi

2

IS:4!264-1967

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY FOR CAUSTIC SODA
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 June 1967, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 Caustic soda is an important basic chemical having large-volume use in industries such as raycn, paper and soap in addition to its use in a very large Caustic soda is a number of industries as an auxiliary process chemical. corrosive chemical and handling of it presents various hazards which are A sound code of practice will reduce the better prevented than cured. frequency of hazards and also, in many cases, the amount of damage caused by an accident. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes a code of safety concerning caustic soda. It describes the properties and essential safe handling and use of caustic soda. 2. TERMINOL~Y 2.1 3. 3.1 The terms defined OF Properties in IS : 41X-1966* CAUSTIC solid, 310 to 320X, and and deliquescent and IS : 4167-1966T shall apply. hazards relating to information for the

PROPERTIES Physical a) b) d)

SODA
physical properties are:

Important

Physical state Colour -

white or light grey, hygroscopic

c) Melting point Hygr?scopicio -

3.2

Chemical

and Hazardous

Properties and a few metals, such as alu&nium, these metals; slowly corrodes iron,

3.2.1 Caustic soda corrodes clothing tin, lead, zinc and alloys containing copper and Monel metal.

*Glossary of terms relating to chemical and radiation hazards and hazardous chcmic&. tGlossary of terms relating to air pollution. 3

IS : 4264 - 1967 Considerable heat is generated 3.2.2 Caustic soda destroys living tissues. on adding water to solid caustic soda or its strong solutions and this may cause boiling and spattering of hot solution. 4. HAZARDS ASSOCIATED WITH CAUSTIC SODA

4.1 Health Hazards - Caustic soda is dangerous when carelessly handled. Solid caustic soda or its solutions have marked corrosive action on all tissues of body. Signs and symptoms of irritation do not immediately become evident after contact with caustic soda, as a result, the worker may suffer injury before he realizes that the chemical is in contact with his body. 4.1.1 Acute Toxicity Contact Locul effect3- Caustic soda is dangerous to live tissue. with it causes burns, frequently deep ulceration and ultimate scarring. Severe burns result not only from the solid alkali but also from solutions of this compound. Even dilute solutions on prolonged contact exert a desMultiple tructive effect on tissues. Caustic soda is a strong primary irritant. small burns may result from exposure to dust or mist of the material. Contact with eyes either of solid caustic soda or its solutions may rapidly Molten caustic causes cause severe damage to the delicate eye tissues. severe injury both by reason of high temperature ( above 320�C ) and Ingestion either of the solid caustic corrosive nature of the compound. soda or its solution results in damage to mucuous membranes or deeper tissues. As a result, perforation may follow or subsequent extensive scar formation may occur. Death may occur if vital areas are penetrated into. Scarring may so constrict the damaged tissues that extensive corrective Inhalation of the dust or concentrated mist may surgery may be required. cause damage to upper respiratory tract and even to the lung tissue proper. The effects of irritation may vary from mild irritation of nasal membranes to severe pneumonitis depending on the severity of the exposure. 4.1.1.2 Systemic effects except those resulting from 4.1.2 Chronic Toxicity No general or systemic shock or those secondary effects are noted to tissue damage.

4.1.1.1

4.1.2.1 Local eficts - Repeated contact with dilute solutions may cause superficial destruction of skin in multiple areas and primary irritant dermatitis may result. Repeated inhalation ma.y similarly cause varying degrees of irritation to the tissues of the respiratory passage. 4.1.2.2 $stenric tissue damage. 5. HANDLING 5.1 Handling care should be taken to avoid soliThe strength of the solution may e&is-There are none `except those secondary to

AND

STORAGE

5.1.1 In handling caustic soda solution dification in the pipe lines and equipment. 4

IS:4264-1967 be easily determined from its density. All equipment should be kept clean by washing of the accumulation of solidified caustic and sodium carbonate that forms around small leakages. When disconnecting equipment or pipe lines, make sure that they are empty of caustic and they are washed,At such times, a hose with running water should always be available. Glandless pumps should preferably be used, otherwise packing glands of pumps should be shielded in order to prevent spraying of caustic solution. When spillage has occurred of solid or flakes it should be swept carefully with a broom and the area hosed down. In case of spillage of solution, the floor should be washed with water from a hose rather than swept. 5.1.2 Molten caustic has a temperature range of 320 to 3OO'G. Extreme care should be taken to avoid spurting of molten caustic in the caustic filling yard. The yard should be always kept clean. Any overflow or spillage of molten caustic should be allowed to solidify and then immediately washed away, otherwise a dangerous slippery surface will be left on the floor. Handling filled drums of`molten caustic is a dangerous practice which should not be followed unless the operator is well guarded. If hot caustic is to be run into a container the latter should be absolutely dry and When liquid enters into a container, free of acid to guard against explosion. extreme caution should be exercised to prevent splashing. 5.1.3 Accidents frequently occur while taking samples of molten caustic soda. A long handled nickel or steel ladle of small capacity should be used to scoop out the sample. It is not advisable to take samples of flowing molten caustic as there is always danger of spurting. Goggles, gloves, gum boots, aprons and safety helmets should be invariably worn whenever handling molten caustic soda. The supervisory staff should constantly bear in mind that all safety equipment should be properly and constantly used. The most common hazard is to the eye and should always be protected by suitable goggles., Use of transparent face shield is recommended in addition to safety goggles. 5.1.4 Solid caustic should be ground and flaked in a separate well ventilated room remote from other work rooms. Each man in the grinding room should be provided with adequate type of personal protective equipment. 5.1.5 Equipment for Handling

5.1.5.1 Pots containing boiling caustic soda should be provided with exhaust hood to carry off the mists and sprays. 5.1.5.2 Evaporators `and similar vessels used in handling liquid caustic soda under pressure should be tested periodically with cold water according to the standards laid down in the relevant pressure vessels code. 5

IS:4264-1967 5.1.5.3 Tanks should be provided with overflow arrangements in such a way that the Lliquid is conveyed to a safe place without causing harm to workers nearby. 5.1.5.4 Stumng boxes are sources of leaks. With modern materials of construction and gland packings or seals, this leakage may be well controlled. 5.1.5.5 To prevent leaks, pipe lines should be of seamless type and have welded flange joints. Depending on temperature and pressure, the gaskets may be of soft rubber or compressed asbestos. 5.1.5.6 Pipe lines exposed to low temperatures should be so arranged that they can-be heated to prevent crystallization of the solution. 5.1.5.7 All equipment used for manufacture, handling, storage or use of caustic soda should be regularly inspected and maintained in good condition. 5.1.5.8 During maintenance work when pipes are to be disconnected, workers should operate from above. Before breaking the point they should ensure that there is no pressure inside and that the line has been thoroughly drained, and if necessary, thoroughly rinsed with water. Flanges should always be opened from the far end. The valve which controls the line should be closed and locked and a ` MAN AT WORK ' sign should be hung on it until the repairs are complete. 5.1.6 &solving Caustk Soda

5.1.6.0

Dissolve solid caustic soda in one of the following ways.

5.1.6.1 Strip the drum and immerse the cake of solid caustic in the dissolving tank of water. 5.1.6.2 Perforate the drum suitably and suspend it above the dissolving tank and pump a stream of water into the drum allowing the solution to flow into the dissolving tank. 5.1.6.3 To avoid iron contamination, peel off the steel drum from solid cake of caustic before dissolving. In bulk addition rapid generation of heat is obtained and there is likelihood of local boiling and spurting of Dissolve flakes by addition to a well-agitated tank of water. the solution. Accidents frequently occur during the handling of caustic soda for making solutions and it is imperative that all safety equipment is properly used in this dissolving department. 5.2 Storage 5.2.1 Drum containers should be stored in dry locations to prevent rusting. They should be periodically inspected and spills, etc, attended to. Rusted containers become weak and they should be handled with extra care. 6

IS : 4264 - 1967

5.2.2 For stationary storage, mild steel tank or any other properly designed tank with alkali resistant lining should be used. They should be provided with manholes of at least 60 cm diameter protected with grills and cover. Top of the tank should be vented to atmosphere. 5.2.3 All tanks should be capable of being completely isolated from other tanks and processes by suitable valves. Where possible small portions of pipe lines should be removed or blanks should be inserted for additional safety. The tanks should be capable of being drained off completely. 5.2.4 Before repairs or cleaning, tanks should be completely drained and thoroughly washed. 5.2.5 Persons required to enter a tank should first make sure that the tank is empty, has been washed free of alkali and certified so by a competent authorized inspector or inspecting authority. They should wear adequate personal protective equipment including a safety belt securely attached to a rope the free end of which is held by a person standing outside the confined space. Supply of fresh breathable air to persons inside the tank should be ensured by proper means. 6. TANKERS
6.1 Precautions with Tankers -

remembered:

The following points are to be carefully

a) Tankers, unless they are specifically meant for storage and transport of caustic soda solution, should be thoroughly cleaned of all extraneous matter before use. b) During loading and unloading, isolated against any movement. the tanker s.hould be braked and

c) While loading and unloading spurting should be avoided and as an additional precaution anti-splash screens should. be used. d) Work on tankers should be supervised by foremen and only workers using approved type of personal protective equipment should be allowed to work. e) Compressed air should not be used for loading or unloading the tank wagons but pumps or gravity method should be used. f) All valves g) Water should be closed before disconnection. . should be freely available and used in case of spillage.

h) When empty, all openings and valves should be properly closed and the tanker returned promptly.
j) Safety

instructions should be stencilled on both sides of the tanker. 7

Is:4264-1967 7, PACKING AND LABELLING with Fig. 7ir

7.1 The containers of caustic soda should be labelled of IS : 1260-1958* which should contain the following text: ` SODIUM HYDROXIDE ( CAUSTIC SODA )

Danger : Do not get in eyes, on skin or clothing. Do not take internally_ In case of contact, flush with water copiously; in case of eyes flush Use goggles, face-shield, wrth water for 15 minutes and see the doctor. rubber aprons, gloves, gum boots and helmets while handling. ' 7.2 Solid - Solid caustic soda should be packed in mild steel drums of 24 gauge or 22 gauge. The container should be securely closed, the lid being tack-welded or expanded to a tight At. If the closure is not air-tight, moisture and carbon dioxide will be absorbed by casutic soda. Over the lid, a printed sealing foil of tin should be affixed. On this label, it should be clearly stated that the container is carrying a corrosive and caustic chemical. Precautions regarding the handling and the corrosive nature of chemical should be clearly written on the container. It should also be marked with paint with the name of the manufacturer, grade and weight of caustic soda material, and the year and month of manufacture. The container used for solid caustic soda is generally not corrugated. 7.3 Flakes - The mild steel drums used for flakes should be usually of 22 gauge black sheets and should be corrugated for greater strength. The lid should be expanded into position or should be tack-welded. All the other markings should be as for the solid drums. Roth solid and flake drums should be black painted. 7.4 Lye - Lye of 50 or 73 percent strength should be transported in tankers. The tankers should be generally painted in light grey or white with an alkali-resistant paint. The words `caustic soda 50 or 73 percent ' should be painted in large block letters horizontally across the tankers, on both sides. Precautions regarding the handling of the corrosive chemical shall be written on the label or on the printed tin-plate attached to the tanker, and should be prominently displayed. The words ` CORROSIVE CHEMICAL ' should in addition be stencilled on both sides of the tanker. 8. PREVENTIVE MEASURES

required to handle caustic soda in 8.1 Employee Traiuing -Workers any form should be instructed about the hazards involved and safe methods of work. They should be provided with adequate and appropriate personal protective equipment and its correct use should be ensured. They should be instructed about basic first-aid measures against alkali and the steps to *Code of symbolsfor labclling dangerourgoods. ( Sincerevid pa*). 8 ud *Iit in@ dew

IS t 4264 - 1967 be taken in the event of spillage of caustic soda. They should be instructed about the location and use of showers, eye fountains, hose lines,. etc. Food should not be stored or eaten in a work-area where caustic soda is handled. 8.2 Medical Examination - All new entrants should be given a preplacement medical examination before they are engaged in the manufacture of caustic soda. All workers should be regularly checked up by a physician with particular reference to dermatitis. 8.3 Personal Protective Equipment 8.3.1 All personnel handling caustic soda in any form should wear the following safety equipment:

4 b)

cl 4 4

Suitable close-fitting goggles with side shields. Rubber or PVC gloves for the hands with protection up to elbow. For handling molten and hot concentrated caustic soda ( above 1lO'C ), gloves made of asbestos lined inside with, PVC or rubber are recommended. Non-slippery rubber gum boots or rubber-coated canvas boots.

Rubber apron. Broad-brimmed alkali-resistant plastic or rubber hats to provide protection for head, face and neck from splashing of caustic soda, Suitable respirators or protective hoods when handling flakes, f1 granules or powdered caustic soda.

8.3.2 A readily accessible, welLmarked, quick-acting safety shower should Eye-washing be available in the area where caustic soda is handled. fountains or a hose with a soft gentle flow of water should be readily available for eye irrigation. These and all safety equipment should be maintained in good working condition `by periodic inspection and repair. 8.4 Accident Investigation - All the accidents occurring in a caustic soda plant should be thoroughly investigated to find out the causes of the accidects and to suggest remedial measures and the detailed report should be recorded properly for future reference. 9. FIRST-AID AND MEDICAL TREATMENT

9.1 General - Speed in removing caustic soda from the affected parts is of primary importance. Whether a full time physician is employed or not, industrial first-aid kits should be kept at all places where caustic soda is handled. 9.1.1 Copious and prolonged application of water to affected part is of foremost importance. The irrigation should be continued for as long as 1 to 9

Contaminated clothing should he removed promptly. In case of 2 hours. severe burns and those involving extensive areas of body shock may ensue, and in this case, patient should be laid in a supine position and kept reasonably warm until the physician, who should be called in attendence at once, arrives. No oil or ointment of any kind should be applied within first 24 hours after exposure or subsequently without orders from the physician. 9.1.2 Neutralization until thorough washing or 4-percent boric acid ammonium chloride or tion to skin. with acid or other chemicals should be postponed has been done. One-percent ammonium chloride solution is suitable for eye washing. Ten-percent P-percent acetic acid solution is suitable for applica-

9.2 Contact with Eyes - Even if minute quantities of caustic soda either in solid or liquid form enter the eyes, they should be irrigated immediately Eyelids should be with copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes. held apart during washing. A physician preferably an eye specialist should be called at once and if necessary, eye washing may be continued for another 15 minutes until he arrives. After the first washing, few drops of 3*5-percent pontocaine solution or an equally effective aqueous topical anaesthetic may be `instilled into the eyes. No oil or oily ointment should be used. 9.3 Ingestion-Do not attempt to induce vomitting. Patient should be encouraged to drink a large quanity of water. Dilute vinegar or a 5-percent solution of ammonium chloride may be administered freely if available. After dilution or neutralization of the alkali, whites of egg or paraffin oil may be taken for soothifig effect. Stomach tubes or emetics should not be used unless ordered by the physician. 10. DISPOSAL OF EMPTY CONTAINERS AND WASTE

10.1 Waste containing alkali is harmful to bacterial growth necessary for degradation of organic waste. Such wastes should be properly treated and neutralized before it is led into sewers, rivers, ponds or open fields. 10.2 Disposal of Empty Containers

10.2.1 Empty flake-drums should be thoroughly washed with water by filling to the brim, agitating and pouring out the water at least six times. Before washing, the drum should be visually. examined to see that no appreciable quantities of caustic flakes are sticking inside. 102.2 Solid.drums are usually cut open, so the drum sheets should be washed profusely with water before .disposal. In case the solid csustic is dissolved out of the uncut drum, the empty drum should be treated like the empty flake drum bet&e disposal. 10.2.3 In the case of returnable flake drums, care should be taken tightly close and reseal the lid before returning the empty drums. 10 to

BUREAU
Heedquerters Telephones Regionel Central :

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Menak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002

: 331 01 31

Telegrams

: Manaksanath8

331 13 75 Offices :

(Common to all Offices) Telephone 331 01 31 ! 331 13 75 37 86 62 21843 41 2916 6 32 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9. Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg.

NEW DELHI 110002 * Eastern m l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. ' V.I.P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 t Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol. Andheri (East), BOMBAY 400093 Brench Offices : `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD t Peenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage. Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 660058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road. T.T. Nagar. BHOPAL 462003 380001

2 63 48 39 49 65 55 40 21 6 36 27 2 67 05 a-71 19 96 3 31 77 231083 634 71 21 68 76 5 56 07 6 23 06

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 Kalai Kathir Building, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 Quality Marking Centre, N.H. IV, N.I.T., FARIDABAD 121001 Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 5315 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane. GUWAHATI 781003 S-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, ( Nampally Station Road ) HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAJPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Plot No, A-9, House No. 561/63, LUCKNOW 226005 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA District Industries Centre Complex, SRINAGAR 190011 Sindhu Nagar. Kanpur Road, 800013 Bagh-e-Ah Maidan.

T. C. No. 14/1421, University P. 0.. Palayam. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 fnspection Offices (With Sale Point)

6 21 04

:
62 61 71 6 24 36

Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 `Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee P. 0. Princep Street, CALCUTTA t $ Sales Office iS at Unitv Building. BANGALORE Approach.

27 68 00 89 66 28 22 39 71

Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY Narasimharaja Square.

Printed at Dee Kav Printers. New Delhi. India

