**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 7354-4 (1974) : Guide on reliability of electronic and 
electrical items^ Part 4: Collection of 

reliability, availability and maintainability data from 
performance [LITD 2: Reliability of Electronic and 
Electrical Components and Equipment] 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS i 73S4 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF 
ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS 

PART IV COULECTION OF RELIABILITY, AVAILABILITY 

AND MAINTAINABILITY DATA FROM 

FIELD PERFORMANCE 



Second Reprint NOVFMBER 19K3 
( Intoiporating Amendments No. I and 2 ) 



UDC 62r:58 ( 083'4 ) 




© CnpyriRht 1981 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSIITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH '/MAR MARG 

NEW DELI^I llOOOI 

Cr 3 ' September 1974 



IS : 7354 ( Part IV ) ^ 1974 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF 
ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS 

PART IV COLLECTION OF RELIABILITY, AVAILABILITY 

AND MAINTAINABILITY DATA FROM 

FIELD PERFORMANCE 

Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and 
Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC 54 

Chairman Rtpresfnting 

Shri H. R. Bapu Sekthauam BLarat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

MtmbtTS 

Sniu P. S. K. Prasah ( AlternaU to 
Shri H. R. Bapu Srrlharam ) 
Buio B. Bhasin Ministry of Defence ( DGT ) 

Shri G. R. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. A. Claydon Lucas- TVS Ltd, Madras 

Shri M. A. SrinivamaN ( Altematt ) 
Dr p. K. Dt'TTA Philips India Ltd, Bombay 

Ckntral Standardization 
Okfickr ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Ganuuly Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Miniitry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
Shri V. K. Khandklwal ( Alternate) 
Skri B. p. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shui K. C (jOWKishankar Drpartmrnt of I'^lcrtronici, New Delhi 

Shri John Francis l^osts and Tclrpraphs Board, New Delhi 

Joint DiKFCTow, MRS ( ElkC- Railway Hoard ( Mmistry oi Railways ) 
TKU.M. ), MTP ( R ) 

Dkpitty Diueotor ( Electri- 
tal ). RDSO ( AllernaU ) 
Shri H. sS. Jolly All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri S. A. Karhikattk Instrumentation Ltd, Kota 

Srrt a. p. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shhi V. C. MATJiCR The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' 

Association, Bombay 
SuRl S. R. NfhHTA Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Aiiociation, 

Bombay 

( Continued en page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyrtght Act i XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduct)on in whole or m part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher ihall be deemed to be an mfrmgcmcnt of copyright under the said Act. 



IS t 7354 I Part IV ) • 1974 

( Continutd from pag* I ) 

Mitnbtfs Represtnting 

Shri N. G. Nanda Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad 

Srri T. R. Mehta ( Alttrnatf ) 
Shri D. V. Petkar Bhabha Atomic Rcjcarch Centre, Trombay, 

Bombay 

Shri A. K. Babar ( AUirnatt ) 
Shri V, Rama Rao Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri C D. Murty ( AUtrnaU ) 
Shri K, Ramoofal Indian Scientific Satellite Project, Bangalore 

Shri N. S. Satryanarayanan Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri K. Vaidyanathan ( AlUmaU ) 
Dr Y. V. SoMAYAJULU National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri P. Suryanarayana ( AlternaU ) 
Dr S. S. SaiVASTAVA Directorate of Scientific Evaluation, Ministry of 

Defence (R&D) 

Dr R. C. Garo ( Altirnate ) 
Shri N. Skinivasan, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offici* Membn ) 

Director ( h Ice tech ) ( Stcrttary ) 



IS ; 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF 
ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS 

PART IV COLLECTION OF RELIABILITY, AVAILABILITY 

AND MAINTAINABILITY DATA FROM 

FIELD PERFORMANCE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part IV ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 19 June 1974, after the draft finalized by the 
Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotcchnical Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard provides guidance for the collection of reliability data 
relating to the field performance of electronic and electrical items. It 
provides ft>r the acquisition of data sufficiently comprehensive to permit 
detailed fiihire and failure-rate analysis of items operating under various 
conditions, namely, time, environment, storage, stand-by, repair, etc. 

0.2.1 It is also emphasized in this standard that meaningful reliability 
data shall include the data on successes ( performance without failure), as 
well as (lata on failures. In other words, this standard is not intended to 
be only a failure-reporting document. 

0.2.2 This standard also provides guidance for the collection of data 
from which the maintenance and availability aspects of items may be 
considered. 

0.2.3 In all cases, it is important to distinguish between the items 
which fail and items which are wrongly removed. 

0.3 This standard is largely based on lEC Pub 362-1971 * Guide for the 
collection of reliability, availability and maintainability data from field 
performance of electronic items', issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



♦Rulca for rounding off numerical values ( rtvited). 



IS ; 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This staiidar(] ( Part IV ) provides guidance for the collection of 

reliability <Lita iclating to ihc fa hi ])ci fur'nancc of electronic and 
(electrical itc^ms. It also provides i^uid.incc lor the collection of data 
from which niaintciiancc and availability as{>ccts of items may be 
con si (J t led. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose oi'this standard, the teims and definilions covered in 
IS : 18{;5 ( Part XXXIX )-1974* bhall apply. 

3. OBJECTIVES 

3.1 The specific objectives of the collection of relial)ility data on the field 
performance of electronic and electrical items are: 

a) To provide for a smvey of the actual reliability level and, hence, 
to enable the predicted reliability characteristic of the item to b(* 
compared with field data, and thereby improve future i)redictions; 

b) To piovide data for irn]:>roving the reliability, both r»f the current 
item and of fulure developments; and 

c) To provide data for the organization and management of the 
maintenaner ojjeration f pievcuiive niainteir.ince, cuirective 
maintenance, si i vice personnel, spare paits stores, etc ). 

4. DATA REQUIRED 

4.1 Consideration of the objectives sp'cified in 3, defines the need for a 
systejn wldeh provides for the culh.etion ofducutnentcd data covering: 

a) the total population under ol)ser\atioi), 

b) o[)erational conditions, 

c) failmcs of the items, and 

d) maintenance operations. 

5. GUIDELINES 

5.1 It is the int virion of this stan lard to pr )vi(le <ti,,' jrlines for setting 
up data collection schemes which aie consistent with 3 and 4, and which 
may be applied either during investig.itions of samples of it^m, or on a 
mon- widesj^read basis by large maintenance and/or service orgarhzations. 

5.2 It is considered that, if such guidclir)es arc followed, accuracy and 
completeness ol reporting, which are param )unt if such schemes are to 
be of value, will be protnoted by the collection of standardized 



*ElccirotccliUic.il vucabiilary: Part XXXIX Reliability of tlfciionic and electrical 
items. 



IS : 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

information. Moreover, such standardization will f;icilitate the inter- 
change of information between users on one hand and manufacturers and 
designers on the other hand. 

NuTE — To obtain opiimum results from the coUrrtion of data, it h drsirrd that 
the entire prograriiine of reporting, analysis and dissemination of reasults be closely 
co-ordinated. 

6. REPORTS 

6.0 General — The suggested contents of reports covering over-all use, 
held failures and preventive maintenance are shuwn in Appendix A, for 
reporting on both the performance of mdividual items and on the whole 
population under consideration. It should be noted that, in the case of 
reports on individual items, the relative content of use and failure reports 
will vary markedly with the items considered and the type of operation. 
For instance, in the case of large installations maintained in situ, the use 
and failure reports will probably be combined, whereas in the case of 
smaller equipment maintained at a central workshop, simple failure 
reports will probably be prepared by the service engineer and use reports 
bv the office controlling the operation of the equipment. 

Note 1 — Thr information called for in Appendix A is intended to provide data, 
whereby the reliabilitv of items functioning under specific conditions in the field may 
be assessed and cooipared with the predicted reliability of those items when function- 
ing under the same or closely similar conditions. Alternatively, if the items in the 
total population under observation are operating under somewhat different conditions, 
the results of oprraiion under these difterent condio jris may furnish information of 
significance from the point of view of the applicability of the item, or measures 
needed for its reliabilitv improvement. 

NoTK 2 — SufHciently detailed reports permit the estimation of reliability, not 
only of the elements, but also of the items to which the elements pertain. Of course, 
the po{>ulations considered in the reports should be homopenenus from the point of 
view of the constitution and woiking conditions of the items forming these populations. 

Note 3 — Failure rates are determined for a pivrn period of reference. Hence, the 
failures reported bv mems of thr form suggested in Appendix A should correspond, 
time-wisr, to the * usr ' experience of thr total population of similar items. It is 
important not (ndv thai the same pojiulations be involved in both failure and use 
reports l^^J^ ^'^^ '1^^^ ^^^ ^"^^^ pt-riods of reference in each be suitably co-ordinated. 
Correct data in resj)ect to the f.me history of thr item? is of fundamental value, 

6.1 Use Reporting — - Data reporting should be supported by 
information on the use of the items. Where schemes are in operation for 
the reporting of all failures, it is necessary to collect data on the use of 
the whole population of items ( the total number of similar items under 
observation ). 

6.2 Failure Reporting 

6.2.1 Failure reports should cover all failures which have been 
observed. They should also contain sulficient information to identify 
misuse failures. Failures considered to be attributable to any maintenance 
action should be so noted. ^ 



IS I 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

C.2,2 Appendix A is considered to be sufficiently comprehensive to covei 
the requirements of detailed investigation of an individual failure. Where 
economic reasons or lack of resources make it undesirable to collect all 
of the fiilure data indicated, it may be desirable to agree upon a short- 
ened form of report which may be used to collect limited data on all 
relevant failures, with an option to call for the full report in specific 
cases. 

6.2.3 Appendix A docs not provide the physical format for a failure form. 
As far as'the equipment/system is concerned, an important part of the 
data such as the general operating conditions, may be found in other 
documents, particularly the use report. 

6,3 Preventive Maintenance Reporting — Essentially, preventive 
maintenance is scheduled so as to forestall failure or eliminate failure 
entirely. Therefore, reporting action taken in this sense is not a failure 
report nor is it a use report. However, since the data are essentially the 
same as those required for 6.1 and 6.2, the information may be included 
in the same scheme. When no replacements or repairs are made, the 
action may be classified as a *Use* report. When the preventive 
maintenance action resiilts in a replacement or repair, the report may be 
treated as a ^Failure' report even though the item has in fact not failed 
in operation. 

6.3* I These differences are detectable when the Field Performance 
Report is accurately completed. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clauses 6.0, 6.2.2 and 6.2,3 ) 

FIELD PERFORMANCE REPORT 

A-0. Code reference '•r and T* below in parentheses refer respectively to 
^Individual' and 'Population* reporting. Numerals in parentheses refer 
to clauses in the standard or to notes in this Appendix. 

A-1. NUMBER AND DATE OF REPORT ( LP. ) 

A-2- NAME AND ADDRESS OF USER, LOCATION OF ITEM (L) 

.A-3. NATURE OF REPORT 

a) *Usc' report ( see 6.1 ). 

b) 'Failure' report ( see 6.2 ). 

c) Trcvcntivc maintenance' report ^sii 6.3 ). 

6 



IS : 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 
A-4. ITEM IDENTIFICATION ( LP., Note 1 ) 
A-5. NUMBER OF ITEMS CONSIDERED ( P., Note 2 ) 
A-6- TIME HISTORY OF ITEM { Note 3 ) 

a) Date of manufacture or of reconditioning ( I. ). 

b) Built or nnodified state — nature and date of modifications likely to 
change reliability of item ( I. P. ). 

Note — Underline modification likely to concern failures noted in thii 
report. 

c) Date first placed in use ( I., Note 4 ). 

d) Cumulative o^^crating time ( or cycles ) elapsed since this date 
( LP. ) [ see A.6 ( c ) ]. 

e) Date placed in use since last modification noted in A-6( b ) 

(I., Note 4). 

f ) Date last placed in use ( I., Note 4 ). 

g) Cumulative operating time ( or cycles ) elapsed since this date 
( I.P. ) [see A-6( b ) ]. 

h) Storage or tran^^portation conditions including remarks on packing 
and cumulative time prior to last place in use (I. P., Note 4). 

j) Nature and date of last maintenance task — operating time ( or 
cycles ) elapsed since this date ( I. ). 

k) Cumulative time non-operational but believed serviceable { LP. ). 

m) Cumulative time non-operational but believed unserviceable 

(LP.), 
n) Cumulative time on stand-by ( LP, ). 

A-7. GENERAL OPERATING CONDITIONS ( LP. ) 
A-7.1 Type of Installation 
A-7J.1 Mobility Level 

a) Stationary. , 

b) Transportable. 

c) Portable ( item specially built for easy transportation by one man 

only ). 



IS : 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

A-7.1.2 Nature of Support 

a) On ground. 

b) Carried by man ( for example, man pack ). 
(*) In land vehicle. 

d) In ship. 

c) In aircraft. 

f ) Other ( specify ). 

A-7.2 Specific Environment 

a) Indoors, open air under shelter, open air, etc. 

b) Temperature range ( mean and extreme values ). 

c) Humidity ( absolute and/or relative ) range ( mean and extreme 
values ). 

d) Environmental pressure range ( mean and extreme values ). 

e) Nature of atmosphere ( air conditioned, temperature regulated, 
cleardirjess monitored^ dusty, sandy, salty, corrosive, etc ). 

f ) Vibrations, shocks, bumps ( frequency, amplitude, acceleration, 

waveform, etc ). 

g) Others ( specify ). 

A-7.3 Mode of Operation 

a) Continuous. 

b) Intermittent ( give cycle ). 
(•) Stand-by. 

d) Single operation ( for examplr, onr shot devices ). 

e) Storage. 

A-8. ITEM FAILURE DESCRIPTION 

A-8,1 Symptoms and Premonitory Signs ( L ) 

A-8.2 Failure Detected During Operation, Periodic Checks aqd 
Preventive Maintenance Schedules ( I. ) 

A-8,3 Item Failure Mode ( Identification of Functions Afifected ) 

( I.P. ) 

A-8. 4 Failure Causes ( I.P., Note 5 ) 

a) Inherent to item under observation. 

b) Misuse failure. 



IS I 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

c) Induced by maintenance action. 

d) External to item under observation ( Note 6 ). 

e) Secondary ( caused by related item ). 

f ) Under investigation. 

g) Unknown. 

h) Unconfirmed. 

A.9. ITEM FAILURE ANALYSIS ( Note 7 ) 

A-9.1 List ( Identification ) and Circuit Reference of Failed Parts 

(I.) 

A-9,2 Part Failure Mode ( L, Note 8 ) 

A«*9*3 List ( Identification ) and Circuit Reference of Parts 
Primarily Responsible for Item Failure ( LP. ) 

A-9.4 If Necessary, Parts beang Retained Pending Investigation 
and Their Location ( L ) 

A-IO. ACTION TAKEN ( LP. ) 

A^lO.l Diagnose to: Item, Part 

Corrrctby: Reolaccnicnt, repair, adjustment, modification, 
lubrication. 

Verify by: Check, test. 

A-10.2 Active Technician Time ( Diagnostic-f Repair -f Tests -f ... ) 

A-10.3 Down-time ( Including, for Escample, Waiting for Com- 
ponentS) Transport, etc ) 

A-10.4 Maintenance Level 

All. ASSESSMENT BY FIELD OR MAINTENANCE ENGINEER 

( I.P. ) 
A-lLl Additional Pertinent Data ( Note 9 ) 
A-li.2 Observations and Opinions as to Cause of Failure ( Note 10 ) 

A-12. POSITION, NAME AND SIGNATURE OF THE ORIGINA- 
TOR OF THE REPORT ( LP. ) 

A-13. POSITION, NAME AND SIGNATURE OF THE PERSON 
RESPONSIBLE FOR EDITING THE REPORT ( LP., Note 11 ) 

NoTK 1 — The more cf)in[>lctc ihc indratification of tlic ilrrn involved, the Ins 
giicssiri.,' tlir analyit does, and corrcciivr actijn may result more rapidly. 



IS s 7354 ( Part IV ) - 1974 

At applicable for an item and its application, give type, series or mark, serials' 
number, date of manufacture, and name of the manufacturer of the itemfs), specifi- 
cation ( if applicable ) and drawing circuit diagram, schematic, item number(s) and 
revision number(s). 

NoTK 2 — When this report is used to report successful operational periods or 
misMons and preventive maintenance action, it is possible to cover more than one 
item of basically identical design. The serial number and date of manufacture may 
have to be listed separately, but otherwise all data are equally applicable to all 
items covered. 

Noa« 3 — The history data arc expected to he available on major items or major 
sub-assemblies of the item. Any item having an ^elapsed time indicator or cycle 
counter may be construed to be a major itrm. Each major item should have a 
history record from which these data may be obtained. Such data sources include 
plant or facility operating records and maintenance rework. If these data are avaiU 
able for smaller items, component parts, etc, it will aid in analysis and corrective 
action tasks. 

If the item is intended for two or more differently defined output functions, the 
information of paragraphs (d), (g) and (n) should be given for all functions relevant 
to the failure. 

Note 4 — Successive operations corresponding to the operation cycle of A"7.3(b) 
are not reported as 'placed in use*. 

NoTK 5 — In cases where the failure ynmediatcly follows a period of transport, 
storage or stand-by, the relevant conditions shall be stated. 

Note 6 — Encessive mains voltage or fluctuations, overloads, interruption, etc. 
Details of conditions immediately before the failure are useful. 

Note 7 — Where icveral detail components ( or parts ) have failed at the same 
time, each such component ( or part ) shall be indentilied. 

Note 8 — Open or phort-circut, intermittent operation, deterioration of perform- 
ance outside specified limits, mechanical faults, etc. 

Note9 — If available, drawings, photographs and test data sheets should be 
attached to the reptort. If required, failed items should be returned to the responsible 
authority. In case of removal of an item from observation, it shall be reported to 
the responsible authorities. 

Note 10 — In offering observations, consideration should be given to che prime 
cause of failure and secondarv failures or cause and secondary effects of a failure, 
such as the weakening of a spring or the deterioration of a contact and its effect on 
wear-out or life of any associated item. 

Note 1 1 — Personi to whom a copy of the report is to go should be mentioned in 
the report. 



10 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Bttse Units 








Quantity 


UNrr 


Symbol 




Length 

Mass 

Time 

I lectric current 

Therrnodynamic 

temperature 
Lumiaous intensity 
Amauat of substance 


metre 

kilogram 

second 

ampere 

kclviii 

can del a 
mole 


in 

kg 

s 

A 
K 

cd 
mol 




Supplementary Units 








QUM^TITY 


Unit 


SVMHOL 




Plane angle 
Solid angle 


radian 
steradian 


rad 
»r 




Derived UnU«» 








Quantity 


Unit 


SVMIIOL 


DmiNrnoN 


Force 


newt on 


N 


1 N 1 kp m!^-- 


Energy 


joule 


J 


\ 1 1 N.m 


Power 


vva tT 


VV 


1 W I J s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


\ \Vb I V s 


Flux density 


tCHlu 


I 


IT I Wb/m'2 


Frequency 


bcrt/ 


Uz 


1 Hz - 1 c/s (s-1) 


Electric conductance 


sicnicas 


s 


IS - 1. A/V 


Electromotive force 


voM 


V 


1 V - 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa " 1 N/m- 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 



Telephones : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 

Regional Offices : 

Western : Novalty Chambers, Grant Road 

Eastern : 5 Chowringhoe Approach 

Southern : C.l.T, Campus 

Northern ; 669, Phase VI) 



Telegrams 



BOMBAY 400007 

Calcutta 7000 72 

MADRAS 600113 
S A S. NAGAR 
(IWOHALI) 1C>0051 



Manaksanstha 

Telephone 

89 65 28 
27 50 90 
41 24 42 

^78 26 



Briinch Offices : 

*Pu8hpak\ Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur AHMADABAD 380001 2 03 91 

•F* Block, Unity Bldg, Naraaimharaja Square BANGALORE 560002 22 48 05 

Gaofl^trl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T.T, Nagar BHOPAL 462003 6 27 16 
22E K^'paoa Area BHUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 

e-8-96C L. N, .Gupta Marg HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

ft 14 Yudhistor Marg, C Schema JAIPUR 302005 6 98 32 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar KANPUR 208005 4 72 02 

Patliputra Industrial Estate P ATNA 800013 6 28 08 

Hantex Bldg {Zn6 Floor). Riy Station Road TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 

PrlSttiTaFsimcol^rliiTfn^ lndT« 



