**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10552 (1983) : buckets to be used in power driven bucket 
type sewer cleaning machine [CED 24: Public Health 
Engineering . ] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS i 10552 -T 983 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR BUCKETS TO BE USED 

IN POWER DRIVEN BUCKET TYPE 

SEWER CLEANING MACHINE 



UDC 628'2S 




IJNDfAN STANIIAPDS INS! ITU! ION 

MANAK BirAVAR9 TMIJADUR 5HAH JEAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI nCKHG 



IS : 10552 - 19S3 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR BUCKETS TO BE USED 

IN POWER DRIVEN BUCKET TYPE 

SEWER CLEANING MACHINE 



Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee, 

BDC 40 

Chairman Representing 

Dr B. 3. SuNDARESAN National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 

Members 

Shri R. Paramasivam ( Alternate to 
Dr B. B. Sundaresan ) 
Adviser ( PHE ) Ministry of Works & Housing, New Delhi 

Dr S. R. Sukla ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Bopardikar Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. C P. Chaudhary Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Chief Engineer Department of Health, Government of West 

Bengal-Calcutta 
Shri T. N. Chatterjbe ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Water ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 

Shri Jai Narain ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Choudhury Geo-Miller & Co, Calcutta 

Shri D. R. Mall ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Dasgupta Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. J. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Dy Municipal Commissioner Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 

Bombay 
Hydraulic Engineer ( Alternate I ) 
Chief Engineer ( Sewerage ) 
( Alternate II ) 
Shri B. R. N. Gupta Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri K. V. Krishnamurthy 
( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



18:10552-1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. p. James Local Administration & Social Welfare ( F ) 

P^pa^tment, Trivandium 
Shri R. Krishnaswamy Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Shri S. A. Jagdesan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Y. Madan The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Majumdar Paterson Engineering Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri A. R. Mir Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar 
Shri G. M. Kanth ( Alternate ) 
SHRf S S. Naik Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. R. Kenkre ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. M. Rahul ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. Pat el Indian Water Works Association, Bombay 

Prof S. Subha Rao All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri A. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Representative Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Representative Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Haryana, Chandigarh 
Shri K. K. Gandhi ( Alternate) 
Shri T. P. Sharma " M. P. State Prevention and Control of Water 

Pollution Board, Bhopal 
Dr G. K. Khare ( Alternate ) 
SiotlS. S. Srivastava Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

Siffi.1 S, A. SwAMY The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

S«u P; S. Tendolkar Candy Filters ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. L. f Astri ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. G. Vaidya Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 
Shri V. Vardarajan Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 

Board, Madras 
Shri S. Daivamani ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. K. Avasthy 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 

Sewer Cleaning Equipment Subcommittee, BDC 40 : 3 
Convener 
Shri B. R. N. Gupta Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

Members New Delhi 

Shri R. R. Bagri Clear Water Ltd, New Delhi 

( Continued on page 6 ) 



IS : 10552 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR BUCKETS TO BE USED 

IN POWER DRIVEN BUCKEI TYPE 

SEWER CLEANING MACHINE 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 31 May 1983, after the draft finalized by the Public Health 
Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 For removing accumulated silt and debris from a sewer, power driven 
bucket type sewer cleaning machine should be preferred to old methods, 
such as manual cleaning by rope pulling which are not considered to be 
hygienically safe* This standard has been prepared with a view to provid- 
ing guidance regarding dimension, shape and material of buckets commonly 
employed in power driven bucket type sewer cleaning machine. General 
requirements for power driven bucket type sewer cleaning machine have 
been covered in Indian Standard 'Requirements for power driven type 
sewer cleaning machine' ( under preparation ). 

0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down requirements regs^rdiog materials, capacity 
nd construction of different sizes of buckets me4 for cleaning of sewer by 
ameans of the power driven bucket type machines, 



''fRulcs for foundjijg oflF numerical values ( revised ), 

3 



IS : 10552 - 1983 
2- MATERIALS 



!♦ 



2.1 Buckets shall be made of mild steel plate conforming to IS : 2062-1980' 
hot rolled steel sheet/plate conforming to IS : 1079-1973t (Grade *0', *D', 
'DD' or 'EDD* quality) or cold i oiled steel s^heet/plate conforming to 
IS : 513-1973J (Grade *D', 'DD' or *EDD' quality). Materials for round 
bars shall conform to IS ; 432 (Part 1)-1966§. 

2.2 Hooking hole or other attachments may be provided on the bucket 
for facilitating discharge. Additional steel plates on either side should be 
welded around the hooking hole. 

2.3 The thickness of steel sheets/plates used for fabrication of buckets 
shall not be less than 3 mm. 

3. SIZE AND CAPACITY 

3.1 The sizes and capacity of buckets shall be in accordance with Table 1. 





TABLE 1 


DIMENSION OF BUCKETS 




Sl 


Designation 


Overall Dia 


Overall Length 


No. 




(mm) 


(mm) 


i) 


Bl 


100 


600 


ii) 


B2 


150 


700 


iii) 


B3 


250 


900 


iv) 


B4 


300 


1 000 



4. CONSTRUCTION 

4.1 Each bucket shall be designed with construction features like ribs, 
stiflfening flats, etc, to withstand stress and strain arising during operation 
in the sewer. 

4.2 The bucket shall be of cylindro-conical shape. 

4.3 The bucket shall be provided with hinged flap bottoms. The hinged 
flap bottom shall automatically open when being pulled into the sewers. 
On being pulled out in reverse direction, the flaps shall automatically 
close. Each bucket shall be provided with bails for connecting to the 
pulling ropes. 

♦Specification for structural steel ( fusion welding quaUty ) ( second revision ). 

tSpecification for hot rolled carbon steel sheet and strip ( third revision ), 

JSpecification for cold rolled carbon steel, sheets ( second revision ). 

^Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire 
for concrete reinforcement: Part I Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars ( jeco/if^ 
revision), ,.. .; 



IS : 10552 - 1983 



4.4 Cutting lips, drain holes and other features may be provided depend- 
ing upon manufacturer's design. 

4.5 The buckets should be so designed that they can be satisfactorily 
emptied with the help of the rotating hook arms or with the help of truck 
loader attachments provided on the machine. >^ 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each bucket shall have a plate firmly attached, with the following 
particulars: 

a) Manufacturers' name and trade-mark, 

b) Designation, and 

c) Year of manufacture. 

5.1.1 Each bucket may also be marked with the IS! Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



18:10552-1983 

(Continued from page 2) 

Members Representing 

Shri p. K. Banerjee Choudhary Corporation of Calcutta 

Shrj a. C. Bhalla Mechanical Movements Private Ltd, Delhi 

Shri N. C. Bhalla ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. J. Datta Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Dy Chief Engineer ( Sewerage ) Municipal Corporation of Grater Bombay, 

Bombay 
Executive Engineer 
( Maintenance ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Gandhi Public Health Engineering Department, Govern- 

ment of Haryana 
Shri Jai Narain Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi 

Shri R. Krishnasv^amy Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Shri S. A. Jagdesan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. S. Naik Hydraulic General Engineers Ltd, Bcmibay 

Shri R. S. Gaitende ( Alternate ) 
&iRi KisHQRB K. Sanghani Ahmadabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmadabad 

Shri V. Varadarajan Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and Drainage 

Board, Madras 
Shri S. Daivamani ( Alternate ) 



