( Reaffirmed 1995 )

IS : 12180- 1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR NOISE MEASUREMENT OF AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS
Agricultural
PROF M. M.

Tractors
MEHTA

and Power Tillers Sectional
Escorts Limited, Agricultural Escorts Limited, Indian Society Delhi

Committee,

AFDC 52
of

Chairman

Rcprrscnting Faridabad; and Indian Society Engineers, New Delhi Faridabad of Agricultural Engineers, New

Members SHRI RIPDAMAN SINGE ( Alfrmat4 I to Prof M.M.Mehta) SHRI J. P. SIXENA ( Allcrnalr II to Prof M. M. Mehta ) DR A. ALAM SHRI A. V. ALEXANDER SHRI A. JINDAL ( Alternate ) SHRI B~UPENDRA SHRI A.K. CHAKRAVARTY

Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi Escorts Tractors Limited, Faridabad National Agricultural Co-operative Marketing Federation of India Limited, New Delhi National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, Bombay Punjab Tractors Limited, Ropar

SHRI CEIANDRA MOHAN SHRI G. S. &EAL ( Alfernat sI) SHRI S. S. GREWAL ( Alternate : [I 1 Auto Tractors Ltd, Pratapgarh SHRI N. C. GUPTA Development Commissioner ( Small Scale IndusSHRI K. S. LAXBA tries ) ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi SHRI G. N. MEHTA Gujarat Tractors Corporation Ltd, Vadodara SHRI G. C. PATEL ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. MISHRA Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Budni SHRI R. S. DASS ( Alfcrnatc ) DR V. K. MITTAL Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR R. B. RAM ( Alternate) SHRI J. S. MTJDHAR HMT Limited (Tractor Division ).. Pinjore SHRI G. B. LAL ( Alternatr ) ,Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Bombay SHRI H. M. MUTTA SHRI A.R. SONALKAR (Alternate) VST Tillers Tractors Limited, Bangalore SHRI A. T. NAHENDER SERI V. F'RASRANT RAO ( Alternate I ) SIIRI K. CHANDRASEKHAR RAO ( Alternate II ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@ Cofiyright 1988
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :I2180 - 1987

Members
SHRI R. N1o.i~ SHRI K. N.

Representing Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur

GAUR ( Alternate )

DRT.P. OJHA

Central Institute of ( ICAR ), Bhopal

Agricultural

Engineering

STTRI J. PRASAD ( Alternate ) SHRI S. B.PANDYA SHRI R. N. P~TIL

SHRI V. A. FATIL SHRI R. TIWARI ( Alfcrnate ) SHRI V. V. PATIL SHRI HUDSON PETER

National Farmers Organization, New Delhi Ministry of Agriculture ( Department-of Agriculture and Co-operation ), New Delhi Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and g;;Frg Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture),

Bharat Krishak Samaj, New Delhi Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation Limited, Ernakulam SHRI JOHN MATRAI ( Ahnate ) Bharat Earthmovers Ltd, Bangalore SHRX S. R. PR.~BH.~EAR SHRI C. GANGADHARAIAH ( Alternate ) Tractors and Farm Equipment Ltd, Madras SERI M. RAMBSWAMY SHRI S. R~Nc+~N.%TH.w ( Alternate I ) SHRI G. V~NKATARAM.%N ( Alf~rnafe II ) Eichet Goodearth Limited, Ballabgarh DR S. SATYAMURTY SHRI SUNIL KUMAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development SHRI UDAYAN SEN ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi Director General, BIS ( Ex-oflcio Member ) SHRI T. PERNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary SHRI R. N. SHARMA Joint Director ( Agri & Food ), BIS

lS:12180-1987

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR NOISE MEASUREMENT OF AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 June 1987, after the draft finalized by the Agricultural Tractors and Power Tillers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 With the increasing emphasis on safety and comfort of the operators and bystanders, efforts are being made to reduce the noise level from A need was, therefore, felt agricultural tractors to an acceptable limit. to formulate this standard at the first instance for laying down the methodology for measuring the noise level. 0.3 In the preparation the following: IS0 of this standard, assistance has been taken from

5131-1982 Acoustics Tractors and machinery for of noise at the operaagriculture and forestry - Measurement International Organization tor's position Survey method. for Standardization. 7216 Acoustics - Agricultural and forestry wheeled and self-propelled machines - Measurement of noise in motion. International Organization for Standardi-

ISO/DIS tractors emitted zation.

0.4 In reporting the result of a test, made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard agricultural tractors
*Rules for rounding

covers methodology for measuring noise at the operator's and the bystander's positions.
off numerical values ( revised ),

of

3

IS : 12180- 1987 2. GENERAL 2.1 The values measured
shall be A-weighted sound pressure levels for the overall sound levels expressed in decibels. Spectral analysis is optional. If required, the values measured shall be octave band sound pressure levels in decibels. 2.2

Measuring

Instruments

2.2.1 A suitable measuring device is a sound level meter meeting or exceeding the requirements of a Type 1 instrument according to IS : A wind screen attachment to the microphone may be used, 9779-1981*. if necessary, provided that this is allowed for in the calibration and does not significantly alter the measured sound pressure level as a consequence of its effect on the omnidirectional characteristics of the microphone.
2.2.2 If alternative measuring equipment, including, for example, a tape recorder and/or level recorder, is used, the tolerances of several sections of the measuring chain shall not exceed the tolerances of the relevant clauses of IS : 9779-1981*. If a tape recorder is used as part of the measuring equipment, it may be necessary to include suitable weighting networks for recording and reproduction to provide an adequate signal to noise ratio over the whole frequency range of interest, 2.2.2.1 Measurement of the sound carried out using a frequency analyser accordance with IS : 6964-19737. frequency spectrum fitted with octave shall filters be in

NOTE - Care shall be taken, partictilarly when a microphone with a diameter of more than 13 mm is used, to ensure that microphone characteristics do not lead to errors when the sound is directional. It is recommended that, when necessary, a random incidence adaptor be used to ensure that the omnidirectionality is not worse than that of a Type 2 microphone as specified in IS : 9779-1981*.

2.2.3 The calibration of the ,equipment at the time of the measurements shall be in accordance in all respect with IS : 9779-1981*. Calibration shall be carried out at appropriate intervals and at least before and after each measurement session using an acoustical calibrator with an accuracy of 4 0'5 dB at a known frequency in the range 250 to 1 000 Hz.

2.2.3.1 The calibrator shall output and its initial calibration standards laboratory.
2.3 Meteorological Conditions

be checked shall be

annually traceable

to verify its to a national

2.3.1 The test shall not be carried out in adverse which are likely to influence the measurements.
*Specification for sound level meters. TSpecification for octave, half-octave sound and vibrations. and third-octave

weather

conditions

band filters for analysis of

4

IS : 12180 - 1987
2.3.2 The wind velocity at microphone height shall not exceed 3 m/s. Care shall be taken to ensure that wind effect does not distort the results. 2.4 Background Noise - The level of the background noise including wind noise shall be at least 10 dR below the level measured during the test. the level of the background noise Where spectral analysis is required, shall be at least 10 dB below the corresponding level in each frequency band as measured during the test. 2.5

Acoustical

Environment

2.5.1 The test area shall be a flat and open space and, within at least 20 m of the test tractor, there shall be no obstacle likely to reflect the significant sound, such as a building, solid fence, tree or other vehicle.
2.5.2 No person other than the operator of the tractor shall be driving position or cab during measurements. Where the noise position of other operators on the tractor is being measured, the No person other than the number of operators shall be present. tors(s) shall be in such a position as to influence the sound measurements. 2.6 in the at the usual operalevel

Tractor

Condition
tractor shall and shall be comply operated with the manufacturer's in accordance with his product published it shall

2.6.1 The specification instructions.

2.6.2 If the tractor is fitted with more than two wheel drive, be tested in the drive which is intended for normal road use.

2.6.3 The tractor shall be unballasted. Wheeled tractors shall be fitted with normal pneumatic tyres, not -more than 50 percent worn. Before the noise measurement, it shall be established by a power takeoff test or other means that the power of the tractor is within 10 percent of the manufacturer's declared value.
2.6.4 The measurement procedure applies whether or not the tractor is fitted with a cab. If a cab is fitted, the noise shall be measured with all doors and windows closed. The noise measurements may optionally be repeated with all windows open. 3. MEASUREMENT

AT OPERATOR'S

POSITION

3.1 Operational

Conditions

3.1.1 For these measurements, tractors with pneumatic tyres shall be operated on a dry, horizontal concrete or tarmacadam surface free from gravel, leaves, snow, etc. Tracked and metal-wheeled tractors shall be
5

IS : 12180- 1987
operated on a smooth, horizontal grassland or soil surface free from long grass and vegetation. The test track or course shall have a straight section of at least 150 m to enSure that the tractor speed is stabilized for an adeqdate time for measurements to be made, particularly in the higher gears. 3.1.2 The measurements shall be made away from agricultural work. For maximum precision, the test with the tractor loaded should, preferably, be carried out using a drawbar load provided by a load car or any other similar device remotely positioned to avoid interference. 3.2 Location of the Microphone

3.2.1 The microphone shall be placed 200 f 20 mm to the side of the centre line of the seat, the side being that giving the highest sound level as determined in a preliminary check made with the tractor operating in the gear giving the nearest forward speed to 7.5 km/h, with the maximum drawbar pull exerted, with a wheel slip of not more than 15 percent and with the engine speed not falling below the manufacturer's rated value. 3.2.2 The microphone diaphragm shall be facing forward and the centre of the microphone shall be 790 j, 50 mm above the seat reference point and 150 .i_ 20 mm forward of that point. Excessive vibration of the microphone must be avoided. 3.2.2.1 The seat reference point shall be determined in accordance with IS : 11806-1986* with the seat set at or as near as possible to the mid-point of its horizontal and vertical adjustment. Any suspension of the seat shall be depressed until the seat reaches the mid-point of its dynamic range.
-Attention is drawn to the possibility, particularly when a cab is fitted, of NOTE standing waves being present within 300 mm of the operator's ear position. Checks should be made by moving the microphone around in this area to delete such standing waves.

3.3

Measurement

3.3.1 A-weighted sound pressure level measurements shall be made in all field gears giving a rated speed from 4 km/h up to 17 km/h. These measurements shall be made in each gear with the governor control lever fully open, at the maximum drawbar pull attainable with wheel slip of not more than 15 percent or engine speed not falling belowthe manufacturer's rated value, and at 25 percent and 70 percent of this
pdl.

3.3.1.1 Do not make the tests in exceeds the safety limits of the testing
*Method for determination of seat reference

gears in which equipment.
point

the forward

speed

of agricultural

tractors.

6

IS : 121803.3.1.2 For infinitely made at four transmission 4 to 17 km/h.

1987
be of

variable transmissions, measurement shall speeds equally distributed over the range

3.3.2 Each reading shall be taken over a 5 s period of stabilized The number of readings to be taken shall exceed the range, running. in decibels, of observed fluctuations. 3.3.3 For initial commercial tests, at least three measurements shall be made at each microphone position for each dperating conditions. If the spread of results of sound pressure level obtained under any measuring condition exceeds 3 dB, further measurements shall be made until the readings of the three consecutive measurements fall within 3 dB. The arithmetic mean of all the measurements shall be calculated and reported together with the value at the load resulting in maximum noise in the gear giving speed nearest to 7.5 km/h, and any other gear for which the sound level is one dB or greater above the sound level obtained in the former gear. 3.3.3.1 When octave band sound pressure levels are measured, it is recommended that the machine be operated at the speed and under the load which give the highest sound level. 3.3.4 For measurement microphone batch testing purposes, it is sufficient to perform one under each of the specified measuring conditions at selected positions. with the general

3.3.5 Any peak which is obviously out of character -sound pressure level being read shall be ignored. 3.3.6 The valves reported shall be rounded mean of the readings for initial commercial batch tests.

to the integral part of the tests, or of the reading for

3.3.7 Optionally, at the manufacturer's request, octave band pressure levels over the centre frequency range 31.5 to 8 000 Hz may be reported in addition to A-weighted sound pressure level. 4. MEASUREMENTS

AT BYSTANDER'S

POSITION

4.1 Operational

Conditions

4.1.1 The surf&e of an area of radius not less than 10 m about the centre of the site ( the test area ) shall consist of smooth concrete, or similar hard material, dry and free from acoustically absorptive materials such as, powdery snow, grass and ashes.
4.1.2 The surface of the track shall does not cause excessive tyre noise. be dry and have a texture that

7

IS : 12180 - 1987 4.2 Layout of Test Area - The centre line of the track ( CC ), a line ( PP' ) perpendicular to it and passing through the centre of the test area, and two lines ( AA' and BB' ) parallel to line PP' and 10 m from it shall be marked on the test track ( see Y in Fig. 1 ). each shall be located 4.3 Location of Microphones - A microphone on line PP' on each side of the centre line and 7.5 m from it ( see Xin Fig. 1 ). The microphone shall be 1.2 m above ground level. 4.4 Measurements test, the engine shall be brought to its

4.4.1 Immediately before the normal operating temperature.

4.4.2 The tractor with its centre line over the centre line of the track, shall approach line AA' at a steady speed corresponding to the threequarters of the maximum travel speed. 4.4.3 When the front of the tractor reaches line AA', the throttle be fully opened as rapidly as practicable and held in that position the rear or" the tractor crosses line BB'. shall until

4.4.4 The maximum sound pressure levels indicated during the passage If a sound of the tractor betweenthe lines AA' and BB' shall be noted. peak obviously out of character with the general sound level is observed, the measurement shall be discarded. 4.4.5 The results shall be considered valid if the differences between two consecutive measurements made on the side of the tractor which gives the higher sound pressure level do not exceed 2 dB. 5. TEST 5.1 The Appendix REPORT test A. report shall be presented in the proforma given in

APPENDIX
( czause PROFORMA 1. General a) Tractor i) Make ii) Model iii) Special feature ( two wheel/four FOR NOISE

A

5. I )
MEASUREMENT TEST

wheel

drive

)

8

IS: b) Cab ( if fitted i) Make ii) Model iii) Description iv) Working 2. Noise a) at Operator's Brief description of test site of sound level meter of octave of test conditions `C percent kPa humidity, m/s filter and frequency analyser, if used ( cladding, condition Position of silencing system etc ) ) ( open/closed )

12180 - 1987

b) Background c) Details d) Type e) Type f) Date

noise level,

dB (A)

g) Atmospheric i) Temperature, ii) Pressure, iii) Relative h) Wind j) Test data

velocity,

Gear Used 2.
(1) (2)

T'ravelling Sfeed km/h (3)

Sound Level dB (A) (4)

Remarks (5)

k) One-octave band sound pressure levels, in decibels, following centre frequencies, in hertz ( optional ): 31'5 3. Noise 63 125 500 Position system 1 000 2 000 4 000

for

the 8 000

At Bystander's

4 Brief description of silencing b) Background noise level, dB(A) c) Details of test site 4 Type of sound level meter
9

IS:12180-1987
e) Date of test f) Atmospheric conditions "C percent i) Temperature, ii) Pressure, kPa iii) Relative humidity, g) Wind velocity, m/s h) Test data Sl G'car Used (2) Travclling Speed km/h (3) Sound Level dB(A) (4)
Remarks

NO.
(1)

(5)

10

IS : 12180- 1987

A

I

A

A'

All dimensions in millimetres. FIG. 1 POSITIONSFOR MEASUREMENT OF AMBIENT NOISE EMITTED BY TRACTOR

11

INTERNATIONAL
Base

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

Unit*
QUANTITY
UNIT

SYMROL m kg S A R

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

cd mol

Supplementary QU ANT-ITT Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY

UNIT

SYMBOL rad sr

radian steradian

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEFINITION 1 N = 1 kg.m/sP

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force Electromotive Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

N

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1

J =

1 N.m 1 J/s 1 Wb/ma

1 W = 1 1 1
1

1 Wb = 1 V.s T= 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l) S = 1 A/V v = 1 W/A
Pa =

1 N/m'

NO. 1 JANUARY 1998 TO IS 12180 : 1987 METHOD FOR NOISE MEASUREMENT OF AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS
up

AMENDMENT

( Page 6, clause 3.3.1,line 2 ) to 17 km/h'.

Substitute `2 km/h to 17 km/h' for `4km/b Substitute `2 km/h to 17 km/h' for `4 to Substitute `values' for `valves'.

( Page 7, clause 3.3.1.2. Iin~ ? ) 17 km/h'. (Page 7, clause 3.3.6, line 1) -

(FAD32)
Reprography Unit, UIS, New Delhi, India

