SRA He IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Frater utadurn ia — Am- 


ATT 7 ATUUT Weert 


Construction Project 
Management — Guidelines 


Part 7 Procurement Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda Ark sql 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR eH, 9 Tea TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


A rent MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 7 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 7) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 
b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 


procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation, if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time overruns, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial and 
other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and technical 
processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top management 
commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of the public 
domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’: Part | General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts. The other parts in the series are: 


Part2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part3 : 2015 on Cost management 

Part 4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part 5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 
Part 6 : 2015 on Scope management 

Part 8 : 2015 on Risk management 

Part 9 : 2018 on Communication management 
Part 10 : 2020 on Human resource management 
Part 11 : 2021 on Sustainability management 
Part 12 : 2016 on Integration management 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT — GUIDELINES 


PART 7 PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 7) covers guidelines for 
procurement management aspects of construction 
project management. 


1.2 The scope of this standard covers the stages 
subsequent to the stage of approval when a decision to 
implement the project including its financing is taken 
till commissioning and handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
7337:2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 
10400 :2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 
15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human resource 
development (first revision) 
15883 Construction project management — 
(Part 1): Guidelines General 
2009 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Need for Procurement Management 


Procurement process is one of the essential elements 
ofthe construction project management, through which 
works, goods, and services are procured in a systematic 
manner. Essentially, it involves initiation, management 
and completion of contracts leading to completion of 
a work, delivery of goods or conclusion of services. 


The process starts with the identification of the need 
for the works, goods or services and ends with the 
completion of the process. For successful procurement, 
it is, therefore, necessary to identify the processes, 
procedures, and methods in a systematic manner so that 
the intended milestones are achieved or deliverables 
are completed. 


4.2 Holistic View of Procurement Management 


4.2.1 Once the need for procurement is identified, for 
the completion of the process, generally, the following 
activities are to be completed and end when the 
transaction is completed: 


a) Correctly spell out and document the need and 
scope of the activity; 


b) Decide the procurement strategy in terms of 
packaging, contracting, pricing and procurement 
procedure; 

c) Tender action; 

d) Tender evaluation, negotiation etc.; 

e) Award and enter into the agreement; and 

f) Contract management. 


4.2.2 There exist a variety of means by which the 
processes can be executed which depends on the size of 
the project, policies set in place, and the complexities 
of the projects. Of late, the advances in financing 
methods require the processes to be in tune with such 
complexities. Essentially, the procurement process 
shall have the following attributes: 


a) Fairness, 

b) Equitability, 

c) Transparency, 

d) Competitiveness, 

e) Cost effectiveness, and 

f) Shall fulfill other objectives like, social security, 


promotion of indigenous materials and processes, 
etc. 


Government, private sector, international agencies, 
financing institutions and general contractors can 
establish their own procurement systems based on the 
procedures and methods prescribed by this standard. 


4.2.3 Toward brevity, this standard looks at the generic 
systems of procurement only, but proposes to create 
standards which will specifically address the diverse 
methods of procurement. 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


4.2.4 The standard currently does not cover the contract 
management part, which shall be included later. 


4.3 Organizational Structure 


Organizational structure depends on the project delivery 
model. As an example, a typical organizational chart 
for procurement management in a design-bid-build 
model is given in Fig. 1. 


4.4 Methods and Processes 


The owner shall establish a documented system 
of procurement for use in the organization, which 
shall incorporate all the strategies and policies of the 
organization concerned. The documentation shall 
generally include the following: 


a) Standard procurement procedures applicable to 
each category of procurement, 

b) Essentials of documentation, 
approval systems, 


reporting and 


c) Clear indication of the legal and statutory 
requirements, if any, which are to be followed for 
accepting or rejecting the offer, 

d) Publicity requirements and arrangements for the 
calling for bids, 

e) Standard forms of contract and generic industry 
standards which are to be incorporated, 

f) Requirements of bid security, security deposit and 
other retention requirements and acceptable bank 
instruments in lieu of the same, 


g) Basic insurance requirements, 
h) Quality standards to be followed, 


j) Health, safety and environment standards to be 
followed, and 


k) Detailed procedures to deal with departures from 
specified procedures. 


5 SCOPE 
MANAGEMENT 


OF PROCUREMENT 


5.1 General 


The purpose of procurement management is to establish 
and maintain the process and relationships with the 
planning and design consulting firms, contractors, 
vendors/suppliers all through the project duration. The 
procurement management plan for the project shall be 
prepared and defined as part of the planning stage and 
shall be applied and updated for construction activities. 


5.2 Procurement Types 


The types of procurement can be broadly classified 
based on the requirement of the project as works, 
services, and goods. The procurement in construction 
project includes the selection of contractors for works, 
selection of consultants for design and services, and 
selection of vendors for supply of plant and equipment/ 
materials/goods. 


5.2.1 Works 


The work shall mean all physically built activities 
related to construction carried out by the contractors. 
The procurement could be publicly funded, privately 
funded or through public-private participation. 
Depending on the project requirement, broadly two 
different types of procurement routes/strategies/ 
methods are used for the delivery of works, that is, 
traditional delivery system and other delivery systems 
as shown in Fig. 2. 


OWNER / CLIENT OR 
HIS REPRESENTATIVE 


PROJECT MANAGER 


CONSULTANTS 
QUANTITY 
PLANNI DESIGN 
i en 


OTHER 
SERVICES 


NOTE — ‘CONSULTANTS’ MAY COVER IN-HOUSE TEAMS OR OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS. 


CONSTRUCTION 
AGENCY 


ELECTRICAL / 
MECHANICAL 
WORKS 


OTHER 
SERVICES 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE FOR PROCUREMENT 
MANAGEMENT IN DESIGN-BID-BUILD MODEL 


TRADITIONAL DELIVERY 
SYSTEM 


.-m— 
z NS 


/ N 
—__ | PROJECT ) 
\ MANAGER 


CONTRACTOR 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


DESIGN AND BUILD 
TURNKEY, PACKAGE DEAL 


CONTRACTOR 


N 
___ f PROJECT ) 
\ MANAGER 


SUB-CONTRACTORS 


Fic. 2 PROCUREMENT RouTES/STRATEGIES/ METHODS 


5.2.1.1 In the traditional route, the process will be a 
design-bid-build form of procurement. In this the 
owner/client/employer is responsible for providing 
the preiliminary design and drawings, technical 
specifications, bill of quantities (BOQ) and detailed 
designs and drawings. In this system, preliminary 
drawings (tender drawings) and BOQ are provided at 
the time of bidding, following which the bidders quote 
rates, percentage based on the BOQ or a lump-sum 
price. 


5.2.1.2 Types of contracts under traditional routes 


Depending upon the procurement route/strategy/ 
method chosen and based on the degree of clarity of 
scope, level of preparation of designs, time, flexibility 
and availability of finance the resulting contracts may 
take any of the forms as given hereunder: 


a) Rate contract — Each item shall use the 
pre-determined rate for the execution of works. 
Quantities may not be specified in the contract, 
and the contractor shall execute any quantity 
within stipulated time during the validity period 
ofthe contract. 


b) /tem rate contract — The contractor quotes the unit 
price for each item in the BOQ during the tender 
stage and undertakes the execution of work on the 
accepted item rate. The payment is released based 
on certified measurement of the actual quantity of 
each item executed. 


c) Percentage contract — The Employer provides 
the schedule of rates with the item, unit rate, and 
quantities. The contractor quotes the percentage 
above or below the schedule of rates. 


d) Lump-sum contract — The contractor quotes the 
price as a single tendered amount. The contractor 
shall include all employers’ requirements and 
shall comply with provisions of the contract. 
The employer shall not pay for any missing 
detail/item or make any price adjustment subject 
to the contract conditions and scope. 


5.2.1.3 Other delivery systems 
Other routes of procurement are as follows: 


a) Design and build — In this the owner/client/ 
employer provides detailed scope, the performance 
specifications and design basis report at the time 
ofbidding. The design, as well as the construction, 
is the responsibility of the contractor. 


b) Engineering, procurement and construction 
(EPC) — The employer shall provide the basic 
concept and drawings along with the budget 
amount at the tendering stage. The contractor 
is responsible for all engineering, procurement 
and construction including commissioning and 
handing over. He shall be responsible for removal 
snags and routine maintenance of facility during 
the defect liability period. 


c) Turnkey contract— The employer shall provide the 
performance requirements to the contractor who 
shall design, execute the works and demonstrate 
the performance of the facility based on an agreed 
price within stipulated time. 


d) Public-private partnership (PPP) — Public 
sector entity (employer) enters into a contract 
with a private entity or consortium to finance, 
construct and operate an asset/facility that may 
also provide services for design. This arrangement 
is suitable for long-term projects aiming at cost- 
recovery model within the concession period. 
The selected private entity would be responsible 
for procurement, construction, operation, and 
maintenance for a specific period. The contractor 
shall transfer the facility to the client/employer 
on successful completion of services. The 
employer shall provide a brief description of the 
requirements and estimate at the tendering stage. 
PPP projects may take several forms as follows: 


1) Build, Own, Operate and Transfer (BOOT), 
2) Build, Own and Operate (BOO), 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


3) Build, Operate, Lease and Transfer (BOLT), 
4) Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT), 
5) Design, Build, Operate and Transfer (DBOT), 


6) Design, Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer 
(DBFOT), and 


7) Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM). 
5.2.1.4 Disposal of waste 


The procurement process applicable for works shall also 
be applicable for dismantling the existing structures 
and disposal. 


5.2.2 Goods, Materials, Plant and Equipment 


5.2.2.1 Supply of goods, materials and plant and 
equipment 


For incorporation in the works, the employer may 
separate the supply of goods, materials and plant and 
equipment from works contract. Generally, the bill of 
quantities of works contract shall cover supply and 
installation of following items: 


a) Goods — The Goods shall mean articles or 
commodities in the works or used in the works and 
would be manufactured articles. 


b 


wm 


Construction Material — Any material used in 
works that can be from naturally available sources 
or manufactured for construction works. 


c 


— 


Plant and Equipment — It is mechanical/electrical/ 
IT items for the works. The employer may use a 
separate contract for supply or lease of any special 
equipment for works. 


5.2.3 Services 


5.2.3.1 Professional services 


For the design and construction, the employer may 
seek professional services like financial planning 
consultants, civil and architectural firms, design and 
consultancy firms, operational and facility managers. 
These professional services may be involved either 
separately or in some combination by the employers. 
Selection of these services depends on the type of 
construction and the experience of the employer in 
dealing with various professionals in the previous 
projects undertaken by the firm. 


The employer may use information technology (IT) 
for effective project management. A customized tender 
document may be prepared based on the need and scope 
of the IT vendor/supplier. The scope of the vendor/ 
consultant ranges from design, supply, implementation, 
operations and maintenance for a specific period. The 
vendor/supplier shall be responsible for implementing 
the solution which meets all features, functions and 


performance requirement as described in the tender 
document. The employer may also need application 
support which consists of troubleshooting and 
addressing the functional requirements, availability 
and performance issues, etc. Further, the vendor will 
be required to undertake a study of best practices and 
benchmark the designed solution against market best 
practices. 


5.2.3.2 Labour 


Labour is the human resource used in construction. 
Labour can be skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled. The 
contractor undertakes contract for the labour part only 
excluding the construction materials and equipment 
which are arranged at the work site by the Employer. 
The contractor engages the necessary labour and gets 
the work done as per drawings and specifications. 
Labour can be on item rate basis for labour part only, 
and the contractor gets paid for the quantities of work 
done on measurements of different items of work 
at the stipulated rate in the contract agreement. The 
contractor shall comply with all statutory requirements 
for engaging labour and other personnel involved in the 
construction. 


5.3 Scope during Pre-Construction Stage 


The procurement management scope 
pre-construction stages includes the following: 


during 


a) Need assessment, 

b) Developing specifications, 

c) Forming a procurement plan, 

d) Procurement inception report, 

e) Estimates and approvals, 

f) Preparation of tender documents, 
g) Bid process management, and 

h) Award of contract. 


5.4 Scope during Construction Stage 


The procurement management scope during 
construction stages includes the following: (a) 
Procurement schedule, (b) Procurement management 
plan, (c) Procurement operations, and (d) Contract 
Management. 


5.5 Scope during Post-Construction and Closure 
Stage 


The procurement management scope during 
post-construction and closure stages includes the 
following: 


a) outcome of procurement operations, and 


b) lessons learnt. 


6 PROCUREMENT MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Procurement Planning 


6.1.1 General 


Procurement planning is key to a successful procurement 
process. The effort and time invested in procurement 
planning will prevent time and cost overruns during 
subsequent procurement operations. The three stages 
of procurement planning are: 


a) need assessment, 
b) developing specifications, and 


c) forming a procurement plan. 


6.1.2 Procurement Requirements 


The first step in the procurement process is assessing 
the requirements for the project involving various 
stakeholders. The employer may prepare a template 
to request information like scope, quantity, technical 
specification, terms of reference and timeline. Based 
on the requirements, the employer shall further develop 


DETAILED 
ESTIMATE 
AND 
DRAWINGS 


PROCUREMENT PROCUREMENT 


STRATEGY 


TECHNICAL 
SANCTION 


PLANNING 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


a detailed specification and decide the technical and 
commercial aspects of the procurement plan. 


6.1.3 Procurement Strategy (Inception Report) 


The employer shall develop a procurement strategy 
based on the finalized procurement requirements. The 
approach shall essentially cover: 


a) objectives for the project, 
b) required outcomes, 
c) performance measures, 


d) aspects of governance, economic, social and 
environmental, 


e) technology, 
f) project risks, and 
g) procurement routes. 


6.1.4 Procurement Process 


6.1.4.1 Flow chart 
See Fig. 3. 


BIDDING 
PROCESS 
AND 
MANAGEMENT 


PROCUREMENT 
OPERATIONS 


PROCUREMENT 
CLOSURE 


Fic. 3 FLow CHART 


6.1.4.2 Procurement plan 


The procurement plan is an outcome of procurement 
planning. The procurement plan describes how the 
project procurement activities support objectives 
of the project and deliver value for money under a 
risk-managed approach. The scope and details of the 
procurement plan take into account and are proportional 
to, the relevant market, scale, risk, value, including, 
when applicable, situations of the urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints, and the specific 
economic, environmental, and social objectives of the 
project. The procurement plan shall discuss the specific 
contracts for the goods, works, and services required 
and the proposed methods for procurement. The plan 
shall include monitoring and control mechanisms, 
methodology for change management and risk 
mitigation measures. 


6.1.5 Procurement Documents 


6.1.5.1 Estimates 


The preliminary estimate shall be prepared based on the 
initial drawings and specifications, etc. The preliminary 
assessment shall appropriately indicate in the history 
sheet the items that are included or excluded in the 
estimate. 


The preparation of detailed estimate and drawings 
and designs should be taken up only after ascertaining 


that the site is available, or likely to be made available 
within a reasonable time without any encumbrances. 
The detailed estimate should give full details for each 
item of the work involved along with specifications. 
The detailed estimate shall use the rates provided in the 
schedule of rates for those items of work covered by it, 
and by analysed market rates for the remaining items. 


6.1.5.2 Technical approval 


The technically competent authority of user 
agency/department shall review the detailed estimate 
and drawings to ensure that proposals are technically 
sound and that the cost estimate is accurately prepared 
based on adequate data. The employer shall issue 
notice inviting tender (NIT) based on the technical 
approved estimate. 


6.1.5.3 Pre-qualification/request for qualification 
(RFQ) 

The employer shall examine whether pre-qualification 
is essential in view of nature and complexities in the 
project and available time. Pre-qualification ensures that 
invitations to bid are extended only to those who have 
adequate capabilities and resources. Prequalification 
shall be based entirely upon the ability and resources of 
prospective bidders to perform the particular contract 
satisfactorily, taking into account their (a) experience 
and past performance on similar contracts, (b) technical 
capabilities and (c) financial capabilities. 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


6.1.5.4 Request for bid (RFB) 


The objective of RFB is to provide all eligible 
prospective bidders with timely and adequate 
notification of an employer’s requirements and an equal 
opportunity to bid for the required goods, services or 
works. The bidding documents shall clearly state the 
type of contract to be entered into and contain the 
proposed contract provisions impacting the bid. The 
size and scope of individual contracts will depend on 
the magnitude, nature, and location of the project. 


The RFB shall provide clear instructions on how bids 
should be submitted, how prices presented, and the 
place and time for submission of proposals. Time for 
preparation and submission of bid proposal should 
be adequate. The procedures shall provide for fair 
competition to ensure reasonable prices, and methods 
used in the evaluation of bid proposals and the award 
of contracts shall be objective and made known to all 
bidders in the bidding documents and not be applied 
arbitrarily. The procedures shall also include process 
of bid opening, evaluation, publication of results and 
award of contract. 


6.1.5.5 Conditions of contract 


In any RFB, the conditions of contract shall comprise 
the following two parts: 


a) General conditions of contract (GCC) 


The general conditions set the minimum 
performance requirements and include the rights 
and responsibilities of the parties to contract. The 
employer may adopt FIDIC conditions of contract 
with due authorization. The standard text of the 
general conditions chosen must be retained to 
facilitate its reading and interpretation by bidders 
and its review by employer. 


b) Particular conditions of contract (PCC)/Special 
conditions of contract (SCC) 


Any amendments and additions to the GCC, 
specific to the contract in hand, should be 
introduced in PCC/SCC. Clause numbers in the 
PCC/SCC should correspond to those in the GCC, 
and the PCC/SCC takes precedence over the GCC. 


6.1.5.6 Specifications/employers requirements 


Detailed and clear specifications are a prerequisite for 
bidders to respond realistically and competitively to 
the requirements of the employer without qualifying 
or conditioning their bids. The specifications should 
require that all materials, plant, and other supplies to 
be incorporated in the works are new, unused, of the 
most recent or current models, and include all recent 
improvements in design and materials unless provided 
otherwise in the contract. The specifications should 
cover classes of craft, materials, and equipment 
commonly involved in construction, although not 
necessarily to be used in a particular works contract. 


Deletions or addenda should then adapt the general 
specifications to the specific works. The employer shall 
ensure that the specifications are not restrictive. 


6.1.5.7 Bill of quantities (BOQ) 


The employer shall estimate the quantities from the 
drawings wherever applicable and necessary. The 
items in the BOQ should be grouped into sections to 
distinguish between those parts of the works, which by 
nature, location, access, timing, or any other distinctive 
characteristics, may give rise to different methods of 
construction, phasing of the works, or considerations of 
cost. The employer may group general items common 
to all parts of the works as a separate section in the 
BOQ. Consistent with these requirements, the layout 
and content of the BOQ should be as brief and clear as 
possible. The BOQ shall provide sufficient information 
on the quantities of works to be performed to enable 
bids to be prepared efficiently and accurately, and assist 
employer in the periodic valuation of works executed. 


6.1.5.8 Drawings 


The employer shall provide construction drawings, 
even if not fully developed, which must show sufficient 
details to enable bidders to understand the type and 
complexity of the work involved and to price the bill of 
quantities. The employer shall ensure that the drawings 
are prepared to the appropriate scale and readable. A 
simplified site plan showing the location of the site 
with the local geography, including major roads, ports, 
airports, and railroads, is helpful. 


6.1.5.9 Rate analysis/schedule of rates 


The employer may prepare a schedule of rates (SoR) 
for each item/type of work commonly executed by the 
contractor and should be maintained up-to-date by the 
respective tendering authority. SoR shall use the rates 
prevailing in each work area, and necessary analysis 
of the prices for each description of work and the 
varying conditions thereof should, so far as practicable 
and recordable. The employer may provide access 
to the SoR documents to facilitate the preparation of 
estimates, as also to serve as a guide in settling rates in 
connection with contract agreements. 


6.1.5.10 Market quotations 


Anemployer may obtain market quotations for the items 
not specified in the schedule of rates. The average price 
of not less than three quotes shall be used to ascertain 
the market price. An engineer’s estimate prepared 
adopting market price at the time of the bidding process 
may be useful for the price bid evaluation. 


6.1.5.11 Agreements 


The employer shall prepare and attach contract forms. 
Documents, such as letter of acceptance, contract 
agreement, performance security, and advance payment 
security will form part of the contract. 


The forms for performance security and advance 
payment security, when required, shall only be 
completed by the successful bidder after contract 
award. 


6.1.6 Procurement Schedule 


The procurement schedule lists all the items to 
be procured and relevant actions in each stage of 
procurement expected to be carried out by the contractor 
over the project period. The finalized procurement 
schedule establishes the timelines for carrying out each 
step in the procurement process up to the fulfillment of 
the requirement. 


6.1.7 Procurement Management Plan 


The employer shall prepare the project-specific 
procurement management plan (PMP) while 
developing a project management plan. The PMP shall 
describe the procedures on procuring goods during the 
project and managing vendors effectively. The PMP 
may essentially include but not limited to: 


a) project needs and how to purchase, 


b) procurement process, time and roles and 


responsibilities, 
c) approval process, and 
d) potential vendor list and credentials. 


6.1.8 Procurement Action 


The employer shall encourage and continually 
modernize their procurement systems including 
procurement through electronic means (e-tender) to 
facilitate transparency and efficiency in the procurement 
process. Any e-tender system shall be accessible and 
secure, ensure integrity and confidentiality, and have 
sufficient audit trail features. 


6.1.8.1 Publicity 


The employer shall advertise the tender in the national 
and local newspapers depending on the size of the 
project to ensure adequate competition. The employer 
shall also upload the tender documents in a free 
assessable website. 


6.1.8.2 Mode of call (e-Tender) 


The employer shall recommend e-tender tools for 
communications with bidders, advertisements, 
notices and amendments, distribution of procurement 
documents, submission of bids or proposals, and 
disclosure of contract awards. The employer shall 
ensure that these arrangements are adequate, efficient, 
and secure, and should not prevent the participation of 
potential bidders. 


6.1.8.3 Notice inviting tender (NIT) 


Notice inviting tender/bid shall clearly state the 
system of receiving and processing of the tender/bid, 
which can be either: 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


a) Single envelope bid, or 
b) Two envelope bid. 


In case of single envelope bid system, technical as well 
as financial/price are contained in the same envelope 
and evaluation made at the same time. In case of two 
envelope bid system, technical evaluation is made first 
and those who are qualified in the technical evaluation 
are processed for the financial/price evaluation. 


NIT shall have all essential details of the bidder’s 
qualifications and experience, cost of the tender 
documents and sale details, bid security amount, 
pre-bid meeting date and venue, bid submission 
details. The eligible bidders should have the option to 
download the bidding document from the employer’s 
website, and such bidders shall be required to submit 
the cost of bidding document with their bid in the form 
of a bank demand draft or other modes of payment as 
indicated in the bidding document. 


6.1.8.4 Pre-bid meeting 


The employer shall conduct a pre-bid meeting 
preferably after two weeks from the issue of NIT and 
all queries clarified before not less than one week 
from the date of submission of bids. Bidders shall 
use the pre-bid meeting to get clarifications of any 
questions related to the as-issued bidding document. A 
site visit may also be arranged by the employer before 
the pre-bid meeting, if necessary for the bid proposal 
preparation, and the date of the site visit should be 
available in the bidding document. 


6.1.8.5 Corrigenda and addenda 


The employer shall issue corrigenda in case there is 
a change in the submission date or revision in bid 
qualifications and conditions and addenda in case 
any additional information/data is given after issue 
of tender documents. The employer shall consider the 
request from the bidders to extend the bid submission 
date, if necessary. Changes agreed by the employer as 
a result of pre bid meeting should also be in the form 
of corrigenda/addenda. 


6.1.8.6 Bid receipt 


The employer must receive bids at the designated 
address and no later than the date and time indicated in 
the bidding document. The employer shall not consider 
any bid that arrives after the deadline for submission 
of bids. Any bid received by the employer after the 
deadline for submission of bids shall be declared late, 
rejected, and returned unopened to the bidder. Bids 
requested for withdrawal shall be returned unopened 
to the bidders. No bid may be withdrawn, substituted, 
or modified in the interval between the deadline for 
submission of bids and the expiration of the period 
of bid validity specified by the bidder on the letters of 
technical bid and price bid or any extension thereof. 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


6.1.8.7 Bid opening and processing 


Bids shall be opened by a designated authority 
committee constituted for the purpose in the presence 
of representatives of bidders at the date, time and place 
given in the instructions to bidders. 


Bids requested for withdrawal shall be returned 
unopened to the bidders. No bid may be withdrawn, 
substituted, or modified in the interval between the 
deadline for submission of bids and the expiration of 
the period of bid validity specified by the bidder on the 
letters of technical bid and price bid or any extension 
thereof. Any bid which is without the mandatory bid 
security/earnest money from a proper bank will not be 
processed further and will be treated as unresponsive. 


6.1.8.7.1 Technical bid 


The employer shall examine the technical bid to 
confirm that all documents and technical documentation 
requested in the bidding document are available to 
determine the completeness of each bid document 
submitted. The employer’s determination of a bid’s 
responsiveness is to be based on the contents of the 
bid itself, as defined in the instruction to bidders. 
A substantially responsive technical bid is one that 
meets the requirements of the bidding document 
without material deviation, reservation, or omission. A 
material deviation, reservation, or omission is one that, 
if accepted, would affect in any substantial way the 
scope, quality, or performance of the works specified 
in the contract. The employer shall determine to its 
satisfaction during the evaluation of technical bids 
whether bidders meet the qualifying criteria specified. 


6.1.8.7.2 Financial/price bid 


An affirmative determination of the substantially 
responsive technical bid shall be a prerequisite for 
the opening and evaluation of a bidder’s price bid. An 
adverse decision shall result in the disqualification of 
the bid, in which event the employer shall return the 
unopened price bid to the bidder. 


6.1.8.7.3 Price bid evaluation 


The employer shall use the criteria and methodologies 
listed in this bidding document and no other evaluation 
criteria or methods permitted for evaluation. If the 
lowest evaluated bid price is seriously unbalanced, 
front-loaded or substantially below updated estimates in 
an admeasurement contract, the employer may require 
the bidder to produce detailed price analyses for any 
or all items of the bill of quantities, to demonstrate the 
internal consistency of those prices with the construction 
methods and schedule proposed. After evaluation of the 
price analyses, taking into consideration the timing of 
estimated contract payments, the employer may require 
increased performance security at the expense of the 


bidder to a level sufficient to protect the employer 
against financial loss in the event of default of the 
successful bidder under the contract. 


Bid information relating to the examination, 
evaluation, comparison, and post-qualification of bids 
and recommendation of contract award, shall not be 
disclosed to bidders or any other persons not officially 
concerned with such process until the contract awarded. 
Any attempt by a bidder to influence the employer in 
the evaluation of the bids or contract award decisions 
may result in the rejection of its bid. If any bidder 
wishes to contact the employer on any matter related to 
the bidding process, it may do so in writing. 


6.1.8.8 Negotiation 


Negotiation shall be conducted where it is absolute 
necessary. The employer shall avoid such kind of 
negotiation that alters the responsiveness and qualities 
of the bid proposal. 


6.1.8.9 Acceptance and notification of award 


The employer shall award the contract to the bidder 
whose offer has been determined to be the lowest 
evaluated bid and is substantially responsive to the 
bidding document, provided further that the bidder 
is determined to be qualified to perform the contract 
satisfactorily. Before the expiration of the period of bid 
validity, the employer shall notify the acceptance of the 
bid to the successful bidder, in writing. Until a formal 
contract is prepared and executed, the notification 
of award in the form of ‘Letter of Acceptance’ shall 
constitute a binding contract. 


6.1.8.10 Performance security/performance guarantee 
(PG) 


The successful bidder shall furnish the performance 
guarantee (PG) following the conditions of contract 
within a stipulated period as indicated in the bidding 
document. The employer shall include the PG form in 
the bidding document. The bidder may also submit a 
performance security document in an acceptable form 
to the employer. Failure of the successful bidder to 
submit the PG or to sign the contract agreement shall 
constitute sufficient grounds for the annulment of the 
award and forfeiture of the bid security. In that event, 
the employer may award the contract to the next lowest 
evaluated bidder whose bid is substantially responsive 
and is determined by the employer to be qualified to 
perform the contract satisfactorily. 


6.1.8.11 Signing of contract 


The employer shall sign the contract agreement with 
the successful bidder who complies with the PG 
requirements and determined to be qualified to perform 
the contract satisfactorily. 


6.1.8.12 Debriefing 


The unsuccessful bidders may seek clarification from 
the employer, which shall be provided. 


6.1.9 Procurement Inception Report 


The contractor shall prepare a procurement inception 
report based on (a) procurement plan, (b) procurement 
schedule and (c) discussion with all the stakeholders of 
the project. The contractor shall discuss the program 
and schedule in the inception report in detail and 
suggest an action plan for achieving the timeline 
as agreed with the employer. The contractor shall 
present the inception report and obtain concurrence 
from the employer. If required, the procurement plan 
and procurement schedule may be revised based on 
the suggested timeline in the inception report. The 
employer shall provide a template for the procurement 
inception report immediately after the mobilization of 
the contractor. 


6.2 Procurement Monitoring 


6.2.1 General 


Procurement consists of all processes required to 
acquire/purchase/appoint any works/goods/services 
for the project. Procurement monitoring is the process 
of monitoring the procurement plan for its successful 
completion of procurement action. 


6.2.2 Monitoring Schedule 
6.2.2.1 Need 


The monitoring of the procurement schedule includes 
tracking of stage-wise progress to avoid coordination 
issues, resource conflicts and overruns. The schedule 
shall be monitored to ensure the quality of planned 
deliverables. 


6.2.2.2 Process 


A planning tool for example, Gantt chart, PERT, etc. 
may be used to monitor schedule. Any computer based 
software for monitoring the schedule may also be used. 
The main inputs for these tools are work breakdown 
structure (WBS), activity linkages and time duration. 
Procurement schedule shall be monitored at different 
stages by using following data: 


a) Pre-construction stage — Documents required 
for monitoring schedule at pre-construction stage 
include: 


1) Procurement plan, 


2) Schedule for procurement of services/ 
consultants, 
3) Schedule for procurement of goods, 


4) Tender event schedule for work packages, and 
5 


wa 


Payment tracker. 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


b) Construction stage — Documents required for 
monitoring schedule during construction stage 
include: 


1) Procurement plan, 


2) Schedule 
consultants, 


for procurement of services/ 
3) Schedule for procurement of goods, 
4) Tender event schedule for work packages, 
5) Payment tracker, 
6) Contract document for all goods/services/ 
work packages, and 
7) Contract management. 
c) Post-construction and closure stage — Documents 
required for the post-construction stage include: 
1) Audit schedule, and 
2) Document schedule including a list of 
documents to be submitted during handover. 


6.2.3 Management Information System (MIS) 
6.2.3.1 General 


MIS is generally a computer-based information system 
for the managers. It consists of the tools and techniques 
used to collect inputs, integrate, evaluate and 
communicate the outputs of procurement management 
processes. 


6.2.3.2 Need 


MIS is used to inform the management about 
procurement progress and seek inputs or suggestions 
for critical approvals. It helps to plan, execute and close 
procurement management goals by a collaborative 
approach. MIS reports shall be prepared weekly or 
monthly as per the scale of the project. 


6.2.3.3 MIS constituents 


MIS reports shall be used at pre-construction, 
construction and post-construction stages as given 
below. 
a) At pre-construction stage 
Documents required for MIS at pre-construction 
stage include: 
1) Project summary, including a project brief, 
project team, organizational chart of different 


stakeholders, project directory, contract 
summary; 

2) Procurement plan; 

3) Schedule for procurement, of services/ 
consultants; 

4) Schedule for procurement of goods; 


5) Tender event schedule for work packages; 
6 
7 


— 


Roles and responsibility matrix; 


— 


Risk register including identified risks, their 
impact, severity and stakeholder responsible; 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


8) Payment tracker, including pre-construction 
approval, during and post-construction 
approval, labour compliance, bank guarantee 
update; and 

9) Drawing/deliverables status. 

b) At construction stage 


Documents required for MIS during construction 
stage include: 


1) Procurement plan; 

2) Schedule for procurement of services/ 
consultants; 

3) Material procurement status, for goods for 


example, cement, steel, bricks; 
4) 
5 


Tender event schedule for work packages; 


— 


Risk register, including identified risks, their 
impact, severity and stakeholder responsible; 


6 


wm 


Construction schedule, including planned 
versus actual start/finish of activities; 


7 


— 


Payment tracker, including pre-construction 
approval, during and post-construction 
approval, labour compliance, bank guarantee 
update; and 

8 


At post-construction and closure Stage 


— 


Drawing/deliverables status. 
€ 


) 


Documents required for MIS post-construction 
stage include: 


1) Budget summary including budget status; 
2) Audit status; and 


3) Document status, including a list of document 
to be submitted during handover. 


6.2.4 Communication 


6.2.4.1 Need 


Communication throughout the procurement enables 
the flow of relevant information among stakeholders. It 
ensures the tracking of processes for efficient delivery. 


6.2.4.2 Communication methods 


a) Management Information System — As discussed 
in 6.2.3, MIS can be used as a tool for monitoring 
communication among stakeholders. 


b) 


Progress Reviews — The procurement team 
evaluates progress on the basis ofthe work done. It 
is required for assessing the need for intervention, 
responsibility for taking further actions and the 
timeframe for implementing the changes. 


c) Meetings — Meetings are formal/informal 
discussions with the procurement team to 
determine the required information from 


stakeholders. These meetings help to evaluate 
procurement progress, exchange suggestions and 
make critical decisions. 


10 


6.2.4.3 Communication plan 


A communication plan shall be made for monitoring 
communication among stakeholders which includes: 


a) Data requirement of stakeholders; 
b) Reason for circulation of data; 
c) Timeframe and frequency of circulation; and 


d) Individual or group 
communication. 


responsible for 


6.2.5 Document Management 


6.2.5.1 Need 


All documents related to various processes of 
procurement shall be maintained and managed. The 
document shall be stored in a safe place for easy access 
in case of audits, references or legal disputes. 


6.2.5.2 Type of document 


Various procurement processes for example, collecting 
information, soliciting offers and finalizing the contract 
shall have different procurement documents. Some of 
these are: 


a) Procurement (inception 


report); 


strategy document 


b) Request for information (RFI)/Expression of 
interest (EOT); 


c) Bid/tender documents: 
1) Notice/invite for bid/tender, 
2) RFQ/RFP (including pre-qualification): 
i) Bill of quantities, 
ii) Specifications (employer’s requirement), 
iii) Drawings, and 
iv) Acceptance criteria. 


3) Addendum/corrigendum 
procurement process 


4) Contract conditions (GCC and SCC) 
d) Bid proposals; 


issued during 


e) Purchase orders/work orders; and 
f) Any amendment in these documents. 


6.2.5.3 Structure of the document 


The procurement document shall be standardised, 
preferably using a uniform format for better 
work-flow, simplification and to avoid repetitive work. 
All documents shall be comprehensive and wherever 
required must specify in detail, for example terms and 
conditions, methods of payment, milestones, and work 
to be delivered. If any supporting document is required 
then it shall be clearly mentioned in the references. 
The structure of the document shall have well-defined 
headings and sections in order to facilitate prospective 
bidders for providing necessary details. 


6.2.5.4 Maintaining the document 


Internal (within the procurement team) and external 
(contractor, vendors and consultants) document 
shall be maintained even after the completion of the 
procurement. The duration for which these documents 
are retained shall be determined through the document 
retention policy of stakeholders. Amendments or 
updates in any of the documents shall be communicated 
to stakeholders and prospective bidders. The 
procurement document shall be maintained as an 
e-document through computerization. 


6.2.6 Pre-completion Finalization 


It shall be ensured that all the deliverables of the 
procurement process are met and in accordance with the 
acceptance criteria before completion. The following 
work shall be ensured for pre-completion finalization: 


a) Verification of work done and deliverables; 

b) Maintaining a record of negotiations, claims, 
invoices etc.; 

c) Financial closure; 

d) Auditing of processes for any malpractice or 
ambiguity; and 

e) Amendments in procurement documents are up to 


date and circulated. 
6.3 Procurement Control 


6.3.1 General 


It is recommended that employers put in place several 
panels/committees for managing and controlling the 
procurement. Panels can be assigned for document 
reviewing, evaluation, and awarding the contract. 


6.3.2 Review of Procurement Document 


The procurement document should be reviewed with a 
view to conforming that, 


a) the procurement documents have been formatted 
and compiled in accordance with the requirements 
of the employer’s procurement policy/guidelines; 

b) the selected form of contract is appropriately 

suitable for the construction; 

c) the relevant standard employer’s templates have 

been correctly applied during the procurement 

process; 

d) the selected contract data or tender data options 

are likely to satisfy procurement objectives and 

are likely to yield best-value outcomes; and 

e) the scope of work adequately establishes what 

is required and the constraints to the manner in 


which the contract work is to be provided. 


The sections of the document, if any, which require 
amendments or improvements should be identified by 
the panel. 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


6.3.3 Control Measures in Tender Evaluation 


Following measures should be taken in tender 
evaluation: 


a) Determine whether or not submissions or tender 
offers were responsive to requirements established 
in the procurement documents; 

b) Evaluate submissions in accordance with the 

qualification criteria and procedures established in 


the procurement documents; 


c) Determine whether or not there are any grounds 
for disqualification; 

d) Determine the acceptability of preferred tenderers 
or respondents (legal compliance, capability, 
capacity and commercial risk); and 

e) Prepare a tender-evaluation report, 
prequalification, shortlisting or approved 
listing report, as relevant, complete with 
recommendations, which clearly states the 


reasons for overlooking a tenderer or respondent. 


Records of all communications with tenderers during 
the procurement process to obtain information 
and clarifications should be made and retained for 
auditing purposes. 


6.3.4 Control Measures in Awarding the Contract 


Following measures should be taken in awarding the 
contract: 


a) 


Verify compliance of the established procurement 
process and procedures; 

Confirm the integrity of the process; 

Determine whether successful bidder submitted 
factual documents, if required; 


Confirm the reasonableness and correctness of 
reasons provided for the elimination of tenderers; 
and 


e) 


6.3.5 Interaction with other Processes like Time and 
Cost 


Approve the award of the contract. 


Procurement process shall be monitored and 
controlled at each stage of the project to avoid time 
and cost overruns as given in 6.3.5.1 to 6.3.5.3. 


6.3.5.1 Change control system 


It defines the methodology for making any amends in 
the procurement process. It may include the tracking 
schedule, dispute resolution procedures, approval(s) 
required for changes and its impact on the project 
timeline. 


6.3.5.2 Procurement performance reviews and audits 


Procurement data and reports shall be evaluated 
against the agreement requirements and documented. 
It shall then be tracked against the set milestones to 
deliver project scope within cost and on schedule, as 
per the contract. 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


6.3.5.3 Payment records 


All the payments to the third party shall be processed 
by the accounts payable system and documented in 
accordance with the terms of the contract and against 
achieved milestones. 


6.3.6 Change orders 


Any task which is added or deleted from the 
original scope of contract during procurement of 
works/goods/services is to be properly documented 
and maintained in the form of change order throughout 
the project life. 


6.3.6.1 Need 


Changes needs to be controlled early including 
documenting changes, its impact on the contract and 
developing a change order. Change order is to be 
referred later in case of conflict among team members 
when the team cannot agree on the change. Controlling 
and implementing the change management process will 
minimize this conflict and avoid any negative effect on 
the project. 


6.4 Procurement Closure 


6.4.1 General 


It is the process of completing each procurement of 
works/ goods/ services as per procurement management 
plan. All agreements and related amendments shall be 
documented and maintained for future reference. The 
contract terms and conditions shall prescribe specific 
procedures for agreement closure. 


6.4.1.1 Procurement audits 


A procurement audit is a structured review of the 
procurement process starting from the procurement 
management plan to procurement closure. The 
objective is to identify successes and failures during 
the procurement lifecycle that shall form the basis 
of preparation of other procurement contracts on the 
project. 


12 


6.4.1.2 Document management system 


For maintaining closure documents, a document 
management system shall be used to manage contract 
and procurement documents and records as part of the 
closure process. 


6.4.2 Physical Closure 


It includes closure of administrative activities such 
as finalizing open claims, updating records and 
documenting procurement information. The closure 
process ensures contractual agreements are completed 
or terminated. Early termination of a contract is a 
special case of procurement closure that can result 
from a mutual agreement by both parties. In such case, 
the responsibilities of the parties are contained in the 
termination clause of the contract. Based on these terms 
and conditions, the employer may have to compensate 
the employee for preparations or for any completed 
and accepted work related to the terminated part of the 
contract. 


6.4.3 Financial Closure 


It includes the closure of financial activities, such 
as making final payments, settlement of all claims, 
invoices and completing cost records. 


6.4.4 Final Dispute Settlement 


During procurement process, the final settlement shall 
be done of all outstanding issues, claims, and disputes 
by negotiation. When settlement cannot be done 
through direct negotiation, other forms of alternative 
dispute resolution mechanisms including mediation, 
arbitration and litigation may be exercised as per the 
contract. 


6.4.5 Lessons Learnt 


Lessons learnt is a summary of procurement experience 
and process improvement recommendations. It 
includes information on schedule, scope, quality and 
cost performance along with all amendments, payment 
terms, audit results and shall be documented for the 
project file to improve future procurements. 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, 
Rustom Bagh, Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Construction Industry Development Council, 


New Delhi 


Construction Skill Development Council of India, 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Pvt Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 

CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GMR Infra and Airport, New Delhi 
Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Kaleidoscope, Noida 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


M. N. Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 
Sur! P. KRISHNAN (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


Suri G. D. GUPTA 
Suri M. N. N. Rao (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
SHRI SANJAY SONI (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. SHARMA 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
SHRI O. P. GuPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND KUMAR SINGH 
Ms JANCY MATHEW (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


DR ACHAL K. MITTAL 
DR AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMIT KUMAR GARG 
SHRI RAVI KAPOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI AMITAVA PAL 
SHRI RAVINDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI AVINASH HARDE (Alternate I) 
Ms PoOJA DESHMUKH (Alternate ID) 


CHAIRMAN-CUM-MANAGING DIRECTOR 
SHRI S. K. Jam (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NARAYAN 


Dr K. C. Iver 
Dr J. UMA MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMOR KOOL 


SHRI M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SOUMIK SEN 
SHRI ALAKES BHATTACHARYYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI AGNI Gupta (Alternate II) 


13 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation, New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and 
Research, Mumbai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
NITI Ayog, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
STUP Consultants, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur 
Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, 
PPD Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, 
Thiruvananthapuram) 


In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (P1/2, Block 2, Silver Estate 
Sector 50, Noida) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Bric M. J. KUMAR 
Cor Y. S. DHAka (Alternate) 


Deputy DIRECTOR GENERAL (PI) 
Director (IPMD) (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK RASTOGI 
Suri P. S. Rao (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 
DR ARUN CHANDRAMOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 


SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 
SHRI SANJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SUVARNA NAIKDESAI 
SHRI SESHA SAI (Alternate) 


Pror V. K. PAUL 
Suri ABHIJIT RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI BIPIN CHAND 


Suri V. K. SHARMA 
DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
SHRI KRISHNA KANT 
DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


SHRI R. P. LAHIRI 


Bric VINOD NAKRA (RETD) 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST °C’ (CiVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


14 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, 
Rustom Bagh, Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


RICS School of Built Environment, Amity University 
Noida 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, 
Abhay Khand-II, Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
LP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 

In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 


In personal capacity (P1/2, Block 2, 
Silver Estate Sector 50, Noida) 


15 


Representative(s) 


SHRI P. KRISHNAN (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER-CSQ 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 
SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI A. K. MISHRA 
SHRI D. JANA (Alternate) 


DR K. C. Iver 


SHRI M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 


PROF JOSEPH V. THANIKAL 
PROF V. K. PAUL 
SHRI ABHIJIT RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 

SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 

SHRI KRISHNA KANT 

DR S. N. MANDAL 

Suri V. K. SHARMA 

DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


Bric VINOD NAKRA (RETD) 


IS 15883 (Part 7) : 2021 


Working Group on Procurement Management, CED 29/P1/WG 6 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, PPD Suri JOSE KURIAN (Convener) 
Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, Trivandrum) 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi DRK.N. JHA 
SHRI SANTU Kar (Alternate) 
Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai SHRI K. P. SUDHEESH KUMAR 
AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIAR 
Ms KoMat VERMA (Alternate) 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida SHRI MANOJ MITTAL 
In personal capacity (81/200, 3” Street, AH Block, SHRI J. BALASUBRAMANIAN 
Annanagar Chennai) 
In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, SHRI V, K. SHARMA 
Mayur Vihar -1 Extension, Delhi) 
In personal capacity (P1/2, Block 2, BRIG VINOD NAKRA (RETD) 


Silver Estate Sector 50, Noida) 


16 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard (Part 7) is intended to provide aspects on procurement management as part of the construction 
project management, delineating the processes involved and the delivery systems, while procuring works, goods 
and services. The guidelines have been prepared following the generic structure of project management processes 
of procurement planning, procurement monitoring and procurement control. Users of this standard are encouraged 
to employ suitable construction management software as an aid to implement provisions of this standard. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (15099). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


