amid hr HA IS 26001 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


mle amatista rear — 
o 


Corporate Social Responsibility — 
Requirements 


ICS 03.100.01 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, 4$ freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2020 Price Group 7 


Social Responsibility Sectional Committee, MSD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Social 
Responsibility Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. 


With the formalization of Section 135, under the Companies Act, 2013, India emerged as one of the pioneering 
nations to mandatorily adopt Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). This historic progression was instrumental 
in re-defining the narrative of CSR, the vital espousal of which led companies to transcend from traditional 
philanthropy towards institutionalizing CSR across all levels - from governance to policy and even within the 
operational set up of businesses. 


The CSR law has advanced to the sixth year of its implementation and companies are extensively implementing 
their CSR activities across India. As a result, an immediate necessity has emerged to uniformly assess the 
CSR performance of companies especially in terms of implementation, reporting and real-time impact. The Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS) with the sole directive to formulate standard to assess and certify products and systems 
in the country, undertook the responsibility to devise Indian Standard on “Corporate Social Responsibility”. 


BIS further realized the need to institute a system-based Standard in the realm of CSR, which will act as a 
strengthened framework for companies to embed an ideal CSR management system across governance, policy, 
and implementation and reporting. 


With this initiative, India symbolically directs a strong message, as for the first time, a Standard is being formulated 
in the world that is voluntary and certifiable - making CSR integral to management systems of companies. 
Companies applying for this standard will realize the requirement to instill ‘Strategic CSR’ processes thereby 
ensuring that CSR plans drawn at the table are implemented with accountability and utmost transparency. The 
formalization of the standard and the attendant certification will bring in a spirit of aspiration for companies to 
achieve Star Rating by effectively building a business case for CSR that will yield long-term impact for both the 
company and the community. 


BIS has envisaged the CSR requirement standard as one of the foremost standards being developed by India 
to be positioned at the global level. The innovativeness of the standards lies in the unique set of principles and 
parameters that will assess and measure the performance of companies. The formulation process of the standard 
ensures that contemporary discourses on CSR and SDGs are well reflected and aligned to confirm its global 
relevance. 


This CSR standard also provides an opportunity to companies that are interested to seek CSR star rating based on 
their CSR performance, which would greatly facilitate the enhancement oftheir brand value. This Standard should 
be read in conjunction with Companies Act, 2013 and CSR Rules, therein. However, it is not intended to replace, 
alter, or in any way change the obligations of the Law. 


Other Indian Standards for conducting Assurance Engagement are as follows: 
a) Requirement for assurance engagement all matters other than statutory financial information; 
b) Guidelines for assurance engagement all matters other than statutory financial information; and 
This CSR requirement standard document comprises of the following components: 
1) The star rating process as outlined in Annex A; 
2) The criteria for basic level certification provided in Annex B; 
3) The criteria for advanced level certification (two, three, four and five star) provided in Annex C; and 
4) The composition ofthe Social Responsibility Sectional Committee MSD 10, provided in Annex D. 


IS 26001 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY — 
REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 General 


This standard facilitates a company to effectively design 
and implement a Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) program, with an overall objective to ensure that 
it has an effective mechanism to: 

a) Develop a strong CSR governance in line with the 

CSR policy; 
b) Identify appropriate and need-based CSR projects; 
c) Plan, implement, and monitor CSR activities; 


d) Evaluate the outcomes of CSR activities 
implemented; and 

e) Report the outcomes of CSR activities 
implemented. 


This Standard specifies the ‘Basic Level Certification’ 
(BLC) and ‘Advance Level Certification’ (ALC) 
requirements for Corporate Social Responsibility that 
a company can use to enhance its CSR performance. 


1.2 This standard is applicable to all types of 
companies irrespective of their size. This atandard is 
primarily applicable to Indian companies that have 
an obligation to comply with the requirements of the 
CSR Rules 2014, in alignment with Section 135 of the 
Companies Act, 2013. However, other companies can 
also apply for obtaining certification. 


1.3 It is hereby clarified that these Standards are 
only supplemental to the CSR Legislation and Rules 
for which the Ministry of Corporate Affairs is the 
Regulating Agency. These standards will have no 
bearing on any part of the Legislation or Rules. 


1.4 It is further clarified that these Standards are 
dynamic in nature and will continually evolve with 
changes in the Legislation and Rules, which will be 
duly incorporated from time to time. 


1.5 Moreover, changes will also be effected, if need 
be, as the Standards and the rating process herein 
conceptualised, are rolled out and put into operation. 


1.6 The rating process envisioned in these standards, 
are purely based on the CSR reports, records and data 
submitted by the corporate entities that are applying and 
the verification provided by the Empanelled Auditors 
(see 3.5). 


2 REFERENCES 


The references given below contains provisions, which 
through references in this text, constitute the provisions 
of this standard: 


a) Companies Act, 2013 and CSR Rules framed by 
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 


b) Indian Standards on Assurance Engagement 
Standard. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Corporate Social Responsibility — It is the 
responsibility of a company for the impacts of its 
decisions and activities on society and the environment 
through transparent and ethical behaviour that: 


a) contributes to sustainable development, including 
health and welfare of society; 


b) takes into account the expectations of all 
stakeholders; 


c) is in compliance with applicable law and 
consistent with national and international norms 
of behaviour; and 


d) is integrated throughout the company and 
practiced in its sphere of influence. 


3.2 CSR Policy — Intentions and direction of a 
company related to societal and environmental 
development and performance, as formally 
expressed by its top management, in alignment 
with the requirements of the rules, specified in 
Companies Act, 2013 and CSR Rules 2014 that are 
notified by the Govt. of India 


3.3 Compliance Obligations — Legal and regulatory 
requirements that a company has to comply with 
and other requirements that a company chooses 
to comply with namely company and industry 
standards, contractual relationships, codes of practice 
and agreements with the community groups or 
non-governmental organisation. 


3.4 Implementing Agency — A partner of a company 
that is engaged in directly managing the CSR project; 
executing its project activities, monitoring the project’s 
progress; sub-contracting a part of its job in agreement 
with the company; managing project staff and funds, 
and carrying out other project management functions 
including reporting. 


IS 26001 : 2020 


3.5 Empanelled Auditor — A person or a firm who 
complies with the competence criteria laid down 
Indian Standard on Requirements for Competence 
for Individual Applicant and Firm for Conducting 
Assurance Engagements, as per Indian Assurance 
engagement standard (Requirements) and empanelled 
by BIS. 


The auditor shall provide an assurance/opinion on 
whether the company complies with the requirements 
of Basic Level Certification (BLC) and/or Advanced 
Level Certification (ALC). 


3.6 Certification Committee — The apex body, 
which will hear the applicants as wellasthe Empanelled 
Auditor and decide whether or not to award star rating 
as well as the category of the star rating. 


4 GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR CSR 


4.1 Principles and Parameters 


This standard comprises a set of 5 Principles 
that are distributed across the respective cycle(s) 
in the form of a PDCA (Plan, Do, Check, Act) 
Matrix. The 5 principles are supported by 
9 parameters as described in Table 1. 


4.2 Criteria for Basic Level CSR and Advanced 
Level CSR 


4.2.1 The requirements specific to Basic Level 
Certification and Advanced Level certification are 
provided in Annexe **B” and Annexe **C” respectively. 


4.2.2 For a company seeking Basic Level Certification, 
it is mandatory for the company to be in conformance 
with all the items provided in Annexe "B". 


4.2.3 A company is eligible for Advance Level 
Certification (ALC) only after fulfilling the criteria 
of Basic Level Certification. The ALC outlines the 
principles of moving beyond compliance as it entails 
the provisions of the “CSR Star Rating Certification” 
that will be awarded on the basis of a company’s 


performance in the ALC assessment. The parameters 
for ALC have been outlined in Annexe C. 


4.2.4 A company seeking certification as per ALC shall 
have to establish effective processes and procedures as 
per the requirements of this standard. 


4.2.5 For a company seeking BLC and ALC, it is 
imperative and mandatory to establish a proper CSR 
system as per the applicable set of Legal Performance 
Criteria within the 9 Parameters enlisted in 4.1. 


4.2.6 Appropriate documented information shall be 
maintained for certification of BLC and or ALC, 
inclusive of all legal matters. A company seeking 
certification to BLC and or ALC shall ensure 
compliance with all applicable legal requirements 
specific to CSR mentioned in the Companies Act 
and CSR Rules. Sufficient documented evidence to 
the satisfaction of the empanelled auditor shall be 
maintained to enable the auditor for the issuance of 
a positive opinion, on the basis of a BIS approved 
assurance standard. The same documents shall also 
be retained for the reference of the Certification 
Committee, if required. 


5 REQUIREMENTS FOR BASIC LEVEL 
CERTIFICATION 


5.1 CSR Governance 


The Board of the Company shall be accountable 
for taking all decisions pertaining to the CSR policy 
and activities of the company. Compliance with this 
principle will ensure that companies take the first step 
in accomplishing one of the major avowed objectives 
of the CSR legislation which is to take CSR from the 
“backroom to the boardroom”. 


The Board of the Company shall ensure the following: 
a) Commitment to corporate social responsibility; 


b) Involvement of all concerned stakeholders in the 
decision-making process; 


Table 1 Principles of CSR 
( Clause 4.1 ) 


Cycle Principles Parameter(s) 
a) Parameter 1 — Functions and responsibilities of the board 
1) CSR Governance b) Parameter 2 — Composition and constitution of the CSR committee 
PLAN c) Parameter 3 — CSR policy, functions and responsibilities of the CSR committee 
2) CSR Planning a) Parameter 4 — CSR projects 
b) Parameter 5 — Identification of credible implementing agencies 
3) Funds and Resources for a) Parameter 6 — Provision of funds and resources 
DO a " 
Implementing CSR Projects 
CHECK 4) Monitoring, Evaluation and a) Parameter 7 — Process for monitoring of CSR projects and activities; 
Impact b) Parameter 8 — Evaluation and impact of CSR projects 


ACT 5) CSR Reporting a 


= 


Parameter 9 — CSR reporting 


c) Provision of the resources for the establishment, 
implementation, maintenance and continual 
improvement of the system; and 


d) Creation of awareness and promotion of corporate 
social responsibility as an integral part of the 
company’s culture. 


The Parameters within this Principle aim to delineate 
the roles and functions of the Board and 
CSR Committee. 


5.1.1 Functions and Responsibilities of the Board 


The Board of the Company shall be fully accountable 
and responsible for the execution and implementation 
of the CSR policy and all of the projects that are 
formulated thereunder. 


Legal Performance Criteria: 


a) The CSR Policy of the company shall be approved 
by the Board. Also, indicate the date and number 
of the Board Resolution. The date must be 
subsequent to 01.04.2015. 


The approved CSR policy shall be appropriately 
displayed on the company's website along with 
web-link. 

c) The company shall periodically review 
its activities, risks, CSR Budget and legal 
requirements. Accordingly, the minutes of Board 
meetings shall reflect the actions taken in this 
regard. 


b 


= 


5.1.2 Composition and Constitution of the CSR 
Committee 


This parameter aims to define the processes and 
procedures for the composition and constitution of 
the CSR Committee and also delineate its functions. 
The Board shall ensure that its Corporate Social 
Responsibility Committee has been formed as per Rule 
(5) of Section 135. The CSR Committee shall appoint 
a responsible CSR Management Representative (MR) 
who shall be a member of the management and shall 
also have the responsibility and authority to ensure that 
processes required to establish the CSR system are well 
implemented, maintained, and periodically reviewed, 
and improvements needed are reported to the CSR 
Committee and Board at regular intervals. 


Legal Performance Criteria 


a) The CSR Committee must be constituted by 
means of a Board resolution. The Board resolution 
number and date must be provided. 

b) The composition of the CSR Committee with 
names and designations must be provided. 

c) One of the members of the CSR Committee shall 
be an Independent Director (where applicable) 
whose particulars must be provided. 

d) If the CSR Committee has less than three 
members it must provide reasons for the same. 


IS 26001 : 2020 


e) If the company is a foreign company, it must 
provide the details of the Directors. 


f) In case of a foreign company, the declaration 
shall be submitted to the Registrar of Companies 
indicating that none ofthe directors of the company 
or authorized representatives in India have ever 
been convicted or debarred from formation of 
companies and management in India or abroad. 


5.1.3 CSR Policy, Functions and Responsibilities of 
the CSR Committee 


The CSR committee shall formulate a CSR Policy, 
and establish steps for the effective implementation, 
maintenance, periodic review, and improvement of 
the CSR System. Such a policy shall be approved 
(prior to its issuance), maintained, communicated, 
reviewed and updated, as and when required. 


Legal Performance Criteria 


a) The CSR Committee must formulate and 
recommended the CSR policy to the Board for 


approval. 
b) The CSR policy must indicate the 
sectors/areas/subjects in which CSR 


programmes/projects are to be undertaken as per 
Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013 and 
CSR Rules 2014. 


The CSR Committee must recommend the amount 
of expenditure to be incurred on CSR activities 
to the Board along with a detailed break-up of 
activities. 


Cc 


— 


d) The CSR Committee must meet at least on three 


occasions each year, over the last three years. 


5.2 CSR Planning 


The CSR Policy must clearly outline mechanisms 
and modalities of actual implementation of CSR 
projects/programmes with a view to ensure measurable 
and sustainable outcomes primarily focusing on 
projects/activities which are beneficiary-oriented and 
contribute to sustainable development. The company 
must evaluate prospective CSR  projects/activities 
in accordance with activities mentioned in schedule 
VII of Companies Act, 2013. 


— 


5.2.1 CSR Projects/Programmes 


The Company must involve identified stakeholders in 
the selection of projects, planning, and implementation 
phase in accordance with the company's CSR 
policy. The Company may also involve appropriate 
stakeholders in the monitoring and evaluation of the 
CSR performance. 


Legal Performance Criteria 


a) The projects/programmes must be executed by the 
company after receiving specific approval of the 
CSR committee. 


IS 26001 : 2020 


b) The company must provide the number of 
projects/programmes that have been taken up for 
implementation in each of the last 3 years. 


c) Ofthe above, the company must enlist the number 
of projects/programmes that are ongoing and that 
have been completed in each of the last 3 years. 


5.2.2 Identification of Credible Implementing Agencies 


The Company can implement CSR Project on its own. 
However, it can also hire implementing agencies. It is 
important to have transparent mechanisms to ascertain 
the level of competence, experience, reputation, and 
integrity of the implementing agency and its personnel. 
In view of the same, the company shall conduct due 
diligence of implementing agency/agencies, inclusive 
of compliance with applicable legal requirements 
prior to hiring its services for implementation of its 
CSR projects in order to ascertain risks as well as 
benefits of working with the potential partner and 
ascertain the following: 
a) The extent to which the senior leadership of 
the implementing agency is independent of the 
company. 


b 


— 


Memorandum of understanding with 
implementing partner to be established indicating 
inter alia, KPIs, monitoring and reporting 
mechanism, timeliness, scope, risk mitigation 
strategies, dispute/conflict resolution mechanism 
and audit criteria etc. 


Legal Performance Criteria 


1) The process of due diligence must be carried 
out for selecting implementing agencies. 


2) The selected implementing agency must 
have a track record of 3 years of project 
implementation. 


Selected implementing agency must be 
registered as a trust, society, or Section 
8 company or a company established by a 
company. 


3 


— 


The company must duly declare the modality of 
CSR project implementation as direct and indirect. 
In case of the latter, it must enlist the number 
of implementing agency(s) involved in project 
implementation in the last 3 financial years. 


5.3 Funds 
CSR Projects 


The Company shall identify and provide the 
necessary competence and resources necessary for the 
implementation, maintenance, continual improvement 
and sustenance of the CSR projects. The details of 
CSR spent shall include all expenditures including 
CSR activities undertaken for each projects and 
contribution to corpus. Also, the company shall review 
risk and mitigation measures and establish good 
practices for timely implementation of CSR projects. 


and Resources for Implementing 


Legal Performance Criteria 
a) Indicate the CSR budget of the company in each 
ofthe past 3 years. 


b) In each year mentioned above, the company 
will ensure that the CSR budget in at least to 2 
percent of the average net profits ofthe company 
made during the three preceding financial years. 


c 


wm 


In case the company has not spent the 2 percent 

of average net profits as indicated above, has it: 

1) provided due reasons to the MCA for either 
not spent or underspent? 

2) received any notice from the MCA in this 
regard? If so, how has the notice been 
responded to? 


5.4 Monitoring, Evaluation and Improving 
CSR System 
The company shall monitor and evaluate 


CSR projects as per the CSR Policy. The company 
shall devise appropriate internal and external methods 
of monitoring and evaluating the performance of 
CSR projects and activities, by way of suitable 
qualitative and quantitative indicators. The company 
shall specify the modalities of execution of the 
CSR projects and the process of monitoring. 


5.4.1 Process of Monitoring of CSR projects and 
Activities 

The company shall establish, implement, maintain 
review procedures and its frequency for addressingrisk 
assessment, determining causes of non-conformities, 
initiate corrective actions, record the results and 
review the effectiveness of initiated corrective actions 
and assess, if they have departed from their desired 
course, through a process to: 


a) Demonstrate conformity with and 


regulatory requirements; 


legal 


b) Assess whether the company’s CSR projects 
have been able to meet their targeted objectives 
and benefit the targeted beneficiaries; and 


c) Evaluate periodically the adequacy and 
appropriateness of the impact assessment 
tools and framework established for impact 
assessment, as per context and size of the CSR 
projects. 

Legal Performance Criteria 
1) The company must put in place a detailed 
project monitoring mechanism for the 
implementation of tracking and monitoring 
each CSR project. 
2 


— 


Ensure that the periodicity of the monitoring 
reports for the projects has been maintained 
as planned. 


5.4.2 Evaluation and Impact of CSR Projects and 
Activities 

Periodic internal and external audits shall be planned, 
established, and conducted in relation to this standard 
as well as the CSR projects. 


The company shall establish and put in place appropriate 
processes and procedures for conducting such internal 
and external audits. 


The CSR projects of a company may be subjected 
to a third-party independent evaluation. Such 
third-party evaluation will include (a) appropriateness 
of the processes and controls developed by the 
company and (b) the outcomes and impacts achieved 
by the implementation ofthe CSR projects undertaken. 


Legal Performance Criteria 


a) The company has undertaken an evaluation or 
impact assessment for any of the implemented 
CSR projects. 


b) The company has enlisted the number of projects/ 
programmes for which the evaluation/impact 
study reports been finalised and submitted to the 
company. 


5.5 CSR Reporting 


The Board of the Company shall ensure that the entire 
process and procedure of CSR projects and activities 
shall be duly consolidated and documented. The 
relevant documentations generated in the context of 
this standard shall be maintained and preserved for 
a period that is deemed appropriate and kept in safe 
custody; and shall be readily accessible and retrievable. 


The company shall at appropriate intervals report to its 
stakeholders on results relating to CSR. The reporting 
shall include: 


a) The company’s key/significant stakeholders and 
processes for identification, engagement and 
involvement of these stakeholders; 


IS 26001 : 2020 


b) Prioritized corporate social responsibility core 
subjects and issues the company addresses, and 
how these are prioritized; 


c) Corporate Social responsibility, policy, objectives 
and targets; and 


d) Corporate social responsibility performance, 
challenges and outcomes including inadequate 
performance. 


Legal Performance Criteria 


1) The company has submitted to the MCA 
in each of the preceding three years the 
returns specified in the Annexure (II) of the 
CSR Rules under Section 135 (2014). Please 
provide the link of the CSR report published 
on the website. 


2) The Annual Reports of the Board of 
Directors of the company in each of the 
preceding three years, including a statement 
of CSR projects and activities undertaken by 
the company. 


3) Submission of Form AOC-4 in each of the 
three financial years within thirty days of its 
annual general meeting. The Company shall 
ensure that in each of these filings, Segment 
II relating to Corporate Social Responsibility 
has been duly filled in. 


4) The company shall ensure regularity of 
reporting by the KRPs to the CSR Committee 
and Board and indicate the number of 
meetings convened in each of the last three 
financial years. 


5) The Company shall clearly disclose 
any notice that it has received from the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) on 
CSR compliance and the means adopted or 
proposed to be adopted to have the issue 
resolved. 


IS 26001 : 2020 


ANNEX A 


PROCESS OF CERTIFICATION 


I. For a company that is seeking ‘CSR Star 
Rating’, and comes under the purview 
of Section 135 Companies Act, 2013, it 
is expected that it would have defined, 
developed, and implemented a proper CSR 
System. 


II. For a company that is not required to comply 
with the provisions of CSR as per the 
Companies Act, 2013 and CSR Rules, it would 
still be required to adhere to the requirements 
prescribed for Star Ratings in order to qualify 
for certification. 


II. A company, only upon fulfilling the criteria 
of Basic Level Certification (BLC), will 
be eligible to apply for the Advance Level 
Certification. Upon meeting all the criteria for 
the BLC to the satisfaction of the Certification 
Committee, the applicant will be presumed 
to have a One Star Rating (60 marks) and 
the scoring will commence from this specific 
rating. 

IV. There are four (4) levels to the Advance Level 
Certification (ALC) that is, Two, Three, Four 
and Five Star. The marks achieved under each 
criterion for which the certification is applied 
for, will determine the Star Rating of the 
company. 

V A Company that applies for Advanced Level 
Certification must separately submit the data 
required for Basic Level Certificate as well 
as the data required for the desired level of 
Advance certification. 


VI. A Company applying for Certification may 
do so indicating the Star Category/Categories 
which it seeks. The Certification Committee 
(Clause 3.6) may, after due assessment, award 
the same category or a lesser category or reject 
the application altogether on grounds that it 
deems fit. The decision of the Certification 
Committee will be final. 


VI. A Company may straightaway apply for any 
category in the ALC. In such an event, it will 
need to submit all the information related to 
BLC and simultaneously, all the information 
related to the category for which ALC is being 
sought. 


VII. The Star Rating (2, 3, 4 and 5 rating) will 
be awarded on the basis of the company’s 
performance in the ALC assessment. There 
will be a graded scale of 1-100 and the 
position obtained on the scale will indicate the 
star rating. The company will be required to 
answer all the questions prescribed in the level 
for which the certification is being sought. The 
overall ALC Assessment Framework has been 
provided below with the assigned weightage: 


IX. Ifthe company fails to achieve any ALC Star 
rating level, but meets the BLC criteria, it will 
be awarded 1 (One) Star Rating. However, 
such a rating will not be deemed to be a legal 
proof or certificate of compliance. 


STAR RATING SCORES ACHIEVED (OUT OF 100) 
»e $ 6 6. € 91 — 100 
KURT = 
x x x 75 —80 
x * 65 — 70 
x 60 


ANNEX B 


BASIC LEVEL STAR RATING (BLC-ONE STAR) 


IS 26001 : 2020 


YES/NO/Does not 
Apply/(Provide reason) 


One Star Rating > 
1 


Does the Company have a formally constituted CSR Committee? 


Has this been done by a Board Resolution post 1.4.2014? 


"dd 


Has the composition of the CSR Committee been displayed on the web site 
of the Company? 


Does the CSR Committee have at least three members? 


Does the CSR Committee include an Independent Director? 


A pa QUA 


Does the Company have a CSR Policy? 


Has the CSR Policy been duly accepted by the Board by means of a Board 
Resolution post 1.4.2014? 


Has the Company disclosed the contents of its duly approved CSR Policy on 
its web site? 


Did the Company spend at least 2 percent of its previous three years’ average 
net profits on CSR activities in each of the last three financial years? 


Ifthe answer to the above question (No. 9) is “NO” for any ofthe three years, 
did the Company specify the reasons therefor on its web site/Board Report? 


Has the CSR Committee been regularly monitoring the CSR activities of the 
Company regularly? 


If the answer to the above question (No.11) is “YES”, does the Company 
have a monitoring mechanism/format for the same? 


Has the Company been filing its CSR Returns regularly as prescribed in the 
ANNEX to the CSR Rules notified on 27" February 2014? (Rule 8) 


Has the Company been filing regular returns to the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs on MCA 21 (AOC 4 Form)? 


15. 


Has the Company received any notice from the Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
on the subject of CSR? 


16. 


Has the Company been implementing its CSR projects/programs by any one 
or more of the following: 


1) Its own staff 
2) through a registered trust or society 
3) through a Section 8 company 


4) by contribution to Corpus (Rule 7 of CSR Rules notified on 27" February 
2014? By contributing to one ofthe specified funds of Schedule VII such 
as PMNRF, PM-CARES or any another funds? 


IS 26001 : 2020 


ANNEX C 


ADVANCED LEVEL CERTIFICATION (ALC) 
TWO, THREE, FOUR AND FIVE STARS 


. MAXIMUM MARKS 
LEVEL II - Two star rating ASSIGNED - 10 (10 x 1) 
Marks Marks 
LEVEL II - Two Star Rating xx Assigned Obtained 
1. Has the company done 3 or more CSR projects in each of the 3 1 
preceding financial years (FY)? 
2. For projects started in the last FY by the company, has the 1 
need-based assessment and baseline survey been conducted for 
at least 20 percent of the projects? 
3. Has a detailed documentation been conducted for at least 1 
30 percent the CSR projects undertaken in the last three 
financial years with respect to planning, implementation, 
monitoring, evaluation and reporting of CSR performance? 
4. Has a detailed monitoring process been put in place with 1 
submission of reports to the CSR Committee at regular 
intervals? 
5. Has the company externally evaluated or started to evaluate at 1 
least 20 percent of projects completed in the last three financial 
years subject to a capping of 20 projects? 
6. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, does the number 1 
of direct beneficiaries exceed 100? 
7. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, are at least 20 1 
percent located in more than one district/panchayat? 
8. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, are at least two 1 
activities of Schedule VII of the Companies Act addressed? 
9. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, whether at least 1 
one CSR project has been aligned with the relevant SDG? Ifso, 
please specify the SDG and indicators. 
10. Has the internal audit of CSR activities and expenditure of the 1 
company been carried out for the 3 financial years preceding 
the last FY? 
Maximum Marks 10 (10 x 1) 


IS 26001 : 2020 


LEVEL III - Three Star Rating MAXIMUM MARKS 
ASSIGNED - 20 
‘ à " Marks 
LEVEL III - Three Star Rating Marks Obtained 

1. Has the company done 5 or more CSR projects in each of the 3 2 

preceding financial years (FY)? 
2. Has the average cost of at least 5 projects mentioned above been more 2 

than Rs. 10 lacs? 
3. For projects started in the last FY by the company, has the need-based 2 

assessment and baseline survey been conducted for at least 30 percent 

of the projects? 
4. Has a detailed monitoring process been put in place in the format of 2 

an MIS for submission of reports to the CSR Committee at regular 

intervals? 
5. Has a detailed documentation been conducted for at least 40 percent the 2 

CSR projects undertaken in the last three financial years with respect 

to planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of 

CSR performance? 
6. Does the number of direct beneficiaries from all the projects undertaken 2 

exceed 500? 
7. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, are at least 30% located 2 

in more than one district/panchayat? 
8. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, have at least three CSR 2 

projects been aligned with the relevant SDGs? If so, please specify the 

SDGs and indicator. 
9. Has the internal audit of CSR activities and expenditure of the company 2 

been carried out for the 3 financial years preceding the last FY? 
10. Has the company externally evaluated or started to evaluate at least 2 

30 percent of projects completed in the last three financial years subject 

to a capping of 25 projects? 

Maximum Marks 20 (10 x 2) 
(10 x 2) 
LEVEL IV Four Star Rating MAXIMUM MARKS 


ASSIGNED = 30 


LEVEL - IV Marks Marks 
FOUR STAR RATIN YODO - . 
OURS S Assigned | Obtained 
1. Has the company done 10 or more CSR projects in each of the 2 
3 preceding financial years? 
2. Has the average cost of at least 5 projects mentioned above been 2 
more than Rs. 20 lakhs. 
3. For projects started in the last three financial years, has the need- 2 
based assessment and baseline survey been conducted for at least 
40 percent of the projects? 
4. Has the Company put in place a robust due diligence system in the 2 
selection of its implementation agencies? 


IS 26001 : 2020 


LEVEL IV Four Star Rating MAXIMUM MARKS 
ASSIGNED = 30 
LEVEL - IV Marks Marks 
FOUR STAR RATIN kkk . . 
DURS S Assigned | Obtained 
5. Has a detailed documentation been conducted for at least 50 percent 2 
the CSR projects undertaken in the last three financial years with 
respect to planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and 
reporting of CSR performance? 
6. Has a detailed monitoring process been put in place in the format of 2 
an MIS for submission of reports to the CSR Committee at regular 
intervals? Has the CSR Committee reviewed the performance of the 
Company and its projects at least four times in the last financial year? 
7. Does the number of direct beneficiaries from all the projects 2 
undertaken exceed 5000? 
8. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, are at least 40 % 2 
located in more than one district/panchayat? 
9. For the last two financial years, have at least 10 projects been located 2 
in aspirational districts (as identified by NITI AYOG)? 
10. Has the company externally evaluated or started to evaluate at least 2 
30 percent of projects completed in the last three financial years 
subject to a capping of 40 projects? 
11. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last two financial years, has 2 
the company undertaken impact assessments of at least 20 percent of 
these projects? 
12. Has the internal audit of CSR system/activities and CSR expenditure 2 
ofthe company been carried out for the last 3 years? 
13. In the last three financial years, has any of the Company’s 2 
CSR projects or the Company itself, received an award from 
any nationally/internationally reputed organization, or a 
national/State level Industry Association/body (such as CIL, FICCI, 
ASSOCHAM etc.)? 
14. Are at least 10% of the completed CSR projects still 2 
surviving/being sustained without any support of the company, 
for at least a period of one year, post the company’s exit from the 
CSR project (subject to a cap of 20 projects)? 
15 For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, have at least five 2 
CSR projects been aligned with the relevant SDGs? If so, please 
specify the SDGs and indicator. 
MAXIMUM MARKS 30 


10 


IS 26001 : 2020 


LEVEL V - Five Star Rating MAXIMUM MARKS 
ASSIGNED = 40 
Marks Marks 
LEVEL-V | FIVE STAR RATING 0.04 Obtained 

1. Has the company done 20 or more CSR projects in each of the 2 
3 preceding financial years (FY)? 

2. Has the average cost of at least 10 projects mentioned above been 2 
more than Rs. 50 lakhs per annum? 

3. Has the expenditure of the company on CSR in each of the last 2 
3 years been at least 2.5 % of its average net profits (of the preceding 
three financial years)? 

4. For projects started in the last three financial years, has the 2 
need-based assessment and baseline survey been conducted for at 
least 40 % of the projects? 

5. Has a detailed documentation been conducted for at least 60 % the 2 
CSR projects undertaken in the last three financial years with respect 
to planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
of CSR performance? 

6. Does the number of direct beneficiaries from all the projects 2 
undertaken exceed 10,000? 

7. Are the CSR projects of the company located in more than 3 
50 districts/panchayat? 

8. For the last two financial years, have at least 20 projects been located 2 
in aspirational districts (as identified by NITI AYOG)? 

9. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last FY, have at least ten 4 
CSR projects been aligned with the relevant SDGs? If so, please 
specify the SDGs and indicator. 

10. Has the company externally evaluated or started to evaluate at least 4 
40% of projects completed in the last three financial years subject to 
a capping of 50 projects? 

11. For all CSR projects undertaken in the last two financial years, has 4 
the company undertaken impact assessments of at least 30 % of 
these projects? 

12. In the last three financial years, has any of the Company's 3 
CSR projects or the Company itself, received an award from any 
nationally/internationally reputed organization, or a national/State 
level Industry Association/body (such as CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM 
etc.) or a National Award from the Government of India? 

13. Are at least 15 % of the completed CSR projects still surviving/ 4 
being sustained without any support of the company, for at least a 
period of one year, post the company's exit from the CSR project 
(subject to a cap of 30 projects)? 

14. Has any ofthe company's projects demonstrated special creativity or 4 
innovation? Please provide details. 

Maximum Marks 40 


IS 26001 : 2020 


ANNEXD 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Social Responsibility Sectional Committee, MSD 10 


Organization 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
(Former DG, Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, 
New Delhi) 


AROH Foundation, Noida 
Cargill, New Delhi 


Centre for Responsible Business, New Delhi 
Charities Aid Foundation India, New Delhi 
Coca Cola India, Gurgaon 


Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, 
New Delhi 


Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of CA, F & PD, 
New Delhi 


Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Heavy Industries 
& Public Enterprises, New Delhi 


FICCI, New Delhi 

Foundation for MSME Clusters, New Delhi 

GAIL India Ltd, New Delhi 

GITAM University, Hyderabad 

Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, Haryana 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 

M/s Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India LLP, Gurgaon 


Management Development Institute, Gurgaon 


Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Department of Industrial 
Policy & Promotion, New Delhi 


Ministry of Corporate Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi 


Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises, New Delhi 
QCI, New Delhi 


The Energy Research Institute (TERI), New Delhi 
United Nations Global Compact Network India, New Delhi 


12 


Representative(s) 


Dn BHASKAR CHATTERJEE (Chairman) 


Dr NEELAM GUPTA 
Ms DIPANWITA CHAKRABORTY 


MR Rut SENGUPTA 
Mr Arun ASTHANA (Alternate) 


Ms MEENAKSHI BATRA 
MR AvNEET Kumar (Alternate) 


MR ISHTEYAQUE AHMED 
Ms SHUBHA SEKHAR (Alternate) 


MR Ajay Y ADAV 
Ms Tanu SınGH (Alternate) 


MR DHARMESH MAKWANA 
MR ANIL Kumar PANDEY (Alternate) 


Dr MADHUKAR GUPTA 


Ms Rita Roy CHOUDHURY 

MR MUKESH GULATI 

MR SANTANU Roy 

DR Divya Kirti GUPTA 

Mr MUKESH KUMAR 

MR BiBHUTI PRADHAN 

CA SANJAY KUMAR AGARWAL, FCA 


MR Sumit MAKHIJA 
MR SAURABH Krosa (Alternate) 


MR ANKUR Roy 


MR ZAKARIA KHAN YUSUFZAI 
Mn Binop Kumar (Alternate) 


MRK.M. S. NARAYANAN 


Mr ViNOD KUMAR 


MR SANJEEV CHAWLA 
MR PiyusH AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Dr Hart PRAKASH 
Dn S. K. Misura (Alternate) 


Dr ANNAPURNA VANCHESWARAN 
Mr KAMAL SINGH 


Organization 


Yes Bank, Mumbai 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 26001 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


Ms NAMITA VIKAS 


Ms RADHIKA RALHAN 


MR DINESH AGARWAL 


Member Secretary 


Ms SHALU VARSHNEY, 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS), BIS 


Composition of Panel on ‘CSR Requirements’, MSD 10/P-6 


Organization 


Charities Aid Foundation India, New Delhi 
AROH Foundation, Noida 

Cargill, New Delhi 

Centre for Responsible Business, New Delhi 
Charities Aid Foundation India, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 

GITAM University, Hyderabad 

Indian Institute of Corporate Affairs, Haryana 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 
Management Development Institute, Gurgaon 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi 


The Energy Research Institute (TERI), New Delhi 


In personal capacity, Delhi 

In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
BIS 

BIS 


Representative(s) 


Dr NEELAM GUPTA 

Ms DIPANWITA CHAKRABORTY 
MR Rurr SENGUPTA 

MR AVIJEET KUMAR 

Ms Rita Roy CHOUDHURY 
Dr Divya KIRTI GUPTA 

Mr MukEsH KUMAR 

MR BiBHUTI PRADHAN 

Dr Ankur Roy 

MR ViNOD KUMAR 

DR ANNAPURNA VANCHESWARAN 
Ms RADHIKA RALHAN 

MR RAJIB Kumar DEBNATH 
MR DINESH AGARWAL 


Ms SNEH LATA 


Ms SHALU VARSHNEY 


Drafting Team on *CSR Requirements” 


SI. No. NAME OF THE REPRESENTATIVE(S) 


1. Dr BHASKAR CHATTERJEE, 
2. Ms RADHIKA RALHAN 
3. Mn RAJIB KUMAR DEBNATH 


13 


Mn RAJIB KUMAR DEBNATH 


Ms MEENAKSHI BATRA (Convener) 


MR Barası GURUMURTHY (Alternate) 


Ms SNEH Lara, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (MSD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 10 (12371). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


