( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS :' 10242 ( Part 3/See 2 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS
PART Section
Electrical
Chairman
SHRI

3

EQUIPMENT and Controlgear Assemblies

2

Switchgear

Equipment and Installations in Ships Sectional Committee, ETDC 62
Representing Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay

H. K. TAN~J.~ Members

SHRI S. CHANDRA ( Alternate to Shri H. K. Taneja ) Organization Scientific Instruments Central SHRI A. N. AGARWAL ( CSIR ), Chandigarh SHRI V. K. SEHGAL ( Allernate ) Directorate of Warships Projects, New Delhi SHRI S. S. ANAND SHRI M. P. SIN~H ( Alternate ) SHRI C. R. BALASUBRAMA?~TIAN The English Electric Co of India Ltd, Madras SRRI K. VASU~EVAN ( Alternate ) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, SRRI S. N. BASS1 Calcutta SHBI A. D. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) Directorate of Standardization, Department of CLUL A. M. BHO~PATI Electrical Engineering ( Ministry of Defencc ) CDR M. S. CHANDRASHE~HAR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Shipping, Bombay SHRI N. CHIKRABORTY SHRI B. B. BADWAL ( Alternate ) The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay DR L. R. CHARY SHRI N. N. BAHADURI ( Alternate ) Delton Cable Industries Ltd, New Delhi SHnr S. P. CHAUDHRY SF~RIP. MUKUNDAN ( Alternate ) General Electric Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. K. DATTA Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. J, D'SILVA SHRI J. MANSUKHANI ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, SHRI A. N. GHOSH New Delhi SHRI A. BANDYOPADHYAY ( Alternate )

INDIAN

STANDARDS

@

( Continuedon page 2 )

Copyright 1985 INSTITUTION

I

This publication is protected under the In&n Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproductkn in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10242 ( Part 3jSec 2 ) - 1984
( Continued from page 1 ) 1Mcnlbs7s SHRI L. GOPALAKRIRHNAN
CDR

Represmting Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Directorate of Production Inspection ( Naval ) ( DGI ), Ministry of Defence
)

HARDTAL SINCH CDR VINOD KUXAR ( Alternate

sHRIK.KISHORE SHRI SHRI

Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay G. BHAT ( Alternnte ) Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SRRI K. V. MANJUNATH SHRI N. RAMACHANDRA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Vishakhapatnam SHRI P. V. NARASI~~HAN SHRI P. S. P. RAO ( Alternafe ) Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay SHn1H.D. PENDSE SHRI W. R. PATWARDHAN ( Alternate ) Larsen & Tonbro Ltd, Bombay SARI V. MOKAN SHRI A. M. MIJXSHI ( Alternale ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHR1M.A. NOORUDDIN SHRI R. JAIRAM ( Alterrznte ) Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara DR B. RAQR~JNATH SHRI R. PALANI ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. Hyderahad SHRI K.R. R_4XACHANDRAN SHRI S. C. BHAR~AVA ( Alternate I ) SIIRI V. R. G.~RDE ( Alternate II ) The Indian Cable Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI K. V. R. RAo SHKI S. BHATTACN~RYA ( Alternate) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHR~K.P.SARATHY SRRI JAVEED AHMED ( Alternate ) Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin SHRI P. J. C. SERENO SHRI A. K. MUEHERJEE ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o$cio Member ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV. Director ( Elec tech )
SHRI M. M. OEA
h4.

D. K. SANYAL ( Alternate)

Directorate Bombay

of

Marine

Engineering

Training,

Secretary BIR SINQH Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), IS1
SHRI SUKN

Panel
SRRI

for Switchgear

and Controlgear

Assemblies,
Ltd, Bombay

ETDC

62/P3

Convener V. MOHAN Members SERI A. M. MUNSH~ ( Alternate to Shri V. hiohan ) The English Electric Co of India Ltd, Madras SHRIC.R.BALASUBRAMANIAN SHRI K. W~SUDEVAN ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page a )
I3

Larsen & Toubro

2

IS : 10242 ( Part 3/Set 2 ) - 1984

lna!ian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS IN SHIPS
PART Section 2 Switchgear 3 EQUIPMENT and Controlgear Assemblies

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard ( Part 3Sec 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 November 1984, after the draft finalized by the Electrical Equipment and Installations in Ships Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. on electrical installations in ships

0.2 This series of Indian Standards consists of the following parts: Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 General System design Equipment Installation Special

and tests of completed

installation

features

0.2.1 Under Part 3 different sections have been prepared to deal with individual equipment. Other sections which have already been published are as follows: Section Section 1 3 Generators Transformers and motors for power and lighting

0.3 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been taken from IEC Pub 92-302 ( 1980 ) `Electric installations in ships, Part 302 assemblies', issued by the - Switchgear and controlgear Equipment International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). $4 This part of the standard shall be read appropriate parts mentioned in 0.2. 3 in conjunction with the other

IS : 10242 ( Part S/Set 2 ) - 1984
of deciding whether standard is complied with, the final expressing the result of a test or analysis, The number ance with IS : 2-196Q*. the rounded off value should be the same in this standard.

0.5 For the purpose

a particular requirement of this value, observed or calculated, shall be rounded off in accordof significant places retained in as that of the specified value

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard ( Part S/Set 2 ) is applicable to switchgear and controlgear assemblies and components, with rated voltages up to and including 1 kV ac or 1.2 kV dc for use in ships. 2. TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the definition of general terms used in this standard, reference should be made to IS : 1885 ( Part 17 )-19797 and IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )Following additional definitions shall apply for the purpose of 1977:. this standard.
assembly for 2.1 Main Switch Board - A switchgear and controlgear the control of a ship service power generated by the main source of electrical power and its distribution to all electrical consumers utilized in the normal operational and habitable duties of the vessel. 2.2 Emergency Switchboard - A switchgear and controlgear assembly for the control of power generated by the emergency source of electrical power and its distribution of power to electrical consumers essential for the safety of passengers and crew under emergency conditions. 2.3 Section Board - A switchgear and controlgear controlling the supply of electrical power to other section bution boards or final sub-circuits. 2.4 Distribution protective devices sub-circuits. assembly for boards, distri-

Board arranged

An assembly of for the distribution

one or more overcurrent of electrical power to final extending

2.5 Final Sub-circuit - That portion of a wiring system beyond the final overcurrent protective device of a board. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary: Part 17 Switchgear and controlgear.

$ Specification for factory built assemblies of switchgear and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 000 V nc and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements.

4

IS : 10242 ( Part 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

S/Set 2 ) - 1984

specified in the following clauses, all switchgear and controlgear assemblies antl ll\cir component:; shall be in compliance The accuracy of lnetcrs fitted on main with JS : 8623 ( Part I )-1977". switch-board shall not be less than class 1.5. Additional requirements for switchgear and controlgear assemblies for use in ships are g:ven in the following clauses. 4. INFORMATION

3.1 Unless otherwise

AND

TO BE GIVEN REGARDING CONTROLGEAR ASSEMBLIES
required

SWITCHGEAR
( Part 1 )-

4.0 In addition
1977*,

to the information the following shall apply.

by 7 of IS : 8623

4.1 Marking

- The identification of individual circuits ant1 their devices shall be made on labels of durable material. Nameplates shall be of flame-retardent material. The rating of fuses and setting of protective When, for fuses above 500 V, the fusedevices shall also be indicated. holders permit the insertion of fuses for Iower nominal voltage, special warnin? labels shall be placed, for example, `CAUTION, 660 V FUSES ONLY;.
4.2 Marking of Voltage - Section boards and distribution shall be marked with the rated operational voltage. For nominal exceeding 500 V a warning label shall be considcrecl. 5. SERVICE boards voltages

CONDITIONS
1,Sec 1 of

5.1 The ambient air temperature shall be as stated in Part This supersedes 5 of IS : 8623 ( Palt 1 )-1977*. this standard.
6. DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION
( Part 1 )-1977* the following clauses

6.0 Inaddition shall apply.

to 6 of IS : 8623

6.1 Structural Parts of Aluminium - If structural parts are of aluminium, suitabIe precautions shall be taken to attach them to the steel All nonstructure in such a manner that galvanic corrosion is inhibited. current carrying, accessible metal parts are to be earthed by means of good electrical connection to the hull. 6.2 Insulating Material - Insulating retardent [ see also IS : 10242 ( Part l/Set material I )-1982t 1. shall be flame-

*Specification for factory built assemblies of switchgear and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 000 V ac and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements. *Electrical installation in ships: Part 1 General, Section 1 Definitions and general requirements.

5

IS : 18242 ( Part 6.3 Section

3,`Sec 2 ),- 1984 Boards -

and Distribution

flame-retardent material and so constructed opened only by authorized personnel.

Enclosures shall be made of or located that they can be

6.4 Clearances and Creepage Distances - Bare main busbars in but not including the conductors main and emergency switchboards, between the main busbars and supply side of outgoing units, shall have minimum clearances and creepage distances in accordance with Table 1.
TABLE 1 MINIMUM
VOLTAOX BETWEEN PHASES OR POLES

CLEARANCES
Mmmcm CLEARAN~TB `BETWEEN PHASES 011 POLES (mm) (3)

MINT~~Z CLEARANC.ES TO EARTH

(mm) (1) (2)

660 or lets 2 200 3 300 6 600

16 38 51 63

19 38 51 89

The values in this table apply to clearances between well as between live parts and exposed conductive parts.

live parts

as

6.5 Busbar Phase or Polarity Arrangements - Consideration shall be given to providing a standard pattern of busbar phase and polarity Examples of such a pattern are: arrangements where practicable.

4 b)

For ac switchgear and controlgear assembly busbars 1, 2, 3, counting from front to back, top to bottom or left to right viewed from the front of the assembly.

. .. as

The polarities on dc switchgear and controlgear busbars and connections to be positive, neutral, negative, counting from front to back, top to bottom or left to right as viewed from the front of the assembly. busbars shall be sub-divided be connected by removable is practicable, the connection equipment shall be equally

Busbar Sub-division - Main into at least two parts which shall normally So far as links or other equivalent means. of generators and any other duplicated divided between the parts.

6.6 Main

above the safety voltage 6.7 Degree of Protection - For voltages assemblies shall have a degree of specified in Part 1 of this standard, For nominal protection against contact with live parts of at least IPPX. voltages in excess of 500 V, special precautions against unintentional touching of live parts shall be considered, for example, the protection at G

IS : 10242 ( Part

3/Set

2 ) - 1984

the rear of each individual compartment should be at least IPPX. The degree of protection shall also be chosen depending on the location of the assembly. In the case of main switch board the degrees of protection shall not be less than the figures indicated below:
Location of Main Switch Board Degree of Protection

Engine room and boiler room above floor or platform up to 660 V In dry control room up to 660 V

IP 22 IP 22

6.8 Handrail or Handles - Every main and emergency switchboard shall be provided with an insulated handrail or insulated handles suitably fitted on the front of the switchboard. Where access to the rear is required, a horizontal insulated handrail shall be suitably fitted on the rear of the switch-board, 6.9 Means of Isolation - Means of isolation of generator circuitbreakers shall be provided to permit safe maintenance while the main busbars are alive The provision of means of,isolation of other important parts of switchgear and controlgear assemblies is recommended. 6.10 Short-Circuit Protection and Short-Circuit Reference shall be made to Part P/Set 2 of this standard. current evaluation shall be done with special regard circuit capacity of circuit-breakers installed in ships.
NOTE -

Strength Short circuit to rated shortto in the above

Special attention shall be paid to power factors referred

standard.

6.11 Installation

of Components - Each switching device shall be so designed and arranged that when in the off position it cannot accidentally move sufficiently to close the circuit. Wherever possible, fuses of different nominal voltage shall be installed separated from each The components shall be so located as to provide assessibility to other. parts requiring inspection or adjustment.

6.12 Internal be stranded. type.

Wiring - Insulated wiring connecting components shall In the case of hinged panels wiring shall be of flexible

6.13 Cross-Sections and Current-Carrying Capacity of Main determining busbar cross-sections, Table 2 of Circuit - When If this method is not appropriate IS : 8623 ( Part I )-I 977*-shall apply. ( see 7.1 ) the busbars shall be designed such that the temperature rise does not exceed 45�C.
*Specification for factory built assemblies of switchgear and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 000 V ac and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 Gener..l requirements.

7

IS : 10242 ( Part 3/Set 2 ) - 1984

The current rating of the equalizer main circuit dc generators shall be not less than half the rated full-load current of the generator. The rating of equalizer busbar shall be not less than full-load current of the largest generator in the group. half the rated

6.14 Soldered Connections - Soldered connections shall not be used for connecting or terminating any wire or cable of nominal cross-section greater than 2.5 mmz. Soldered connections shall have a solder contact length at least 1.5 times the diameter of the conductor. 6.15 Terminals for Systems with Nominal Voltages Above 500 v - Terminals for systems with nominal voltages above 5G0 V shall be clearly separated from terminals for lower voltages and clearly marked as such. 7. TESTS 7.0 In addition to tests specified following clauses shall apply.
7.1 Type

in 8 of IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977*

the

Test - When temperature-rise limits according to Table 2 of IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977* and short-circuit strength according to 6.5 of IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977* are not verified by the Bppropriate type test of 8 of the same standard, the following applies:

Compliance with the second paragraph of 6.13 can be verified by comparison with the results obtained in practice from similar switchgear assemblies or when necessary by suitable tests under operational conditions. Short-circuit
7.2 R6utin.e

strength of busbars can be verified by calculations.

Test - Before components which may have been disconnected for the dielectric tests in IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-I 977* are the insulation resistance between current-carrying parts reconnected, ( connected together for the purpose of this test ) and earth and between current-carrying parts of opposite polarity shall not be less than 1 h4a when tested with a dc voltage of not less than 500 V.

8. INSTRUMENTS

FOR

DC GENERATORS one voltmeter and

8.1 For generators not operated in parallel, at least one ammeter shall be provided for each generator.

8.2 For generators arranged for parallel operation one ammeter capable of reading 15 percent reverse current is to be provided for each generator and at least two voltmeters. One voltmeter is to be connected to the busbars and other is to be capable of measuring voltage of any generator.
*Specification for factory built assemblies of switcbgear and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 000 V ac and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements.

8

IS : 10242 ( Part 3/&c

2 ) - 1984

8.3 For compound-wound generators fitted with equalizer connections, the ammeter shall be connected to the pole opposite to that connected to

the series winding of the generator

( see Part S/Set 1 of this standard ).

8.4 For three-wire generators, the ammeter shall be located between equalizer connection and the generator armature.

the

8.5 For three-wire systems supplied by a three-wire generator or by a balancing booster, an ammeter shall be connected in each outer pole of each balancing generator and a voltmeter between each pole of the busbars and the middle wire. 9. INSTRUMENTS IN PARALLEL
9.1 Each generator

FOR

AC

GENERATORS

NOT

OPERATED

not operated in parallel shall be provided with at least one voltmeter, a frequency meter, one ammeter with an ammeter switch to enable the current in each phase to be read or an ammeter in each phase, and for generators rated more than 50 kVA, a three phase wattmeter. 10. INSTRUMENTS FOR AC GENERATORS PARALLEL OPERATION ARRANGED FOR

- Each generator arranged for parallel 10.1 Measuring Instruments operation shall be provided with a three-phase wattmeter, capable of reading 15 percent reverse power and an ammeter in each phase conductor or an ammeter and a selector switch to enable the current For paralleling purposes, two voltmeters, in each phase to be read. at least two frequency meters, a synchroscope and synchronizing lamps or their equivalent shall be provided.

A suitable selector switch shall be provided to enable one voltmeter and the frequency meter to be connected to one phase of any one generator before the machine is connected to the busbars. The other voltmeter and frequency meter shall be permanently connected to one phase of the busbars. The connections generator.
NOTE - The recommended.

shall be made to the corresponding
of an ammeter

phase of each
is

provision

in the exciter circuit of each generator

10.2 Synchronizing - Where the generated power exceeds 500 LVA, Suitable a check synchronizer shall be used for synchronizing purpose. reactance may be used for synchronizing in the case of slow moving circuit breakers. Large capacity reactors, if necessary, may be placed outside the switch-board. 9

IS : 10242 ( Part

3/Set 2 ) - 1984
on each contra!

10.2.1 Details of synchronizing should be provided panels to facilitate easy synchronizing of the generators.

10.3 Speed Governor - For ac generators arranged to operate in parallel, a device for remote speed control of each set shall be provided and consideration shall be given to providing a manuai speed control where the frequency can be varied from at least 20 percent belotir to at least 10 percent above the system rated frequency. The time taken to cover this range should be at least 3 seconds.

11. INSTRUMENT 11.1 Secondary

TRANSFORMERS
of instrument transformers shall be earthed.

windings

11.2 Current transformers shall be provided with an approved arrangement /protective devices to prevent the appearance of a high voltage on the secondary terminals in the event of the circuit being inadvertantly opened.

12. INSTRUMENT

SCALES

12.1 The upper limit of the scale of every voltmeter shall be not less than 120 percent of the nominal voltage of the circuit and the scale shall be provided with a mark to indicate the nominal voltage.
12.2 Thf: upper limit of the scale of every ammeter and wattmeter shall be not less than 130 percent of the rated values of the circuit in which it is installed. The scale shall be provided with a mark indicating the normal full-load. 12.3 Frequency Meter Range - The frequency meter shall have scale of at least 58 percent of the nominal frequency. The scale shall be provided with a mark to indicate the nominal frequency. - Every insulated distribution system is to be 12.4 Earth Indication provided with lamps or other means to indicate the state of insulation In the case of tanker ships a low insulation alarm shall be from earth. provided. 13. MAGNETIC BRAKES

13.1 Series-wound and compound-wound brakes shall release on firstSeries-wound brakes shall hold-off step starting current of the motor. under all working conditions including light running. Where mechanical hold-off equipment is provided, for example, pedal operation, the holdoff arrangement need not operate on the first-step.
10

IS : 10242 ( Part

S/Set 2 ) - 1984

13.2 Shunt-wound and compound-wound brakes shall operate at such voltages as will ensure the following requirements:

4

When operating at voltages above or below normal at rated frequencies; contactors, relays and other electromagnets shall be capable of functioning satisfactorily even when the line voltage falls to 85 percent of the normal busbar voltage for dc equipment, or b5 percent of the normal voltage at rated frequency for ac equipment, when the coil is at the temperature which it will attain under normal service at the normal line voltage. They shall also function satisfactorily and without damage to their coil when the voltage rises 10 percent above the normal voltage, and, on ac supplies, when the frequency of the supply varies up to 5 percent from the normal for prolonged periods. The voltage drop across series coils such as overcurrent trip coils and brake solenoids shall not be such as to reduce materially the voltage at the motor terminals. CLUTCHES

b)

c)

14. MAGNETIC

14.1 The requirements in 13.1 for series-wound brakes apply generally to When the coil is energized, the clutch shall take up magnetic clutches. No end thrust shall be exerted from the drive smoothly and positively. the clutch, the pressure between members being balanced within the clutch itself. Magnetic clutches shall be balanced. Suitable means for taking up wear on the linings shall be provided. Collector rings for current supply to the clutch shaI1 be of non-corrodible material. Double brush-contacts shall preferably be fitted to ensure positive contact. 15. TESTING 15.1 Use of Type-Test Data - It is not intended that type tests should be made on individual items of apparatus to prove compliance with these requirements where it can be shown that the apparatus is similar to apparatus for which type-test data can be supplied by the manufacturer, except for such individual tests as are specified in 15.2 and 15.3. 15.2 Test of Operation - A11 apparatus shall be tested to verify the coperation of all mechanisms and controls, the operation, in accordance with the scheme of control, of all electromagnets, and the operation in accordance with the calibration of overcurrent and other releases. 15.3 High-Voltage Tests - All apparatus shall be capable of withstanding a high-voltage test applied between the current-carrying parts and -the earthed frame or case, with all covers in their normal position. 11

IS : 10242 ( Part

3/Set 2 ) - 1984

The test voltage shall be in accordance with the relevant Indian Standards [see IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977* 1. For apparatus for which no Indian Standard exist, the test voltage will be as follows: a) for supplies under 60 V, test voltage 500 V; b) for voltage exceeding rated voltage. The specified test voItage between 25 Hz and 100 Hz. 60 V, test voltage 1 000 V plus twice the is applied for 1 min at any frequency

Items of equipment included in controlgear, but for which a test vhitage lower than the above is specified by the appropriate authority, may be disconnected during the above test and tested separately at the appropriate lower test voltage. ( For example, it is permissible to test fractional-horsepower rated at 0.5 kW or less, or small instruments, at 1 000 V ). A test report from the manufacturer compliance with this standard. is considered motors

as establishing

*Specification for factory built assemblies of switchgear and controlgear for voltages. up to and including 1 000 V ac and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements.

12

cs: 10242 ( Part
( Continuedfrom page 2 ) Representing Members
SHRI S.

3/&c 2 ) - 1984

and Engineers Garden Reach Shipbuilders Calcutta SHRI A. D. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SRRI M. A. NOORUDDIN SHRI R. JAIRAY ( Alternate ) Mazagon Dock Ltd, Bombay STIRI H. D. PENDSE SHRI W. R. PATWABDHAN ( Alternate ) Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI M. R. S. RAO SHRI N. VENEATARAMAYA ( Alternate ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. P. SARATHY Srtar JAVEED AHMED ( Alternate ) Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin SERI P. J. C. SERENO SHRI A. K. MUKEERJEE ( Aitcrnak ) N. BASSI

Ltd,

13

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTITY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS

)

UNIT

SYBIROL m kg S A K cd mol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Snpplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure. stress force Units

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL N 1 1 1 1 1 1

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/s* J = 1 N.m W=lJ/s T= 1 Wb/m*

J w
Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1) S = 1 A/V V=lW/A

1 Pa = 1 N/ma

