INATA Ah IS 18347 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


GANT Ald HAT Bite а {А0107 
(тата ак Sanit eh этеттат) — Afà 
ufa 


Hazard Identification and Risk 
Assessment (Other than Chemical 
Industries) — Code of Practice 


ICS 13.100 


© BIS 2023 


ameda HAH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ey HAH чач, 9 FR IWS AHL AMT, AE Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 7 


Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Occupational 
Safety and Health Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


It has been identified that, as a preventive measure to minimize accident occurrence in hazardous installations and 
thereby reduce the probability of injury, loss of material and degradation of the environment, it is necessary to use 
more searching and systematic methods for risk control to supplement existing procedures for identification of 
hazards and assessment of risks. 


Risk assessment is carried out by combination of hazard analysis, consequence analysis and probability 
calculations. All employers and self-employed people have a legal duty/obligation to assess the risks from their 
work activities. 


The risk assessment procedure is useful for situations where the hazards pose a significant threat and it is uncertain 
whether the existing or planned controls are adequate in principle or in practice; and for organizations seeking 
continual improvement in their occupational health and safety (OH&S) management systems in addition to 
meeting legal requirements. 


This standard therefore describes specific techniques to prevent human and property losses in the operation and 
management of industrial activities through systematic identification of hazards as well as quantification of the 
risks associated with the operation of plants (other than chemical industries). 


A separate Indian Standard IS 15656 : 2006 Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment — Code of practice would 
be applicable for hazards related to chemical process plants. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


HAZARD IDENTIFICATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT (OTHER 
THAN CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES) — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard provides guidelines for 
identification/assessment of all hazards related to 
industrial activities (except chemical Industries) and 
for assessment of associated risk. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated was valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
this standard: 


IS No. Title 


IS 15656: 2006 Hazard identification and risk 
analysis — Code of practice 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions 
given in IS 15656 shall apply. 


4 APPLICATION AND OVERVIEW 
4.1 Application 


All employers and self-employed people have a 
legal duty to assess the risks from their work 
activities. The risk assessment procedure described 
in this standard is intended to be used: 


a) for situations where the hazards pose a 
significant threat and it is uncertain whether 
the existing or planned controls are adequate 
in principle or in practice; and 

b) by organizations seeking continual 
improvement in their OH&S management 
systems in addition to meeting legal 
requirements. 


The full procedure described in this standard is not 
necessary or cost-effective when it is quite clear 
from preliminary study that risks are trivial, or a 
previous assessment has shown that, existing or 
planned controls: 


a) conform to the legal requirements as well 
as established standards; 
b) are appropriate for the tasks; and 


c) are, or will be, understood and used by 
everyone concerned. 


Here no further action is required other than to 
ensure, that controls continue to be used. Small, low 
risk organizations in particular should be highly 
selective in the risks that they choose to assess in 
detail. 


Effort developed for assessment of trivial risks or for 
evaluation of standard controls will lead to 
collection of more information that can possibly be 
used, and to situations where important facts are lost 
in a mass of spurious documentation. 


4.2 Overview 
4.2.1 Basic Steps 


The following steps are followed in identification of 
hazard and assessment and control of risk: 


a) Identify hazards; 


b) Estimate the risk (the likelihood and 
severity of harm) from each hazardous 
event; and 


c) Decide if the risk is tolerable (for this 
purpose a tolerable risk criterion should be 
evolved which should take into 
consideration the legal requirements and 
other norms in that activity). 


4.2.2 Necessity 


Employers are legally obliged to carry out OH&S 
risk assessments. Their main purpose is to determine 
whether planned or existing controls are adequate. 
The intention is that risks should be controlled 
before harm can occur. 


For many years OH&S risk assessments have been 
carried out on an informal basis. It is now 
recognized that risk assessment is a key foundation 
for pro-active OH&S management and that 
systematic procedures are necessary to ensure their 
success. 


A risk assessment based on a participative approach 
provides an opportunity for management and the 
work force to agree that an organization’s OH&S 
procedures: 


a) are based on shared perceptions of hazards 
and risks; 
b) are necessary and workable; and 


c) will succeed in preventing accidents. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


4.2.3 Pitfalls and Solutions 


Poorly planned assessments, carried out in brief due 
to bureaucratic impositions, will waste time and 
change nothing. Moreover, organizations may get 
bogged down in detail, where completion of 
assessment proforma becomes a herculean task in 
itself. Risk assessment should provide an inventory 
for action and form the basis for implementing 
control measures. Potential risk assessors may have 
become complacent. People who are too close to 
situations may no longer perceive and recognize 
hazards, or perhaps judge risks as trivial because to 
their knowledge no one has been harmed. The aim 
should be that everyone tackles risk assessments 
with a fresh questioning approach. Risk assessment 
should be carried out by competent people with 
practical knowledge of the work activities, 
preferably with colleagues from another part of the 
organization, who may have greater objectivity. 


A worthwhile approach, whenever possible, is to 
train small teams to carry out assessments. 


Ideally, everyone should contribute to assessments 
that relate to them. For example, they should tell 
assessors what they think about the need for and 
feasibility of particular risk controls. In larger 
organizations a competent person, usually from 
within the organization, should coordinate and guide 
the assessors’ work. Specialist advice may need to 
be sought. 


NOTE — Pitfall of simple risk concept is that it cannot 
distinguish high probability low consequence events from 
low probability high consequence events. 


5 PRINCIPLE 


5.1 Figure 1 shows the principle of risk assessment. 
The steps are outlined below and described fully in 
4.2, 5 and 6. 


Eliminate 
саше [= 


Но 


Wark 
Description 


т 


Hazard 


Identification 


т 


Identify probable 


Г Е Be 
дагъадеѓ а] 


т 
Risk 
ASS ment 
> 
15 Risk 
Acceptable 
7 


Mercus bo 
Маан 
damagels! 


FIG. 1 PRINCIPLE OF RISK ASSESSMENT 


5.2 The following criteria are necessary for 
organizations to carry out effective risk assessment: 


a) Classify work activities — Prepare a list of 
work activities covering plant, raw 
materials/chemicals handled, premises, 
people and procedures, and gather 
information about them; 


b) Identify hazards — Identify all hazards 
relating to each work activity. Consider 
who might be harmed and how; what might 
be damaged and how; 


c) Determine risk — Make a subjective 
estimate of risk associated with each 
hazard assuming that planned or existing 
controls are in place. Assessors should also 
consider the effectiveness of the controls 
and the consequences of their failure; 


d) Decide if risk is tolerable — Judge whether 
planned or existing OH&S precautions (if 
any) are sufficient to keep the hazard under 
control and meet legal requirements; 


e) Prepare risk control action plan (if 
necessary) — Prepare a plan to deal with 
any issues found by the assessment to 
require attention. Organizations should 
ensure that new and existing controls 
remain in place and are effective; and 


f) Review adequacy of action plan — Re- 
assess risks on the basis of the revised 
controls and check that risks will be 
tolerable. 


NOTE — The word ‘tolerable’ here means that risk 
has been reduced to the lowest level that is reasonably 
practicable. 


5.3 Risk Assessment Requirements 


If risk assessment is to be useful in practice 
organizations should: 


a) appoint a senior member of the 
organization to promote and manage the 
activity; 

b) consult with everyone concerned; discuss 
what is planned to be done and obtain their 
comments and commitment; 


c) determine risk assessment training needs 
for assessment personnel/teams апа 
implement a suitable training programme; 


d) review adequacy of assessment; determine 
whether the assessment is suitable and 
sufficient; that is to say, adequately 
detailed and rigorous; and 


e) document administrative details and 
significant findings of the assessment. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


It is generally not necessary to make precise 
numerical calculation of risk. Complex methods for 
quantified risk assessment are normally required 
only where the consequences of failure could be 
catastrophic. Risk assessment in major hazard 
industries is related to the approach required in other 
workplaces, but in most organizations much simpler 
subjective methods are appropriate. 


The assessment of risks to health associated with 
exposure to toxic substance and harmful emissions 
may require, for example, measurements of airborne 
dust concentrations or noise exposure. 


6 PROCEDURE 
6.1 General 


The sub clause describes the factor that an 
organization should consider when planning the risk 
assessment. Attention is drawn to the need to refer 
to relevant regulations and guidance to ensure that 
specific legal requirements are met. The risk 
assessment process described here covers all OH&S 
hazards. It is better to integrate assessment for all 
hazards, and not carry out separate assessment for 
health hazards, manual handling machinery hazards 
and so on. If assessment is carried out separately, 
using different methods, ranking risk control 
priorities is more difficult separate assessment may 
also lead to needless duplication. 


The following aspects of risk assessment need to be 
considered carefully at the outset: 


a) Design of a simple risk assessment 
proforma (see 6.2); 


b) Criteria for classifying work activities and 
information needed about each work 
activity (see 6.3 and 6.4); 


c) Method of identification and categorization 
hazards (see 7.1); 


d) Procedures for making an informed 
determination of risk (see 7.1); 


e) Words to describe estimated risk levels 
(see Tables 1 and 2); 


f) Criteria for deciding whether risks are 
tolerable: whether planned or existing 
control measures are adequate (see 8.1); 


g) Preferred methods for risk control (see 
8.2); 

h) Time scales for implementing remedial 
action (where necessary) (see Table 2); and 


j) Criteria for reviewing adequacy of action 
plan (see 8.3). 


IS 18347 : 2023 


6.2 Risk Assessment Proforma 


Organizations should prepare a simple proforma that 
can be used to record the findings of an assessment, 
typically covering: 
a) work activity; 
b) hazard(s); 
c) controls in place; 
d) personnel at risk; 
e) likelihood of harm; 
f) severity of harm; 
g) risk level; 
h) action to be taken following the 
assessment; and 
j) administrative details, for example name of 
assessor, date, etc. 


Organizations should develop their overall risk 
assessment procedure and may need to carry out 
trials and continually review the system. 


6.3 Classification of Work Activities 


A necessary preliminary to risk assessment is to 
prepare a list of work activities, to group them in a 
rational and manageable way, and to gather 
necessary information about them. It is vital to 
include, for example, infrequent maintenance tasks, 
as well as day-to-day production work. Possible 
ways of classifying work activities include, 


a) geographical areas within/outside the 
organization’s premises; 

b) stages in the production process, or in the 
provision of a service; 

c) planned and reactive work; and 


d) defined tasks (for example, driving). 
6.4 Work Activity Information Requirements 


Information required for each work activity should 
but are not limited to include items from the 
following: 


a) Tasks being carried out, their duration and 
frequency; 
b) Location(s) where the work is carried out; 


c) Who normally/occasionally carries out the 
tasks; 


d) Who else may be affected by the work (for 
example, visitors, subcontractors, the 
public); 

e) Training, that personnel have received 
about the tasks; 


f) Written systems of work and/or permit-to- 
work procedures prepared for the tasks; 


g) Plant and machinery that may be used; 
h) Powered hand tools that may be used. 


j) Manufacturers’ or suppliers’ instructions 
for operation and maintenance of plant 
machinery and powered hand tools; 


k) Size, shape, surface character and weight 
of materials that might be handled; 

m) Distance and heights of the place where 
materials have to be moved by hand 

n) Services used (for 
compressed air); 


example, 


p) Substances used or encountered during the 
work; 


q) Physical form of substances used or 
encountered (fume, gas, vapour, liquid, 
dust/powder, solid); 


r) Content and recommendations of safety 
data sheets relating to substances used or 
encountered; 


s) Relevant acts, regulations and standards 
relating to the work being done, the plant 
and machinery used, and the materials used 
or encountered; 


t) Control measures believed to be in place; 


u) Available monitoring data gained as a 
result of information from within and 
outside the organization, incident, accident 
and ill-health experience associated with 
the work being done, equipment and 
substances used; and 


v) Finding of any existing assessments 
relating to the work activity. 


7 ANALYSING RISK 
7.1 Identification of Hazards 
7.1.1 General 


Three questions enable hazard identification: 
a) Is there a source of harm? 


b) Who (or what) could be harmed? and 


c) Howcould harm occur? 


Hazards that clearly possess negligible potential for 
harm should not be documented or given further 
consideration. 


7.1.2 Broad Categories of Hazard 


To help with the process of identifying hazards it is 
useful to categorize hazards in different ways for 
example: 


a) Mechanical; 
b) Electrical; 
c) Radiation; 
d) Substances; 


e) Fire and explosion; 


f) Toxic release; 
g) Natural calamities; 
h) Physical, ergonomic; and 


j) Biological. 
7.1.3 Hazard Prompt-List 


A complementary approach is to develop a prompt- 
list of questions such as: 


During work activities could the following hazards 
exist? 
а) Slips/falls on the level; 
b) Falls of persons from heights; 
c) Falls of tools, materials, etc, from heights; 
d) Inadequate headroom; 


e) Hazards associated with manual 
lifting/handling of tools, material, etc; 

f) Hazards from plant and machinery 
associated with assembly, commissioning, 
operation, maintenance, modification, 
repair and dismantling; 

g) Vehicle hazards, covering both site 
transport, and travel by road; 

h) Fire and explosion; 

j) Work place violence 

k) Substances that may be inhaled; 

m) Substances or agents that may damage the 
eye; 

n) Substances that may cause harm by coming 
into contact with, or being absorbed 
through, the skin; 

p) Substances that may cause harm by being 
ingested (for example, entering the body 
via the mouth); 

q) Harmful energies (for example, electricity, 
radiation, noise, vibration); 

r) Work-related upper limb disorders 
resulting from frequently repeated tasks; 

s) Inadequate thermal environment, for 
example too hot; 


t) Inadequate Lighting levels; 
u) Slippery, uneven ground/surfaces; and 


v) Inadequate guard rails or hand rails on 
stairs; 


The above list is not exhaustive. Organizations 
should develop their own hazard ‘prompt-list’ 
taking into account the nature of their work activities 
and locations where work is carried out. 


7.1.4 Techniques of Hazard Identification and 
Analysis 


Adhering to good engineering practices alone, may 
not be adequate for controlling hazards. Thus, a 


IS 18347 : 2023 


variety of techniques have been developed for 
analysis of processes, systems and operations in 
order to identify and analyse associated hazards. 


The objective of hazard identification is to identify 
and evaluate the hazards and the unintended events, 
which could cause an accident. The first task usually 
is to identify the hazards that are inherent to the 
process and/or operation and then focus on the 
evaluation of the events, which could be associated 
with hazards. 


7.1.4.1 Hazard identification 


Formal hazard identification studies generate a list 
of unintended consequences. The list can usually be 
derived reliably by considering: (a) the way the 
operation is carried out (b) nature of hazards it poses 
(c) the condition in which operation is carried. 


The hazard identification methods may be 
categorized as comparative methods апа 
fundamental methods. 


7.1.4.2 Comparative methods 


These methods are based on hazard identification by 
comparing with standards. The various methods are 
checklist, safety audit, hazard indices and 
preliminary hazard analysis. 


a) Checklist: 


1) Purpose: For quick identification of 
hazards; 
2) Applicability: In all phases — design 
construction, commissioning, 
operation and shutdown; 


3) Data required: Checklist is prepared 
from prior ехрегіепсе/ѕ(апдага 
procedure manual/knowledge of 
system or plant; 


4) Results: Essentially qualitative in 
nature and leads to “yes-or-no” 
decision with respect to compliance 
with the standard procedure set forth. 


b) Safety audit: 


1) Purpose: For ensuring that procedures 
match design intent; 


2) Applicability: In all phases of the plant 
and periodicity of review depending 
on the level of hazard; 


3) Data required: Applicable codes and 
guides, plant flow sheet, P and I 
diagram, start-up/shutdown procedure, 
emergency control, injury report, 
testing and inspection report, material 
properties; and 

4) Results: Qualitative in nature — The 
inspection teams report deviation from 


IS 18347 : 2023 


design and planned procedures and 
recommends additional safety 
features. 


c) Hazard indices: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


Purpose: For relative 


hazards; 


identifying 


Applicability: In design and operation 
phase used as an early screening 
technique for fire/explosion potential; 


Data required: Plot plan of a plant, 
process flow condition, fire and 
explosion index form, risk analysis 
form, worksheets; and 


Results: Relative quantitative ranking 
of plant process units based on degree 
of risk. 


d) Preliminary hazard analysis: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


Purpose: For early identification of 
hazards; 

Applicability: In preliminary design 
phase to provide guidance for final 
design; 

Data required: Plant design criteria, 
hazardous materials involved and 
major plant equipment; and 

Results: List of hazards (related to 
available design details) with 
recommendation to designers to aid 
hazard reduction. 


7.1.4.3 Fundamental methods 


These methods are a structured way of stimulating a 
group of people to apply foresight along with their 
knowledge to the task of identifying the hazards 
mainly by raising a series of questions. These 
methods have the advantage that they can be used 
whether or not the codes of practice are available 
for a particular operation. Four main methods in 
this category are what-if analysis, failure modes 
and effects analysis (FMEA), job safety analysis 
(JSA) and hazard and operability study (HAZOP). 


a) What-if analysis: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


Purpose: Identifying possible event 
sequences related to hazards; 
Applicability: During plant design, 
development stage or at pre start-up 
stage; 


Data required: Detailed documentation 
of the plant, the process and the 
operating procedure; and 


Results: Tabular listing of accident 
scenarios, their consequences and 
possible risk reduction methods. 


b) Failure modes and effects analysis: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


Purpose: Identifying equipment failure 
modes and their effects; 

Applicability: In design, construction 
and operation phases, useful for plant 
modification; 


Data required: Knowledge of 
equipment/system/plant functions; 
and 


Results: Qualitative in nature and 
includes worst case estimate of 
consequence resulting from failure of 
equipment. 


c) Job safety analysis: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


Purpose: 
operations; 


Identifying hazards in 


Applicability: In design, construction 
and operation phases, useful for job 
modification; 

Data required: Knowledge of 
equipment/system/operation; and 
Results: Identification of hazards and 
operating problems, recommends 
change in design, procedure. 


d) Hazard and operability study: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


Purpose: Investigating how the system 
or plant deviate from the design intent 
and create risk for personnel and 
equipment and operability problems; 


Applicability: In design, construction 
and operation phases of processes, 
useful for plant modification; 


Data required: Detailed documentation 
of the plant P&ID, the process and the 
operating procedure; and 


Results: Qualitative in nature and 
includes worst case estimate of 
consequence resulting from failure of 
equipment. 


7.1.4.4 Hazard analysis 


The principal techniques are fault tree analysis 
(FTA) and event tree analysis (ETA): 


a) Fault Tree Analysis: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


Purpose: Identifying how basic events 
lead to an accident event; 


Applicability: In design and operation 
phases of the plant to uncover the 
failure modes; 


Data required: Knowledge of 
plant/system function, plant system 
failure modes and effects on plant 
system; and 


4) Results: Listing of set of equipment or 
operator failures that can result in 
specific accidents. 


b) Event tree analysis: 


1) Purpose: Identifying the event 
sequences from initiating event to 
accident scenarios; 

2) Applicability: In  design/operating 
plants to assess adequacy of existing 
safety features; 

3) Data required: Knowledge of initiating 
events and safety system/emergency 
procedure; and 


4) Results: Provides the event sequence 
that result in an accident following the 
occurrence of an initiating event. 


7.2 Determination of Risk 
7.2.1 General 


The risk from the hazard should be determined by 
estimating the potential severity to harm and the 
likelihood of occurrence of harm. 


7.2.2 Severity of Consequences 


Information obtained about work activities (see 6.4) 
is a vital input to risk assessment. When seeking to 
establish potential severity, the following types of 
consequences should be considered. 


7.2.2.1 Bodily injury 
a) Part(s) of the body likely to be affected; 


b) Nature of the harm, ranging from slightly 
to extremely harmful: 


1) Slightly harmful, for example: 


i) superficial injuries; minor cuts and 
bruises; eye irritation from dust; 
and 

li) nuisance апа irritation (for 
example headaches); ill-health 
leading to temporary discomfort. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


2) Harmful, for example: 


i) lacerations; burns; 
ii) contusion; serious sprains; 
iii) minor fractures; 
iv) deafness; dermatitis, asthma; 
v) work related upper limb disorders; 
and 
vi) disorders; ill-health leading to 
permanent minor disability. 


3) Extremely harmful, for example: 

i) amputations; major fractures; 

ii) poisonings; multiple injuries; 

iii) fatal injuries; 

iv) occupational cancer; other severely 

life shortening diseases; 
v) acute fatal diseases; and 
vi) occupational diseases. 
7.2.2.2 Property damage 


Information obtained about work activities (see 6.4) 
is a vital input to risk assessment. When seeking to 
establish potential severity of harm, the following 
should also be considered: 
a) Part(s) of the body likely to be affected; 
b) Nature of the harm, ranging from slightly 
to extremely harmful: 
1) Slightly harmful, for example: 
i) superficial injuries; minor cuts and 
bruises; eye irritation from dust; 


ii) nuisance and irritation (for 
example headaches); ill-health 
leading to temporary discomfort. 


2) Harmful, for example: 
i) lacerations; burns; 
ii) contusion; serious sprains; 
iii) minor fractures; 


iv) deafness; dermatitis; asthma; 


SI No. Property Damage Small Scale Organization Medium Scale Organisation Large Scale Organisation 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Slightly harmful Less than Rs. 25 000/-* Less than Rs. 1,00,000/-* Less than Rs. 10 Lakhs * 
il) Harmful, Rs. 25 000/- to Rs. 1 lakh* Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 10 lakhs* Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 50 lakhs* 
ш) Extremely harmful More than 1 lakh* More than 10 lakhs* More than 50 lakhs* 


*all above amounts are indicative, the organization should decide the criteria considering their turnover. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


у) 


vi) 


work related upper limb 
disorders; and 


disorders; ill-health leading to 
permanent minor disability; 


3) Extremely harmful, for example: 


i) 
ii) 


amputations; major fractures; 
poisonings; multiple injuries; 
fatal injuries; 


occupational cancer; other 
severely life shortening diseases; 
and 


acute fatal diseases. 


7.2.2.4 Environmental damage 


7.2.2.3 Business interruption 


Business interruption may be loss of production, 
delay of production etc due to accidents, machine 
breakdown, internal issues etc: 


SI №. Damage Business Interruption* 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Slightly Upto 1 day* 
harmful 
11) Harmful, More than | day and 
day upto one week * 
ili) Extremely More than one week* 
harmful 


*Organizations may form their own norms considering 
statutory norms, non-statutory norms and their own norms. 


Environmental damage means pollution of air, water, soil, ill effects on living organisms etc: 


Scale of Environmental Damage* 


(3) 


SI №. Environmental Damage 
(0 
1) Slightly harmful 

ii) 


iii) Extremely harmful 


Less than the environmental norms 


More than the environmental norms 
within the factory 


More than the environmental norms 


outside the factory, offsite emergency 


*Organizations may form their own norms considering statutory norms, non-statutory norms and their own norms. 


7.2.3 Likelihood of Harm 


When seeking to establish likelihood of harm the 
adequacy of control measures already implemented 
and complied with needs to be considered. Here 
legal requirements and codes of practice are good 
guides covering controls of specific hazards. The 
following issues should Шеп typically be 
considered in addition to the work activity 
information given in 6.4: 


a) Number of personnel exposed; 


b) Frequency and duration of exposure to the 
hazard; 


c) Failure of services for example, electricity 
and water; 


d) Failure of plant and machinery components 
and safety devices; 


e) Protection afforded by personal protective 
equipment and usage rate of personal 
protective equipment; and 


f) Unsafe acts (unintended errors or 
intentional violations of procedures) by 
persons, for example, who: 


1) may not know what the hazards are; 


2) may not have the knowledge, physical 
capacity, or skills to do the work; 


3) underestimate risks to which they are 
exposed; and 


4) underestimate the practicality and 
utility of safe working methods. 


It is important to take into account the consequences 
of unplanned events. These subjective risk 
estimations should normally take into account all the 
people exposed to a hazard. Thus, any given hazard 
is more serious if it affects a greater number of 
people. But some of the larger risks may be 
associated with an occasional task carried out just 
by one person, for example, maintenance of 
inaccessible parts of lifting equipment. 


8 EVALUATION OF RISK 
8.1 Risk Tolerance 


Table | shows one simple method for estimating risk 
levels and for deciding whether risks are tolerable. 
Risks are classified according to their estimated 
likelihood and potential severity of harm. Some 
organizations may wish to develop more 
sophisticated approaches, but this method is a 
reasonable starting point. Numbers may be used to 
describe risks, instead of the terms ‘moderate risk’, 
‘substantial risk’, etc. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


8.2 Risk Control Action Plan 


An approach, again suggested as a starting point, is 
shown in Table 2. It shows that control measures 
and urgency should be proportional to risk. The 
outcome of a risk assessment should be an inventory 
of actions, in priority order, to devise, maintain or 
improve controls. A procedure for planning the 
implementation of necessary changes following risk 
assessment is described in 8.4. 


8.2.1 Eliminating Hazards and Reducing OH&S 
Risks 


The organization should establish, implement and 
maintain a process(es) for the elimination of 
hazards and reduction of risks using the following 
‘hierarchy of control: 

a) eliminate the hazard; 


b) substitute with less hazardous processes, 
operations, materials or equipment; 


c) use engineering controls and reorganization 
of work; 

d) use administrative controls, including 
training; and 


e) use adequate personal protective equipment. 
8.2.2 Management of Change 


The organization should establish a process(s) for 
the implementation and control of planned 
temporary and permanent changes that impact 
associated risks including: 


a) new products, services and processes, or 
changes to existing products, services and 
processes, including: 

1) workplace locations and surroundings; 
2) work organization; 

3) working conditions; 

4) equipment; 

5) work force; 

b) changes to legal requirements and other 
requirements; 

c) changes in knowledge or information about 
hazards; and 

d) developments іп knowledge апа 
technology. 


The organization should review the consequences of 
unintended changes, taking action to mitigate any 
adverse consequence, as necessary. 


IS 18347 : 2023 


Table 1 Simple Risk Level Estimator 


(Clauses 6.1 and 8.1) 


SINo. Probability of Slightly Harmful Harmful Extremely 
Occurrence Harmful 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) High unlikely Trivial risk Tolerable risk Moderate risk 
ii) Unlikely Tolerable risk Moderate risk Substantial risk 
iii) Likely Moderate risk Substantial risk Intolerable risk 


NOTE — Tolerable here means that risk has been reduced to the lowest level that is reasonably practicable 


Table 2 Simple Risk Based Control Plan 


(Clauses 6.1 and 8.2) 


Action and Time Scale 


(3) 


No action is required and no documentary record needs to be kept. 


No additional controls are required. Consideration may be given to 
a more cost-effective solution or improvement that imposes no 
additional cost burden. Monitoring is required to ensure that the 
controls are maintained. 


Efforts should be made to reduce the risk, but the cost of prevention 
should be carefully measured and limited. Risk reduction measures 
should be implemented. 


Work should not be started until the risk has been reduced. 
Considerable resources may have to be allocated to reduce the risk 
where the risk involves work in progress, urgent action should be 


SI No. Risk Level 

(1) (2) 

i) Trivial 

11) Tolerable 
Ш) Moderate 

iv) Substantial 

taken. 
v) Intolerable 


Work should not be started or continued until the risk has been 
reduced. If it is not possible to reduce risk even with unlimited 
resources, work has to remain prohibited. 


8.3 Adequacy of Action Plan 


The action plan should be reviewed before 
implementation, typically by asking: 

a) Do people affected think about the need 
for, and feasibility of, the revised 
preventive measures? 

b) Will Will the revised controls lead to 
tolerable risk levels? 

c) Are new hazards created? 


d) Has the most cost-effective solution been 
chosen? 


e) What the revised controls be used in 
practice, and not ignored in the face of for 
example, pressures to get the job done? 


8.4 Changing Conditions and Revising 


Risk assessment should be seen as a continual 
process. Thus, the adequacy of control measures 
should be subject to continual review and revised if 
necessary. Similarly, if conditions change to the 
extent that hazards and risks аге significantly 
affected then risk assessments should also be 
reviewed. 


ANNEX А 
(Foreword) 


IS 18347 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Occupational Safety and Health Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


Organization 
National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


3M India Limited, Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR - Central Institute for Mining and Fuel Research, Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


CSIR - Indian Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire and Explosive Environment Safety, Defence 
Institute of Fire Research, Delhi 


Coal India Limited, Kolkata 

Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 

Consumer Education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad 

Defence Research Development Organization, Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 

Department of Space, Bengaluru 

Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 

Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 

Directorate of Standardisation, Ministry of Defence, DTE of 


Standardization Government, New Delhi 


Draeger India Pvt. Ltd, Mumbai 


Honeywell International India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


ICMR - National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


Intech Safety Private Limited, Kolkata 


Joseph Leslie Dynamics Manufacturer Private Limited, Nehru 


Place, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI LALIT R. GABHANE (Chairperson) 


SHRI GIRIDHAR M. 
SHRI RISHI RAJ ARYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI BIDYUT CHETIA (Alternate II) 


SHRI DIPTENDU DAS 
SRIMATI PAMMY GOSWAMI (Alternate I) 
SHRI PAVAN KUMAR PATEL (Alternate П) 


SHRI G. NAGARAJU 
SHRI PRAVEEN DUBEY (Alternate) 


DR J. K. PANDEY 


Ок D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SURIANARAYANAN 


DR ARTI BHATT 
DR S. MARRY CELIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI BIKRAM DAS (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIKHAR JAIN 
SHRIMATI ANJALI (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI DOLLY A. JANI 
SHRIMATI ANINDITA MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT PASI 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR SHAW (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SUBHANATHAN 
SHRI R. MANOJ (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI AMIT GOLA (Alternate) 


SHRI SAIFULLAH ANSARI 
SHRI A RAJESHWAR КАО (Alternate) 


GP CAPT M. K. PANI 


SHRI HIRENDAR CHATERJEE 
SHRI GANESAN MURUGESAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIT V ASANT CHAUDHARI 
SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI POOJA CHETRI (Alternate П) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


SHRI SUBRATA MUKHERJEE 
SHRI GAUTAM BANERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEAN LESLIE ROY 
SHRI CYRIL PEREIRA (Alternate) 


IS 18347 : 2023 


Organization 


Karam Industries, Noida 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 


Ministry of Labour and Employment, New Delhi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate, Noida 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 


Safety Appliances Manufacturer's Association, Mumbai 


Unicare Emergency Equipment Private Limited, Mumbai 


Venus Safety and Health Private Limited, Navi Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (702/103 апа 104 
Plot No. 64 & 65, Mayuresh Trinity Opp. Poonam 
Tower Sector 16А Nerul, Navi Mumbai-400706) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJESH NIGAM 
SHRI MOHAMMAD (Alternate) 


SHRI P. У. BALARAMAKRISHNA 


SHRI B. N. JHA 
SHRIG. Р. NJALINGAPPA (Alternate) 


SHRI D. K. SHAMI 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


DR M. S. PARMAR 
SHRIMATI SHWETA SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK V ARSHNEY 
SHRI M. U. VINCY (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA M MAHAJAN 


SHRI P. KUMAR 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. BAHL 
SHRI ABHAY PATHAK (Alternate) 


DR PRASAD TIPNIS 
SHRI NEERAJ SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVANG MEHTA 
SHRIMATI NEHA NAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI CLINT LESLIE PEREIRA 
SHRI SHIRISH SATHE (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAJASEKHARAN М. K. (Alternate П) 


SHRI HARSHAL PATIL 
SHRI SANJEEV MINHAS (Alternate) 


SHRI S. D. BHARAMBE 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING 


DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


SHRI SUSHANT KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 08 (17842). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern :C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot Мо. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


