IRAT HA IS 12094 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


qA aa a Pram a fess 
& mias Rrgia 


( ZAT YARAT ) 


Planning and Design of River 
Embankments (Levees) — Guidelines 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 
© BIS 2018 
ada Aah À 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF WH, 9 RE aR HP, ae feeeit-110002 
diea MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2018 Price Group 3 


Flood Management, Erosion Management and Diversion Works Sectional Committee, WRD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Flood Management, Erosion Management and Diversion Works Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


An embankment (levee) is an artificial bank built along banks ofa river for the purpose of protecting adjacent 
land from inundation by flood. Such type of structure is also called ‘embankment’, ‘stop-bank’, ‘bund’ or 
‘dyke’. Construction of embankment to control flood is an age-old practice and is still being followed due to 
its proven suitability. 


This standard was first published in 1987 and its first revision was made in 2000. In view of the various 
technological changes that has taken place in this field since 2000 and also to incorporate the latest practices, 
this second revision has been taken up. 


There is no ISO standard on the subject. This standard has been prepared based on indigenous data/ 
practices prevalent in the field in India. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) ’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12094 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


PLANNING AND DESIGN OF RIVER 
EMBANKMENTS (LEVEES) — GUIDELINES 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers planning and design of river 
embankments (levees) on dry land. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on these standards are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

7894 : 1975 Code of practice for stability 
analysis of earth dams 

8237 : 1985 Code of practice for protection 
of slope for reservoir 
embankments (first revision) 

8408 : 1994 Planning and design of 
groynes in alluvial river — 
Guidelines (first revision) 

10751 : 1994 Planning and design of guide 
banks for alluvial river — 
Guidelines (first revision) 

11532: 1995 Construction and maintenance 
of river embankments (levees) 
— Guidelines (first revision) 

12169 : 1987 Criteria for design of small 
embankment dams 

14262 : 1995 Planning and design of 
revetments — Guidelines 

3 PLANNING 

3.0 General 


For planning of embankments the following three 
aspects need to be looked into: 


a) The area to be protected, 
b) Degree of protection to be provided, and 
c) Alignment and spacing of embankment. 
3.1 Area to be Protected 
3.1.1 Classification 


It is necessary to know the importance of the area to 


be protected in order to determine the degree of 
protection (see 3.2) to be provided. At present, there 
are two classifications made according to land 
utilization of the area as given below: 


a) Predominantly agricultural areas, and 


b) Townships or areas having industrial or 
other vital installations. 


3.1.2 Collection of Data 


For preparation of a suitable flood protection 
scheme, information on topography, characteristics, 
and hydrology of the river, history of past floods 
and works is necessary. The basic data required is 
as follows: 


a) Topography 


1) Index plan showing the area affected in the 
past (including lands, villages and property) 
and the area likely to be affected in post- 
project conditions. 


2) Contoured survey plan of the area prone to 
inundation. 


3) Plan showing past river courses. 


4) Plan of soil survey of the area where 
embankments are proposed. 


5) Plan and section of the flood protection 
works already existing or executed. 


6) Plan of structures likely to be affected due to 
construction of embankment as a result of 
increase in flood level. 


b) River characteristics and hydrology 


1) Characteristics of the river whether alluvial, 
incised, aggrading or degrading; 
meandering or braided. 

2) Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the 


silt of river at sites of proposed work or 
upstream. 


3) Nature of the soil of the bank and the bed at 
site of the proposed work. 


4) Gauge and discharge data of the main river 
and its tributaries, preferably at sites of 
proposed work or otherwise upstream. 


IS 12094 : 2018 


5) Recorded maximum flood discharge, 
velocity and level. 


6) Safe carrying capacity of the river (where 
work is proposed). 


7) Extent of the flood spill and the spill to be 
controlled. 


8) Cross-section and L-sections of the river 
particularly in the reaches where works are 
proposed. 


9) Rainfall data for the basin for the past years. 
c) History of past floods 


A brief history of the past floods indicating duration 
of floods, flood discharges and corresponding water 
levels, stage of the river at which the damage was 
most pronounced, extent of damage and their effect 
on the river regime, measures adopted earlier for the 
protection against floods and their effect on the river 
courses, river sections, bed levels, etc, as well as the 
present condition of the existing flood control works. 


3.1.3 After determining the type of the area to be 
protected and degree of protection to be given, the 
extent of area to be protected economically should 
be decided upon. For economic viability, the benefit 
cost ratio (B.C. ratio) should be more than unity. 


3.2 Degree of Protection 


The height of the embankment and the corresponding 
cost and B.C. ratio should be worked out for various 
flood frequencies taking into account the damage 
likely to occur. The degree of protection which gives 
the maximum benefit cost ratio should be 
adopted.However, till such time as the details of all 
relevant parameters are available, embankment 
schemes should be prepared for a flood of 25 years 
frequency in the case of predominantly agricultural 
areas and for flood of 100 years frequency for works 
pertaining to protection of town, important industrial 
and other vital installations. In certain special cases, 
where damage potential justifies, the maximum 
observed flood may also be considered. 


3.3 Alignment, 
Embankments 


Spacing and Length of 


3.3.1 Alignment 


As far as possible, embankments should be aligned 
on the ridge of the natural banks of the river, where 
land is high and soil suitable for the construction of 
embankments. 


The alignment should be determined in such a way 
that the high velocity flow which can erode the 
embankment material is sufficiently distant from them. 
Hydraulic models are useful guides in this regard. 


Where it is not possible to set back embankments to 
avoid the high velocity flow, some form of protection 
is necessary. Protrusions and sudden changes in the 
alignments and forming kinks should be avoided as 
far as possible. 


Embankments should be aligned so that important 
towns and properties along the river bank are left 
outside the embankment. Alignment of embankments 
should also be planned so that land acquisition for 
embankment construction is feasible and is not 
prolonged. 


3.3.2 Spacing 


The spacing between the embankments in jacketed 
reach of river with wide flood plain should not be 
less than 3 times Lacey’s wetted perimeter for the 
design flood discharge. In no case should an 
embankment be placed at a distance less than Lacey’s 
wetted perimeter from the river bank or one and a 
half times the Lacey’s wetted perimeter from the 
midstream of the river. This should also be ensured 
in case of embankment on only one bank of the river. 
Spacing should be decided keeping in view: 


a) Loss of flood storage (prior to embankment 
construction) and consequent rise in HFL. 

b) Deposition of sediments on the river bed 
(within the embankments) which, otherwise, 
used to be deposited in the flood plains in 
the absence of embankments. 

c) Navigation requirement, in case the river is 
navigable in the reach. 


In the tidal reach of a river, embankments should be 
constructed with due regard to their effect on the 
navigation requirements in the channel as 
embankments in such cases may substantially reduce 
the tidal influx causing a reduction in the available 
navigation depth. As such no recommendation on 
spacing and alignment of levee can be generalized in 
view of the fact that each river is unique in its 
behaviour. Thorough knowledge of the river 
behaviour and studies of the effects of the 
embankments along different alignments are 
prerequisites for taking decision on spacing and 
alignment. Vulnerability to river attack, rise of high 
flood level on account of reduction in flow area, 
increase in discharge due to cut off in valley storage, 
as well as optimization of benefit, etc, should reflect 
in the decision making. 


3.3.3 Length of the Embankment 


Length of embankment directly depends upon the 
alignment and the areas to be protected. However, it 
is to be ensured that both ends of the bund are tied 
up to some high-ground or existing highway or 
railway or any other embankment nearby conforming 
to the design height of the embankment. 


4 DESIGN OF EMBANKMENT 
4.1 Types 


Embankments can be classified into two types as 
given below: 


a) Homogeneous Embankment — It consists 
of practically single kind of impervious 
material throughout. There is no designed 
plan of material distribution other than the 
coarsest or most pervious material being 
placed at the outer slopes (see Fig. 1). 

b) Zoned Embankment — It essentially 

consists of an inner or impervious section 

supported by two or more outer sections of 
relatively pervious materials. 


4.1.1 The essential requirements for design of the 
embankment are the determination of the design high 
flood level (HFL), hydraulic gradient, freeboard, side 
slopes, top width, etc. The stability of the 
embankment should be checked under all stages of 
construction, condition of saturation and drawdown. 
The embankment should be safe against cracks due 
to unequal moisture contents in different parts and 
unequal settlement (see IS 7894 and IS 12169). 


4.2 Design HFL 


Correct assessment of the HFL is an important item 
in the design of embankment. A general problem 
encountered in determining HFLis non-availability 
of adequate data. Depending on data, the approach 
to determine HFL is divided into the following three 
categories: 


NOT STEEPER THAN 

1:2 OR 1:3 

LONGITUDINAL “| 
T 


MINIMUM 
COVER 0-6m 


BORROW PIT (IF REQUIRED) 


(COUNTRY SIDE) 


NOTES 


IS 12094 : 2018 
a) Where Long-term Discharge and Gauge 
Data are Available — Firstly gauge 
discharge relationship should be 
established. Then available discharge data 
should be subjected to frequency analysis 
for the return period according to land 
utilization pattern of area (see 3.2) using 
standard statistical methods. 


b) Where Discharge and Gauge Data are 
Available for a Short Period — A suitable 
gauge discharge relationship should first be 
established. Then a relationship between 
storm, rainfall and peak discharge should 
be established based on the data for the 
period for which discharge data is available. 
Utilizing all available past rainfall data, a 
suitable return period value should be 
chosen for design storm rainfall intensity. 
Land-use and nature of the area should also 
be taken into consideration to find out the 
design peak flood discharge from the rainfall 
peak discharge relationship. The design 
flood level is to be obtained from gauge 
discharge relationship already established. 
The design flood level so obtained should 
be verified on the basis of observed cross- 
sections, slopes and velocities of the river 
in the recent years. 


c) Where No Discharge and Gauge Data are 
Available — Synthetic unit hydrograph 
approach should be used for estimating the 
desired return period flood. For this purpose 


flood estimation reports prepared by 


TOP WIDTH 5.0 TO 5-5 m 


FREE BOARD 


1-5 m OR 1-8 m 
DESIGN HFL 


NOT STEEPER 
THAN 1:2 TO 1:3 


STRIP LEVEL BORROW PIT 


(RIVER SIDE ) 


0-3 m (AVERAGE) 


1 Regarding alternate dimensions shown in the figure, refer to the various clauses relating to design aspects 


given in the standard. 


2 The depth and distance of borrow pits shall be as per the requirements given in IS 1532. 


3 Spacing of cross-drains are as per IS 8237. 


4 Strip level is shown as it is an obvious feature of construction work. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION OF HOMOGENEOUS EMBANKMENT 


3 


IS 12094 : 2018 


Planning and Coordination Committee and 
published by the Directorate of Hydrology 
(Small Catchments), Central Water 
Commission, New Delhi for the country as a 
whole under the short-term plan and for each 
sub-zone under long-term plan may be used. 


d) Rashtriya Barh Ayog Report (1980) may be 
referred for determination of design HFL. 


4.2.1 In the case of embankment on both sides of 
river, rise in the water level due to jacketing of the 
river should be kept in view in determining the design 
HFL. Backwater analysis should be carried out to 
determine the afflux due to loss in flood storage after 
the construction of embankment. 


4.3 Free Board 


As a guideline, minimum free board of 1.5 m over 
design HFL including the back water effect, if any, 
should be provided for the river carrying design 
discharge up to 3000 m°/s. For higher discharges or 
for aggrading/flashy rivers, the minimum free board 
should be of 1.8 m. This should be checked also for 
ensuring a minimum of about 1.0 m of free board over 
HFL corresponding to 100 years frequency flood (see 
also 3.2). 


4.4 Top Width 


For facilitating transport of material during 
construction and maintenance work, it is desirable 
to make the top width of embankment sufficiently 
wide to accommodate two-lane vehicular traffic and 
to be used as inspection road. The criteria given 
below may be considered as general guideline for 
top width (see IS 11532). 


4.4.1 The top width of the embankment should not 
be less than 4.5 m. The turning platforms, 15 to 30m 


3m WIDE AND 15m TO 30m 
LONG TURNING PLATFORM 
AT EVERY KILOMETRE 


MINIMUM COVER 


BORROW PIT 
(COUNTRY SIDE) 


STRIP LEVEL 


long and 3.0m wide with side slope 1:3 along the 
countryside of the embankment should be provided 
at every kilometre (see Fig. 2). 


4.4.2 The top width should be adequate for the type 
of vehicular-traffic designed to use the embankment. 
No water should be allowed to collect over the 
embankment at any stage. Suitably designed gutter- 
drains may be provided on country side. 


4.5 Hydraulic Gradient 


It is always desirable to know, approximately at least, 
the line of seepage (phreatic line) in the cross-section 
of a proposed embankment. This line should never 
be allowed to intersect the outside countryside slope 
of bank above GL and care should be taken so that a 
cover of 0.6 m is available on HG line. 


4.5.1 Hydraulic gradient line should be determined 
on the basis of the analysis of soils which are to be 
used in the construction of embankment. However, 
the following guidelines are recommended: 


Type of Fill Hydraulic Gradient 


Clayey soil lin4 
Clayey sand lin5 
Sandy soil lin6 


4.6 Side Slope 


The side slopes are dependent upon the nature of 
the material of which the embankment is made, the 
method of construction, the height of the 
embankment and the period of time that the 
embankment is likely to be subjected to the action of 
flood waters. They shall also be stable against 
slipping under conditions of saturation and sudden 
drawdown (see IS 7894). 


TOP WIDTH OF 
EMBANKMENT 


FREE BOARD 
DESIGN HFL 


No 


BORROW PIT 
(RIVER SIDE } 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL CROSS-SECTION SHOWING TURNING PLATFORM 


4.6.1 River Side Slope 


The river side slope should be flatter than the 
underwater angle of repose of the material used in 
the fill. Up to an embankment height of 4.5 m, the 
slope should not be steeper than 1 in 2 and in case of 
higher embankments slope should not be steeper than 
1 in 3, when the soil is good and to be used in the 
most favourable condition of saturation and 
drawdown. 


Following guidelines should be followed: 


a) In case of higher embankment protected by 
riprap, the slope of embankments up to 6 m 
high may be 1 in 2 or 1 in 2.5 depending upon 
the type of slope protection; 


b) Ifthe construction material is sandy, the slope 
should be protected with a cover of 0.6 m thick 
good soil; 


c) Itis usually preferable to have more or less 
free draining material on the river side to take 
care of sudden drawdown. In case of high and 
important embankment stone rip-rap either dry 
dumped or hand placed and concrete 
pavements/concrete blocks with open joints 
are adopted to protect the embankment 
against drawdown and/or erosive action of 
the river (see IS 8408); in less important 
embankments where rip-rap is costly, willow 
mattress can be used; and 


d) For embankment height more than 6m, line of 
saturation should be found by Kozeny’s base 
parabola method and stability analysis should 
be carried by slip circle method for finalizing 
side slopes (see IS 7894). 


4.6.2 Countryside Slope 


A minimum cover of 0.6 m over the hydraulic line 
should be provided. 


a) For embankment up to 4.5 m height, the 
countryside slope should be 1 in 2 from the 
top up to the point where the cover over HG 
line is 0.6 m after which a berm of suitable 
width, with the countryside slope of 1:2 from 
the end of the berm up to ground level, should 
be provided; 


b) For embankments of height between 4.5 to 
6.0 m, the corresponding slopes with respect 
to 4.6.2 (a) should be 1 in 3. Berms should be 
of width 1.5 m normally; and 


c) For embankments of height more than 6.0 m, 
detail design should be made. 


IS 12094 : 2018 


4.6.3 Drainage 


For drainage, longitudinal drains should be provided 
on the berm and cross drains at suitable places 
should be provided to drain the water from the 
longitudinal drains (see IS 10751). Toe drain should 
be provided to prevent sloughing of toe. Perforated 
pipe embedded in properly designed graded filter 
with arrangements for disposal of water in the 
country side should be provided. 


4.7 Safety Measures in Design 


Structure should be stable under all stages of 
construction and conditions of saturation and 
drawdown. It is therefore necessary that stability 
checks for various conditions should be done to 
ensure safety of the structure. Seismic forces should 
also be considered for high embankments. The factor 
of safety for slope stability should be as per IS 7894. 


4.7.1 Safety against Cracks Due to Unequal 
Settlement and Wetting 


Unequal settlements can be largely avoided by 
preparing the foundations properly and by selecting 
suitable material for construction. Where the 
foundation soil is weak, suitable strengthening 
measures may be taken. Clayey soils containing 
organic matter or soils containing decaying 
vegetables matter such as remains of plants and roots 
should be rejected. Well graded homogeneous 
materials are most suitable for construction. In case 
of difficulty in getting full quantities of the same 
material, zonal sections with impervious core and a 
pervious casing may be adopted. In high 
embankments it is desirable to mechanically compact 
the earth fill in suitable layers with a view to achieve 
optimum density with appropriate moisture content. 
Breaking of big clods specially in clayey soils is to 
be done and organic/vegetable matter separated to 
safeguard against seepage/leakage/piping. 


4.8 Sluices 


Sluices with regulating arrangement should be 
provided for countryside drainage. The size of sluices 
will depend upon the intensity of the rainfall and the 
catchment area to be drained. 


4.9 Treatment on Top of Embankments 


An embankment should be provided with suitable 
soling over filter for proper drainage. For 
embankments protecting towns in industrial and 
places of strategic importance, the necessity of 
providing all weather road surfaces of 3 to 3.5 m 
width should be examined to ensure maintenance 
work for reaches which are not easily accessible. 


IS 12094 : 2018 


4.10 In order to provide communication from one 
side of embankment to the other, ramps at suitable 
places should be provided as per requirement to 
obviate subsequent interference. 


4.11 Failure/Breaching of Embankment 


Embankments, especially the marginal ones adjacent 
to river banks, often fail/breach due to one or more 
of the following reasons: 


a) Overtopping of flood water due to floods of 
magnitude higher than the design flood; 

b) Improper compaction and settlement of 
embankment; 

c) Transverse cracks due to unequal 
settlement; 

d) Inadequate side slope causing slip failure; 

e) River erosion due to meandering/shifting 
river course and poor shear strength of bank 
soil; 

f) Piping /sand boiling due to uncontrolled 
seepage, creep flow, burrowing by animals 
etc; 

g) Inadequate drainage and pore pressure 
development; and 

h) Inadequate protection and improper 
planning and design of protective works. 


Failure/Breaching of embankment lead to 
catastrophic damages in the country side apart from 
loss of life and properties, loss of communication 
and above all human miseries which can not be 
measured in terms of money. Proper investigations 
should be carried out by experts to find the exact 
cause of failures/breaches with a view to improve 
design criteria so that such failures/breaches can be 
avoided in future as far as possible. 


4.11.1 Preventive Measures 


Beaches/Failures can be avoided or delayed by 
adopting suitable preventive measures mentioned 
briefly underneath: 


a) Toe drainage, 


b) Placing sand bags near toe (with drains 
covered by wooden planks) in order to 


increase shear resistance against 
actuating forces causing slip, 


c) Reducing seepage by lowering seepage 
head by constructing ring wells with 
sand bags near the toe, 


d) Plugging piping holes with divers by 
using tarpaulins soaked with bitumen 
from river side face of the hole, and 


e) Raising height of embankment (in case 
of overtopping) by using wooden 
planks without endangering stability 
against slip. 

4.11.2 Closure of Breach 


Breaches should be closed on war footing so that 
the flooding of countryside can be minimized. 
Usually, retired embankments are constructed around 
the breach connecting the retired embankment with 
the original one at points sufficiently away from the 
breach so that by the time construction of the retired 
embankment is over, the breach does not propagate 
to the connecting points. Vertical closure by driving 
piles all along the breach width is better than trying 
to close the breach horizontally starting from ends, 
since there will be very high drag due to increasing 
velocity of the stream passing through the neck as 
the breach width gets narrowed down, 


4.12 Protection of Embankment 


An embankment under direct attack of a river needs 
protection against failure. Different protective 
measures which are commonly employed to protect 
embankment are: 


a) Revetment/mattressing to protect against 
erosive action of river (for details see 
IS 14262), 


b) Spurs/groynes to deflect/dampen high 
velocity flow attacking the embankment (for 
details see IS 8408), 


c) Different grade control measures to tame a 
river flowing in steep terrain; and 


d) Improving shear strength of embankment soil 
by growing shallow rooted vegetation. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 22 (581). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ee 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi ee 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 iC 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 o 1216,2254 1442 
22542519,22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


