( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 2259 - 1963

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR DETERMINATION OF INSULATION RESISTANCE OF SOLID INSULATING MATERIALS

Insulating Materials Sectional Committee,
Chairman SHRI S. SWAYAM~~ Members PROP D. J. BADKAS SHRI T. V. BALAKRISHNAN Dx P. K. BHANDARI Representing Central Water Wing ) & Power

ETDC

18
( Power

Commission

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore Heavy Electrica_ls ( India ) Ltd, Bh.opal PaintsC;;ntg&i;Id Products Scctronal

Committee,

Dr Beck & do ( India ) Private Ltd, Bombay Sxmr K. DORAISWAMY Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. N. HIRIYANNIAH SHRI B. G. BHAKAY ( Alternate ) Government Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. N. MUKERJI Hindustan Transmission Products Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. F. PARIKH SHRI K. V. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Bakelite ( India ) Private Ltd, Bombay DR H. N. PATEL SHRI S. S. CARDMA~TER ( Alternate ) The Western India Plywoods Ltd. P. 0. Baliapatam SH~I A. K. RAMACHANDRA Electronic Components Sectional Committee, ETDC SHRI T. V. RAsfMAMuRn 25, IS1 Imperial Chemical Industries ( India ) Private Ltd, DR J. N. SEN Calcutta SHRI K. VENKAT~RAMANAN ( Alternate ) The glzr$ Electric Co of India ( Private) Ltd. Sssm M. G. SETH ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, ETDC 26, IS1 India Mica 8s Micanite Industries Ltd. P. 0. JhumriSHRI M. VENUGOPAL~W Telaiya SHRI KRISHNASHARANBHADANI ( Alternate ) Director, IS1 ( Ex-@.cia Member ) Smu Y. S. VENKATESWARAN, ~gm~a~yctor ( Electrotechnical) SHRI B. C. DM GUPTA SHRI R. K. TANDAN SHRI K. R. TH~UCAR

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110992 ZAFAR MARC

IS : 2259 -

1963

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR DETERMINATION OF INSULATION RESISTANCE OF SOLID INSULATING MATERIALS
0. FOREWORD 0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 9 February 1963, after the draft finalized by the Insulating Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.
0.2 With the advent of indigenous manufacture of electrical insulating materials, the need for having Indian Standard specifications covering their performance requirements and methods of testing has become more urgent particularly considering the varying atmospheric conditions met with in a This is one of a series of standards on methods tropical country like India. It lays down uniform test proceof testing electrical insulating materials. dures with a view to ensuring consistency in results of tests carried out by different agencies. 0.3 The methods for determining the insulation resistance of solid insulating materials give values of resistance which include, without discrimination, These methods, consequently, do not both volume and surface resistance. give well-defined constants for the material in contrast to the methods of test for volume and surface resistivities for which a separate standard is being prepared.. These methods, however, give empirical values which are appropriate for the comparison of the quality of different insulating materials. 0.4 These methods are very useful in determining the influence of humidity on hygroscopic insulating materials, in which conditioning not only appreciablymodifies the insulating properties of the surface but also that of the body of the material. 05 This standard is based, to a large extent, on IEC Document 15 ( Central Office ) 25 Draft Standard Methods of Test for the Determination of the Insulation Resistance of Solid Insulating Materials. 0.6 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in these methods, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 0.7 Metric system has been adopted in India and all quantities dimensions appearing in this standard have been given in this system. 2 and

IS : 2259 - 1963

0.8 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Rwised ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard insulation resistance resistances involved.

lays down test procedures for the determination of without discrimination between the volume and surface

1.1.1 Because of the simplicity and ease in preparing a test specimen, these methods are particularly useful for quick determination of values where great accuracy is not required.

2. TERMINOLOGY
2.0 For the purpose

of this standard,

the following

definitions

shall apply.

2.1 Insulation Resistance - The insulation resistance between two electrodes which are in contact with or embedded in a specimen is the ratio of the direct voltage applied to the electrodes to the total current between It is dependent them at a given time after the application of the voltage. upon both the volume and surface resistance of the specimen. 2.2 Surface Resistance - It two electrodes which are on current between them which is other semi-conducting material is the ratio of the direct voltage applied the surface of a specimen to that portion in a thin layer ( for instance moisture ) on the surface. to of or

2.3 Volume Resistance - It is the ratio of the direct voltage applied to two electrodes which are in contact with or embedded in a specimen to the portion of current between them which is distributed through the volume of the specimen. 3. TEST EQUIPMENT

3.1 A suitable measuring device having the required sensitivity and accuUsually insulation resistance is determined either by a racy may be used. bridge method or by measuring the current and voltage. Brief descriptions of such measuring methods are given in Appendix A. 4. TEST 4.1 Unless VOLTAGE otherwise specified the test voltage 3 shall be 500 f 10 volts dc.

IS : 2259 - 1963
4.2 The test voltage shall be steady enough to keep charging current miniA steady mum as compared to the current flowing through the specimen. voltage may be obtained either by batteries or by a stabilized power pack. 5. ELECTRODES

5.0 The electrodes
rode under

shall be made of such a material that they do not corthe conditions of test or react with the material being tested.

5.1 Taper Pin Electrodes - Clean brass or stainless steel pins of approximately 5 lnrn diameter and having a taper of approximately 2 percent and of sufficient length to comply with 6.1.1, shall be used. The electrodes may be used with flat specimens, tubes and rods ( see Fig, 1 Three-pin electrode system may be used for plate specimens and 2 ).

-T
25 MIN

+$`1 \

_-.

I

i 2521

1 25 MIN

1 D-- 25 MIN ---&--25fl---+---25 MIN -

All dimensions FIG. 1
PLATE SPECIMEN

FOR

in millimetres. TAPER PIN ELECTRODES

4

IS : 2259 - 1963

as shown

in Fig. 1 and

the insulation

for both perpendicular plate specimens.

directions.

resistance values shall This shall be the preferred

be specified method for

1

-725 MIN
I ,
I

*
I
I I j

I I
L-' I I I I

I I I I I
1

4% '
' I

+

+259

I I I L_ , I &\ I I

I I I I I I I I f I

I. ..

-+

t25 MIN

I I I I --II '

-I"1. ? FIG. 82

AI1 dimensions in millimetres. ROD OK TUBE SPECIMENS FOR TAPER

PIN ELECTRODES

5.2 Conducting Paint Electrodes - Conducting paint may he used as an electrode material. TWO stripes of conducting paint one millimetre wide are applied around tubes and rods so that nearest edges are IO.0 5 0.5 mm apart (see Fig. 3 ). The vehicle of conducting paint should be of such a nature that it will not have any effect on the insulation resistance to be measured. ( This may easily be done by mounting the tube or rod in a lathe and rotating it against a small brush or drawing pen containing the paint.)

5

IS : 2259 - 1963

This type of electrode may also be used on plate specimens. In this case the electrodes shall be two parallel stripes of conducting paint one millimetre wide. The total length of each electrode shall be 100 & 1 mm, their nearest edges being spaced 10.0 + 0.5 mm apart ( see Fig. 4 ). 5.3 Bar Electrodes - The electrodes are metal bar clamps about 10 x 10 x 50 mm which are spaced 25-O f O-5 mm apart between their nearest edges ( see Fig. 5 ). The electrodes are used for thin sheet material ( usually one millimetre or less in thickness ) and for flexible tapes. The assembly should be mounted on a support whose resistance is at least one hundred times greater than that of the materials to be measured. Alternatively, the test specimen may be supported in air by the leads attached to the electrodes. For rigid materials the bars have tin foil wrapped around them and after the bars have been clamped onto the test specimen, the tin foil shall be pressed down with a thin tool along the edge of the electrodes to assure intimate contact with the test piece.

e
c_ / \ :

`. __ / /

+

:

TWO STRIPES OF CONDUCTING PAINT

All dimensions FIG, 3

in millimetres.

ROD OR TUBE SPECIMEN FOR CONDUCTINGSTRIPE ELEC-IRODE

6

IS : 2259 - 1963

r
25 MI

10.ot-5

25 MIN

1 100+t

TWO STRIPES QF CONDUCTING PAINT -4

All

dimensionsin millimetres.

FIG.4

PLATE SPECIMENFOR CONDUCTING STRIPEELECTRODE

6. SHAPE AND SIZE OF TEST SPECIMENS 6.1 For measurements with taper pin electrodes, the test specimens shall
be plates having a size at least 75 x 75 mm ( see Fig. 1 ), or tubes or rods at least 20 mm in diameter and 75 mm long ( see Fig. 2 ). 6.1.1 To introduce the electrodes, the plates shall be drilled with three holes, and tubes or rods shall be drilled with two holes along parallel diaAfter reaming with a reamer meters whose centres are 25 f 1 mm apart. the diameter of each hole at the larger end shall be not less than 4.5 mm and not greater than 5.5 mm. The holes shall be drilled completely through 7

IS : 2259 - 1963

I

I

ELECTRODES I

All dimensions in millimetres.
FIG.

5

BAR ELECTRODES FOR TAPS OR THIN SHEET MATERIAL

the specimen - in the case of tubes through one wall only - and shall be reamed throughout the full length. While drilling and reaming this specimen, care shall be taken to see that the material adjacent to the hole is not damaged ( for example, split, broken or charred ) in any way. The holes shall be at least 25 mm from the outer edges of the test specimen. 6.1.1.1 The taper pins used as electrodes shall be pressed ( not hammered ) into the holes so that they fit tightly and extend on each side of the material by not less than 2 mm ( seeFig. 1 and 2 ). 6.2 For measurements with conducting paint electrodes, the test specimens shall be rectangular plates of at least 60 x 150 mm in size ( see Fig. 3 ), or rods or tubes at least 60 mm long ( see Fig. 4 ). 8

IS : 2259 - 1963
6.3 For measurements with the bar electrodes, form of tapes or thin bars shall be 25 mm 50 mm long. 7. PROCEDURE of test specimens to be used for each test shall be specified in the material specification. They shall be properly selected, cleaned, mounted and conditioned before resistance measurements are made. 7.1.1 Selection of Test Sjecimen - As the measured value of the insulation resistance depends to a great extent on the condition of the surface of the test specimen, care should be taken to select test specimens having undamaged surfaces. the test specimens in the or less in width and at least

7.1The number

7.1.2 Cleaning of Test Specimen - In many cases it may be desirable to test the material in the condition in which it is to be used after handling and processing. In this event, the test specimens should not be cleaned. If cleaning is desired, the surfaces of the test specimens should be cleaned before conditioning with an alcohol and ether mixture, or other suitable solvent that has no effect on the material of the specimen and shall not be handled with bare fingers afterwards ( acetate rayon gloves are recommended ).
7.1.3 Mounting of Test Specimens - In mounting the test specimens for measurement, there shall be no conducting path between the electrodes other than those associated with the test specimen, for example, specimens shown in Fig. 1 to 5 shall be held by the edges or supported from the electrodes so that none of the electrodes touches anything but its lead and specimen. In case the above method is not possible the specimen may be rested on an insulating material whose insulation resistance is about 100 times that of the specimen under test. 7.1.4 Conditioning of Test Specimens - The test specimens shall be conditioned and preconditioned as specified in the material specifications ( see also IS : 2260-1963 Recommendations for the Conditioning and Testing of Electrical Insulating Materials ). 7.2 The resistance shall be measured while the specimen is still in the conditioning atmosphere but under certain circumstances it may be measured after removal from the conditioning atmosphere. In the latter case, the test shall be carried out as quickly as possible after removal from the conditioning atmosphere and the period elapsing before testing and the conditions during measurements shall he quoted in the test report. 7.3 Unless otherwise specified the time of electrification shall be one minute ( see Appendix A ). 9 at the test voltage

B3 : 2259 - 1963
8. EXPRESSION OF RESULTS shall be measured individually.

8.1 Each test specimen

8.2 In case of conducting paint shall be expressed corresponding relation :

stripes around tubes and rods the resistance to a 100 mm length of electrode using the

R 100=
where RIO0= resistance 100 mm, 1 Rx = length

100

'

Re

corresponding

to

length and length

of

electrode

of

of electrode

in millimetre, to

= resistance d mm.

corresponding

of

electrode

of

8.3 When measuring with the bar electrodes test specimens less than 25 mm in width, the resistance R, shall be referred to a resistance Rzs corresponding to a width of 25 mm using the relation :

Rts=
9. TEST REPORT 9.1 The test report a> Designation b) Dimensions 4 shall contain of insulating

Width
25

x R

z

following material;

information

:

of test specimens; electrodes, been including before nature or of after

Method of test and type of conducting paint when used; electrodes used; have

the d) Whether conditioning; e) Cleaning

applied

procedure

f 1 Conditioning

and preconditioning; during measurement if not in the

g> Time elapsed and conditions conditining choamber; 10

IS : 2259- 1963

h) Test voltage;
j) Time of electrification; and resistance obtained. k) Individual values of insulation

in showing the overall results in the form of an NOTE - There is no advantage arithmetical mean of the individual values, because high values influence the results too strongly, and the low values have too great an influence when the result is given in the resistance calculated taking the mean of the conductivities of the several test It is consequently preferable to use the arithmetical mean of the logarithm specimens. of the individual results, which will provide the geometrical mean and so avoid this undue influence of individual results.

APPENDIX
GENERAL PRINCIPLES RESISTANCE

A
OF

( Clauses 3.1 and 7.3 )
REGARDING METHODS MEASUREMENT

A-l.

MEASUREMENT

A-l.0 The determination of the resistance of an insulator is not fundamentally different from that of a conductor. In both cases, the resistance is measured by the ratio of a voltage to a current. The methods available can be separated into two groups, as follows. A-l.1 Voltmeter-Ammeter Method - In this method the current is measured by a microammeter or galvanometer ( seeFig. 6 ) or by a dc amplifier which indicates current by measuring the voltage drop across a known resistor ( see Fig. 7 ) and the voltage is measured by an indicating voltmeter. In some cases the ratio of voltage to current is measured in a single instrument to indicate resistance directly. A-1.1.1 Voltmeter-Ammeter Method Using a Galvanometer

A-1.1.1.1 The voltmeter and galvanometer are connected to the voltage source and to the test specimen as shown in Fig. 6. The applied voltage is measured by a dc voltmeter, preferably having such range and accuracy as to give minimum error in voltage indication. In no case shall the voltmeter have an error greater than f2 percent of full scale; nor a range such that the deflection is less than one-third of full scale. The current is measured by a galvanometer having a high current sensitivity. The galvanometer is provided with a precision Ayrton universal shunt for so adjusting 11

IS t 2259 - 1963

BATTERY ;T;;;.IE

OR D VOLTAG

GALVANOMETER AYRTON SHUNT

AN0 I

FIG. 6

VOLTMETER-AMMETER USINQA GALVANOMETER

7A

Normal USC of Amplifier and Indicating

Meter

DC AMPLIFIER

7B

Amplifier and Indicating

Meter as Null Detector USING DC AMPLIFICATION

FIG. 7 VOLTMETER-AMMETER METHOD

12

IS : 2259 - 1963
its deflection that the readability error does not in general exceed f2 percent of the observed value. The galvanometer is calibrated to within f2 percent. The galvanometer can also be made direct-reading in current by providing a suitable additional fixed shunt. A-1.1.1.2 The unknown
R, =

resistance
+

R, shall be calculated

as follows :

x where E, = applied I, voltage;

E C----L.XdF

= total current; sensitivity in amperes and current. per scale division;

IT = galvanometer d = deflection

in scale divisions;

F = ratio of the total current

1, to the galvanometer

A-l.l.1.3 With a galvanometer having a sensitivity of 500 x 10-laA per millimetre scale division, and with 500 V applied, a resistance of 1Ol2 ohms can be detected by a l-mm deflection. Since the Ayrton shunt errors are negligible, the maximum percentage error in the computed resistance is the sum of the percentage errors in galvanometer sensitivity, galvanometer deflection and indicated voltage. If the galvanometer deflection is at least 25 mm, read to the nearest 0.5 mm; the resultant galvanometer error will not exceed 4 percent. Hence 4 x 10'0 ohms at 500 V can be measured with a maximum error of + 6 percent when the voltmeter reads full scale, and & 10 percent when it reads one-third full scale. The desirability of a good voltmeter is readily seen. A-1.1.2 Voltmeter-Ammeter Method Using dc Amplijcation

c

A-1.1.2.1 The voltmeter-ammeter method can be extended to measure higher resistances by using dc amplification to increase the sensitivity of the current-measuring device. Generally, but not necessarily, this is achieved only with some sacrifice in precision, depending on the apparatus used. Measure the applied voltage by a dc voltmeter as prescribed in A-1.1.1, It is subject to the same error considerations indicated therein. h/ieasure the current in terms of the voltage drop across a standard resistance, as illustrated in Fig. 7A and 7B. In the circuit shown in Fig. 7A the specimen current 1, produces across the standard resistance R, a voltage drop which is amplified by the 13

1s : 2259 - 1963
dc amplifier and read on an indicating meter or galvanometer. The net gain of the amplifier usually is stabilized by means of a feedback resistance Rf from the output `of the amplifier. The indicating meter can be calibrated to read directly in terms of specimen current I, or in terms of the feedback voltage e, which is determined from the known value of the resistance of Rf and the feedback current passing through it. When the amplifier has sufficient intrinsic gain, the feedback voltage e, differs from the voltage I, R, by a negligible amount. As shown in Fig, 7A the returned lead from the voltage source E, can be connected to either end of the feedback resistor R,. With the connection made to the junction of R, and R, (switch in position i), the entire resistance of R, is placed in the measuring circuit and any alternating voltage appearing across the specimen resistance! is amplified only as much as the direct voltage I, R, across R,. With the connection made to the other end of Rf (switch in position 2 ), the apparent resistance placed in the measuring circuit is R, times the ratio of the degenerated gain to the intrinsic gain of the amplifier; any alternating voltage appearing across the specimen resistance is then amplified by the intrinsic amplifier gain. In the circuit shown in Fig. 7B, the specimen current I, produces across the standard resistance R,a voltage drop which is balanced out by adjustment of an opposing voltage d, from a calibrated potentiometer, the dc amplifier and the indicating meter serving only as a very sensitive, The return lead from the voltage source high-resistance, null detector. Ee is usually connected as shown, to include the potentiometer in the measuring circuit. When connections are made in this manner, no resistance is placed in the measuring circuit at balance; a steeply increasing fraction of R, is included in the measuring circuit, however, as the potentiometer tap is moved off the balance. Any alternating voltage appearing across the specimen resistance is amplified by the net amplifier gain. The' dc amplifier may be either conductively coupled or provided with input and output converters. Induced alternating voltages across the specimen usually are sufficiently troublesome as to require a resistance capacitance filter preceding the amplifier. The input resistance of this filter should be at least 100 times greater than the effective resistance that is placed in the measuring circuit by resistance R,. A-1.1.2.2 Calculate the resistance
R,=

R, as follows :
R,

+E,.
2

6

where E, = applied voltage; I, = specimen current; 14

IS : 2259 - 1963

R, = standard
& s=

resistance;

and

voltage drop across R,, indicated by either the amplifier output meter or the calibrated potentiometer.

I

A-1.1.2.3 The maximum percentage error in the computed resistance is the sum of the percentage errors in the voltages E, and =e,and the resistance R,. The applied voltage E, is subject to the same errors noted in A-1.1.1. The errors in e, and R, are generally dependent more on the characteristics of the apparatus used than on the particular method. The most significant factors that determine the errors in e, are indicator error, amplifier zero drift and amplifier gain stability. With modern well-designed amplifiers, gain stability is usually not a matter of concern. With existing techniques, the zero drift of conductively coupled dc amplifiers cannot be eliminated, but it can be made slow enough to be relatively insignificant for these measurement; with careful design of converter-type amplifiers, zero drift is virtually non-existent. Consequently, the null method shown in Fig. 7B is theoretically less subject to error than those methods employing an indicating instrument, provided, however, that the potentiometer voltage is accurately known. The error in R, is to some extent dependent on the amplifier sensitivity. For measurements of a given current, the higher the amplifier sensitivity the greater the possibility that lower-valued highly precise wire-wound standard resistors can be used. Such amplifiers can be obtained. Standard resistances of IO3 ohms, known to f2 percent, are a distinct possibility, however, and with a typrcal amplifier sensitivity of 1 mV per scale division, a current of lo-12A could be detected. At 500V applied, this would correspond to the detection of a specimen resistance of 500 x lOi* ohms. If 100 mV input to the amplifier gave fullscale deflection on an indicating meter having an error not .greater than 2 percent of full scale, a resistance of 5 x 10ia ohms could be measured with a maximum error of A6 percent when the voltmeter read full scale, and * 10 percent when it read one-third full scale. A-l.2 Comparison Method - In this method the unknown resistance is compared with a known resistance. This comparison is effected by determining the ratio of the currents when the same voltage is applied successively to the two resistances ( see Fig. 8 ) or by balancing the two resiitances in a Wheatstone bridge ( see Fig. 9 ). For all of the methods the unknown resistance must be large compared to any standard resistances placed in series with it so that it will have essentially full voltage placed across it. A-l .2.1 Comfiarison Method Using a Galvanometer A-1.2.1.1 A standard resistance R, and galvanometer are connected to the voltage source and to the test specimen as shown in Fig. 9. The galvanometer and its associated Ayrton shunt shall be as described 15

IS : 2259 - 1963

FIG. 8

COMPARISON METHOD USINO A GALVANOMETER

Fro. 9

COMPARISON METHODUSING A WHEATSTONE BRIDGE

in A-1.1.1.1. It is convenient,

but not necessary, to connect a voltmeter The switch is provided across the source for a nominal check of its voltage. for short-circuiting the unknown resistance in the process of measurement. Sometimes provision is made to short-circuit either the unknown or standard resistance, but not both at the same time. A-1.2.1.2 In general, it is preferable to leave the standard resistance in circuit at all times to prevent damage to the galvanometer and shunt in With the same voltage applied, determine the case of specimen failure. ratio of the unknown resistance to the standard resistance from the ratio of the current with the unknown resistance short-circuited to that with the unknown resistance in circuit, and then short-circuit it, the corresponding galvanometer deflections d, and d, being made as large and as nearly equal as possible by suitable adjustment of the Ayrton shunt. 16

ISr22M-1963 A-1.2.1.3 The unknown resistance R, is calculated as follows :

where F, and I;, = ratios of the total current to galvanometer current with R, in circuit and short-circuited, respectively; and

galvanometer current sensitivities, K, and KS = corresponding which are assumed to be equal for nearly equal deflections d, and d,. In case R, is short-circuited computed as follows : when R, is in circuit, RS shall be

A-1.2.1.4 The maximum percentage error in the computed resistance is given by the sum of the percentage errors in R,, the galvanometer deflections and the assumption that K, = K'. The latter assumption is correct to well within f2 percent over the useful range ( 250 mm or more ) of a good, modern galvanometer. The error in Rt depends on the type of resistor used, but resistances of 100000 ohms, with a limit of error of &O-l percent, are available. With a galvanometer such as that described in A-1.1.1.3, and with 500 V applied, a resistance of 10's ohms could be detected. At this voltage, with the above-noted standard resistor and with F, = 105, d, would be 100 mm, with a readability error of not more than If d, were approximately 15 mm, the readability error f0.5 percent. would not exceed 53.5 percent, and a resistance of the order of 7 x 1010 ohms would be measured with a maximum error of ~6 percent, A-1.2.2 Comparison Method Using a Wheatstone Bridge A-1.2.2.1 The test specimen is connected into one arm of a Wheatstone bridge as shown in Fig. 9. The three known arms shall be of as high a resistance as practicable, limited by the errors inherent in such resistors. Usually, the lowest resistance RR is used for convenient balance adjustment with either RS or RN being changed in decade steps. The detector shall be a de amplifier, with an input resistance high compared to any of these arms. A-1.2.2.2 The unknown resistance R, is calculated as follows :

R == RB - RN
RA

IS :2259-1963 where RA, RB and RN are as shown in Fig, 9. When arm A is a rheostat, its dial can be calibrated to read directly in megohms after multiplying by the factor RB RN which, for convenience, can be varied in decade steps. A-1.2.2.3 When the detector has adequate sensitivity, the maximum percentage error in the computed resistance is the sum of the percentage errors in the arms A, B and Jv. With a detector sensitivity of 1 mV per scale `division, 500 V applied to the bridge, and RN = lo9 ohms, a resistance of 500 x lOI ohms could be detected, assuming that the bridge were balanced to one scale division. Assuming negligible errors in RA and RB with RN = lo9 ohms known to within +2 percent, and with the bridge balanced to one detector scale division a resistance of 20 x 1tY2 ohms could be measured with a maximum error of &6 percent. A-2. REPRODUCIBILITY A-2.1 Because of the variability of the resistance of given specimen with test conditions, and because of non-uniformity of the same material from specimen to specimen, determinations are usually not reproducible to closer than 10 percent, and are often even more widely divergent ( a range values of 10 to 1 may be obtained under apparently identical conditions ). This condition is in contrast to the determination of the resistance of metallic conductors, which is one of the most precise of electrical measurements. A-3. INSULATION RESISTANCE OF MEASURING CIRCUIT

A-3.1 The insulation of the measuring circuit is composed of materials which at best, have properties comparable with those of the material under test. Errors in the measurement of the specimen may arise from : a) Shunting of the specimen resistance, reference resistors, or the current measuring device by insulations resistance of unknown, and possibly variable, magnitude. b) Stray currents from spurious external voltages which are unknown in magnitude and often sporadic in character. usually

A-3.2 An approximate correction of these difficulties may be obtained by making the insulation resistance of all parts of the circuit as high as possible under the conditions of use. A-3.3 To ensure satisfactory operation should be made with the high potential 18 of the equipment a measurement lead to the specimen disconnected.

IS : 2259 - 1963
Under this condition the equipment should indicate infinite resistance within its sensitivity. If suitable standard resistances of known values are available they may be used to test the operation of the equipment. A-4. FLUCTUATION OF VOLTAGE

A-4.1 Any fluctuations in applied voltage may result in charging and discharging currents being superimposed on the current which it is desired to measure. Therefore the voltage should be steady. A-5. TIME OF ELECTRIFICATION

A-5.1 When a potential is applied to a specimen the current through it decreases asymptotically ( except in rare cases ) towards a limiting value which is the conduction current and which may be as little as 0.01 of the current observed when the voltage has been applied for one minute. This decrease of current with time is due to dielectric absorption ( interfacial polarization, volume charge, etc ) and the sweep of mobile ions to the electrodes. A-5.2 Depending upon the characteristics of the specimen material, the time required for the current to decrease to within one percent of its final value may be from a few seconds to many hours. Thus in order to assure that measurements on a given material are comparable, it is necessary to specify the time of electrification. A-5.3 The conventional arbitrary time of electrification has been one minute. For some materials, misleading conclusions may be drawn from the test results obtained at this arbitrary time. A resistance-time curve should be obtained under the conditions of test for a given material as a basis for selection of suitable time of electrification which must be specified in the test method for a particular material for each condition of test (temperature, humidity, etc). A-5.4 Occasionally a material may be found for which the current increases with time. In this case special study should be made and arbitrary decisions as to time of electrification should be made, A-5.5 A specimen which has a volume charge, looses it gradually when its electrodes are connected together. The loss of this volume charge can be observed by measuring the current which flows when the specimen is connected directly across the current.measuring device. It should be established that the test specimen is completely discharged before attempting the first measurement, a repeat measurement or a measurement wi+ reversed voltage.

19

