( Reaffirmed 1998 )

Indian Standard

GUIDEFORTYPESOFMEASUREMENTSFOR STRUCTURESINRIVERVALLEYPR~JEKTSAND CRITBRIAFORCHOICEANDLOCATIONOF MEASURINGINSTRUMENTS
PART 1 FOR EARTH AND ROCKFILL DAMS (

First Revision )

UDC

627.824058

0 BJS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002 August 19% Price Group 3

Hydraulic

Structures

Instrumentation

Sectional Committee,

RVD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Increase in the height of structures study of the behaviour of structures of view of safety and knowledge commonly made either explicitly or and varied topographical conditions have focussed attention to the in the construction as well as operation stage, both from the point of behaviour pattern. In addition, various assumptions which are implicitly in the dam design need verification.

A number of these structures in India have been located in regions of seismic activity. Hence, there is a need to establish adequate instruments both in the structure as well as the foundation to evaluate and understand the influence of various parameters in the structural performance. Periodical and timely observations will provide the means of evaluating the behaviour of the structure and, if need be, take appropriate remedial measures on the basis of observed data. It is, therefore, imperative that adequate means should be established within the structure so that measurements of vital significance can be made and compared with design criteria. It is emphasized that field -measurements cannot eliminate all the uncertainties of earth and rockfill dam design, construction and operation and they are no substitute for proper understanding of the problems involved. This standard was first published in. 1974. A revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate certain changes found necessary. in the standard in the light of comments from the users, The major changes in this revision are inclustons m clmometers and choice of instruments to measure movements. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in actor_ dance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7436 ( Part 1) : 1993

Indian Standard

GUIDEFORTYPESOFMEASUREM[ENTSFOR STRUCTURESINRIVERVALLEYPROJECTSAND CRITERIAFORCHOKEAND LOCATIONOF MEASURINGINSTRUMENTS
PART 1 FOR EARTH AND ROCKFILL (
1 SCOPE

DAMS "

First Revision )

1.1 This standard covers the various types of measurcments nccdcd for monitoring the behaviour of earth and rockfill dams and provides guidelines for choice of instruments and their locations.
1.1.1 Generally the same type of instruments are suitable for earth and rockfill dams. For the latter, however, graded material is used between the rockfill and the instrument so that the instrument does not get damaged-by the rock pieces.

deformation of the upstream and downstream slopes under~the cycles of reservoir operation~may indicate the likely development of shear failure at weak points. 3.1.3 Seepage Measurement of seepage through and past a dam, may indicate erosion or blocking of downstream drains and reliefwclls, by increase ordecrease of seepage, respectively at constant reservoir conditions. Seepage and erosion along the lines ofpoorcompaction and through cracks in foundations and fills may specially be indicated by such measurements. 3.2 Straius
and Stresses

2 REF-ERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard : Title IS No. 4967 : 1968 4986 : 1983 Recommendations for seismic instrumentation for river valley projects Code of practice for installation of raingauge (non-recording type) and measurement of rain (first revision ) Spccificationforraingauge,non-recordill&

5225 : 1969 5235 : 1969 3 TYPES

Design analysis of earth and rockfill dams is based on radical simplifications of the stress pattern and the shape of the rupture planes. Stress measurements, therefore, require considerable judgement in interpretation. Accurate measurement of stress is difficult and distribution of stress in earth and rockfill dams is complex. Strains may be calculated from displacements or measured directly. 3.3 Dyuamic
Loads (Earthquakes)

Specification

for raingauge, recording
and Seepage

OF MEASUREMENTS
Movements

3.1 Pore Pressure,
3.1.1 Fore Pressure

Earthquake causes sudden dynamic loading and measurement of vibrations in dams located in areas subjected to seismicity is important for evolving design criteria for such conditions. 3.4 Other Measurements
3.4.1 Reservoir and Tail Wuter Level

The measurement of pore pressure is probably the most important and usual measurement to be made in the embankments. Their measurement enables the seepage pattern set up after impounding of reservoir to be known, the danger of erosion to be estimated, at least partially, and the danger of slides in the dam and abutments to be estimated if the relia~ble shear strength is known. Valuable informaLion about behaviour during construction and drawdown is obtained. 3.1.2 Movements Measurement of movements is as important as the measurement of pore pressures. Movements conforming to normal expectations are basic requirements of a stable dam. An accurate measurement of internal and external movements is of value in cohtrolling conStNdOll stability. The measurement of the plastic 1

Reservoir and tail water heads being one of the principal loading to which a structure is subjected, the measurement of reservoiraud tail water levels is essential for interpretation and realistic asscssmcnt of the structural behaviourofthereservoirrctainingstructure. 3.4.2 Wave Height Records of wave height data along with wind velocity and other pertinent data help in deciding free board requirements more realistically. 3.4.3 Rainfnll This measurement is necessary for interpretation of pore water pressure and seepage development in earth dams.

IS 7436 ( Par-t 1 ) :1993

3.4.4 Data A boat A4aterial Properties
The knowlectge of properties of materials which are relevant to the type of measurement are essential for interpretation of instrument observations. 4 PLANNIN{; INSTRIJMENTS SYSTEM 4.1 Careful attention should bc given to planning an instrumentation system to emure that required infor-

mation is obtained both during construction as well as
the life of the structure. The requirements of the system and the procedures to the used for analyzing the observations should be formula led in detail and selection of measuring devices and their location chosen to meet these requirements. 4.1.1 In genera 1, from the consideration of usefulness of data obtainilble, no instruments except for seepage, rainfall and rescrvoirwater levels are required for dams up to 30 m height. Although this li~i~itmay seem superfluous, lhe actual requi rcments "may be best guided by consideration of fou relation and constmction ma teria 1s, the imports nce of \he structure, design methods and criteria adopted. Provision of instruments for measuring pore pressures and movements should be provided fors[ructures having greater height. Provision of instruments [or measuring strain and stress and dynamic effects of earthquake may be made for a few selected cases where dam heights are more and adequate tra inect sta ff is available. An earth or rockfiIl dam with weak soi 1s in the foundation of embankment is to bc treated as a special case irrespective of its height and instruments should be provided to suit the observation requirements from the points of view of safety and collecting data for future similar designs.
during

5.1.1.1 Surface markers may be established on lines parallel to the centre line of the dam at 50 to 100 m centres. The lines may be at the edge of the top width of the dam, at the edge of berms or at suitable intervals along the slope, at the toe. of the dam and at 50 m and 100 m from toe if foundationsoil-is not firm. These may be provided both on upstream and downstream slopes excepting Ioeations on upstream slope which retnain throughout the year below Iake water. 5.1.2 Cross-Arm Installation It consists of telescopic steel easing to which are attached horizontal cross-arms at predetermined vertical intervals. As the soil settles, sections of casing are dragged down and these are thus relocated in their new positions by lowering down the casing a problem fitted with retractable claws which engage the bottom of each section in turn or by using an electrical probe. Crossarms are used in order to eliminate any possibility of the easing sections not settling along with the surrounding soil. 5.1.3 Hydraulic Device It is made from two 50-nun diameter brass pipe nipples soldered to a common diaphragm. Pipe caps are secured at both ends of the assembly which is then mounted vertically on a steel base plate for a nchorage in the embankment. The diaphragm separates the upper (air) chamberfrom the lower (overflow) chamber and encloses a plastic float valve which prevents water from entering the air chamber during flushing of the lower chamber. Three 8-n~m outer diameter plastic tubes are embedded in trenches which are exeavated to maintain continuous downward slopes to the instrument terminal. The instrument terminal is equipped with a pump, air compressor and high precision pres-

4.1.2 Where dam Icngtks are more and foundation strata varies along the length, location of instruments at two or three sertiom should bc considered. 4.1.3 Mcasuri ng instruments for pore water pressures
a ad movemenLs should be installed in close proximity so that a nalysis and interpretation of dam is meaningful. 4.1.4 Suitable access should preferably be available

sure gauges.
5.1.4 Geonor Probe It consists of a three-pronged tip connected to a double rod which is lowered down a bore hole or driven in soft ground to desired depth. When the outer rod is held and the inner rod driven with hammer, the three prongs are forecd out in the surrounding soil. The outer rod is then uncovered from, the tip and withdrawn a few ecntimetres. The top of the inner rod, which remains in contact with the anchored tip is used as a reference point to measure the settlement of the tip. This device is particularly well suited for measuring settlements of soft foundations under-low embankments. 5.1.5 Foundation Settlement Measuring Device It is a base plate placed on the foundation line with a vertical column of steel tubings. The position of the base plate is determined by a surrounding device lowered from the top open end of the steel tubings. 5.1.6 Magnetic Probe Extensometer This system consists of a magnetfleed switch probe of approximately 15 mm diameter connected to an indicator with a marker connecting cable. Magnetic ring markers with stainless steel spring parts are installed over a series of PVC access pipes of 33 mm outer diameter and 27 mm inner diameter jointed together.
.

for taking measurements throughout the year. 4.2 In..tallati(ln of instruments should be made under constant surveillance of a qualified responsible individual. 4.3 Instruments should be destruction by construction 5
~ui]

rded against damage operations.

or

INSTRIJMENTS MOVEMINT

FOR MEASUIUNG

5.1 Vertical Movement Gauges 5.1.1 Surjilcc Markers Surface marker points consist of steel bars which are driven vertically into the embankment or the ground a ad e mbcddcd in concrete. A reference base Iine is established ONa firm ground outside the area of movement due to reservoir and embankment load. Position of surface stil kcs or markers fixed on the embankment
are determi ncd by survey with referenee measures ho rizo nta I movcm ents atso. to this line. It

IS 7436 ( I'illt
The probes whcu lnwcrcd through the access pipe will give iudications in the indicator where the magnet ularker rings arc located. When seltling takes place~thc u\arkcr riags will IUOVC with Ihc soil aud the l&h positions nl' the marker rings indicate' the anmunt of

1 ) : 1993

HorizoutaI strains in the range of 0.1 to 0.3 pcrceut cause cracking in earth dams. Therefore, horizontal strain need to be measured near Ihc abutments by providing soil exlcnsninetcrs lo dclccl tcnsinn znncs.
Soil cxteusouletcrs consist ol'lwo l>laIeanchors welded to two slaiuless steel rods protected by telescoping tubes. The strain measuringdevicc tnauntcd on the rods inay bc bonded resistance strain gauge, vibrating wire strain gauge or potentiometer and is electrically conucctcd to a rtmote readout. Soil extensonletcr should be provided in two groups near Ihc lop of dam on each abutnml only up IO quarter Icngth of Ihc dam from the abutn~ent~both in core as well as shell zones.

se~tlc~ncnlswiIh respect IO earlier logged yosilion. 5.1.7 ltlduction Coil Type Extcnsorndcrs This induction coil type exIcnsometers consist of an cIc`c'Iric;tIprobe made of PVC and having~a diameter of 35 uuu or 43 IIII~ which houses a primary electrical exit. The probe is conuccted to an indicator electrical caldr. Indicator has a volt/anunetcr to measure Ihc voliagc/currcut incrcasc when the primary coil enters a secondary coil, when there is a steel marker ring or pla~c, it will indicale a curreut/volIage which could bc mid Illrough lhc indicator. Scrics of marker rings inslallcd over a corrugalcd PVC pipe iitstallcd over a PVC access ~ubcs or inrlinou~etcr tube should help rnouitoriug lhc scltlculcul.

This

i nsIall;rIiou

is similar

tn thaI described iu 4.1.2 but

fixed at dil'lcsrcnt sections Ihcrc arc Iwo VcrlicaI plates at lhc same level placed at a c*rri;liu disk1IICC al)art. The relative .horizontaI IIIOVCn~enls bclwcen Ihe two cross-arm are measured by
Iriitisnlilling Ihc siiulc by ulcilns

instead of cross-arm

install, but its maintcnanrc isvery dill`irult asslush may cuter the pipe and render Ihc device inopcrativc. FurIhrr Ihc use of the asseulbly appears to Ix: limited to dalIIs of low IO nlcdiuul height~becausc wiIh iucrcasiug height IIIC asscnlbly tuay unt remain in pluu~b and observations by torpedo luay bccomc difficult. Alternalivcly, the hydraulic device can bc used fnr high daIus. Whcrc snli fouudatious are ~ICI wiIh, USC of Geonor prnbc is recmmcndcd. Fnr the nmsurcment
0l'horiz0lllill n~oVcnlcnls, lhc incliiinn~clcr is a superior i~~cta1laIinn as it gives inl?muatinn ol'hnriznnIa1 movcmcut along its cnu~plctc IcngIh aud the position of

The cross-am insIallation for vertical n~ovcn~cn~s has hreu a slaudard practice, it being eilSic?r to fabricate and

of a

Cable In a pilir 01

(`oulllrrwrigllls,

which IIIOVC:vcrlic.ilIly'itl the

tubing. A

solllldilrg probe silnililr

10 Illill

UScd ill IIu)iISWCIIlCIll Of

vcrIica1 lll~~vc'lIlcl11 il~S~illli~liOl~ delcmincs of~ihe ~~~~~~Icr-wci~l~Is. 5.2.2

Ihc posilim

slidingsurf;acc niay bc, Ihcrelhre, dclcrniincd accuralcly. Further with the prnvisinn of telcscopiug coupling, nlclal rings at lhc cuds of sections and inctal discs lo surrnuud the tubing, vertical ~novc~~~cn~s ulay be a Iso nlcasurcd at a little extra cost. The fabricatinu and
illsI;lllaIinu, hnwcvcr, requires precision and the insIruurcrrt is njurh costlier Ihau the cross-am arrangcnlcnt. Howcvcr au allcruatc dcvire which is l:asy li)r inslallalieu and nbscrvatinn is bascd~on Ihc principle drscribcd in 5.2.2. 5.4 (Xoire

Itic~liiiot,li,ter.s
iIilCilORXl to

Pl;lsIic or ;lluulilCuu1 Iuhing is placed vertically in the
iIau1 will1 ils I~ollonl sir;lIurrl. The iuclirlatiou

sl'nsilivc clcclriciil in~linon~cIcr, s1i.p by slrp, sliirting froni the 1~0l101i1 of the lubiug. tlorizonlal niovcnicuts arc ~~~nil~iilrd by inlrgraling lhc ii~ovcrncnls slarliug from the IX~IIOIII, OII the basis ofchangs in Ihe inclinalion. Vc.rticill l\\oVClIJCIIIS 1lMy i\lSO 1X Illei~SUrCXlby
using lclcscoping c7)ul)lings li)r coiirlecliug the sections 01' tlic tulGiigs ;ind iioliug Ihc positions of llic rids 0C c*ilCh scclion by ii llll~~hill1iC;lI l;~lchillg ilcvicc, or if IllClillrings are cllllXddcd ia the cud portions Of I'lilSliC luh ttg, by il II clcclroiwigttelic device. Ebcll srcliott of lubiiig is illllk~rd I0 Ihc surrnuuding soil nliiss by

of Ihe tubing

firm unyicldiug is measured by a

of IA)~ilti~~tl of Instrunwllts

to Measure

Movements The iustallaliou
should IX at critical. lnrati~~~s where dcsigncorlsidcriltions show weak ZOIICS.Soft Clays aud fissured clay in the limudation are parlicularly susccptiblc IO long Irrut INO~CIIXIIIS and uccda careCu watch. By llleatls or surf;lcc surveys it III;IY 1~ pnssiblc to locate arcas in which Irnsinn of' coullmssinn is drvclopiug, cspc~ially in earth dams, which tuay help in Jocaliug incipiciil slope instability. While locating a IIIOVCIIICIIIdcvicc, it shouid Ix: kept iu view~Ih;lt maxiIIIIII~ horizonlat IIIOVCIIICIIIS gcncrally occur at midSIO~CSand ulaxiuluuI vcrIicaI umvculcuts occur at ulid hcighl OClhe structure. 6 I'IE%OMET'I`EKS

I`isiug Ilaugcs or collars to the tubing. Altcrnativcly, whcii ii11clcl~lr0ltlilgl~~li~ sounding device is usrd, the plastic IulGug psscs Ihrnugh clfcircling metal discs
which
UK

arc I'm

lo IIIoVc

iIlOl\g

with the

IXrth

IllaSS ad

position of thcsr discs are detcmined by Ihc device.

5.2.3 HtrrizonIaI IIIOVCIIICIIIS may also bc mcasurrd by runniug aII clccIrolll;lgllctic. probe Ihrough Iclcscoping l~lasti~ Iubing laid horizouIally across the Daneaxis. 5.2.4 III nlcdiuu~ and high dams tension cracking call occur near Ihc abutnICllIs in Ihc core as well as shell mncs ilS il result of diffcrcnlial scltlemcnt and surllrce irrcgulariiics iu the abuln~~~t prolilc. Shaq) SIO~CS tllily aIs0 c.ouIribuIc IO tramverse crackiug in the core. 3

6.1 Picmwtrls 6.1.1.1 This

conunonly used an: given in 6.1.1 to6.IA

6.1 .l Porous 7ipf Tdw Picwrneter
is a steel or PVC pipe 10 to 40 nun in diauleter placed vertically duriug conslrurtiou or in a borehole alirr construction. A pornus clrmcnt is Gxcd al IIIC bo~~orn ol' the pip or ahcruaiivcly, the lower

IS 7436 (Part

1) : 1993

portion is perfora~cd, and soil prevented

from entering the pipe by surrounding the perforated portion by brass wire mesh and a gunny bag filled with filter material. With increase or decrease of pore water pressure in the soil near the perforated portion, water level rises or drops in the pipe and this level is fioted by as electrical sounding device or a bell sounder. 6.1.1.2 The piezometer consisting of PVC vertical pipe 12 to 15 mm outer diameter extending above ground or embankment surface with carborandutialundum porous tube tip having 37 mm outer diameter and length 30 to 60 cm at the measuring point is known as porous tube type piezometer. It is free frqm electrolytic action and attack by chemicals in water.or soil. It has also less response time compared to ordinary stand pipe piezometer with bottom end open or with perforated bottom section.
6.1.2 Closed System Hydraulic Piezometer

lead to .more time lag. Installation of twin-tube hydraulic piezometers has been a standard practice. Factors considered in its favour include relalive economy and availability of materials and ease of installation. But presence of air-bubbles in the tubing which may become difficult to remove is one of the disadvantages. Electrical piezometers have instantaneous response and are available indigenously. A final choice regarding selection will be best judged upon the accuracy of results required, the importance of such records, and the cost involved. 6.3 Choice of Location for Installation of Piezometer Pore water pressures indicate whether the various zones in an earth/rockfill dab are functioning properly. These also indicate th? effectiveness of the seepage barrier provided in case of pervious foundations, the effectiveness of chimney filters and horizontal drains provided in the upstream embankment in case of earth dams, etc. As such the piezometers are required to be located at critical ~points of a cross-section and locations. Typical installation arrangements are shown in Fig. 1. Structures made up of inferior materials or resting on soft, slow draining foundations should have adequate number of piezometers. Piezometets located in the upstream and downstream of the filter and upstream and downstream side of the under seepage barriers casing of not freely draining materials would indicate drawdown pore pressures, and those in the downstream casing would give information about seepage conditions. 7 INSTRIJMENTS FOR MEASURING SEEPAGE 7.1 Rectangular or V-notches are fixed at suitable points on the main collecting drains to measure the seepage water. There should be a clear fall over the notch and-the approach velocity should be reduced as far as practicable. The head ofwater is measured by the graduations on the~notchand the discharge is calculated by using appropriate formula. 8 INSTRUMENTS
PRESSURE 8.1 Earth Pressure Cells FOR MEASURING EARTH

it consists of a porous element which is connected by two plastic tubes to pressure gauges located in a terminal house or terminal well. The terminal house or well contains pumping and vacuum equipment, an air trap and a supply of de-aired water besides pressure gauges. Use oftwo plastic tube makes possible,circulation of water through the porous element to de-air the system. The pore-water pressure is noted by means of gauges. 6.1.2.1 There are two types oftips. The foundation type can by installed in a bore hole. The embankment type is rcquircd to be placed during construction. 6.1.3 Electrical Piezometers Electrical piezometer consists of. a tip having a diaphragm which is deflected by the pore water pressure against one face. The deflection of the diaphragm is measured by a suitable strain gauge which may be suilably calibrated to read pore water pressure. The str;lin gauge is either electrical resistance (unbonded strain gauge) type or vibrating wire type. 6.1.4 Pneumcrtic Piezometers In the pneumatic piezometers, the diaphragm deflection due to pore water pressure is balanced by a known air/gas pressure and recorded at the outside indicator end using pneumatic pressure gauges or pressure transducers. 6.2 Choice l'ressutx
of Instruments to Measure Pore Water

6.2.1 Piezometer observations are of prime importance and are to be continued over an extended period of time. It is, therefore, imperative that limitations will be imposed as to the selection of particular instruments because of its reliability and durability. Other factors that influence the selection are time lag and sensitivity. The significance of time lag depends to a considerable extent on the nature of the anticipated fluctuations of pore pressure.

6.2.2 Stand pipes, though durable and reliable, are not generally used for measuring pore pressures during construction, there being no water flow. Installation of a stand pipe in impervious or semi-pervious soils will 4

The usual instrument to measure earth pressure is the earth pressure cell. It uses a stiff diaphragm on which the earth pressure acts. The action is transmitted through an equalizing, confined, incompressible fluid (Mercury) on to a second pressure responsive element, the deflection of which is proportional to the earth pressure acting. The deflection is transformed into an electrical signal by a resistance wire (unbonded strain gauge) or vibrating wire strain gauge and transmitted through a cable embedded in the earth work tb a receiver unit on the surface. The measure of the electrical signal indirectly indicates the earth pressure by appropriate calibration. 8.1.1 The earth pressure cell may be designed to measure effective or total earth pressure or both. When it measures total earth pressures only, piezometers should be placed by their side to measure pore pressure which when deducted from the total earth pressure to

IS 7436 ( Part 1) : 1993 give effective earth pressure. For observations of a retaining wall, when it is intended to note the change in the coefficient of earth pressure, clinometers should be fixed to the wall near the earth pressure cell to measure ita tilting. 9 INSTRUMENTS FOR MEASURINGEFFECTS OFDYNAMIC LOADS DUE TO EARTHQUAKES 9.1 These measurements are made by installing seismographs, adcelerographs and structural response recorders in accordance with IS 4967 : 1968. 10 INSTRUMEN'IX FOR MEASURING RESERVOIR A-`YDTAIL WATER LEVELS 10.1 Hydrostatic pressure is exerted on a dam by lake water and tail water. Headwater and tail water levels are observed daily by means of gauges (scales) fixed on the dam, at locations conveniently visible. Where the hourly rate of variation of water level is rapid and this information is important for interpretation of~observations, automatic continuous water level recorder should be fixed in shafts suitably located. 11 INSTRUMENTS HEIGHTS FOR MEASURING WAVE

11.1 Automatic wave height recorders are installed to measure wave heights. One type of this instrument provides an electriccircuit, which is completed by lake water. The change in level of lake water due to wave, causes change in resistance/capacitance of the circuit which is automatically recorded by a recorder. Suitable calibration of change in resistance/capacitance in terms of change in water level gives the desired observation. The installation of such recorders will be required only for those reservoirs with long fetch which is likely to experience high velocity winds. 12 INSTRUMENTS RAINFALL FOR MEASURING

12.1 Measurement of rainfall at the dam site is made by installing a raingauge (see IS 4986 : 1983, IS 5225: 1969 and IS 5235 : 1969). /AXIS OF DAM

l

l

0

0

0

.I"

0

0

TERMINAL `WELL'

1A Homogeneous

Dam

16 High Dam (117 m
LcsMdr 10 Foundation Piezometer lip 0 Embankment Piezometet Tip 0 Q) Q)

Height)

Impervious Relatively Pervious Pitching

FIG.1 TYPICAL STATIONS SHOWINGPIEZLMEER INSTKLLNIONS

5

IS7436(Part1):1993 13 DATA ABOUT MATERIAL PROPERTIES 13.1 Properties of soilsnear the instruments should be determined while they are being installed. Grain size distribution, specific gravity and consistency limit tests should be carried out for soils near all types of instruments. Average field density and water content of soil layer in which the instrument is installed should also be noted. In case of instruments for observations of movements, consolidation tests should be done. When measurement of construction pore pressures is contemplated, laboratory construction pore pressure tests should be carried out. Permeability of compacted soils near piezometers should Abe determined. If assumptions made during stability analysis are to be verified; appropriate shear tests should be done. For earth pressure measurements, laboratory test should be run to determine the coefficient of earth pressure tit rest or according to anticipated stress paths.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau af Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BXS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the, Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when &uch review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions' Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference1 Dot : No. RVD 16 ( 81 )

Amendments Issued Since .Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

._

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices 8 Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 37 84 99, i 37 8626, 53 38 43,
I 53 23 84

37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

235 02 16,
I 235 15 19,

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

632 92 95, 632 78 91,

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHUBANESHWAR. CGIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. KANPUR. JAIPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at New India PriPtinp Pmr. Uurie. ~n,ua

