NAT AWA IS 16233 : 2022 
Indian Standard ( Superseding IS 4383 ) 


Utd ate Vast eNA — aah 
ARa — fates 


Ships and Marine Technology — 
Pilot Ladders — Specification 


ICS 47.020.50 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 5 


Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TED 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Shipbuilding 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This standard is intended to supplement existing Indian Government ‘Merchant Shipping (Pilot Ladder) Rules, 
1967 requirements for pilot ladders. Since Merchant Shipping (MS) Rules do not include specific requirements 
for prototype testing of pilot ladders for approval, the tests included in this standard are in addition to the existing 
merchant shipping requirements. The inclusion of these tests was considered necessary in order to provide a means 
of ensuring conformance of pilot ladders with the performance requirements prescribed in Merchant Shipping 
Rules and in this Indian Standard. 


This standard covers all the requirements as given in IS 4383 : 1983 ‘Specification for pilot and embarkation 
ladders’ which has since been withdrawn. This standard covers only pilot ladders. Embarkation ladder is covered 
in IS 16324 : 2015 ‘Ships and marine technology embarkation ladders — Specification’. 


In the formulation of this standard considerable assistance have been taken from ISO 799 : 2004 ‘Ships and 
marine technology — Pilot ladder’, issued by International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 16233 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


SHIPS AND MARINE TECHNOLOGY — PILOT 
LADDERS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies requirements for a ship’s pilot 
ladder which is provided to enable a 


maritime pilot to embark and disembark a ship safely 
along a vertical portion of the ship’s hull. It is applicable 
to merchant ships which embark and disembark 
maritime pilots with the ship underway. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which, 
through references in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS/ISO No. Title 

1084 : 2005 Manila ropes — Specification 
(fifth revision) 

2629 : 1985 Recommended practice for 
hot-dip galvanizing of iron and 
steel (first revision) 

6911 : 2017 Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip — Specification 
(second revision) 

ISO 209 : 2007 Aluminium and aluminium 


alloys — Chemical composition 


ISO 877-2 : 2009 Plastics — Methods of exposure 
to solar radiation: Part 2 Direct 
weathering and exposure behind 


window glass 


3 MATERIALS 


3.1 Wooden Parts 

Each wooden part shall be made of hardwood (ash, oak, 
elm, beech or teak) free from knots. 

3.2 Side Ropes 


3.2.1 Each side rope shall be manila rope as per 
IS 1084 Grade | or a spun thermoset polyster rope with 
a polypropylene core of a colour that contrasts with the 


spun polyester. Each side rope shall have a breaking 
strength of at least 24.40 kN and a nominal diameter of 
18 mm (57.1 mm circumference). 


3.2.2 Alternative side ropes of synthetic material may 
be used if they: 


a) meet the breaking strength and size requirements 
of 3.2.1; 


b) are at least as resistant to elongation under load as 
the standard ropes described in 3.2.1; 


c) have an exterior surface suitable for grasping with 
bare hands similar to manila or spun polyester; 


d) are ofathermoset polymer resistant to deterioration 
form ultraviolet light; and 


e) provide a visual indication of excessive wear, 
similar to the spun _ polyester/polypropylene 
construction described in 3.2.1. 


3.3 Metallic Materials 


3.3.1 Each metal fastener shall be made of material 
which is inherently corrosion resistant or treated to be 
corrosion resistant. 


3.3.2 Each ferrous metal part which is not stainless 
steel shall be coated in accordance with IS 2629. 


3.3.3 Each stainless steel part shall be of a marine grade 
alloy with a corrosion resistance at least equal to grade 
X 04Cr17Ni12Mo2 as per IS 6911. 


3.3.4 Each aluminium part shall be grade containing 
not more than 0.06 percent copper in accordance with 
ISO 209. 


3.3.5 Metals in contact with each other shall be 
galvanically compatible, or insulated to prevent 
galvanic corrosion in a marine environment. 


3.4 Mechanical Fastening Devices 


Each mechanical fastening device securing a part of 
a ladder shall have locking mechanism to prevent the 
device from loosening. 


3.5 Plastic Materials 


Each plastic material shall be of a type that retains at 
least 30 percent of its original tensile strength and at 
least 80 percent of its original impact strength when 
subjected to the one-year outdoor weathering test 
described in Method A of ISO 877-2. 


IS 16233 : 2022 


3.6 Quality of Materials 4.6 Unless a special arrangement is needed to secure 
the ladder to an accommodation ladder or other custom 
installation, the ends of the side ropes shall be finished 
as follows: 


Each part of a ladder shall be free of splinters, burrs, 
sharp edges, corners, projections, or other defects that 
could injure a person, using the ladder. 

a) The two side ropes should each consist of 


3.7 Rope Seizing one continuous length of rope, the midpoint 


Seizing if used, shall consist of two or three ply marline half-length being located on a thimble large enough 
of minimum breaking strength 800 N or other suitable to accommodate at least two passes of side rope. 
material of equivalent strength. b) The side ropes shall not have fittings or form loops 


at the bottom of the ladder that can be used to 


4 CONSTRUCTION attach additional ladder sections or tripping lines. 


4.1 Pilot ladders length should be equal to length from c) The ends of each side rope which do not terminate 
the deck to the waterline in lightest sea-going condition in a splice or fitting shall be served or otherwise 
with trim of normal condition and an adverse list of 15°. treated to prevent fraying. 


4.2 Pilot ladder to be clear from any possible discharge 47 Each side rope shall pass through a hole in each 
of the ship. It should be within the parallel body length step. If the hole is in the form of a slot, the slot shall 


of the ship within the midship half length of the ship. Pe in the longer edges of the steps. The centre of each 
hole shall be at least 50 mm from the end of the step. 


4.3 Whenever the distance from the sea level to the Alternative arrangements are shown in Fig. 1. 
point of access to the ship exceeds 9 m, access from 
the pilot ladder to the ship shall be by means of an 
accommodation ladder or other suitably safe or equally 
convenient means. 


4.8 Each pair of side ropes shall be secured together 
both above and below each step with a mechanical 
clamping device or seizing method which holds each 
step level when the ladder is hanging freely. Alternative 
4.4 Each ladder shall have two side ropes on each side. arrangements are shown in Fig. 2. 

Each step in the ladder shall be supported by each side 


rope. 4.9 If a mechanical clamping device is used to secure 


the side ropes and hold the step in place, the device 
4.5 The side ropes shall: shall not extend above or below the step surfaces by 
more than a distance equal to 0.7 x W (where W is the 
width of the step), so that the step is not prevented from 


: . rolling if caught between a boat and the hull of the ship 
b) not be painted or otherwise coated or covered. (see Fig. 2). 


a) be continuous from the top of the ladder to the 
bottom; and 


Key 


1 Grooved patterned or textured non-skid surface area 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL LADDER STEP SHOWING ALTERNATIVE HOLE AND SLOT DESIGNS FOR SIDE ROPES 


| TSS 


ABBAASBAAeearnay ff 


aw if 


|] [RASSSSSSSSSSS 


TSS SSS SSS | | | 


| ESS SSS 


aaa f 
SSS | 


Key 
1 rope seizing (typical) 
2 step fixture 
3 typical value 


330420 


IS 16233 : 2022 


a 


nh DEAE DAE EE” 
GRR BESESA EES 


sy 


ES 
S 


Q 


aE DEERE EET 
' BEREREREBREEE™S. 


FIG. 2 ALTERNATIVE LADDER CONSTRUCTION USING MECHANICAL CLAMPS (LEFT) 
AND SEIZINGS AND STEP FIXTURES (RIGHT) 


4.10 If a seizing method is used to secure steps and 
side ropes, a step fixture shall be used above and below 
the step. The step fixture shall be designed to lead 
and support the side ropes from the step to the point 
above or below the step where the side ropes are seized 
together. The step fixture shall be designed so that it 
stays in place when the ladder is rolled or the step is 
turned. 


4.11 The clear space between the side ropes on one side 
of the ladder and those on the other side shall be at least 


480 mm. This distance shall be uniform throughout the 
length of the ladder (see Fig. 1). 


4.12 Each side rope shall be arranged so that when the 
ladder is in use along the vertical hull of a ship, the side 
rope cannot come in contact with the ship’s side. 


4.13 The spacing from the top of one step to the top of 
the next step shall be 330 + 20 mm and shall be uniform 
throughout the length of the ladder (see Fig. 2). 


IS 16233 : 2022 


4.14 Each step shall be of one piece construction of 
either wood or resilient plastic or rubber material 
complying with the applicable requirements of 3. 


4.15 The top face of each step shall have a rectangular 
surface that is at least 115 mm wide with a surface 
that is grooved or patterned or of a textured non-skid 
type. The step surface shall be designed so that it does 
not retain water. A textured non-skid surface shall be 
moulded into the step or adhered directly to it. Non- 
skid adhesive sheeting may not be used (see Fig. 1). 


4.16 Each step shall be at least 25 mm thick at its 
thinnest point. In determining this thickness the depth 
of groves in the top face of the step, the diameter of any 
hole extending from one side of the step to the other, 
and the thickness of any non-skid treatment shall not be 
included (see Fig. 1). 


4.17 Each step shall be arranged so that it can bear on 
the vertical hull of the ship when the ladder is in use. 


4.18 The manufacturer shall offer replacement steps, 
including replacement spreader steps for the ladder 
that can replace a removed step without the need for 
unstringing and restringing the ladder. Replacement 
steps shall meet all of the requirements in this Indian 
Standard for steps and each step shall be supplied with 
all parts necessary to install the step in the ladder. 


4.19 Each pilot ladder shall be capable of being rolled 
up for storage. Each ladder shall be capable of unrolling 
freely and hanging vertically. 


4.20 The four lowest steps of the ladder shall be made 
of resilient synthetic or rubber material. The rest of 
the ladder steps may be of either wood or synthetic 
material. 


4.21 Each pilot ladder with more than five steps shall 
have one or more spreader steps at the positions 
indicated in Table 1. 


4.22 Each spreader step shall meet the requirements for 


other ladder steps, except that each spreader step shall 
be at least 1.8 m long. (see Fig. 3). 


4.23 The following shall be available on board: 

a) Two properly secured man ropes of adequate 
strength and not less than 62.5 mm in circumference 
each. 

b) Safety line ready for use whenever required. 

c) Handholds to enable the pilot to pass safety and 
conveniently from the head of the ladder into the 
ship or on to the ship deck. 

d) Light capable of shining alongside the ship so as 
to illuminate the ladder effectively at night and 


adequate lighting arrangements on the deck at the 
position where the pilot would board the ship. 


Table 1 Number of Steps and Relative Positions of 
Spreaders 


( Clause 4.21 ) 


SINo. Number of Steps Position(s) of Spreader Step(s) 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 6 5 
ii) 7 5 
iii) 8 5 
iv) 9 5 
v) 10 5 
vi) 11 5 
vii) 12 5 
viii) 13 5 
ix) 14 5,12 
x) 15 5, 13 
xi) 16 5, 14 
xii) 17 5, 14 
xiii) 18 5,14 
xiv) 19 5,14 
xv) 20 5,14 
xvi) 21 5,14 

xvii) 22 5,14 

xviii) 23 5, 14,21 
xix) 24 5, 14, 22 
Xx) 25 5, 14, 23 
xxi) 26 5, 14, 23 

xxii) 27 5, 14, 23 

xxiii) 28 5, 14, 23 

xxiv) 29 5, 14,23 

XXV) 30 5, 14, 23 


NOTE — Spreader step positions are determined by the step 
number counted from the bottom of the ladder. 


5 TESTING FOR APPROVAL 


Before approval of a ladder design by maritime safety 
administration as complying with this Indian Standard a 
prototype ladder and its components shall be subjected 
to the tests and meet the criteria specified in Table 2. A 
fully assembled ladder shall be used in the tests. Any 
step or other part of the ladder which is permanently 
deformed as a result of testing shall not be used in a 
ladder which is placed in service. 


v 


KS 
POO) 
$9525 25252555 SS 


+ 
DON 


KLL LL LLS S2 


OO 


CA PRAAAASASY 
RK RK 


x2 


IS 16233 : 2022 


Fic. 3 PILOT LADDER SPREADER STEP 


Table 2 Prototype Tests 
( Clause 5 ) 
SI No. Test Item to be Tested Test Procedure Acceptance Criteria 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Visual Fully assembled ladder Compare to construction The ladder shall comply with the 
examination requirements in 4 and the construction requirements in 4 
manufacturer’s drawings and be constructed in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s 

drawings. 

ii) Step flexibility Six steps, which shall include at least Place each steps on a pair of a) Deflection at the centre of 
one of each different type, including supports located where the side the step shall not exceed 
replacement steps and replacement ropes would normally pass 25 mm under load. 
spreader steps, if different from through the step. Apply a static b) There shall be no residual 
steps used in the ladder’s original load uniformly for a period of at deflection after the load is 
construction. least 1 min over a 100 mmi wide removed and the step is 

contact area at the centre of the allowed to recover 
step. The load shall be 3.0 kN 
except that the load shall be 1.4 kN 
for a step limited to use as one of 
the four lowest steps in the ladder 
iii) Step friction a) One step of each different a) Set the reference step in The angles at which the block 


material of construction and 
step surface design 


b) One reference step constructed 
of clean oak, 115 mm wide and 
480 mm long 


c) The step surface shall have 
grooves 3 mm wide, 3 mm 
deep, and 15 mm apart. The 
groves shall run parallel to each 
other and parallel to the long 
edge of the step 


d) One metal block of a mass 
between 1.5 kg and 3.0 kg. The 
metal block shall have a flat 
surface no more than 100 mm 
wide x 135 mm long. The flat 


surface shall have leather or 


composition shoe-sole material 
attached to it. 


a level position. Place the 
metal block at the centre 
of the stepping surface on 
the reference step with the 
shoe-sole material resting 
on the stepping surface of 
the reference step and with 
the longer edge of the metal 
block running across the 
reference step over both 
edges. Slowly raise one 
edge of the step with the 
metal block on it. Measure 
the angle at which the block 
begins to slide 


b) Repeat the procedure with 
the standard reference step 
and the block under water 


Cc 


NST) 


Repeat the procedure in 
both dry and wet conditions 
using each different ladder 
step 


begins to slide on the dry and 
wet pilot ladder step shall be 
greater than or equal to the 
corresponding angles measured 
for the standard reference step 


IS 16233 : 2022 


Table 2 ( Concluded) 
SI No. Test Item to be Tested Test Procedure Acceptance Criteria 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
iv) Step surface a) One step of each different a) Secure the step in a The angles at which the block 
durability material of construction and horizontal position with the begins to slide on the dry and 
step surface design loaded block resting on it. wet pilot ladder step shall be 
b) A metal block of the type Move the block back and greater than or equal to the 
described under the step forth from one end of the corresponding angles measured 
friction test arranged to enable step surface to the other and for the standard reference step 
a vertical load of 380 N to be back in the same line for a 
applied to it as it slides back total of 1 500 cycles. 
and forth over the step under b) Repeat the step friction test 
test on the worn step in both dry 
and wet conditions making 
sure the sliding block is 
resting completely on the 
worn surface of the step. 
v) Ladder and Fully assembled ladder of longest Suspend the ladder vertically a) Steps shall not break or 
step attachment length to be approved hanging to its full length, or extend crack. 
strength the ladder to its full length on a b) Attachments between any 
horizontal surface with the top step and a side rope shall 
end of the ladder secured using its not loosen‘or break: 
own attachments. Apply a static . : 
load of 8.8 KN widely distributed ©) Side ropes shall not sustain 
over the bottom step for a period any observable damage, 
of at least 1 min, so that the load elongation, or deformation 
is applied evenly between the side that Temes after the test 
ropes through the step attachment load is removed 
fittings. Repeat the procedure at 
five different steps except that the 
ladder is not required to be hanging 
at full length and only the step 
under test its side rope attachments 
and the side ropes immediately 
above the step attachment fittings 
are required to be subjected to the 
load. 
vi) Unrolling Fully assembled ladder of longest Attach the rolled-up ladder to a) The steps and attachments 
length to be approved anchoring fixtures in a place away shall not be cracked, 
from any wall or structure that broken, or loosened 
would prevent it from falling freely b) The ladder shall not 
and where it can hang vertically. sustain damage that would 
Allow the ladder to unroll freely make it unsafe to use 
6 DESIGNATION by reference to this Indian Standard. 


6.1 Ladders conforming to this standard shall be 
designated by the following indications, in the order 
given: 
a) Pilot ladder IS 16233; 
b) ‘S ’ followed by the number of steps (see Table 1); 
and 
c) ‘L followed by the length, in metre. 


Example : The designation for a 5 m pilot ladder consisting of 
15 steps, conforming to this Indian Standard is: 


‘Pilot ladder IS 16233 — S15 - L5’ 


6.2 Spare or additional components for ladders 
conforming to this Indian Standard shall be designated 


Example : The designation of a replacement step for a ladder 


conforming to this standard 


‘Step IS 16233” 


7 MARKING 


7.1 The bottom of at least two steps of the ladder shall 


be marked with: 


a) the name and address of the manufacturer; 


b) the manufacturer’s model designation; 
c) IS 16233 and ‘SOLAS’; 
d) the year of assembly or reassembly of the 


ladder; 


e) identification of the approving maritime 
safety administration, along with any approval 
indications required by that administration; 
and 


f) where used, identification of a recognized 
organization acting on behalf of the maritime 
safety administration. 


7.2 The bottom of each replacement step shall be 
marked with: 


a) the name and address of the manufacturer; 

b) the manufacturer’s model designation; 

c) the words ‘REPLACEMENT STEP ONLY’; 

d) IS 16233 and ‘SOLAS’; 

e) the year of production of the step; 

f) identification of the approving maritime 
safety administration, along with any approval 
indications required by that administration; 
and 

g) where used, identification of a recognized 


organization acting on behalf of the maritime 
safety administration. 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


IS 16233 : 2022 


8 PRODUCTION TESTS AND EXAMINATION 


Production tests and examinations of pilot ladders 
approved as conforming to this standard should be 
carried out as described in Annex A. 


9 MAINTENANCE 


9.1 Damaged steps shall be replaced with replacement 
steps meeting the requirements of 4.15 and of the type 
supplied or specified by the ladder manufacturer. A 
ladder shall not include more than two replacement 
steps. 


9.2 If a ladder requires a third replacement step, it shall 
be rebuilt. A ladder constructed with spun polyester 
side ropes, with the inner core showing at any place 
throughout the length of the ladder is no longer 
serviceable. Such ladders shall be rebuilt according 
to the original manufacturer’s standard, using new 
side ropes and using undamaged steps in place of all 
damaged steps and replacement steps. 


9.3 Each ladder shall be subjected to the ladder and step 
attachment strength test in Table 2 at approximately 
30 month intervals. Each ladder which fails the test 
shall be rebuilt according to 9.2, or scrapped. The 
ladder shall be stamped or tagged near the bottom of 
the ladder with the date of the test and the identification 
of the person or company performing the test. The 
person or company performing the test shall also 
provide a test certificate for the owner of the ladder, 
indicating the details of the test, including the date, and 
the identification of the person or company performing 
the test. 


IS 16233 : 2022 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 8 ) 
RECOMMENDED PRODUCTION TESTS AND INSPECTIONS 


A-1 GENERAL 


The manufacturer should have a quality assurance 
system in place which is acceptable to the approving 
maritime safety administration, to ensure that 
production ladders are produced to the same standard 
as the original prototype ladder tested for approval. 


A-2 SAMPLE SELECTION AND TESTING OF 
STEPS 


Steps should be separated into lots of 100 steps or 
less. Steps of different types should be in separate 
lots. One step selected at random from each lot should 
be subjected to the step strength test described in 


Table 3. If the step fails the test ten more steps should be 
selected at random from the lot and tested as described 
in Table 3. If any of the ten steps fails the test each step 
in the lot should be tested before it is used in a ladder. 


A-3 SAMPLE SELECTION AND TESTING OF 
LADDERS 


A visual examination as described in Table 2 and the tests 
in Table 3 should be conducted by the maritime safety 
administration that approved the ladder, or recognized 
organization acting on its behalf, at least annually on a 
ladder taken from the production line to ensure that it 
complies with the requirements of 4 and 5. 


Table 3 Production Tests 


( Clause A-2 ) 


SI No. Test Item to be Tested Test Procedure Acceptance Criteria 
q) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Step strength Ladder step Place supports under each end of the The step shall not break or crack. 


ii) Ladder and 
step attachment 
strength 


Fully assembled ladder at 
least 3 m long 


step where the side ropes pass through 
the step. Apply a static load of 8.8 kN 
widely distributed over a 100 mm 
wide area at the centre of the step. 


Suspend the ladder vertically hanging 
to its full length, or extend the ladder 
to its full length on a horizontal 
surface, with the top end of the ladder 
secured using its own attachments. 
Apply a static load of 8.8 kN widely 
distributed over the bottom step for 
a period of at least 1 min so that the 
load is applied evenly between the 
side ropes through the step attachment 
fittings. 


There shall be no residual deflection 
after the load is removed and the step 
is allowed to recover 


a) Steps shall not break or crack. 


b) Attachments between any step 
and a side rope shall not loosen 
or break. 


c) Side ropes shall not sustain any 
observable damage, elongation, 
or deformation that remains 
after the test load is removed 


IS 16233 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Shipbuilding Sectional Committee, TED 17 


Organization 
Indian Register of Shipping 
Academy of Maritime Education and Training 
(AMET), Chennai 


American Bureau of Shipping, Mumbai 


Bureau Veritas, Mumbai 
Cochin Shipyard Ltd, Cochin 


Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kerala 
Cyber Marine Knowledge Systems Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Directorate General of Shipping, Mumbai 

DNVGL AS 

Directorate of Marine Engineering, Naval Head 


Quarters, New Delhi 


Directorate of Naval Architecture, Naval Head 
Quarters, New Delhi 


Dte of Naval Design, Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 
Directorate of Quality Assurance (WP), New Delhi 


Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd, 
Kolkata 


Goa Shipyard Ltd, Goa 
Govardhan Das P.A. (Calcutta), Kolkata 


Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam 


Indian Chain Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI C. R. VENUGOPAL (Chairman) 


CoL Dr G. THIRUVASAGAM 
SHRI MUDUNNURI SURYA PRAKASA RAJU 
(Alternate) 


Suri A. N. Das 
SHRI ARNAB GHOSH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN S. VARDHAN 


SHRI HARIKRISHNAN S. 
SHRI DEEPU SURENDRAN (Alternate) 


DR K. SIVAPRASAD 
PROF DR A. MATHIAZHAGAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR AJAGEKAR 
SHRI PRAVEEN R. Rat (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJI VASUDEVAN (Alternate) 


SHRI UDAY CHAITANYA GANIVADA 
SHRI JAGADEESH PISINI (Alternate) 


Capt C. S. BABURAJ 
CDR Vikas Soop (Alternate) 


CMDE NIRMAL MEMON 
Capt SUJIT Bax! (Alternate) 


SHRI VINEET TIWARI 
Suri A. P. SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMANR R. BETAGERI (YP) 


CAPT R. SHARMA 
CDR S. MATHur (Alternate) 


CAPT JAGMOHAN 
SHRI SAJAL SENGUPTA 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR (YP) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR SINGH 
SHRI FABIAN SAVIO RODRIGUES (Alternate) 


SHRI J. R. AGGARWAL 
SHRI SANJAY AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. SHIVRAMAKRISHNAN 
SHRI D. SHANMUKH SRIKANTH (Alternate) 
SHRI E. S. S. Vinpuya (YP) 


SHRI PRADIP CHITLANGIA 
SHRI ROHAN CHITLANGIA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. KRISHNANKUTTY 
SHRI R. VAYA KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SURESH RAJENDRAN (YP) 


IS 16233 : 2022 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 
Indian Maritime University IMU, Visakhapatnam 


Indian National Ship-owners Association, Mumbai 


Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


L & T Shipbuilding Limited, Chennai 
Leader Valves Limited Jalandhar 

Lloyd’s Register Asia, Mumbai 

Mazagon Dock Ltd, Mumbai 

Nippon Kaiji Kyokai, Navi Mumbai 

Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 
Reliance Naval and Engineering Ltd, Gujarat 
Rina India Pvt Ltd 

Seatech Integrated Technology, Pvt Ltd 


Shipyard Association of India, New Delhi 
The Great Eastern Shipping Co Ltd, Mumbai 
The Institute of Marine Engineers (India), Mumbai 


The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Mumbai 
Vedam Design & Technical Consultancy Pvt Ltd 
In personal capacity 


In personal capacity 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI PRASAD KUMAR BHASKARAN 


SHRI U. S. RAMESH 
SHRI G. V. V. PAWAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR CHANDRASHEKHAR SINDAGI 
SHRI SHAILESH S. JHA (Alternate) 


SHRI N. GIRISH 
SHRI S. RENGANATHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI PRAVIN NARAYAN DHORE (YP) 


CAPT (RETD) KJH CHRISTIE 
Cpr (RETD) KAMAL KANAGAT (Alternate) 


Mrs PuRNIMA BERI 
SHRI HARJOT SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI C. SREENIVASA RAO 
Suri C. R. DAsH (Alternate) 


Suri A. J. DAs 
SHRI ANANT P. GARKHEDKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR 
SHRI ASHISH BALWANTRAI MATTA (Alternate) 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR (YP) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 


SHRI VINEET SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI DESH CHALIL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. DEVADAS 
SHRI V. UNNIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KANDHA MANTRY 
Ms MALiKA Kuatri (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. GOVIL 
SHRI ANJAN KUMAR SAHU 


SHRI UDAY SHIVAM PUROHIT 
SHRI SIVARAM NARAYAN Swamy (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH SOOD 
SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI AKSHAY JAIN 
SHRI RAKESH Roy (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJNISH (YP) 


SHRI R. S. RAHATE 
Suri S. M. RAI 


SHRI R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (TED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SHARAD KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (TED), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 17 (00913). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


f 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western s Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


