NAT AWA IS 16718 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


are carte — aly ait ama agai 
& fee aei marde tas ass 
AAT Tt BU HUS HAT HAL SN Het 
sre at — ANÈ 


( Teel TREAT ) 


Agro Textiles — Polypropylene 
Spun Bonded Non-Woven Crop 
Covers and Fruit Skirting Bags 
for Agricultural and Horticultural 
Applications — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 59.080.30; 59.080.99 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Tea TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 8 


Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Technical Textiles for Agro-tech Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 2017 which covered the requirements for polypropylene spun bonded 
non-woven crop covers only. This standard has been revised to incorporate the requirements for polypropylene 
spun bonded non-woven fruit skirting bags also. In this revision following major changes have been made: 


a) Title and scope have been modified; 
b) Manufacture clause has been specified; 


c) Table for requirements of fabric weight, and typical size of fruit skirting bags and fabric wraps have 
been specified; 


d) Sampling and criteria for conformity has been modified; and 
e) References to Indian Standards have been updated. 


Crop Covers 


Crop covers are generally non-woven fabrics made from polypropylene. Crop covers are generally placed over 
plants and seedlings to create a micro-climate which encourages early growth and development of crop with the 
valuable result of both improvement in quality and yield. The crop covers are also used to protect plants from cold 
and frost. Up to 5 °C circulating moisture is trapped by it and in the event of a frost, the fabric freezes like film 
providing the plant with natural frost protection. 


a) Crop covers maintains comfortable temperature conditions by reducing convection heat loss, which 
provide protection against frosts and cold climatic conditions during winter season; 


b) Crop covers allow adequate air, moisture, light and water transmission which provide optimum 
growing conditions for plants and seedlings underneath; and 


c) Crop covers prevents crop from being damaged by insects, birds, small animals, etc. 


Crop cover fabrics can be used very successfully by small and large farmers including kitchen gardeners for 
vegetables, fruits and flowers. 


The weight of the crop cover used is a direct function of the degree of exposure that the field is subject to and the 
anticipated weather conditions. The greater the anticipated climatic exposure and the more severe the weather 
conditions the heavier the weight and stronger the fabric needs to be. Typical weights of spun-bond non-woven 
polypropylene fabric used as crop cover are 17 g/m?’ and 22 g/m’. Being very light; it is very economical. The 
fabric has specialized UV absorbers incorporated in it which ensures protection against the sun’s rays. 


Experience has shown that, 


a) in isolated cases, where lightweight fabric is used in more exposed conditions than would normally 
be recommended, the fabric can get adversely damaged thus affecting the crop underneath. 


b) a lot of the fabric is being reused for several different growing seasons. Consequently, a longer 
product life is expected than the fleece was originally intended to provide. 


c) sometimes, there is a reluctance to use heavier weight fabric, in circumstances where it would be 
more appropriate, as this would reduce light transmission through the fabric has adversely affect the 
crop. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 16718 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — POLYPROPYLENE SPUN BONDED 
NON-WOVEN CROP COVERS AND FRUIT SKIRTING 
BAGS FOR AGRICULTURAL AND HORTICULTURAL 

APPLICATIONS — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes the specification and 
performance requirements for polypropylene spun 
bonded non-woven fabric used for crop cover and 
fruit skirting bags for agricultural and horticultural 
applications. 


1.2 While the standard refers various crops and 
vegetables for use of crop covers, and various fruits 
for fruit skirting bags, one should not interpret that this 
standard is applicable to only those crops, vegetables 
and fruits mentioned in this standard. The standard may 
be applied to other crops, vegetables and fruits, based 
on the pertinent available scientific data. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Crop Covers — Thin sheets of polypropylene 
non-woven fabrics used as covering for protection 
of seedling and growing crop from change in climate 
like fog, rains and sunlight. Crop covers create a 
micro-climate by keeping soil temperatures higher than 
environment temperature, thus helping plants to grow 
faster leading to early harvesting and higher yields. 


3.2 Fruit Skirting Bags — These are fabricated bags 
made of polypropylene non-woven fabrics used as 
covering for protection of growing fruits from change 
in climate like fog, rains, sunlight, diseases, insect bites 
and external damage. Fruit covers provide a suitable 
microclimate for fruits to grow faster, larger size and 
glossy skin with higher yields. 


3.3 Spunbond Non-woven Fabric — Fabrics 
produced using continuous filament spinning process 
technology which also includes randomly laying of 
spun filaments in a uniform thickness web or fleece 
which is subsequently thermal bonded to achieve 
desired inter-fiber cohesion and strength to web. If 
such fabrics are produced from polypropylene polymer, 
the fabrics are called polypropylene (PP) spunbond 
non-woven fabrics. 


4TYPES 


Based on the fabric mass, non-woven fabrics used 
to produce crop covers and fruit skirting bags are 
classified into two types: 


a) Type 1 — Having minimum mass of 17 g/m?; and 
b) Type 2 — Having minimum mass of 22 g/m?. 


5 MANUFACTURE 


5.1 Raw Material 


Polypropylene raw material used for manufacture of 
non-woven fabric shall conform to the requirements 
specified in IS 10910, excluding overall migration. 
For stabilization against sunlight induced degradation, 
suitable UV stabilizer additives in required quantity 
shall be added. 


NOTES 


1 Non-woven fabric manufacturer may use maximum up to 
10 percent of reworked in-house process waste (non-woven 
fabric waste), without compromising the final performance 
requirements. 

2 All materials used for manufacturing of non-woven fabric 
shall be chosen in such a way that reprocessing of used crop 
covers and fruit skirting bags is promoted. 


5.2 Fabric 


5.2.1 The non-woven fabric used in the manufacture 
of crop covers and fruit covers shall be produced as 
flat fabric using spunbond process. The fabric shall be 
of white colour. If agreed between the buyer and the 
seller, pigmented coloured fabric may also be used. The 
fabric shall be suitably stabilized to ensure protection 
against outdoor weathering degradation. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


5.2.2 The fabric width shall be 1.6 m or 3.2 m or as 
agreed to between the buyer and the seller, when tested 
as per method prescribed in IS 1954. The tolerance 
on width shall be + 1 cm. The non-woven fabric 
is generally supplied in the form of rolls of length 
400 m or 625 m or as agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller. The fabric length shall not be less than the 
declared value. 


5.3 Crop Covers 


Crop covers are the non-woven fabric of required 
width, which is used as it is, to make fabric tunnels, 
covering the growing crop in long parallel row. For 
wider tunnels, desired fabric width shall be achieved by 
longitudinal joining of two fabrics. The joining of fabric 
shall be accomplished by overlapping of the adjacently 
placed fabric edges and joining using stitching or heat 
sealing, hot air welding, ultrasonic welding, hot melt 
glue bonding and combination thereof. 


5.4 Fruit Skirting Bags 


5.4.1 Fruit skirting bags manufactured from 
polypropylene non-woven fabrics are available in two 
formats that are semi-fabricated and fabricated bags. 


5.4.1.1 Fabricated Fruit Skirting Bags — For fabricated 
fruit skirting bags, flat non-woven fabric is converted 
into a rectangular bag of desired dimensions in two 
formats. In first case, two parallel sides are joined and 
other two parallel sides kept open. In second case, the 
bag is formed with three adjacent sides are joined with 


one side kept open. The joining can be done through 
stitching or heat sealing, hot air welding, ultrasonic 
welding, hot melt glue bonding and combination 
thereof. 


5.4.1.2 Semi-Fabricated Fruit Skirting Tubes — These 
are produced from a continuous non-woven fabric of 
desired width and length. The fabric is longitudinally 
folded in the middle and the two edges of the fabric 
are overlapped and joined. The cylindrical fabric tube 
thus formed, is subsequently flattened before winding 
in the roll form. The edge joining can be done through 
stitching or heat sealing, hot air welding, ultrasonic 
welding, hot melt glue bonding and combination 
thereof. 


5.4.2 The size (dimensions) and fabric GSM for fruit 
skirting bags and fabric wraps shall be as given in 
Table 1. 


6 CONDITIONING AND TESTING 


The fabric shall be conditioned and tested in standard 
atmosphere of 27 + 2 °C and relative humidity of 
65 + 2 percent as per the method prescribed in IS 6359 
and subsequently tested in this standard atmosphere. 


7 REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 The non-woven spun bonded polypropylene crop 
cover and fruit skirting bag shall conform to the 
requirements specified in Table 2. 


Table 1 Fabric Weight (GSM) and Typical Size for Fruit Skirting Bags and Fabric Wraps 
( Clauses 5.4.2 and G-2.2 ) 


SI No. Fruit Type 
(1) (2) 
i) Mango, Orange, Sweet lime, Apple, Custard apple, 
Guava, Avocado, Pear, Lychee, Peach, Plum 
ii) Banana bunch 
iii) Grape bunch 
iv) Pomegranate 
v) Papaya 


Method of Test, Ref to 


NOTES 


Fabric Mass (GSM) Skirting Bag Dimensions, 

Min Width x Height (mm) 

(3) (4) 

17 (200 x 200) +5 

17 (800 x 1020) +5 

I7 (250 x 300) +5 

22 (200 x 200) + 5 

22 (3000 x 1600) + 5 (fabric wrap) 


IS 15891 (Part 1) IS 1954 (see Note 3) 


1 Fruits stated in Table 1 are limited to the available data in literature. The usage of fruit skirting bags may be extended to other fruits 
based on scientific literature feedback and experimental trials. It shall not be construed that the fruit skirting bag are applicable only 
for the fruits mentioned in Table 1. 

2 If the specific fruits require bag size other than specified in Table 1, buyer and seller to decide and agree on the appropriate bag size 
and applicable tolerances. 


3 The dimensions shall be measured from stitch to stich or seal to seal line. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


Table 2 Requirements of Non-Woven Spun Bonded Polypropylene Crop Cover and Fruit Skirting Bag 
( Clause 7.1 ) 


SI No. Characteristics Requirement Method of Test, Ref To 
Type 1 Type 2 
(1) (2) 8) (4) (5) 
i) Thickness, mm, Min 0.18 0.22 IS 15891 (Part 2) (Method A) 
ii) Fabric mass, g/m*, Min 17 22 IS 15891 (Part 1) 
iii) Breaking strength, N/50 mm, Min: IS 15891 (Part 3) 
a) Machine direction 30 35 
b) Cross direction 20 25 
iv) Elongation at break, percent: IS 15891 (Part 3) 
a) Machine direction 55 to 100 55 to 100 
b) Cross direction 55 to 100 55 to 100 
v) Trapezoid tear strength, N, Min: IS 15891 (Part 4) 
a) Machine direction 25 35 
b) Cross direction 12 18 
vi) Air permeability, cm*/cm?/s, Min 400 350 IS 15891 (Part 15) 
vii) Water vapour permeability, in g/m?/day, Min 800 800 Annex B 
viii) UV stability test, retained strength after Annex C 
144 h UV exposure, percent, Min: 
a) Machine direction 50 50 
b) Cross direction 50 50 
ix) Ash content, percent, Max 1 Annex D 
x) Index puncture resistance, N, Min 10 15 Annex E 
xi) Water absorption capacity, percent, Min 50 50 IS 15891 (Part 6) 
xii) Colour White or as agreed White or as agreed Visual 


8 PACKING AND MARKING 


8.1 Packing and Marking for Non-Woven Spun 
Bonded Polypropylene Crop Covers 


8.1.1 Packing 


The crop cover fabric of agreed width shall be in the 
form of neatly and firmly wound rolls. The fabric rolls 
shall have clear edges and free from telescopic winding. 
All fabric rolls shall be suitably protected by wrapping 
material to avoid fabric soiling and damage. The crop 
covers may also be packed as per agreement between 
the buyer and the seller. 


8.1.2 Marking 


The fabric shall be printed with identification mark 
of fabric manufacturer along with the information 
as required by the buyer using suitable inks, by 
flexography or any other suitable printing method. The 
marking shall repeat every 2 meters across the length 
of fabric and shall contain information about fabric 
manufacturer’s name, brand logo, batch number and 
recycling symbol for polypropylene. 


Each packed fabric roll shall be marked or labeled with 
the following information: 

a) Name of the manufacturer or trade mark; 

b) Fabric type and mass, in g/m’; 

c) Length and width; 

d) Batch number or Lot number; and 


e) Any other information as required by the buyer or 
the law in force. 


8.2 Packing and Marking for Non-Woven Spun 
Bonded Polypropylene Fruit Skirting Bags 


8.2.1 Packing of Fabricated Fruit Skirting Bags 


8.2.1.1 Fabricated Fruit Skirting Bags — The 
fabricated fruit skirting bags of one size and shape, shall 
be packed in a bundle of 100 bags each. A compact bale 
of 5 such bundles, that is, total 500 bags shall be packed 
to form a bale. The bale shall be suitably protected by 
wrapping material to avoid bag soiling and damage. 
The fabricated fruit skirting bags may also be packed 
as per agreement between the buyer and the seller. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


8.2.2 Marking of Fabricated Fruit Skirting Bags 


Each packed bale shall be marked or labeled with the 
following information; 


a) Name of the manufacturer or trade mark; 
b) Fabric type and mass, in g/m’; 

c) Bag dimensions; 

d) No. of bags in the bale; 

e) Batch number or Lot number; and 


f) Any other information as required by the buyer or 
the law in force. 


8.2.3 Packing of Semi-fabricated Fruit Skirting Tubes 


8.2.3.1 Semi-fabricated Fruit Skirting Tubes — The 
semi-fabricated fruit skirting tubes of agreed width 
shall be in the form of neatly and firmly wound rolls 
of each 200 m length. The rolls shall have clear edges 
and free from telescopic winding. All rolls shall be 
suitably protected by wrapping material to avoid fabric 
soiling and damage. The semi-fabricated fruit skirting 
tubes may also be packed as per agreement between the 
buyer and the seller. 


8.2.4 Marking of Semi-fabricated Fruit Skirting Tubes 


The semi-fabricated fruit skirting tubes shall be printed 
with identification mark of fabric manufacturer along 
with the information as required by the buyer using 
suitable inks, by flexography or any other suitable 
printing method. The marking shall repeat across the 
length of tube and shall contain information about 
fabric manufacturer’s name, brand logo, batch number 
and recycling symbol for polypropylene. 


Each packed fabric tube roll shall be marked or labeled 
with the following information; 


a) Name of the manufacturer or trade mark; 


b) Fabric type and mass, in g/m’; 
c) Tube dimensions; 
d) Batch number or Lot number; and 


e) Any other information as required by the buyer or 
the law in force. 


8.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed hereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


9 SAMPLING AND 
CONFORMITY 


CRITERIA FOR 


9.1 Lot 


Crop cover fabric rolls or semi-fabricated fruit skirting 
tube rolls or fruit skirting bags having same fabric 
construction, same dimensions and produced under 
similar conditions shall constitute a lot. 


9.2 Random samples shall be drawn from the lot for 
testing to be representative of the lot. The conformity 
of a lot to the requirements of this standard shall be 
determined based on the tests to be carried out on the 
samples selected from it. 


9.3 Sampling and Criteria for Conformity for Crop 
Cover Fabric Rolls and Semi-fabricated Fruit 
Skirting Tube Rolls 


Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of crop cover fabric rolls or 
semi-fabricated fruit skirting tube rolls to be selected 
at random from a lot shall be in accordance with 
Table 3. 


Table 3 Sample Size and Permissible Number of Non-conforming Pieces for Crop Cover Fabric Rolls and 
Semi-fabricated Fruit Skirting Tube Rolls 


( Clause 9.3 ) 


SI Lot Size (Number of Fabric Sample Size 


No. Rolls or Tube Rolls) (No. of Fabric Rolls or 
Tube Rolls) 
0) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 50 5 
ii) 51 to 150 8 
iii) 151 to 300 13 
iv) 301 to 500 20 


v) 501 and above 32 


Sub-Sample Size 
(No. of Fabric Rolls or 


Permissible No. of Non-Conforming 
Fabric Rolls or Tube Rolls 


Tube Rolls) 
(4) (5) 
2 0 
3 0 
5 1 
8 1 
12 2 


9.4 Number of Samples and Criteria for Conformity 
for Crop Cover Fabric Rolls and Semi-fabricated 


Fruit Skirting Tube Rolls 
It shall be as follows: 


Characteristics | Number of Criteria for 
Samples Conformity 
Length, width | As specified No. of 
and colour in column 3 of | non-conforming 
Table 3 rolls shall not 
exceed the 
corresponding 
value as specified in 
column 5 of Table 3 
All other As specified | All the test pieces 
requirements |in column 4 of shall meet the 
Table 3 requirements 


IS 16718 : 2021 


9.5 Sampling and Criteria for Conformity for Fruit 
Skirting Bags 

Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and the 
seller, the number of fruit skirting bags to be selected at 
random from a lot shall be in accordance with Table 4. 


9.6 Number of Samples and Criteria for Conformity 
for Fruit Skirting Bags 


It shall be as follows: 


Characteristics | Number of Criteria for 
Samples Conformity 
Dimensions | As specified No. of 
in column 3 | non-conforming bags 
of Table 4 shall not exceed the 
corresponding value 
as specified in 
column 5 of Table 4 
All other As specified All the test pieces 
requirements in column 4 shall meet the 
of Table 4 requirements 


Table 4 Sample Size and Permissible Number of Non-Conforming Pieces for Fruit Skirting Bags 
( Clause 9.5 ) 


SI No. Lot Size (Number of Fruit Sample Size (No. of Sub-Sample Size (No. of Fruit Permissible No. of 
Skirting Bags) Fruit Skirting Bags) Skirting Bags) (See Note) Non-Conforming Fruit 
Skirting Bags 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(i) Up to 35 000 20 01 2 
(ii) 35 001 to 150 000 32 01 3 
(iii) 150 001 to 500 000 32 01 3 
(iv) 500 001 and above 50 01 5 


NOTE — For sub-sample, additional fabric from which the fruit skirting bags have been made may also be supplied to carry out the 


complete testing. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
1954 : 1990 Determination of length and 
width of woven fabrics — 
Methods (second revision) 
6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of 
textiles 
10910 : 1984 Specification for polypropylene 


and its copolymers for its safe 
use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 


TS No. Title 


15891 Textiles — Test methods for 


nonwovens 


(Part 1): 2011 Determination of mass per unit 


area 
(Part 2) : 2011 
(Part 3) : 2011 


Determination of thickness 


Determination of tensile strength 
and elongation 


(Part 4) : 2011 
(Part 6) : 2012 
(Part 15):2017 Determination ofair permeability 


Determination of tear resistance 


Absorption 


ANNEX B 
[ Table 2, SI No. (vii) ] 
METHOD OF TEST FOR DETERMINATION OF WATER VAPOUR PERMEABILITY 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


A test specimen is sealed over the open mouth of a 
test dish which contains water, and the assembly is 
placed in a controlled environment of 27 + 2 °C at 
65 + 2 percent relative humidity. Following a period to 
establish an equilibrium of the water vapour pressure 
gradient across the sample, successive readings of the 
assembled dish are made and the rate of water vapour 
permeation through the specimen is calculated. 


B-2 SAMPLING 


The samples shall be selected from different places in 
the submitted sample to be representative of the whole. 
Minimum of 3 specimens from each sample shall be 
taken. 


B-3 CONDITIONING OF THE SAMPLE 


The samples need to be conditioned for minimum 
of 2 h in relative humidity of 65 + 2 percent and the 
temperature of 27 + 2 °C. 


B-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


B-4.1 Take care when handling the assembled dishes 
and avoid splashing the inside surface of the test 
specimen. 


B-4.2 Condition the test fabric or sample at least for 2 h 
in the standard atmosphere for testing 


B-4.3 Take three circular each of 


approximately 9 cm diameter. 


specimens 


B-4.4 Using a burette, transfer the volume of water 
at 27 + 2 °C into each open dish predetermined from 
the dimensions of the dish to give an air layer which is 
10 + 1 mm deep between the surface of the water and 
the underside of the supported specimens. This requires 
approximately 46 ml of water in each dish. 


B-4.5 Position the triangular sample support in the dish. 


B-4.6 Apply a continuous layer of adhesive to the rim 
of the dish. Position the test fabric such that the face 
side of the sample is uppermost in the assembly. 


B-4.7 Place the cover ring over the rim of the dish and 
press firmly down. 


B-4.8 Apply a strip of adhesive tape around the full 
circumference of the assembly sealing the join between 
the cover ring and the dish. 


B-4.9 Place each assembly onto the turntable. Rotate 
the turntable with the assemblies for a period of 1 h to 
establish equilibrium of the water vapour transmission 
for each assembly. 


B-4.10 At the end of the equilibrium period carefully 
weigh each assembly to the nearest 0.001 g and record 
the results. 


B-4.11 Record the time these weighing was taken and 
then replace the dishes on turntable. 


B-4.12 Rotate the turntable for a further period of 24 h. 


B-4.13 Re-weigh the assemblies to the nearest of 
0.001 g. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


B-5 CALCULATION 


Calculate the water vapour permeability by the formula 
as given below: 
24x M 


Water vapour permeability, g/m?/day = 
TxA 


where 
M= loss in weight, of assembly after 24 h, g; 
T= time, h; and 
A= area of the dish, m? (0.005 411 3 m°). 


Calculate the average water vapour permeability of 
3 specimen readings. 


ANNEX C 
[ Table 2, SI No. (viii) ] 
UV STABILITY TEST 


C-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


The test specimens for tensile strength shall be cut from 
the sample as specified in IS 15891 (Part 3). 


C-2 TEST CONDITIONS 


C-2.1 The test shall be carried out with fluorescent 
UV-B lamp (313 nanometer or its equivalent). 


C-2.2 The duration of the test shall be 144 h (that is 
6 days). 


C-2.3 The test cycle shall be 8 h at 60 + 3 °C with 
UV radiation alternating after 4 h at 50 + 3 °C with 
condensation. 


C-2.4 Irradiation level throughout the test shall be 
maintained at 0.63 *}}> W/m’. 


C-3 TEST PROCEDURE 


C-3.1 Determine the original average tensile strength of 
shade net specimens separately as per the test specified 
in IS 15891 (Part 3). 


C-3.2 Expose the specimens alternately to ultraviolet 
light alone and to condensation in one respective cycle. 


C-3.2.1 The type of fluorescent UV lamp, the timing of 
the UV exposure and the temperature of condensation 
shall be as specified in C-2. 


C-3.3 Determine the average tensile strength of the 
specimens separately after UV exposure as mentioned 
above. 


C-3.4 Determine the percent retention of original 
tensile strength as follows: 


: ao : b 
Percent retention of original tensile strength = —x100 


a 
where 
a= average tensile strength before UV exposure 
as obtained in C-3.1; and 
b= average tensile strength after UV exposure as 


obtained in C-3.3. 
NOTES 
1 The UV source is an array of fluorescent lamps (with lamp 
emission concentrated in the UV range). 
2 Condensation is produced by exposing the test surface to a 
heated, saturated mixture of air and water vapour, while the 
reverse side of the test specimen is exposed to the cooling 
influence of ambient room air. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


ANNEX D 
[ Table 2, SI No. (ix) ] 
DETERMINATION OF ASH CONTENT 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


The procedure is used to find out the inorganic residue 
in non-woven crop cover sample by ashing it in a muffle 
furnace. A weighed amount of fabric sample is heated to 
590 °C. The polymer sample (organic portion) is burnt 
at 590 °C until constant mass of inorganic matter is 
obtained. The residue (inorganic matter) is reported in 
terms of percentage ash content in a given sample. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Weighing Balance, accurate to 0.001 g. 


D-2.2 Silica  Crucibles, sufficient volume to 
accommodate 3 g of sample in such a way that level of 
the sample after filling the crucible does not cross half the 
height of crucible. 


D-2.3 Bunsen Burner 
D-2.4 Silica Triangle and Tripod 


D-2.5 Muffle Furnace, capable of being controlled 
thermostatically at 590 + 10 °C. 


D-2.6 Desiccator, containing an effective drying agent 
(for example silica gel) that does not react chemically 
with ash components. 


D-2.7 Gloves and Crucible Holder 
D-3 SAFETY 
D-3.1 Burn the sample in an effectively ventilated hood. 


D-3.2 Keep the hood closed and do not inhale the fumes 
of combustion. 


D-3.3 Wear gloves and use sample (crucible) holder, to 
introduce crucible in the furnace. 


D-3.4 Sample shall be folded properly to accommodate 
it in silica crucible. 


D-4 PROCEDURE 


D-4.1 Heat the clean crucible at 590 + 10 °C for 10 to 
15 min and cool it in a desiccator. 


D-4.2 Weigh the empty crucible to nearest 0.001 g. 


D-4.3 Weigh 3 g of non-woven crop cover sample in the 
crucible (nearest to 0.001 g). 


D-4.4 Heat the crucible directly on burner so that the 
sample burns slowly, and loss of ash is avoided. Continue 
burning until no more smoke is evolved. 


D-4.5 Transfer the crucible in the muffle furnace, which 
is already maintained at approximately 590 °C and keep 
the crucible inside for about 2 h. 


D-4.6 Remove the crucible from the furnace and cool it to 
the room temperature in a desicator. Weigh it and record 
the weight to accuracy of 0.001 g. 


D-4.7 Keep the crucible in the muffle furnace for another 
30 min, cool in a desicator and weigh again. Repeat the 
procedure until constant mass is obtained. 


D-5 CALCULATIONS 
Percent ash content = 


Weight of ash 
Weight of non-woven crop cover sample 


x 100 


ANNEX E 
[ Table 2, SI No. (x) ] 
TEST METHOD FOR INDEX PUNCTURE RESISTANCE 


E-1 SCOPE 


This test method is used to measure the index puncture 
resistance of polypropylene spun bonded non-woven 
fabric. 


E-2 PRINCIPLE 


A test specimen is clamped without tension between 
circular plates of a ring clamp attachment secured in a 


tensile testing machine. A force is exerted against the 
centre of the unsupported portion of the test specimen by 
a solid steel rod attached to the load indicator until rupture 
of the specimen occurs. The maximum force recorded is 
the value of puncture resistance of the specimen. 


E-3 APPARATUS 


E-3.1 Tensile/Compression Testing Machine, of the 
constant-rate-of extension (CRE) type. 


E-3.2 Ring Clamp Attachment, consisting of 
concentric plates with an open internal diameter of 
45 + 0.025 mm capable of clamping the test specimen 
without slippage. A suggested clamping arrangement is 
shown in Fig. 1. The external diameter is suggested to be 
100 + 0.025 mm. The diameter of the six holes used for 
securing the ring clamp assembly is suggested to be 8 mm 
and equally spaced at a radius of 37 mm. The surfaces 
of these plates can consist of grooves with ‘o’-rings or 
coarse sandpaper bonded on to opposing surfaces. 


E-3.3 Solid Steel Rod, with a diameter of 8 + 0.01 mm 
having a flat end with a 45° x 0.8 mm chamfered edge 
contacting the test specimen’s surface (see Fig. 1 and 
Fig. 2). 


E-4 TEST SPECIMEN 


The test specimens shall be cut from the polypropylene 
spun bonded non-woven fabric and shall have a minimum 
diameter of 100 mm to facilitate clamping. If the 100 mm 
diameter sample is not available, smaller diameter may 
be taken provided sample is properly clamped. 


E-5 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
atmosphere for testing (65 + 5 percent relative humidity 


100mm+0.025mm DIA 


IS 16718 : 2021 


and 27 + 2 °C temperature). Equilibrium is considered 
to have been reached when the increase in the mass 
of the specimen, in successive weightings made at 
intervals of not less than 2 h, does not exceed 0.1 
percent of the mass of the specimen. 


E-6 PROCEDURE 


E-6.1 Select the load range of the tensile/compression 
testing machine such that the rupture occurs between 
10 and 90 percent of the full-scale load. 


E-6.2 Centre and secure the specimen between the 
holding plates ensuring that the test specimen extends 
to or beyond the outer edges of the clamping plates. 


E-6.3 Test at a machine speed of 300 + 10 mm/min until 
the puncture rod completely ruptures the test specimen. 


NOTE — The rate of testing specified is not an indication of 
the performance of the specimen for its end use. 


E-7 CALCULATION 


Calculate the average puncture resistance and standard 
deviation for all tests as read directly from the recording 
instrument. 


45mm+0.025mm DIA 


ALL HOLES @ 8mm DIA 
EQUALLY SPACED 


37mm+0.025 RAD 


TOP VIEW 
p-12mm 

m FACING SURFACES 
pi i GROOVED WITH 'O' RING 
OR COARSE SANDPAPER 

FIXED TO PLATES 

Test —— 
Specimen 
v 


150mm 


i 


FIG. 1 TEST FIXTURE DETAIL (NOT TO SCALE) 


9 


IS 16718 : 2021 


130mm 


Pa BEVAL 


+1mm 


8mm+0.1mm 


616mm MACHINE FINISH 


0.8X45° CHAMFER 


Fic. 2 Test PROBE DETAIL (NOT TO SCALE) 


ANNEX F 
( Foreword ) 
INSTALLATION GUIDELINES FOR CROP COVER/LOW TUNNEL 


F-1 PREAMBLE 


F-1.1 The primary function of agricultural crop cover 
is to provide favorable micro-climate to the plants by 
partially controlling the atmosphere and environment 
by reducing both light intensity and effective heat by 
allowing air, sun light and moisture hence, round the 
year seasonal and off season cultivation is possible 
except in rainy season. This enables prolonging the 
harvesting period and as well as flexibility of off-season 
cultivation depending upon the conditions and the type 
of crop under crop cover/low tunnel. 


F-1.2 Crop covers are typically cladded on an inverted 
frame structure made from materials such as PVC pipes, 
steel wires, wood or bamboo and is known as crop 
cover/low tunnel in which crops are grown successfully. 
The success of crop cover/low tunnel depends 
particularly on appropriate and proper installation and 


10 


the quality of materials used for its construction. Crop 
cover/low tunnel gives manifold production of good 
quality produce from the same land area as compared 
to the open cultivation. 


F-2 LOGISTICS 


Crop covers are packed and transported by appropriate 
means to protect them from any type of damage. Rolls 
or bundles of crop cover are loaded manually or with 
a crane and can be unloaded in a similar manner at the 
destination. Use of hooks shall be avoided for loading 
and unloading of the crop cover bundles or rolls at site. 


F-3 STORAGE AT SITE 


F-3.1 The crop cover shall be stored on levelled surface 
to protect them from any damage, dirt, grease, water, 
moisture, mud, mechanical abrasions or excessive heat 


and shall be stacked not more than three layers of rolls 
or bundles. 


F-3.2 The owner of the site where the crop cover is to 
be installed shall provide storage space in a location 
sufficiently near the crop cover structure to minimize 
any additional handling. 


F-3.3 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism, vehicular traffic and any other source which 
could create potential damage to the crop cover. 


F-4 PLANNING FOR A CROP COVER/LOW 
TUNNEL 


F-4.1 Before starting a crop cover installation, grower 
shall carefully study the climate and its influences on 
the growth of the crops intended to be grown. The 
following parameter need to be taken into consideration 
for its success: 


a) Climate, soil and water, topography, accessibility 
of the area and the opportunities for transport 
and marketing, protection against fluctuating 
temperatures, solar radiation, heavy rain, hail and 
strong wind. 


b 


wm 


Type of soil, soil profile and the location. If 
possible, choose soil with a good structure in a flat 
area for the crop cover/low tunnel project. 


c) It is very important to have enough and good drip 
irrigation system to irrigate and leach the soil. 


d) A good infrastructure for transporting materials 
and products is also of importance, just like the 
availability of electricity. 


F-4.2 Planning of Production 


Planning of production to include what to plant, when 
to plant, how much to plant, and what quantities are 
required. Market accessibility for selling the produce 
intended to be grown, if necessary, to switch to other 
crops is also an important factor. 


F-4.3 After consideration of the above factors, size of 
the crop cover/low tunnel need to be selected based 
upon the cultivation of crop selected, market access 
and experience of crop cover/low tunnel cultivation. 
It is suggested that growers to start with small sizes 
crop cover/low tunnel as it would require less initial 
capital investment along with operational expenditure 
however, provision shall be made for future expansion 
also. Along with the above, experienced farmers 
and entrepreneurs can decide on size of crop cover/ 
low tunnel depending upon scale of cultivation area. 
The cost may vary depending upon the types of crop 
cover/low tunnel and number of suppliers’ present in 
the region. 


11 


IS 16718 : 2021 


F-5 STRUCTURAL MATERIALS 


A crop cover/low tunnel consists of two basic 
components that is inverted U shaped structural 
component (made of either PVC pipes, steel wire, 
wood or bamboo materials) and non-woven fabric as 
cladding materials. The U-shaped structural component 
provides support for cladding materials. The selection 
of U-shaped structural component shall possess 
adequate strength to withstand the load of row of crop 
cover. There are different sizes of U-shaped structures 
available as per crop pattern. 


F-6 SELECTION OF CROP COVER 


F-6.1 Crop covers of minimum weight of 22 g/m? are 
commonly made from spun-bonded polypropylene 
nonwoven fabric and are placed on supports over crops 
or floated over the tops of stronger, mature plants. 
These crop covers protect plants from frost damage 
down to —2 °C and from strong winds, heavy rains, 
and even hails, but allow light, air, and water to reach 
plants. These crop covers allow from 70 to 85 percent 
of sunlight to reach plants and can be used for light 
shading in summer and can also be used to exclude 
insects and other pests early in the growing season. 


F-6.2 Crop covers of minimum weight of 17 g/m? 
are commonly used to protect plants from insects, 
birds, and insect-borne diseases and transmit up to 
95 percent of sunlight to plants. These covers are used 
for protection from frost in winter and heat in summer 
and readily allow rain and irrigation to reach plants. 


F-7COMMENCEMENTOFCROPCOVER/LOW 
TUNNEL INSTALLATION WORK 


F-7.1 Appropriate fencing shall be put around the crop 
cover/low tunnel to prevent stray entry of men and 
animals to protect any damage to the crop cover. 


F-7.2 Prepare the bed, by rotary tilling or, more 
preferably, aerating and loosening the soil with a spading 
fork. Although the length of the bed is determined by 
the available space, most commonly beds are 5 to 
6 feet in width; width can be made narrower, if growing 
plants with a taller height than most greens. 


F-7.3 Insert one end of a 10-foot length of %-inch PVC 
pipe into a hole. (User can use inverted U-shaped GI 
steel wire of 4 mm diameter with minimum 275 g/m? of 
zinc coating or bamboo pieces for the purpose). 


F-7.4 Insert the other end of the PVC conduit into the 
opposite hole, creating a hoop over the bed (User can 
use inverted U-shaped GI steel wire of 4 mm diameter 
with minimum 275 g/m? of zinc coating or bamboo 


IS 16718 : 2021 


pieces for the purpose). Avoid stepping on the prepared 
beds and folded over bed and end about to be inserted 
into opposite hole. 


F-7.5 Repeat the process of constructing hoops every 
15 feet down the length of the bed (User can use 
inverted U-shaped GI steel wire of 4 mm diameter with 
minimum 275 g/m? of zinc coating or bamboo pieces 
for the purpose). 


F-7.6 Unroll the low tunnel cover of appropriate weight 
and width along the length of the bed (Most crop covers 
are available in 10-foot widths; however, size and 
width of crop cover depend on crop pattern and width 
of soil bed). 


F-7.7 Pull the crop cover over the bed. At the longest 
ends of the bed, gather the cover and cinch it tightly 
with a durable rope (such as woven clothesline). Tie the 
other end of the rope to a secure stake. Repeat on the 
other end of the bed, pulling the cover taut. 


F-7.8 In case of crop cover of 17 g/m’, secure only 
the edges of the cover with available weights and then 


12 


cover edge of fabric by soil also along soil bed. Typical 
photographic representations of crop cover/low tunnel 
are given in Fig. 3A, Fig. 3B and Fig. 3C. 


F-8 POST INSTALLATION PRECAUTIONS 


Crop covers usually last up to 2 years with proper care 
and if the season length is not too long. Once installed, 
plants can be watered directly through the drip irrigation. 
Weeds will grow very well in the microclimate created 
under the crop cover and it is essential that weeds be 
controlled for maximum crop production. To weed the 
covered plant beds, remove crop cover from one side 
(preferably the leeward side if there is any breeze). 
After pulling weeds, reinstall the crop cover and all 
staples. To minimize the need to weed, plastic mulch 
can be used under the crop cover. As the plants grow, 
the crop cover will be lifted, providing protection for 
the plants. The crop cover can be left on until the plants 
pull the slack out of the crop cover. At this point, the 
crop cover must be removed to enhance plant growth. 
Remove the crop cover when dry and roll it up, paying 
attention not to damage it and store for another season. 
Store in a dry place that is free of rodents. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


Fic. 3C 
Fic. 3 TYPICAL PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRESENTATION OF CROP COVERS 
13 


IS 16718 : 2021 


ANNEX G 
( Foreword ) 
INSTALLATION GUIDELINES FOR FRUIT SKIRTING BAGS AND COVER WRAPS 


G-1 INTRODUCTION 


G-1.1 Pre-harvest fruit bagging has emerged as an 
effective method to improve fruit quality and yield. 
Fruit skirting or covering is a physical protection 
method which not only improves the visual quality 
of fruit by promoting skin colouration and reducing 
blemishes but can also change the micro-environment 
for fruit development, leading to several beneficial 
effects on internal fruit quality and yield. Due to its 
many beneficial effects, fruit skirting has become an 
integral part of fruit harvesting. 


G-1.2 Selection of type of non-woven fabric, the type 
of fruit skirting bag used, the stage of fruit development 
when the fruit is bagged, the duration of fruit exposure 
to natural light following skirting bag removal, and/or 
fruit and cultivator specific responses, all these factors 
influence the final quality of fruit and the yield. Fruit 
skirting and bagging is a laborious process, and its 
cost-benefit ratio should be investigated and fine-tuned 
for optimized results. 


G-1.3 Fruit bagging is commonly employed for mango, 
orange, sweet lime, apple, custered apple, guava, 
avocado, pear, lychee, peach, plum, pomegranate, 
papaya, banana bunch, grape bunch, etc. Typical 
photographic representations of fruit skirting bags 
and fruit covers are given in Fig. 4A, Fig. 4B, Fig.4C, 
Fig. 4D and Fig. 4E. 


G-2 TYPES OF FRUIT COVERS 


G-2.1 There are two types of fruit covers commonly 
used, such as appropriate size cut-piece of non-woven 
fabric as simple cover around the growing bunch of 
fruits or certain portion of the tree. The other type is, 
use of fabricated skirting bags of appropriate size. 


G-2.2 The fruit skirting bags are manufactured from 
polypropylene non-woven fabric. For bag fabrication 
stitching or heat sealing, hot air welding, ultrasonic 
welding, hot melt glue bonding and combination 
thereof may be used. The fabric mass and typical bag 
sizes used for various fruits are given in Table 1. 


G-3 EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 


Non-woven fabric cut pieces, fabricated bags, plastic 
clips, zip ties, thin metal wire twist ties, sharp cutter or 
knife blade, scissors, stapler. 


14 


G-4 BAGGING PROCEDURE FOR SOFT AND 
HARD SKIN FRUITS 


G-4.1 Carefully observe the fruits on the tree and decide 
whether the single isolated fruit to be bagged or bagging 
of fruit bunch is necessary and accordingly choose the 
appropriate size of the bag to be used. Ensure the fruit 
stem is clean and free of obstructions for tying the bag. 
If necessary, obstructing leaves around the stem may 
be trimmed. 


G-4.2 For fabricated fruit skirting bags, first select the 
right size bag. Cut 5 mm off each of the two bottom 
corners of bag with scissors to create small size 
opening. This will facilitate drainage when rainwater 
gets into the bag. Take the bag near to the fruit and 
slide-in the young fruit into the bag from open top, just 
far enough so that the top portion of the bag is gathered 
around the fruit stem and tied with a clip or a metal wire 
twist tie string. 


G-4.3 For semi-fabricated fruit skirting bags, first cut 
the required length of fabric tube from the roll for 
installation. Gather the one end of the tube, say bottom 
end, with a clip or tie pin or a metal wire twist tie 
string. Ensure that tying is slightly loose, so it facilitate 
water drainage from the bag in rainy season. Take this 
skirting tube near to the fruit and push the young fruit 
into the bag from the open top. Gather the top end of 
tube fabric around the fruit stem and tie it to the stem 
by means of either with a clip or tie pin or a thin metal 
wire twist tie string. 


G-4.4 For many fruits of larger size or where the 
complete or partial covering of tree is recommended, 
fabric wraps of appropriate size are used. In this 
installation, the fabric cut piece of required size is taken 
and is simply wrapped around the fruit or fruit bunch 
and secured by tying it with the stem using suitable 
tying technique. 


G-5 BAGGING PROCEDURE FOR BANANA 
BUNCH 


G-5.1 Check and monitor banana fruit development 
daily after the flower bract begins to lift away from 
the first bunch or hand of bananas on the stalk. Banana 
plants typically expose one more bunch every day once 
fruits begin to appear. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


Fic. 4C Fic. 4D 


Fic. 4E 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL PHOTOGRAPHIC REPRESENTATION OF FRUIT SKIRTING BAGS AND FRUIT COVERS 


15 


IS 16718 : 2021 


G-5.2 Wait three weeks after the final bunch of bananas 
is exposed to cover the fruits. This gives the soft young 
bananas time to firm up to the point that these can 
withstand handling. The fruit skins will become tough 
enough to tolerate the friction that a covering bag exerts 
on them. 


G-5.3 For bagging of banana bunch, slide the bag up 
over all the banana bunches till the bag top reaches the 
top stalk of the bunch. Gather the end of the bag top 
around the stalk well above the top fruit bunch. Secure 
it to the stalk with a piece of string or clip or metal twist 
wire. Leave the bottom of the bag open to allow for air 
circulation, if necessary. This also keeps the fruits from 
overheating inside the covering. If not needed, gather 
the hanging bag bottom and close it with suitable tying 
technique. 


16 


G-5.4 Leave the skirting bag in place until the final 
bunch of bananas is harvested. 


G-6 TIPS 


G-6.1 Once fruit is bagged, spraying of insecticides 
or pesticides is not required for the remainder of the 
season. 


G-6.2 Bunch covers may slightly accelerate fruit 
ripening and hence care shall be taken to harvest the 
fruits accordingly. 


G-6.3 While commercial non-woven bags are 
available in different colours, it has not been proven 
and established that any specific colour has better 
performance over other coloured bag. 


IS 16718 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE 


COMPOSITION 


Technical Textiles for Agro-Tech Sectional Committee, TXD 35 


Organization 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 
Association, Mumbai 


Central Agricultural University, Imphal 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET), Chennai 

Central Silk Board, Bengaluru 

Chandra Shekhar Azad University of Agriculture and 
Technology, Kanpur 

CTM Technical Textiles Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


FAD 17, BIS, New Delhi 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Garware Technical Fibres Limited, Satara 
Horticulture Training Centre, Pune 
ICAR-Directorate of Rapeseed-Mustard Research, 


Bharatpur 
ICAR-National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering 


and Technology, Kolkata 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 
Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkata 
Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Lamifab and Paper (P) Ltd, Aurangabad 


Maharashtra State Horticulture and Medicinal Plant 
Board, Pune 


Representative(s) 
Dr U. K. GANGOPADHYAY (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI MAMONI PROBHA BORAH 


Dr N. VIGNESHWARAN 
Dr P. K. MANDHYAN (Alternate) 


DR ABDUL KADER 
SHRI RAJIV KUMAR LILHARE (Alternate) 


DR SUBHASH V. NAIK 
SHRI V. RAMESH (Alternate) 


DR ASHOK KUMAR 
DR JITENDRA YADAV (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT AGARWAL 
SHRIMATI JYOTI AGARWAL (Alternate) 


DR SWAPAN KUMAR GHOSH 
Pror A. K. SAMANTA (Alternate) 


MEMBER SECRETARY 


Suri BIRJU N. BHOJANI 
SHRI VIVEK PRABHU (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY RAUT 
Dr VisAY RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVINDRA DESHMUKH 
SHRI SAMPAT YADAV (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ SHARMA 


DR SURAJIT SENGUPTA 
SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK (Alternate) 


Dr T. B. S. RAJPUT 
Dr NEELAM PaTEL (Alternate) 


DR TANWEER ALAM 
SHRI MADHAB CHAKARVARTY (Alternate) 


Dr ManuyYA GHOSH 
Suri D. P. Gon (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR CHANDRA 
SHRI J. K. BEHARA (Alternate) 


DR ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI RUCHITA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMLEISH DHOOT 
SHRI KISHORI LAL Duoot (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
PROJECT MANAGER (PC & FP) (Alternate) 


17 


IS 16718 : 2021 


Organization 
MAHA Seedsmen Association, Jalna 
Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri 


National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development, Mumbai 


National Committee on Precision Agriculture and 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkata 


National Research Centre for Grapes, Pune 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkata 
Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 
Parry Enterprises India Limited, Bharuch 
Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai 


Precision Farming Development Centre, Solan 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 
Rishi Techtex Ltd, Mumbai 
Shri Ambica Polymer Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Shubham Sales, Valsad 
Texel Industries Limited, Kalol 


Textiles Committee, Mumbai 
The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 
The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 


Association, Mumbai 
V K Packwell Pvt Ltd, Kanpur 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SATYANARAYAN B. RATHI 
SHRI UDDHAV MANIKRAO SHIRSATH (Alternate) 


DR S. D. GORANTIWAR 
Dr M. S. MANE (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI VINITA SINGH 
SHRI SANDEEP SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 
Suri K. K. KAUSHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Dr D. S. YADAV 


SHRI SOUMYADIPTA DATTA 
SHRI PRABHAS KUMAR Biswas (Alternate) 


SHRI SIVAKUMAR S. 
SHRI N. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI NOBLE DEIVANAYAGAM 
SHRI NIKHIL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SURENDER CHOUDHARY 
Dr E. SUNDARESAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. S. SPEHIA 


Dr SUNIL MAHAJAN 
SHRI KESHAV PAREEK (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA MEHTA 
SHRI Mavji SAVANI (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI JYOTIKA NAGRI 
SHRI PARTH NAGRI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY LOHIYA 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R. MEHTA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. CHANDRAN 
SHRI P. N. S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


DR PRASANTA KUMAR PANDA 
SHRI G. R. MAHAJAN (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKESH KUMAR GUPTA 
DR Vuay Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI ABHISHEK KUMAR (Young Professional) 


SHRI A. K. BERA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TEXTILES) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI J. K. GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (TEXTILES), BIS 


18 


(Continued from second cover) 


d) for multiple width joined fabrics, when considering the physical properties of the fabric the entire 
width of the glued fabric shall be considered. In particular, the physical properties of the fabric on 
and around the glue line must be considered as these properties differ in certain critical aspects from 
those of the body of the fabric, particularly tear strength. 


Crop covers can be used in different ways. In one of the methods, the fleece is laid flat directly on top of the 
ground. Several rolls of 3.2 m wide fabric are often joined together to form a single fabric up to 16 m wide. A 
typical method of joining this fabric is via the use of continuous ultrasonic method. In another method, the crop 
cover is predominately used stretched and supported over hoops. In this environment the crop cover does not 
come into direct contact with either the plants or the ground. 


These fabrics can be laid both manually and mechanically. Generally, they are laid just like a film. Since they 
are very light, they must be handled with extra care. When laying sufficient margin over and above the normal 
field width must be allowed for growth and securing. They must neither be too loose nor tight, especially in the 
direction in which the wind is or may blow. The fabric must be secured at the edge: a spade full of earth at regular 
intervals will generally be adequate. The fabric is reusable for the next season, if not damaged. The tension must 
be adjusted suitably depending upon the crop. Nowadays crop covers are being used for crops like strawberry, 
chillies, tomato, leafy vegetables, melons, brinjals etc. 


Fruit Skirting Bags 


Several good agricultural practices (GAP) are becoming popular all over the world to produce good quality fruits 
with less dependence on insecticides and pesticides. Among several such practices, pre-harvest fruit and fruit 
bunch skirting, also known as, fruit bagging or fruit covering has emerged as one of the important productive 
method. 


Fruit skirting is a physical protection method using non-woven fabric bags or simply fabric covers which creates 
a physical barrier to the fruit or fruit bunch from extreme weather and improves the physical appearance of 
fruit by promoting skin colouration, gloss, shine, and reducing blemishes. Fruit skirting also modify the 
micro-climate around the fruit, which can have beneficial effects on internal fruit quality, increased average fruit 
size and the overall yield per tree. Fruit skirting can also reduce the incidence of disease, insect pest and/or 
mechanical damage, sunburn of the fruit skin, fruit cracking and bird damage. Researchers reported that fruit 
appearance and size under fruit skirting bags improves which is one of the major factors of influencing a consumer 
for the fruit. 


The fruit skirting bags shall be white or light in colour to avoid attraction by insects or bees. 


Fruit skirting bags can be used very successfully by small and large farmers for fruits and fruits bunches. Fruit 
bags are being used for mango, orange, sweet lime, apple, custard apple, guava, avocado, pear, lychee, peach, 
plum, pomegranate, banana bunch and grape bunch, papaya, etc. 


The installation guidelines for crop covers and fruit skirting bags are given in Annex F and Annex G respectively 
for information only. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 35 (17569). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


