UAT AAP IS 2632 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


piesen — faite 


( TE УТ?) 


Crotonaldehyde — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 71.080.80 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AMG Чч, 9 SGX Mes WH AUT, Ag faceil-110002 
v———áZo3m МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in ^ www.standardsbis.in 


January 2023 Price Group 7 


Organic Chemicals, Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee, PCD 09 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Organic Chemicals, Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal 
and Related Products Division Council. 


Crotonaldehyde is a useful chemical intermediate by virtue of its highly reactive character. It undergoes the 
characteristic reactions of the ethylenic double bond as well as those of simple aldehydes. It is a starting material 
for a wide range of aldehyde-amine type of rubber antioxidants and accelerators; for example, crotonic acid, 
butyraldehyde and butanol, quinoline yellow and other dyes and for certain synthetic resins. It is also used as a 
denaturant for industrial alcohol. The production of crotonaldehyde has been recently established in the country. 
This standard is expected to assist manufacturers in regulating the quality of material produced and the consumers 
in selecting a material of acceptable quality for use as a denaturant for industrial alcohol. 


This standard was first published in 1964. In this (first revision), two grades have been formed, Grade 1 (99 percent 
assay), an unsaturated aldehyde with commercial applications in the fragrance, food, paints, and agriculture and 
adhesive industries and Grade 2 (85 percent assay), used as alcohol denaturant. Characteristics of acidity (as crotonic 
acid) and water content are incorporated in Table 1. Gas chromatography method to determine the purity level is 
also incorporated for both the grades as alternate method to chemical method. 


This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions relating to the supply of crotonaldehyde. 

The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex E. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 


‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2632 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
CROTONALDEHYDE — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements, the 
methods of sampling and testing for crotonaldehyde. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute the provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most editions of the 
standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 323 : Rectified spirit for industrial use — 
2009 Specification (second revision) 


IS 1070: Reagent grade water — Specification 
1992 (third revision) 


3 GRADES 
The material shall be of the following grades: 


a) Grade 1, purity 99 percent. 
b) Grade 2, purity 85 percent. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Description 


The material shall be a clear liquid with a pungent 
suffocating odour consisting essentially of 
crotonaldehyde. The material shall be free from 
sediment and suspended matter. 


4.2 The material shall also comply with the 
requirements specified in Table 1, when tested 
according to the methods prescribed in col 5 and 
col 6 of the Table 1. 


Table 1 Requirements for Crotonaldehyde 
(Clauses 4.2 and 7.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of test, Ref to 
\ \ 
| | | \ 
Grade 1 Grade 2 Аппех IS 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
2 Specific gravity at 27 ?C/27 °С, o 
i) Max 0.860 0.872 A 
Aldehyde content (as 
ii) crotonaldehyde), percent by 99 85 B — 
weight, Min 
a Acidity (as acetic acid), percent o __ 
ш) by weight, Мах L 
| Acidity (as crotonic acid), 
Py percent by weight, Max us E L m 
sj Water content, percent by 02 = o IS 2362 


weight, Max 


IS 2632 : 2023 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 
5.1 Packing 


5.1.1 The material shall be packed in suitable 
containers as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier and subject to the provisions of 
applicable Red Tariff No. for Rules and Rates for 
conveyance by rail of explosives and other 
dangerous goods, issued by the Indian Railway 
Conference Association with any alterations or 
additions made thereafter. 


5.1.2 АП containers in which the material is packed 
shall be dry and clean so that no impurities harmful 
to the end use of the material are introduced. 


5.2 Marking 


5.2.1 The material shall be supplied in accordance 
with the marking and delivery instructions given by 
the purchaser. 


5.2.2 Each container shall be marked legibly and 
indelibly with the following information: 


a) Name of the material; 

b) Name of manufacturer and recognized trade- 
mark, if any; 

C) Net, gross and tare weight; 

d) Month and year of manufacture; 

e) Batch or lot number (if applicable); and 

f) Any other statutory requirements. 


5.2.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 


assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6 SAMPLING 


6.1 Preparation of Test Samples 
The method of drawing representative samples of 
the material shall be as prescribed in Annex D. 


6.2 Number of Tests 


Tests for the determination of all the characteristics 
specified shall be conducted on the composite 
sample. 


6.3 Criteria for Conformity 
The material shall be taken as conforming to the 
specification, if the test results of the composite test 


sample satisfy the corresponding requirements 
given in 4 and Table 1. 


7 TEST METHODS 


7.1 Tests shall be conducted as prescribed in col 5 
and col 6 of Table 1 respectively. 


7.2 Quality of Reagents 
Unless specified otherwise, ‘pure chemicals’ and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 


tests. 


NOTE — "Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


IS 2632 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
[Table 1, SI No. (1)] 


DETERMINATION OF SPECIFIC GRAVITY 


A-1 APPARATUS 


A-1.1 Specific Gravity Bottle, 50 ml capacity of 
regnault type or pyknometer of 25 ml capacity. 


A-2 PROCEDURE 


Clean, dry and weigh the specific gravity bottle and 
the stopper or pyknometer. Fill the bottle with water 
and immerse it up to the neck in a constant 
temperature bath maintained at (27.0 + 0.2) °С for 
20 min and keep at this temperature for additional 
20 min. Suck off the water with a bit of filter paper 
till the level reaches the graduation mark and weigh 


again. Empty the bottle, clean and dry. Repeat the 
operation with the material at 27 ?C. 


A-3 CALCULATION 


A-B 
Specific gravity at 27 °C/27 °C 2. —— 


C-B 
where 


A = weight of the specific gravity bottle with 
the material at 27 ?C, g; 

B = weight of the specific gravity bottle, g; and 

C = weight of the specific gravity bottle with 
water at 27 ?C, g. 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (1)] 


DETERMINATION OF CROTONALDEHYDE CONTENT 


В-1 CHEMICAL METHOD (FOR BOTH 
GRADES) 


B-1.1 Reagents 


B-1.1.1 Alcoholic Solution of | Hydroxylamine 
Hydrochloride, 0.5 N 


Dissolve 35 g of hydroxylamine hydrochloride in 
150 ml of distilled water and dilute to 1 litre with 
methanol. 


B-1.1.2 Aqueous Solution of Triethanolamine, 0.5 N 


Transfer 65 ml (74 g) of 98 percent triethanolamine 
to a 1 000 ml volumetric flask and dilute to the mark 
with water. 


B-1.1.3 Standard Sulphuric Acid Solution (Dilute), 
0.5 N. 


B-1.1.4 Bromophenol Blue Indicator, 0.04 percent 
(w/v) alcoholic solution. 


B-1.2 Procedure 


B-1.2.1 Preparation of Neutral Alcoholic Solution of 
Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride 


Add 30 ml of alcoholic solution of bromophenol blue 
indicator to 1 litre of the hydroxylamine 
hydrochloride reagent. From а burette add 
triethanolamine solution until the solution appears 
greenish-blue by transmitted light. Prepare the 
solution fresh before each series of the analysis. 


B-1.2.2 Prepare a sufficient number of heat-resistant 
pressure bottles to make all the blank and sample 
determinations in duplicate. To each bottle add 
65 ml of neutralized alcoholic solution of 
hydroxylamine hydrochloride and from a burette 
add exactly 50 ml of triethanolamine solution. 
Before capping, purge the bottle for 2 min with a 
gentle stream of nitrogen. This is best accomplished 
by means of a glass tube inserted through the neck 
of the bottle and clamped so that the opening is just 
above the surface of the liquid. Reserve two bottles 
for blanks and into each of the other bottles 
introduce about one gram of the sample weighed to 
the nearest 0.1 mg. Allow the samples to stand 
together with the blanks at room temperature for 
60 min. Shake the bottles occasionally. Cool each of 
the bottle slightly with tap water and uncap carefully 
to prevent loss of contents. Allow the contents to 
return to room temperature and titrate each of the 
blanks with standardized dilute sulphuric acid to 
greenish-blue end-point. Titrate each of the samples 
with standardized dilute sulphuric acid to the colour 
of the blanks approaching the end point dropwise 
until the colours match by transmitted light. 


B-1.3 Calculation 


Aldehyde content (as crotonaldehyde), percent by 
(B-A) x 7.00 x N 


weight = 
8 w 
where 


B = average volume of standard sulphuric acid 
solution required for the blanks, ml; 


IS 2632 : 2023 


A = volume of standard sulphuric acid solution 
required for the sample, ml; 

N - normality of standard sulphuric acid 
solution; and 

W = weight of sample taken for the test, g. 


B-2 GAS CHROMATOGRAPHIC METHOD 
(FOR GRADE 1) 


B-2.1 General 


A representative sample is introduced into a gas 
chromatograph equipped with 6 ә percent 
cyanopropylphenyl, 94 percent 
dimethylpolysiloxane bonded phase fused silica 
capillary column. Suitable carrier gas transports the 
vaporized sample through the column where the 
components are separated by the chromatographic 
process. Components are sensed by a flame 
lonization detector as they elute from the column. 
The detector signal is processed by an electronic 
data acquisition system. The product and other 
components are identified by comparing their 
retention times to the ones identified by analyzing 
standards under identical conditions. The 
concentration of all components are determined in 
mass percent area by area normalization of the peak 
areas. 


B-2.2 Apparatus 
B-2.2.1 Gas Chromatograph 


Any gas liquid chromatograph equipped with 
split/spilt less injector and FID detector can be used 
with following accessories and operating conditions. 
A heated flash vaporizing injector designed to 
provide a linear sample spilt injection (for example, 
2:1) is required for proper sample introduction. 
Carrier gas controls shall be of adequate precision to 
provide reproducible column flows and split ratios in 
order to maintain analytical integrity. Pressure 
control devices and gauges shall be designed to attain 
the linear velocity required in the column used. A 
hydrogen flame ionization detector with associated 
gas controls and electronics, designed for optimum 
response with open tabular columns, is required. 


B-2.2.2 Sample Introduction 


Manual or automatic liquid syringe sample injection 
to the splitting injector is employed. Devices capable 
of 0.1 ul to 0.5 ul injections are suitable. It should be 
noted that inadequate splitter design, poor injection 
technique, and overloading the column can result in 
poor resolution. 


B-2.2.3 Column 


This test method utilizes a fused silica open tubular 
capillary column coated with 6 percent 
cyanopropylphenyl, 94 percent dimethylpolysiloxane 
of 30 m in length, 0.53 mm or suitable internal 
diameter and film thickness 3.0 um or equivalent. 


B-2.2.4 Typical Instrument Condition 


Detector Flame Ionization detector 
(FID) 

Injector : 240°C 

Temperature 

Detector : 240°C 

Temperature 

Oven Temperature 

program 

Initial : 60°C 

Temperature 

Initial Hold Time : Omin 

Ramp-1 : 12 °C/min 

Final Temperature : 240°C 

Total run time : 15 min 

Carrier Gas Nitrogen/Helium (3 
ml/min or suitable as per 
column ID) 


B-2.2.5 Data Acquisition System 


Any suitable data integrator or PC based GC software 
which can handle features like external/nternal 
standard calculations, etc. 

B-2.3 Reagent 

B-2.3.1 Crotonaldehyde, pure AR grade 


B-2.4 Identification 
B-2.4.1 Identification 


Determine the retention time of product by injecting 
small amount of highly pure material either 
individually or synthetic blend mixture. 


B-2.4.2 Analysis Procedure 


Inject 1 ul of sample without any air bubble trapped 
in the syringe. Determine the mass concentration of 
all products by area normalization method. 


Calculate the assay of crotonaldehyde on dry basis as 
below: 
Assay = Crotonaldehyde by GC — 
Water x Crotonaldehyde by GC 
базу ббс. гы 
Acidity x Crotonaldehyde by GC 
100 ) 


B-3GAS CHROMATOGRAPHIC METHOD 
(FOR GRADE 2) 


B-3.1 General 


A representative sample is introduced into a gas 
chromatograph equipped with a porous polymer 
adsorbent packed column. Suitable carrier gas 
transports the vaporized sample through the column 
where the components are separated by the 
chromatographic process. Components are sensed by 
a thermal conductivity detector as they elute from the 
column. The detector signal is processed by an 
electronic data acquisition system. The product and 
other components are identified by comparing their 
retention times to the ones identified by analyzing 
standards under identical conditions. The 
concentration of all components are determined in 
mass percent area by area normalization of the peak 
areas. 


B-3.2 Apparatus 
B-3.2.1 Gas Chromatograph 


Any gas liquid chromatograph equipped with direct 
injector and thermal conductivity detector (TCD) can 
be used. Carrier gas controls shall be of adequate 
precision to provide reproducible column flows. 
Pressure control devices and gauges shall be designed 
to attain the linear velocity required in the column 
used. A thermal conductivity detector with associated 
gas controls and electronics, designed for optimum 
response with packed columns, is required. 


B-3.2.2 Sample Introduction 


Manual or automatic liquid syringe sample injection 
to the injector is employed. Devices capable of 0.5 ul 
to 1.0 ul injections are suitable. It should be noted that 
poor injection technique and overloading the column 
can result in poor resolution. 


B-3.2.3 Column 


This test method utilizes a packed (SS or glass) 
column with 3 m in length, 3.18 mm outer diameter, 
or suitable length. 


NOTE — Porapak Qis an ethylvinylbenzene and 
divinylbenzene copolymer bead which is used in 
packed column gas chromatography for separating light 
gases and volatiles. 


IS 2632 : 2023 


B-3.2.4 Typical Instrument Condition 


Detector Thermal Conductivity 
Detector (TCD) 

Injector : 240°C 

Temperature 

Detector : 240°C 

Temperature 

Oven Temperature 

program 

Initial Temperature : 160°C 

Initial Hold Time : 0min 

Ramp 1 : 8?C/ min 

Final Temperature : 240°C 

Hold Time : 6min 

Total run time : 16min 

Carrier Gas Hydrogen (30 ml/min) 


B-3.2.5 Data Acquisition System 


Any suitable data integrator or PC based GC software 
which can handle features like external/nternal 
standard calculations, etc. 


B-3.3 Reagent 


B-3.3.1 Crotonaldehyde, pure AR Grade 


B-3.4 Identification 


B-3.4.1 Identification 


Determine the retention time of product by injecting 
small amount of highly pure material either 
individually or synthetic blend mixture. 


B-3.4.2 Analysis Procedure 


Inject 1 ul of sample without any air bubble trapped 
in the syringe. Determine the mass concentration of 
product by area normalization method. 


Calculate the assay of crotonaldehyde on dry basis as 
below: 


Crotonaldehyde by GC E 


(acidity x Crotonaldehyde by GC) 
100 


Assay = 


NOTE — The above gas chromatographic conditions are 
suggestive. However any GC having different columns 
(packed/Capillary having different length/diameter/film 
thickness) and different carrier gas (He, Н» or N2), with 
different calibration technique (internal standard, external 
standard, area normalization) may be used provided 
standardization/calibrations are done after setting up 


chromatographic conditions for required resolution. 


IS 2632 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
DETERMINATION OF ACIDITY 
[Table 1, SI No. (iii) and (іу)] 


C-1 REAGENTS 


C-1.1 Rectified Spirit, 95 percent (see IS 323). 


C-1.2 Standard Sodium Hydroxide Solution, less 
than equal to 0.1 N. 


C-1.3 Phenolphthalein indicator 


Dissolve 0.5 g of phenolphthalein in 60 ml of rectified 
spirit diluted with water to 100 ml. Make the solution 
faintly pink by adding dilute sodium hydroxide 
solution. 


C-2 PROCEDURE 


Depending on the degree of acidity, chooses a 
suitable quantity of the material. Dissolve the 
material in 50 ml of rectified spirit, neutralized to 
phenolphthalein and titrate the mixture with standard 
sodium hydroxide solution using 0.5 ml of the 
phenolphthalein indicator. 


C-3 CALCULATION 


C-3.1 Calculation for Grade 1 


Acidity (as crotonic acid), percent by weight 


. 86xVxN 
~ W 


where 


V = volume of standard sodium hydroxide 
solution, ml; 

N = normality of standard sodium hydroxide 
solution; and 

W = weight of the material taken for the test, g. 


C-3.2 Calculation for Grade 2 
6xVxN 


Acidity (as acetic acid), percent by weight — m 


where 


V = volume of standard sodium hydroxide 
solution, ml; 
М = normality of standard sodium hydroxide 
solution; and 
W = weight of the material taken for the test, g. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.1) 


SAMPLING OF CROTONALDEHYDE 


D-1 GENERAL 
SAMPLING 


REQUIREMENTS OF 


D-1.1 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling test 
samples, the following precautions and directions 
shall be observed. 


D-1.2 Samples shall be taken in a protected area with 
good ventilation. 


D-1.3 Sampling instrument shall be clean and dry. 


D-1.4 Precautions shall be taken to protect the 
samples, the material being sampled, the sampling 
instrument and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination. 


D-1.5 To draw a representative sample, the contents 
of each container selected for sampling shall be 
mixed as thoroughly as possible by shaking, stirring, 


rolling, circulation of storage tank or by any other 
suitable means. 


D-1.6 The samples shall be placed in suitable, clean, 
dry and air-tight, amber-coloured glass or metal 
containers on which the material has no action. 


D-1.7 The sample containers shall be of such a size 
that they are almost completely filled by the sample. 


D-1.8 Each sample container shall be seated air-tight 
with a suitable stopper after filling and marked with 
the manufacturer's name or trademark, the month and 
year of manufacture of the material, the batch number 
Gf available), and other details of sampling, such as 
the date of sampling, sampler's name, etc. 


D-2 SAMPLING INSTRUMENT 


D-2.1 It is made of thick glass or metal on which the 


material has no action and is 20 mm to 40 mm in 
diameter and 400 mm to 800 mm in length 
(see Fig. 1). The upper and lower ends are conical 
and reach 5 mm to 10 mm diameter at the narrow 
ends. Handling is facilitated by two rings at the 


IS 2632 : 2023 


upper end. For drawing samples, the apparatus is 
first closed at the top with the thumb or a stopper and 
lowered till a desired depth is reached. It is then 
opened for a short time to admit the material at the 
desired depth and finally closed and withdrawn. 


-e|R-5 1010mm ф 


Y 


400 TO 800 mm 


Q 


О 


20 TO 40 mm ф 


41-5 TO 10 mm ф 


Fic. 1 SAMPLING TUBE 


D-2.2 For small containers, the size and shape of the 
sampling tube may be altered suitably. 


D-2.3 In case of sampling from bulk storage tank 
(through circulation pump sampling valve) suitable 
sampling container can be used. 


D-2.4 In case of filled tanker deeper sampler may be 
used (sampling from top side) or through sample 
point arranged to filling line, if tanker/container is 
under nitrogen pressure (special case) 


D-3 SCALE OF SAMPLING 
D-3.1 Lot 


In any consignment, all the containers of the same 


size and drawn from the same batch of manufacture 
In any consignment, all the containers of the same 
size and drawn from the same batch of manufacture 
shall constitute a lot. If a consignment is known to 
consist of different batches of manufacture or of 
different sizes of containers, the containers 
belonging to the same batch and size shall be 
grouped together and each such group shall 
constitute a separate lot. 


D-3.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
in a lot to the requirements of the specification, tests 
shall he carried out for each lot separately. The 
number of containers to be selected for this purpose 
from a lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall 
be in accordance with the col 1 and 2 of Table 2. 


IS 2632 : 2023 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
(Clause D-3.2) 


Lot Size No. of Containers to be Selected 
N n 
(1) (2) 
Up to 3 * 
4to 15 3 
16 to 40 4 
41 to 65 5 
66 to 110 7 
111 to 180 8 
181 to 300 9 
301 and above 10 


*When the lot size is 3 or less, the number of containers to be selected and the method of judging the conformity of the lot to the 
specification requirements shall be as agreed between the purchaser and the supplier. 


D-3.3 These containers shall be selected at random 
from the lot and in older to ensure randomness of 
selection a random number table as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier shall be used. 
In case such a Table 1, not available, the following 
procedure is recommended for use: 


Arrange all the containers in the lot in a systematic 
manner and starting from any container, count them 
as 1, 2, .... upto r and so on, where r is the integral 
part of N/n (N being the lot size and n number of 
containers to be selected). Every г" container thus 
counted shall be withdrawn to give a sample for 
tests. 


D-4 PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 


D-4.1 From each of the containers selected 
according to D-3.3, a small representative portion of 
the material sufficient for carrying out tests as 


indicated in 4 shall be drawn with the help of the 
sampling tube (see D-2.1). 


D-4.2 Out of these portions, equal quantity of 
material shall be taken and mixed thoroughly to 
form a composite sample, not less than 1 500 ml. 
The composite test sample shall be divided into 
three equal parts, one for the purchaser, another for 
the supplier and the third to be used as a referee 
sample. 


D-4.3 The composite samples shall be transferred to 
containers of 600 ml capacity and shall be sealed and 
marked with full identification particulars given in 
D-1.7. 


D-4.4 The referee test sample shall also bear the seal 
of both the purchaser and the supplier. It shall be 
kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier, to be used in the case of any dispute 
between the two. 


IS 2632 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Organic Chemicals, Alcohols and Allied Products Sectional Committee, PCD 09 


Organization 


Chemical Engineering and Process Development Division, 
NCL, Pune 


Alkyl Amines Chemicals Ltd, Mumbai 


All India Alcohol-Based Industries Development 
Association (AABIDA), Mumbai 


All India Distillers Association (AIDA), New Delhi 


BASF India Ltd, Mumbai 


CSIR- Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow 


Chemical And Petrochemicals Manufacturers Association 
(CPMA), New Delhi 


Deepak Fertilizer, New Delhi 


Deepak Phenolics Limited, Vadodara 


Dow Chemical International Private Ltd, Mumbai 


Godavari Biorefineries, Mumbai 


Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Company Ltd, Gujarat 


Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL), Mumbai 


India Glycols Ltd, Uttarakhand 


Indian Chemical Council (ICC), Mumbai 


Jubilant Life Sciences Ltd, Uttar Pradesh 


Representative(s) 


DRC. V. RODE (Chairperson) 


SHRIS. V. NIKUMBHE 
SHRI SAMEER KATDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI K. L. RAPHAEL 
SHRI KIRTI GAJJAR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. N. RAINA 


SHRI KIRAN BHAT 
SHRI HEMAL (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV KANOJIYA 


SHRI MAHINDER SINGH 


DRL. B. YADAWA 
SHRI SURESH AMLE (Alternate) 


SHRI DHARMESH SIDDHAPURIA 


SHRI SANDIP KUMAR PANDYA (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHANDOSS 
SHRI GOVIND GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANUL LAXMANRAO PAGAR 
SHRI APPASAHEB J. WANI (Alternate) 


SHRI R. M. PATEL 
SHRIC. S. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI DELEEP KUMAR K. 
SHRI V. MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRIS. R. SONI 
SHRI ALOK SINGHAL (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI J. SEVAK (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI MOHAN LOHANI 


IS 2632 : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 


Laxmi Organic Industries, Mumbai SHRI J. P. SURYAVANSHI 
DR VIJAY S. MISHRA (Alternate) 


Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of SHRI O. P. SHARMA 
Chemicals & Fertilizers, New Delhi SHRI V ARUN SINGH POONIA (Alternate) 
National Chemical Laboratory (NCL), Pune DR RAVINDAR KONTHAM 


DR UDAYA KIRAN MARELLI (Alternate) 


National Test House (NTH) , Ghaziabad SHRI DEBASHIS SAHA 
DR GOPAL KRISHAN (Alternate) 


Reliance India Ltd (RIL), Mumbai SHRI K. K. SREERAMACHANDRAN 
SHRI VASANT WARKE (Alternate) 


United Phosphorus Limited (UPL), Mumbai SHRI M. D. VACHHANI 


In Personal Capacity, (37 Nandanvan Society, Near GNFC DR M. J. KAPADIA 
Township, Narmadanagar, Bharuch, Gujarat — 392015) 


BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI NAGAMANI T., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED 
PRODUCTS), [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
MiSS ADITI CHOUDHARY 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED PRODUCTS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 09 (18190). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


