IS 1200 (Part 11) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IRRA HAF 


al ama usa 


at 11 Mar, wet hasnt, ger fea (Set) a 
aa fart (enfer) 


(Aer qero) 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND 
CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS 


PART 11 PAVING, FLOOR FINISHES, DADO AND SKIRTING 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 17.020; 91.040.01; 91.060.30; 93.010 


O BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 2 


Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering (Excluding Water Resources Development) Sectional 
Committee, CED 44 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 11) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Method of Measurement of Works of Civil Engineering (Excluding Water Resources Development) 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Measurement occupies a very important place in the planning and execution of any civil engineering work from 
the time of first estimates to the final completion and settlement of payments for a project. Methods followed for 
measurement are not uniform and considerable difference exists between practices followed by different 
construction agencies and also among various Central and State Government departments. While it is recognized 
that each system of measurement has to be specifically related to administrative and financial organizations 
within the department responsible for the work, a unification of various systems at technical level has been 
accepted as very desirable specially as it permits a wider range of operation civil engineering contractors and 
eliminates ambiguities arising out of inadequate understanding of various systems followed. 


Among various civil engineering items, measurement of buildings was the first to be taken up for standardization 
and this standard having provisions relating to building work was first published in 1958 and then revised in 
1964, 1971 and 1977. 


This revision has been brought out to incorporate the changes found necessary in light of usage of this standard 
and suggestions made by various implementing bodies. The significant modifications in this revision are: 


a) Incorporation of Amendment No. 1; 

b) Detailed revised provision on in-situ finishes on dados and skirting (including raking dados and skirtings); 
c) Revised provision on dividing strips in in-situ finishes; 

d) Revised provision on dividing strips in tile, slab or block finishes; and 

e) Detailed revised provision on particulars of sheet finishes. 


SP 27 : 1997 ‘Handbook on method of measurement of buildings works (first revision)’ published earlier by the 
Committee covering the consolidated provisions of all the Parts of IS 1200 shall be revised after the revision of 
the other Parts of IS 1200. 


For standards on method of measurement of river valley projects, the Indian Standards formulated by the 
Measurement and Cost Analysis of Works for River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, WRD 23 under the 
Water Resources Division Council may be referred. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a measurement shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1200 (Part 11) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF BUILDING AND 
CIVIL ENGINEERING WORKS 


PART 11 PAVING, FLOOR FINISHES, DADO AND SKIRTING 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 11) covers the method of 
measurement of paving, floor finishes, dado and 
skirting in buildings and civil engineering works. 


2 GENERAL 


2.1 Clubbing of Items 


Ttems may be clubbed together provided that the break 
up of the clubbed items is agreed to be on the basis of 
the detailed description of the items. 


2.2 Booking of Dimensions 


In booking of dimensions, the order shall be consistent 
and generally in the sequence of length, breadth or 
width and height or depth or thickness. 


2.3 Description of Items 


The description of each item shall, unless otherwise 
stated, be held to include wherever necessary, 
conveyance and delivery, handling unloading, storing 
fabrication, hoisting, all labour for finishing to required 
shape and size, setting, fitting and fixing in position, 
straight cutting and waste, return of packings, and other 
incidental operations. 


2.4 Dimension 


All work shall be measured as laid in the decimal 
system as under unless otherwise stated hereinafter. 
The length and breadth shall be measured before laying 
skirting, dado or wall plaster: 


a) Dimensions shall be measured to the nearest 
0.01 m; and 


b) Areas shall be worked out to nearest 0.01 m?. 


2.5 Bills of Quantities 


Items of work shall fully describe the materials and 
workmanship and accurately represent the work to be 
executed. 


2.6 Cuttings 


All cuttings shall unless otherwise stated be held to 


include the consequent waste. 


2.7 Mode of Measurement 


All work shall be measured in square metres unless 
otherwise stated. Deductions for ends of dissimilar 
materials or other articles embedded shall not be made 
for areas not exceeding 0.1 m?. 


2.7.1 Work in isolated width not matching with the 
general finish shall be measured as given below: 


a) Width 30 cm and below in running metres (the 
description to include for cutting to edges, if 
any); and 

b) Width above 30 cm in square metres. 


2.8 Expansion and dummy joints shall be described 
and measured separately in running metres stating 
depth and width of joints. The filler shall be described 
and included in the description of item. 


2.9 Work in repairs shall be so described and 
preparation of old surfaces to receive such work shall 
be included in the description of item. 


2.10 Work in isolated areas not exceeding 1 m? each 
shall be so described stating the nature thereof. 


2.11 Work to a pattern or in more than one colour shall 
be so described stating the nature thereof. 


2.12 Curved work, conical work and spherical work 
shall be described separately stating the radius. 


2.12.1 Labour in such works shall be so described and 
measured separately. 


3 IN-SITU FINSIHES 


3.1 In-situ finishes shall be classified according to the 
kind of material (for example, granolithic, terrazzo, 
mosaic, etc) and measured separately. The following 
particulars shall be given for each classification: 


a) Composition and mix; 

b) Thickness, which shall be exclusive of keys, 
grooves and open joints; 

c) Number of coats; 

d) Nature of surface treatment (for example, steel 


IS 1200 (Part 11) : 2013 


trowelled, wood floated, polished, sprinkled 
with carborundum powder, etc); 

e) Nature of base and any special treatment to 
the same; and 

f) Situations, for example, whether in flooring 
or in dado/skirting. 


3.2 Work executed to initiate stone slab, or stone blocks 
shall be so described stating the average size of the 
slabs or blocks, the surface finish (for example, plain, 
rough, etc). 


3.3 Work in floors laid in bays and work to floors laid 
in panels between dividing strips shall be so described 
stating the size of bay or area of panel or bay. The 
dividing strip shall be measured separately (see 3.13). 


3.4 Work in floors laid in one operation with the base 
concrete shall be so described. 


3.5 No deduction shall be made for voids not exceeding 
0.2 m?. 


3.6 Work in treads, risers and edges of landings shall 
be measured in square metres. Work in landings shall 
be included in the main item. 


3.7 Work to wall strings and open strings shall be 
measured in square metres. Ends, angles, ramps and 
wreathed corners shall be included with the item. 


3.8 Moulded nosings shall be measured in running 
metres; returned moulded ends and angles to mouldings 
shall be included in the description. 


3.9 Dados (including raking dados) shall be measured 
in square metres. Skirting (including raking skirting) 
up to a height of 150 mm shall be measured in running 
metres. Dados ad skirting over 150 mm in height shall 
be measured in square metres. Mitres, stops, returned 
ends and the like shall be included with the item. 


3.10 Work to kerbs shall be measured in running metres 
stating the girth on face. Raking kerbs and vertical kerbs 
shall each be so described. Arrises, rounded edges and 
coves shall be included in the description. Angles and 
intersections shall be enumerated separately. 


3.11 Forming channels shall be measured in running 
metres as extra over the finishing in which they occur 
stating the girth on face. Arrises shall be included in 
the description. Ends, angles, intersections and outlets 
shall each be enumerated separately. 


3.12 Lining to channels shall be measured in running 
metres stating the girth on face. Arrises and coves shall 
be included in the description. Ends, angles, 
intersections and outlets shall each be enumerated 
separately. 


3.13 Dividing strips shall be described stating material, 


size and thickness and measured separately in running 
metres. Description shall include for ends, angles and 
intersections and method of fixing, embedding, etc. 


4 TILE, SLAB OR BLOCK FINISHES 
4.1 Particulars of the following shall be given: 


a) Kind of tile, slab or block units (for example, 
precast concrete, precast terrazzo, brick, 
natural stone, cast stone, slate, marble, 
woodblocks, cork, rubber, etc); 


NOTE — In case of precast concrete work, the mix to 
be stated. 


b) Thickness and size of tile, slab or block units; 

c) Shape of units where other than rectangular; 

d) Nature of surface finish (for example, glazed, 
rubbed, polished, type of dressing in case of 
stone, etc); 

e) Bedding or other method of fixing units; 

f) Grouting, pointing or other finish to joints; 

g) Nature of base (for example, wood, screeded 
bed, concrete, brickwork, etc); 

h) Situations, for example, whether in flooring 
or in dado/skirting; and 


j) Layout of joints. 


4.2 Temporary moulds for precast tile, slab or block 
units shall be deemed to be included with the item. 


4.3 No deduction shall be made for voids not exceeding 
0.2 m?. 


4.4 Square cutting at joint and at boundaries shall be 
deemed to be included with the items except as 
provided in 4.5. Raking, cutting and curved cutting 
shall each be measured separately in running metres 
except where occurring within a pattern. In case of 
work laid to diagonal patterns, straight cutting at 
boundary (measured around the perimeter of each area) 
shall be measured in running metres. 


4.5 Fair edges, rebated edges, rounded edges, 
chamfered edges, splayed edges, bevelled edges and 
the like shall be measured separately in running metres 
including ends, angles, mitres, intersections, etc. 


4.6 Moulded edges, grooves, flutes and the like shall 
each be measured separately in running metres. Ends, 
angles and intersections shall each be enumerated 
separately. 


4.7 Cutting and fitting around steel stanchions and the 
like (grouped together) shall be described and 
enumerated. 


4.8 Cutting and fitting around pipes, tubes, bars, cables, 
conduits and the like shall be described and 
enumerated. 


4.9 Cutting and fitting around profile of steps shall be 
enumerated. 


4.10 Cutting and fitting around ducting brackets, 
newels, WC pedestals, vents, soot-doors and the like 
(grouped together) shall be enumerated stating the size 
in stages of 25 cm girth. 


4.11 Dividing strips shall be described stating material, 
size and thickness and measured separately in running 
metres. Description shall include for ends, angles and 
intersections and method of fixing, embedding, etc. 


4.12 Dados (including raking dados) shall be measured, 
in square metres. Skirting (including raking skirting) 
shall be measured in running metres stating the height. 
Mitres, stops, returned ends and the like shall be 
included with the item. 


4.13 Channels, and lining to channels shall each be 
measured separately in running metres describing the 
section and average depth. Channels to falls shall be 
so described. Rounded edges shall be included in the 
description. Ends, angles, intersections and outlets shall 
each be enumerated separately. 


4.14 Kerbs shall be measured in running metres 
describing the section and shall include rounded edges 
coves, etc. 


4.15 Special tiles and special slabs to form coved 
internal angels of any radius, rounded external angles, 
architraves, mouldings, ceiling ribs, cornices and the 
like shall each be measured in running metres 
separately according to size and shape. 


4.16 Work to treads, risers and edges of landings shall 
be measured separately in square metres. Work in 
landings shall be included in the main item. 


5 SHEET FINISHES 
5.1 Particulars of the following shall be given: 


a) Kind of sheeting (linoleum, cork, rubber, 
alloy, etc); 
b) Thickness of sheeting; 
c) Method of laying, fixing and jointing; and 
d) Description of base. 
5.2 Laps and seams shall be included in the description 


stating the lap and type of seam and shall not be 
measured separately. 


5.3 Sheet finishes to vertical inclined and horizontal 
surfaces shall be measured separately. 


5.4 No deduction shall be made for voids not exceeding 
0.2 m?. 


IS 1200 (Part 11) : 2013 


5.5 Raking cutting and curved cutting shall each be 
measured separately in running metres except where 
occurring within a pattern (see 2.11). Forming rounded 
external angels and coved internal angles shall each 
be measured separately in running metres stating the 
girth. 


5.6 Cover strips over joints of finishes shall be 
described stating the size and measured, in running 
metres. Description shall include for ends, angles and 
intersections. 


5.7 Cutting and fitting around steel stanchions and the 
like (grouped together) shall be described and 
enumerated. 


5.8 Cutting and fitting around pipes, tubes, bars, cables, 
conduits and the like shall be described and 
enumerated. 


5.9 Cutting and fitting around profile of steps shall be 
enumerated. 


5.10 Cutting and fitting around ducting brackets, 
newels, WC pedestals, vents, soot-doors and the like 
(grouped together) shall be enumerated stating the size 
in stages of 25 cm girth. 


6 BEDDING AND BACKINGS 
6.1 Particulars of the following shall be given: 


a) Composition and mix; 

b) Thickness which shall be exclusive of keys, 
grooves, open joints; and 

c) Nature of base and any treatment of the same. 


6.2 Screeded beds for all floors finishes shall be 
described measured. 


6.3 No deduction shall be made for voids not exceeding 
0.2 m?. 


6.4 Bedding and backing laid in bays or laid in panels 
between dividing strips shall be so described stating 
the size of bay or area of panel or bay. 


6.5 Bedding and backing in treads, risers and edges of 
landings shall each be measured separately in square 
metres. Work in landings shall be included in the main 
item. 


6.6 Bedding and backing in skirting and dados shall 
be measured separately. 


6.7 Forming channels in beds shall be measured, in 
running metres, as extra over the beds in which they 
occur Stating the girth on face. Arrises, rounded edges, 
coves, ends, angles, intersections, outlets and the like 
shall be included with the items. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 44 (7800). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


