INATA Ah IS 18308 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Urea 


Polygraph 


ICS 07.140 


© BIS 2023 


т Ҥч э] 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


МӘР ЖЕШ, HA чач, 9 SEITE IE AHL AMT, 95 Ree - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 4 


Anatomy and Forensic Sciences Equipment Sectional Committee, MHD 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Anatomy and 
Forensic Sciences Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by Medical Equipment and Hospital 
Planning Division Council. 


This standard describes the specifications for polygraph which is used for recording of physiological parameters 
of human and animal subjects, together with a range of specialized application programs, provides a versatile data 
recording and analysis system when used with a compatible computer. Polygraph is used for teaching and research 
application and environment only. 


It is important that individuals following this procedure are experienced and aware of the experimental protocols, 
and be familiar with the human and animal safety, in order to avoid and damage during the experiment. It is not 
intended to be used to diagnose, treat or monitor a subject in hospital or domestic environment. Furthermore, it is 
not intended for the prevention, curing or alleviation of disease, injury or handicap. It should be installed, used 
and operated under the supervision of an appropriately qualified life-science researcher. The typical usage 
environment is a research or teaching lab or hospital. Environmental factors, temperature, humidity, ventilation, 
noise intensity and light intensity must be maintained at appropriate levels as they may contribute to the levels of 
mouse anxiety. 


The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the 
following International Standards/Other Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use in 
conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard Title 
ТЕС 61326-1: 2020 Electrical equipment for measurement, control and laboratory use — 


EMC requirements — Part 1: General requirements 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision). The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value shall be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18308 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
POLYGRAPH 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard specifies requirements for 
polygraph intended for research and teaching use. 
This standard covers the general description of 
standard materials, technical parameters, test 
settings, and procedures. The test methods described 
herein must follow the procedure strictly and are 
intended for use by individuals who have been 
trained and competent in performing the procedures. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on the standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 13450 (Part 1) : Medical electrical 
2018/IEC 60601-1: equipment: Part 1 General 


2012 requirements for basic 
safety and essential 
performance (second 
revision) 

IS/IEC 61010 (Part 1) Safety requirements for 

:2010 electrical equipment for 


measurement, control, and 
laboratory use: Part 1 
General requirements 


3 REQUIREMENTS 
3.1 Polygraph 


The system should comprise of multiple transducers 
to acquire the different physiological parameters 
along with an analysis software. The software 
should offer comprehensive signal processing, data 
acquisition, data recording, display, and analysis 
features for a variety of teaching and research 
application. The Polygraph should have high quality 
of aluminum enclosure to ensure the longevityof the 
system. 


3.2 Self-Test 


The Polygraph should be able to perform a 
diagnostic self-test each time it is switched on. 


Before connecting it to the computer for the first 
time, it should test that the system is functioning 


properly. 
3.3 Hardware and Software 


3.3.1 The system should be able to record 
simultaneous atleast 4 parameters. 


3.3.2 It should have sampling rate of 40 kHz or 
more. 


3.3.3 It should have fully isolated stimulator for 
constant current & voltage stimulation of output 
range (0 mA to 20 mA) with pulse duration of 50 us 
to 200 us. 


3.3.4 It must have preferred parameters for wireless 
monitoring ECG, SPO», PPG, Respiration, GSR and 
Temperature with data logging on minimum 8 GB 
and real time acquisition and Analysis mode. 


3.3.5 The system should be provided with a printer 
and a compatible computer having suitable 
operating system with minimum 4 GB RAM, 
minimum 500 GB storage, minimum 1.6 GHz quad 
core processor, a suitable monitor and minimum 
1 КУА UPS. 


3.3.6 The software should have step by step 
instructions, protocol, and experimental design for 
performing various experiments in physiology 
teaching applications. 


3.3.7 It should have sample data for animal 
experiments for demonstrating to the students. 


3.3.8 It should have facility for automatic analysis 
while recording and after recording for ECG, heart 
rate variability, blood pressure, peak analysis and 
spectrum analysis. 


3.3.9 The system should be able to record beat to beat 
blood pressure for monitoring tilt table task. It should 
be supplied with motorized tilt table (0 ° to 90°). 


3.4 Safety Requirements 


The device should comply with all safety 
requirements as described in IS 17724 (Part 1) 
ІЕС 61010-1 2016 Safety requirements for 
electrical equipment for measurement, control, and 
laboratory use: Part 1 General requirements. 


IS 18308 : 2023 


3.5 Troubleshooting 


The troubleshooting steps should be instructed in the 
user manual of the system. 


3.6 Maintenance 


The system should be maintenance-free and should 
not require periodic calibration or adjustment to 
ensure safe operation. Internal diagnostic software 
should able to perform system checks during power 
up and will report errors if a significant problem is 
found. 


4 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 
4.1 Subject 


Subjects (human or rodent) before testing require 
training and should be acclimated to testing 
environment and experimenter. 


4.2 Environmental factors 


Environmental factors may contribute to the levels of 
anxiety within the subject therefore temperature, 
humidity, ventilation, noise intensity and lighting 
intensity must be maintained at levels appropriate. 
In order to avoid anomalous results, it is essential 
that the subject be kept in a uniform environment 
before and after testing. 


4.3 Temperature 


The temperature range in the testing room may be 
adjusted at 5 °C to 35 °C for subject.The temperature 
range could change depending on the experimental 
protocol. 


4.4 Humidity 


The humidity range in the testing room may be 
adjusted at 50 percent + 20 percent. 


4.5 Lighting 


Room lighting in the testing room is by indirect 
lighting via mounted LED lights witha dimmer 
switch illuminated to a setting which produces a dim 
light level. 


4.6 Noise 
The ambient background noise levels in the 


procedure room may be adjusted to 60 dB to 70 dB. 
Audible timers should be avoided during this test. 


5 TEST METHODS 
5.1 Procedure 


For Human subject, subject should be relaxed before 
the experiment. After connecting the transducersfor 
the relevant physiological parameters, the 
experiment should start for collecting the baseline 
for first 5 minutes o 10 minutes. Then experimenter 
can guide the subject for different maneuver 
depending on the experiment protocol. For animal 
subject, subject should be anesthetized before the 
experiment. After connecting the transducers for the 
relevant physiological parameters, the experiment 
should start for collecting the baseline for first 
5 minutes to 10 minutes. The experimenter can start 
acquiring the physiological parameters depending 
on the experiment protocol with relevant transducers 
and accessories. 


6 PARAMETERS 


The Polygraph system should be able to acquire and 
analyze the below mentioned parameters: 


a) Pulse, Photoplethysmography (PPG), 
Electrocardiogram (ECG), Pulse Transit 
Time, Heart Rate Variability (HRV); 


b) Beat to beat, blood pressure, non-invasive 
cardiac output, stroke volume and 
baroreflex sensitivity (BRS); 


c) ECG multi leads configurations for real 
time cardiac axis and vector analysis; 


d) Digital microphone for heart and lung 
sounds studies; 


e) Pulse wave velocity, deep breathing test, 
valsalva maneuver; 


f) Oxygen saturation (SPO), Acceleration 
(3 axis), Activity, Galvanic Skin 
Response (GSR) and Temperature, 
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 
Electromyogram (EMG), Nerve 
Conduction Study (NCV); 


g) Dynamometer to study hand grip test; and 


h) Four channel balance board for static post 
urography or body sway studies. 


7 REGULATORY SYMBOLS 


The device shall comply with IS 13450 (Part 1) : 
2018/IEC 60601- 1 : 2012 and IS 17784 (Part 1)/IEC 
61326-1 : 2020, and carry one or more of the safety 
symbols below. 


7.1 B (Body Protected) Symbol 


Equipment marked with this symbol is suitable for 
connection to humans and animals provided there is 
not direct electrical connection to the heart and 
provides basic protection against electric shock. 


IS 18308 : 2023 


7.2 BF (Body Protected-Floating) Symbol 

This means that the input connectors are suitable for 
connection to humans and animals provided there is 
no direct electrical connection to the heart and 


provides increased protection against electric shock 
over B rated applied parts. 


Type B 
Applied 
Part 


Type 
BF 
Applied 
Part 


FIG. 1 SYMBOLS 


7.3 Warning Symbol 


The exclamation mark inside a triangle means that the 
supplied documentation must be consulted for 
operating, cautionary or safety information before 
using the device. 


7.4 WEEE Directive Symbol 


Unwanted equipment bearing the Waste Electrical 
and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive 
symbol requires separate waste collection. 


7.5 Date of Manufacture/Manufacturer’s Name 
Symbol 


This symbol indicates the date of manufacture of the 
device and the name of the manufacturer. 


8 DATA RECORDS AND REPORTS 


The software should be able to record and save the 
recorded data for desired interpretation of the data. 


9 OPERATING MANUAL 


Each polygraph system shall be accompanied by 
an operating manual which shall contain the 
following information: 


a) Instructions and plan for installation, 


b) Operation of the apparatus, and 


c) Routine maintenance and service. 
10 MARKING 


The apparatus shall be legibly and indelibly marked 
at a suitable place with the designation number; the 
manufacturer’s name, initials, or recognized trade- 
mark; serial number; and the country of 
manufacture. 


10.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
product(s) may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


11 PACKAGING 


The apparatus shall be securely packed, in any 
manner, acceptable to the purchaser, so as to 
minimize the risk of damage in handling, transport 
and storage. 


IS 18308 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Anatomy and Forensic Sciences Equipment Sectional Committee, MHD 23 


Organization 
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Association of Indian Medical Device Industry, 
New Delhi 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Hyderabad 


Sri Ramachandra Medical College & Research Institute, 
Chennai 


Directorate General of Health Services, Delhi 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCH, New Delhi 

Indian Council of Medical Research, Delhi 


Indian Medical Association, Delhi 


Kalam Institute of Health Technology, Visakhapatnam 


LNJN National Institute of Criminology and Forensic 


Science, Delhi 


Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


National Health Systems Resource Centre, New Delhi 


VMMC & Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
DR SABITA MISHRA (Chairperson) 


SHRI RAJESH KHATRI 
MRS LALITA KHATRI (Alternate) 


DR A. KIRAN KUMAR 


DR KALPANA RAMACHANDRAN 
DR SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANITA TULI 
DR M. К. WAHI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR 
DR SANDEEP SEWLIKAR (Alternate) 


DR GEETA JOTWANI 


DRR. У. ASOKAN 
DRN. V. KAMAT (Alternate) 


SHRI KINGSHUK PODDAR 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR CHEKURI (Alternate) 


DR K. P. S. KUSHWAHA 
DR J. K. MODI (Alternate) 


DR DINESH KUMAR 
DR SRINIVAS M. (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI VERTIKA AGARWAL 
SHRI BHARAT BHUSHAN DAHIYA (Alternate) 


DR MANOJ KUMAR WAHI 
DRG. A. SUNIL KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI А. R. UNNIKRISHNAN, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND 
HOSPITAL PLANNING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 

GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms NAGAVARSHINIM. 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND HOSPITAL PLANNING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MHD 23 (16299). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


