eT d TT Ah IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


WR dra — чї Ti enc AT uter 
ате 
ATT 1 UHI Үл ch fero 
gaen utram faterat 
( TET Чаат ) 


Solar Heating — Domestic Water 
Heating Systems 


Part 1 Performance Rating Procedure 
Using Indoor Test Methods 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 27.160 
© BIS 2023 
“тї нї Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR YAA, 9 TEAK Me TH AMT, 48 19 - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Wes. TUNES и 


November 2023 Price Group 12 


Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


A wide variety of Solar Domestic Hot Water (SDHW) systems are marketed throughout the world. A natural 
consequence of this highly dispersed activity is the need to understand, predict and compare the performance of 
these systems. Standardized test methods are essential for assessing the performance potential. This standard has 
been developed to facilitate the comparison of these systems. 


Because of the various testing methodologies for determining thermal performance are being followed and 
acceptance in the industry, it was decided to prepare separate parts of this standard each covering a separate 
methodology. 


This standard (Part 1) applies to solar domestic water heating systems designed to heat water to be supplied for 
domestic water usage: 


a) This standard not intended for other than solar water heating systems designed solely for domestic water 
usage; 
b) The test procedures in this part are applicable to systems of 0.2 mš of solar storage capacity or less; 


c) This standard includes procedures for testing solar domestic hot water system either with solar irradiance 
simulators or thermal simulation (non-irradiated) methods; 


d) The test procedures in this standard employing a non-irradiated solar collector array in series with a 
conventional heat source do not apply to an integral collector storage system, a system in which 
thermosyphon flow occurs or to any system employing a collector/heating transfer fluid combination 
which cannot be tested in accordance with the collector test; 


e) The test procedures in this standard do not require the solar water heating system to be subjected to 
freezing conditions. Consequently, the energy consumed or lost by a system while operating in the freeze 
protection mode will not be determined; and 


f) If a solar system is designed to be used with non-freezing (anti-freezing inhibitors) fluids, the test 
procedures in this standard must use these fluids according to the manufacturer’s requirements. 


This standard was first published in 1991. The present revision has been taken up with a view to incorporating the 
modifications found necessary as a result of experience gained on the use of this standard. Also, in this revision, 
the standard has been brought into the latest style and format of Indian Standard, and references to Indian 
Standards, wherever applicable have been updated. 


Other parts of the standard under the general title ‘Solar heating — domestic water heating system’ are: 


Part 2 Procedure for system performance characterization and yearly performance predication; 


Part 3 Procedures for system component characterization and predication for yearly performance using 
component performance data; 


Part 4 Test methods to determine durability and reliability. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
SOLAR HEATING — DOMESTIC WATER HEATING SYSTEMS 


PART 1 PERFORMANCE RATING PROCEDURE USING INDOOR 
TEST METHODS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) specifies a uniform indoor 
method of testing for rating solar domestic water 
heating systems for thermal performance, under 
benchmark conditions. For the determination of yearly 
thermal performance, refer to Part 2 and Part 3. 


1.2 This standard is not intended to be used for 
testing the individual components of the system. 


1.3 This standard is not intended to abridge any 
safety or health requirements. 


1.4 This standard is not generally applicable to 
concentrating or evacuated tube systems, unless the 
requirements of 8.8.3 can be met. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these: 


IS No. Title 


IS 12933 Solar flat plate collector — 


Specification: 
(Part 1) : 2003 Requirements (second revision) 
(Part 2): 2003 Components (second revision) 


(Part 3): 2003 Measuring instruments (first 
revision) 


(Part 5): 2003 Test methods (second revision) 
3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Absorber — Device within a collector for 
absorbing radiant energy and transferring this 
energy as heat into a fluid. 


3.2 Accuracy — The ability of an instrument to indicate 
the true value of the measured physical quantity. 


3.3 Ambient Air — Air in the space (either indoors 
or outdoors) surrounding the thermal energy storage 
device or solar collectors, whichever is applicable. 


3.4 Angle of Incidence (of Direct Solar Radiation) 
— The angle between the solar radiation beam and 
the outward drawn normal from the plane 
considered. 


3.5 Aperture Area — The maximum projected area 
of a solar thermal collector through which the 
unconcentrated solar radiation is admitted. 


NOTE — For concentrating collectors, the gross aperture 
area includes any area of the reflector or refractor shaded by 
the receiver and its supports and including gaps between 
reflector segments within a collector module. Net aperture 
area excludes any shaded area or gaps between reflector 
segments and is sometimes called effective aperture area. 


3.6 Aperture Plane — The plane at or above the 
solar collector through which the unconcentrated 
solar radiation is admitted. 


3.7 Area, Gross Collector — The maximum 
projected area of a completed solar collector 
module, exclusive of integral means of mounting 
and connecting fluid conduits. For an array of 
collectors, including devices such as evacuated tube 
or concentrating collectors, gross area includes the 
entire area of the array. 


3.8 Auxiliary Energy — See 3.9. 


3.9 Auxiliary Thermal (Heat) Source — A source 
of thermal energy, other than solar, used to 
supplement the output provided by the solar energy 
system; usually in the form of electrical resistance 
heat. 


3.10 Collector, Concentrating — A solar collector 
that uses reflectors, lenses or other optical elements 
to redirect and concentrate the solar radiation 
passing through the aperture on to an absorber of 
which the surface area may be smaller than the 
aperture area. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


3.11 Collector, Flat-Plate — A non-concentrating 
solar collector in which the absorbing surface is 
essentially planar. 


3.12 Collector Loop Heater — A heater installed 
within the collector loop when testing the solar 
domestic water heating system with a non-irradiated 
array. 


3.13 Collector — A device containing an absorber. 


3.14 Collector Tilt Angle — The lower angle 
between the aperture plane of a solar collector and 
the horizontal plane. 


3.15 Components — Parts of the solar hot water 
system including but not limited to collectors, 
storage, pumps, heat exchanger, controls, etc. 


3.16 Control — Any device for regulation of the 
solar thermal system or component in normal 
operation, can be manual or automatic. 


3.17 Direct Irradiance — Irradiance produced by 
direct radiation on a given plane. 


3.18 Direct Solar Radiation — Radiation received 
from a small solid angle centered on the sun’s disk, 
on a given plane. 


NOTE — In general the direct solar radiation is measured 
by instruments with field of view angles of up to 15°. The 
refore a part of the scattered radiation around the sun’s disk 
(circumsolar radiation) is included. More than 
99 percent of the direct solar radiation on the earth’s surface 
is contained within the wavelength from 0.3 um to 3.0 um. 


3.19 Domestic — Refers to use in residential and 
small commercial buildings. 


3.20 Draw Rate — See 3.50. 


3.21 Equivalent Length — The length of a straight 
section of pipe or duct causing the same pressure 
drop as actually occurs within the system at the same 
flow rate. 


3.22 Fluid Transport — The transfer of air, water, 
or other fluid between components. 


3.23 Heat Exchanger — A device specifically 
designed to transfer heat between two physically 
separated fluids. Heat exchangers can have either 
single or double walls. 


3.24 Heat Transfer Fluid — A fluid that is used to 
transfer thermal energy between components in a 
system. 


3.25 Incident Angle — The angle formed between 
the incident ray and the normal is the angle of 
incidence. 


3.26 Irradiance — Power density of radiation 
incident on a surface, that is the quotient of the 
radiant flux incident on the surface and the area of 
that surface, or the rate at which radiant energy is 
incident on a surface, per unit area of that surface. 


NOTE — Solar irradiance is often termed “incident solar 


» 66. 


radiation intensity", “instantaneous insulation", or “incident 
radiant flux density" — the use of these terms is deprecated. 


3.27 Load — The daily system hot water load 
defined as the product of the mass, specific heat, and 
temperature increase of the water as it passes 
through the solar hot water system. 


3.28 Potable — Means suitable for human 
consumption. 


3.29 Precision — The measure of the closeness of 
agreement among repeated measurements of the 
same physical quantity. 


3.30 Preheating — See 5. 


3.31 Pyranometer — Radiometer for measuring the 
irradiance on a plane receiver surface which results 
from the radiant fluxes incident from the hemisphere 
above within the wavelength range 0.3 um and 3 иш. 


NOTE — The given spectral range represents roughly the 
spectral range of solar radiation (also called solar or short 
wave range) at the ground and is only nominal. Depending 
on the material used for the domes which protect the 
receiver surface of a pyranometer the spectral limits of its 
responsivity meet more or less accurately the above 
mentioned limits. 


3.32 Pyrgeometer — Ап instrument for 
determining the irradiance on a plane receiving 
surface which results from the radiant fluxes 
incident from the hemisphere above within about the 
wavelength range 4 um to 50 um. 


NOTE — The given spectral range is nearly identical with 
those of the so-called terrestrial radiation or long wave 
radiation and is only nominal. Depending on the material 
used for the domes which protect the receiving surface of a 
pyrgeometer the spectral limits of its responsively meet 
more or less accurately the above mentioned limits. 


3.33 Pyrheliometer — A radiometer for measuring 
direct (solar) irradiance which results from the 
radiant fluxes incident from a well-defined solid 
angle whose axis is perpendicular to the plane 
receiver surface. 


NOTE — According to this definition pyrheliometer are 
applied to measure direct solar irradiance at normal 
incidence. The field of-view-angle of pyrheliometer range 
typically from 5 °C to 10 °C. 


3.34 Solar Collector — See 3.35. 


3.35 Solar Thermal Collector — A device designed 
to absorb solar radiation and to transfer the thermal 
energy so gained to a fluid passing through it. 


3.36 Solar Energy — The energy emitted by the sun 
in the form of electromagnetic radiation (primarily 
in the wavelength range of 0.3 um to 3 um) or any 
energy made available by the reception and 
conversion of solar radiation. 


3.37 Solar Contribution — The ratio of energy 
supplied by the solar part of a system to the total 
load. 


3.38 Solar Noon — For any given location solar 
noon is the local time of day when the sun is at its 
highest altitude for that day, that is the time when 
the sun crosses the observer's meridian. 


3.39 Solar Radiation — The radiation emitted by 
the sun. Practically all of the solar radiation incident 
at the earth's surface is at wavelengths between 
0.3 um to 3 um and is often termed “short wave 
radiation". 


3.40 Solar Irradiance Simulator — An artificial 
source of radiant energy simulating the solar 
radiation, usually an electric lamp or an array of such 
lamps and associated assembly. 


3.41 Solar Storage Capacity — The quantity of 
sensible heat that can be stored per unit volume of 
store for every degree of temperature change. 


3.42 Solar Hot Water System — The complete 
assembly of subsystems and components necessary 
to convert solar energy into thermal energy for the 
heating of water. It may include an auxiliary heat 
source. 


3.43 Standard Air — Air weighing 1.204 kg/m? 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


which approximates dry air at a temperature of 
150 °C and a barometric pressure of 101.325 kPa. 


3.44 Standard Barometric Pressure — The 
barometric pressure of 101.325 kPa at 0 °C 


3.45 Storage Device (Thermal) — The container(s) 
plus all contents of the container(s) used for storing 
thermal energy. 
NOTE — The transfer fluid and accessories such as heat 
exchangers, flow switching devices, valves, and baffles 


which are firmly fixed to the thermal storage container(s) 
are considered a part of the storage device. 


3.46 Storage Tank Volumetric Capacity — The 
measured volume of the fluid in the tank when full. 


3.47 Temperature, Ambient Air — The 
temperature of the air is surrounding the thermal 
energy storage device or solar collectors being 
tested. 

NOTE — Significant differences can occur over short 


distances, therefore, in particular applications, the method 
of measurement must be specified. 


3.48 Time Constant — The time required for a first 
order system to have its output change by 
63.2 percent of its final change in output following 
a step change in its input. 


3.49 Thermopile — A number of thermocouples 
wired consistently in series or parallel to measure 
small or average temperature differences. 


3.50 Water Draw Rate — The rate at which the hot 
water is withdrawn from the system at a specified 
time during the day. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


4 SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS 


Symbol Meaning 
Aa Collector module aperture area, m2 
AgFR(ta) en Intercept of the collector efficiency curve determined in accordance with 
4, collector tests, dimensionless 
Aa FRU, Slope of the collector efficiency curve determined in accordance with collector 
Ag tests, kJ/(h m? °C) 
Ag Gross collector area, m? 
Coc Specific heat of the transfer fluid used in the collector during the collector tests, 
kJ/(kg °C) 
Ср, Specific heat of the transfer fluid used in the collector during the solar hot water 
system test, kJ/(kg °C) 
Cp,w Specific heat of water, kJ/ (kg °C) 
D Nozzle throat diameter, m 
F Collector absorber plate efficiency factor, dimensionless 
Ер Collector heat removal factor, dimensionless 
Сър Beam irradiance from solar irradiance measured іп а plane parallel to the 
collector aperture, kJ/(m7h) 
Ga Diffuse irradiance from solar irradiance measured in a plane parallel to the 
collector aperture, kJ/(m?h) 
G. Total (global) irradiance incident upon the aperture plane of the collector, 
kJ/(m°h) 
Ka: Incident angle modifier, dimensionless 
M Number of rows of collector modules in parallel in the collector array, 
dimensionless 
m. Mass flow rate of the transfer fluid through the collector during the collector tests, 
kg/s 
mj The mass of the j withdrawal of water, kg 
ms Mass flow rate of the transfer fluid through the collector array during the solar 
hot water system test, kg/s 
N Number of collector modules in series in each parallel row in the collector array, 
dimensionless 
NS Subscript to denote solar energy input 
Qaux Daily energy consumed for auxiliary heating in the solar hot water system, kJ 
01м Daily system hot water load defined as the product of ће mass, specific heat, and 
temperature increase of the water as it passes through the solar hot water system 
for the case of no solar energy input, kJ 
QLos Thermal losses from solar system during the test day, kJ 
01.5 Daily system hot water load defined as the product of ће mass, specific heat, апа 
temperature increase of the water as it passes through the solar hot water system 
for the case of solar energy input, kJ 
Qa Rate of energy output from the collector loop heater in series with the non- 
irradiated solar collector array (if used), kJ/h 
QPAR Daily energy consumed for parasitic power by pumps, controls, solenoid valves, 
etc, in the solar hot water system, kJ 
QouTPUT Energy output from the collector loop heater (if used) during the test, kJ 
Qs Daily net energy output from the solar collector and solar storage parts of the 
solar hot water system, kJ 
ЭЛ Rate of useful heat output from the collector, kJ/h 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Symbol Meaning 
R Rating number which is the ratio of the auxiliary plus parasitic energy to 
; : + : : 
the daily system load during the solar day [ликёр], dimensionless 
+ 
5 Subscript to denote case for solar energy input 
sf Fraction of hot water load supplied by solar energy, dimensionless 
ta Ambient air temperature, °C 
tal Ambient air temperature in the laboratory during the system test, °C 
tat Ambient air temperature specified for the test solar day, °C 
tei Temperature of the transfer fluid entering the collector, °C 
tre Temperature of the transfer fluid leaving the collector, °C 
ti Mixed temperature of the water withdrawn from the solar hot water system, °C 
Їрш Mean plate temperature of the collector absorber, °C 
tp,m,non Mean plate temperature of the collector absorber under non-irradiated conditions, 
m, е 
tset Ultimate desired hot water delivery temperature after the addition of 
supplemental energy, °C 
twj Mixed temperature of the j* withdrawal of water to the load, °C 
tsi Mixed temperature of the j^ withdrawal of water from solar tank, °C 
main Temperature of the incoming cold water supply to the solar hot water system, °C 
UL Collector heat transfer loss coefficient, kJ/(h m? °C) 
V Total volume draw as determined from no solar input test 
dn Absorptance of the collector absorber coating 10 the solar spectrum at normal 
incidence, dimensionless 
0 Angle of incidence between the direct solar beam and the normal to the collector 
aperature, degree 
Om Angle of incidence between the beam irradiance from solar irradiance simulator 
and the normal to the collector aperture, degree 
Pa Specular reflectance of the cover plate assembly at an incident angle of 60°, 
dimensionless 
Tn Transmittance of the cover plate assembly to the solar spectrum at normal 
incidence, dimensionless 
(za)en Effective transmittance — Absorptance product for the collector at normal 


incidence, dimensionless 


n 
j=1 


Represents a summation over all water withdrawal periods during a test day 


5 CLASSIFICATIONS 


Solar domestic hot water systems are classified by seven attributes, each distinguishing two or three categories, 
as shown below: 


51 No. System Descriptors 
(1) (3) (4) 
i) Solar only Solar pre-heat Solar plus supplementary 
1) Direct Indirect — 
iii) Open Vented Closed 
iv) Filled Drainback Draindown 
v) Thermosiphon Forced — 
vi) Circulating Series-connected = 
vii) Remote storage Close-coupled storage Integral storage 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


5.1 


5.2 


5.3 


5.4 


a) 


b) 


с) 


а) 


b) 


a) 


b) 


с) 


а) 


b) 


с) 


Solar Only System — А system 
designed to provide solar heated 
domestic water without use of 
supplementary energy other than that 
required for fluid transport and 
control purposes; 


Solar Pre-heat System — A system 
not incorporating any form of 
supplementary heating and installed 
to preheat cold water prior to its entry 
into any other type of household 
water heater; and 


Solar Plus Supplementary System — 
A system which utilizes both solar 
and an auxiliary energy source in an 
integrated away and is able to 
provide a specified hot water service 
independently of solar energy 
availability. 


Direct System — A system in which 
the heated water that will ultimately 
be consumed passes through the 
collector; and 


Indirect System (Heat Exchange 
System) — A system in which a heat 
transfer fluid other than the heated 
water ultimately consumed passes 
through the collector. 


Open System — A system in which 
the heat transfers fluid is in extensive 
contact with the atmosphere; 


Vented System — A system in which 
contact between the heat transfer 
fluid and the atmosphere is restricted 
either to the free surface of a feed and 
expansion cistern or to an open vent 
pipe only; and 

Closed System (Sealed or Unvented 
System) — A system in which the 
Heat transfer fluid is completely 
sealed from the atmosphere. 


Filled System — A system in which 
the collector remains filled with the 
heat transfer fluid. 


Drainback System — A system in 
which, as part of the normal working 
cycle, the heat transfers fluid is 
drained from the collector into a 
storage vessel for subsequent reuse; 
and 


Draindown System — A system in 
which the heat transfer fluid can be 
drained from the collector and run to 
waste. 


5.5 a) Thermosiphon System — A system 
which utilizes only density changes 
of the heat transfer fluid to achieve 
circulation between collector and 


storage; and 


b) Forced System — A system in which 
heat transfer fluid is forced through 
the collector either by mechanical 
means or by externally generated 
pressure. 

5.6 a) Circulating System — A system in 
which heat transfer fluid circulates 
between the collector and a storage 
vessel or heat exchanger during 
operating periods; and 


b) Series-Connected System — A 
system in which the water to be 
heated passes directly from a supply 
point through the collector to a 
storage vessel or to a point of use. 


5.7 a) Remote Storage System — A system 
in which the storage vessel is 
separate from the collector and is 
located at some distance from it; 


b) Close-Coupled Collector Storage 
System — A system in which the 
storage vessel abuts the collector, 
and is mounted on a common support 
frame; and 


c) Integral Collector Storage System — 
A system in which the functions of 
collection and storage of solar energy 
performed within the same device. 


6 REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Solar domestic hot water systems shall be tested 
in accordance with the provision set forth below 
along with 9. 


6.1.1 Test Installation Requirements 


Test shall be performed with the system components 
installed in accordance with manufacturer-published 
installation instructions. In the absence of specific 
instructions from the manufacturer and if the 
collectors are normally mounted remote from the 
storage, the tests shall be performed with the total 
connecting pipe length between the storage tank and 
the collectors a minimum of 15 m (7.5 m in both the 
supply and return lines). In the case of an air 
collector array, the total duct length shall be 
specified by the manufacturer and the total of the 
duct and pipe length shall be a minimum of 15 m. 
The connection piping and ducting shall be insulated 
in accordance with the manufacturer's installation 


instructions. The collectors shall be mounted at the 
tilt angle specified by the manufacturer. If the 
system is to be tested using a non-irradiated solar 
collector array, a black radiation shield shall be 
mounted approximately 0.6 m above the collector 
array and extend approximately 0.6 m beyond the 
perimeter on all sides. The shield shall consist of 
very low thermal capacity/insulative capacity 
material (for example, poster board). 


6.1.2 Solar Collector Performance 


If the system is to be tested using a non-irradiated 
solar collector array, in series with a conventional 
heat source, then the collector which is to be used 
with the solar water heater components to be tested 
shall have been tested to provide the information 
required in 9.3.1. 


6.1.3 Indoor Solar Conditions 


The incident solar radiation conditions to be used in 
the test shall be as specified for the test solar day 
(see Annex A). 


6.1.4 Ambient Air Temperatures 
6.1.4.1 Indoor solar conditions 


The average ambient air temperature surrounding 
the collector array to be used in the test shall be 
specified for the test solar day (see Annex A). 


6.1.4.2 The average ambient air temperature at the 
storage tank and components during the test shall be 
controlled to a value specified to within + 3 °C ona 
continuous 24 hour basis (see Annex A). 


6.1.5 Input Water Temperature 


The water supply temperature to the system shall be 
controlled to tmainas specified in Annex A within + 0.5 °C. 


6.1.6 Water Draw 


Water shall be withdrawn at times and rates as 
specified (see Annex A). 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


6.1.7 Wind 


The air flow over the collector array shall be 
controlled as specified in 8.8.5. 


7 INSTRUMENTATION 
7.1 Solar Radiation Measurement 
7.1.1 Radiometers 


A pyranometer shall be used to measure the short 
wave radiation from the solar irradiance simulator. 
The pyranometer shall have the following minimum 
characteristics, which are summarized in Table 1. 


7.1.1.1 Change of response due to variation in 
ambient temperature 


During the test, the change in the instrument’s 
response due to variation in ambient temperature 
shall be less than + 1 percent. This specification shall 
be accomplished using the temperature response 
curve determined for the specific instrument. 


7.1.1.2 Variation in spectral response 


Pyranometers shall have a constant responsivity to 
within + 2 percent over the spectral range from 
0.3 um to 2.5 um. 


7.1.1.3 Non-linearity of response 


Unless the response of the pyranometer is within 
+ ] percent of linearity over the range of irradiance 
existing during the test, the pyranometer shall be 
used with a calibration curve relating the output to 
the irradiance with an accuracy of + 1 percent. 


7.1.1.4 Time constant of pyranometer 


The time constant of the pyranometer, defined as the 
time required for the instrument to achieve a reading 
of 1 - 1е = 0.632 of its final reading after a step 
change in solar irradiance, shall be less than 
25 seconds. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 1 Summary of Performance Specifications for Solar Radiometers 
(Clause 7.1.1) 


SI No. Responsiti Stability Temperature Spectral Linearity Time Cosine 
vity Compensation Selectivity Constant Response 
mW/cm? percent percent percent percent percent percent 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) Pyrano + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 25 + 3.0 


meter 


7.1.1.5 Variation of response with angle of 
incidence 


Ideally the response of the pyranometer is 
proportional to the cosine of the incident angle of the 
direct solar radiation and is constant at all azimuth 
angles. Unless the pyranometer’s deviation from a 
true cosine response is less than + 1 percent for the 
incident angles encountered during the test(s), the 
pyranometer shall be used with the latest calibration 
curve relating the response to the angle of incidence 
with accuracy within + 1 percent. 


7.1.1.6 Variation of response with tilt 


Unless the pyranometer response varies less than 
+ 1 percent for tilts ranging from horizontal to the 
largest tilt encountered during the test(s), the 
pyranometer shall be used with a calibration curve 
relating the response to the angle of inclination with 
an accuracy within + 1 percent. 


7.1.1.7 Precautions for effects of temperature 
gradient 


The instrument used during the test(s) shall be 
placed in its test position and allowed to equilibrate 
for at least 30 minutes before data taking 
commences. 


7.1.1.8 Precautions for effects of humidity and 
moisture 


The pyranometer shall be provided with a means of 
preventing accumulation of moisture that may 
condense on surfaces within the instrument and 
affect its reading. An instrument with a desiccator 
that can be inspected is required. The condition of 
the desiccators should be observed prior to and 
following any daily measurement sequence. 


7.1.1.9 Precautions for infrared radiation effects on 
pyranometer accuracy 


Pyranometers used to measure the irradiance of the 
solar irradiance simulator shall be mounted in such 
a way as to minimize the effects of the infrared 
radiation above 3 шп from the simulator light 
source. This can be accomplished with a ventilator. 


7.1.2 Calibration Interval 


The pyranometer shall be calibrated using a standard 
pyrheliometer. Any change of the responsivity of 
more than + l percent over a year period shall 
warrant the use of more frequent calibration or 
replacement of the instrument if the instability is 
permanent. If an instrument is damaged in any 
significant manner, it must be recalibrated to check 
the stability of the calibration factor and the time 
constant. In case of a replacement of one of the 
domes the cosine response should be checked, too. 


7.2 Temperature Measurement 
7.2.1 Accuracy and Precision 


The accuracy and precision of the instruments 
including their associated readout devices shall be 
within the limits given in Table 2. 


7.2.2 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient air temperature shall be measured using 
a shaded aspirated sampling device approximately 
1.2 m from the floor and not closer than 1.5 m to the 
tank and system components. 


7.2.3 Time Constant 


In most quasi-steady state test cases the time 
response of the temperature sensors are of secondary 
concern. Cases where the response time may be 
important are during the transient time constant tests 
and the incidence angle modifier tests are high 
incident angles using Method 2. From experience, 
thermocouples and thermopiles with time constants, 
of less than 1 second are preferred and resistance 
thermometers with time constants less than 
10 seconds are adequate. 


7.3 Liquid Flow Measurements 


7.3.1 The accuracy of the liquid flow rate 
measurement, using the calibration if furnished, 
shall be equal to or better than + 1 percent of the 
measured value in mass units per unit time. 


7.4 Air Flow Measurement 


If the collector is an air heater and the test is being 
conducted with a non-irradiated array, the air flow 
in the collector loop shall be measured to an 
accuracy of + 2 percent or better. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 2 Instrument Accuracy and Precision 
(Clause 7.2.1) 


51 No. Instrument Instrument 
Accuracy Precision 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Temperature +0.5 °C + 0.2 °C 
1) Temperature difference across collector +0.1°C +0.1°C 
(and loop heater, if used) 
ii) Temperature difference scross hot water +0.5 °C +0.2 °C 


system (entering cold water to leaving hot 
water) 


7.5 Instrumentation Data Recorders 
7.5.1 Instrument Small Scale Division 


In no case should the smallest scale division of the 
instrument or instrument system exceed 2 times the 
specified precision. For example, if the specified 
precision is + 0.1 °C, the smallest scale division shall 
not exceed 0.2 °C. 


7.5.2 Data Recorders 


Analog and digital recorders used shall have 
accuracy equal to or better than 20.5 percent of the 
full scale reading and have a time constant of 
1 second or less. The peak signal indication shall be 
between 50 percent and 100 percent of full scale. 


7.5.3 Integrators 


Digital techniques and electronic integrators used 
shall have accuracy equal to or better than 
1.0 percent of the measured value. 


7.5.4 Input Impedance 


The input impedance of recorders shall be greater 
than 1 000 times the impedance of the sensors or 
10 mega ohms whichever is higher. 


7.6 Electric Energy 


The electrical energy used shall be measured with an 
instrument and associated readout devices that are 
accurate to within + 1 percent of the reading or 
15 Wh whichever is greater. 


7.7 Fossil Fuels 


The quantity of fuel used for auxiliary energy by the 
solar hot water system shall be measured with an 
instrument and association readout device that is 
accurate within + | percent of the reading. Where 
the supplementary energy is provided from gas, the 
accuracy of the calorific value of the gas fuel 
supplied shall be given. 


7.8 Mass Measurement 


Mass measurement shall be made with an accuracy 
of + 1 percent. 


7.9 Elapsed Time 


Elapsed time measurements shall be made to an 
accuracy of + 0.20 percent. 


7.10 Wind Speed 


The wind speed shall be measured with an 
instrument and associated readout device that can 
determine the integrated average wind speed for 
each test period to an accuracy + 0.5 m/s. 


8 APPARATUS 
8.1 Test Configurations 


The test configuration to be utilized is to be 
determined by the classification of the system as 
described in 5. Representative test configuration 
(see Fig. 1) for the case where a non-irradiated 
collector array is used and the collector loop heater 
is downstream of the non-irradiated collector array. 
The purpose of the by-pass loop is to circulate the 
transfer fluid through the collector loop heater 
during those times when solar irradiance occurs but 
the solar domestic hot water system controller does 
not require the collector loop pump to be on. The 
bypass loop pump should not operate when the 
collector loop is on. For the case where a solar 
irradiance simulator is used, the heater and by-pass 
loop shown in the solar collector loop of Fig. 1 shall 
not be used. 


NOTE — Fig. 1 is a schematic only. All components shall 
be installed according to manufacturer’s instructions. 


8.2 Storage Tank Mounting 


When provided as a separate component, the storage 
tank(s) shall be placed upon a 19 mm thick plywood 
platform supported by 50 mm x 100 mm runners. 
This mounting requirement is necessary for inter 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


laboratory comparisons since heat losses from the 
bottom of storage tanks can be significant. 


8.3 Water Supply 


The water supply shall be capable of delivering 
water at conditions as specified in 6. 


8.4 Water Inlet and Outlet Configuration 


The cold water inlet and hot water outlet piping to 
and from the system being tested shall be turned to 
a horizontal position in the shortest possible vertical 
distance practical when the fittings are in a vertical 
plane. The hot water outlet shall be provided with a 
quick-acting valve located beyond the point of 
temperature measurement and as close to the tank as 
possible. 


8.5 Insulation of Piping 


Inlet and outlet connections and all piping to the 


point of temperature measurement in the system 
being tested shall be insulated with a material having 
a thermal resistance, R, not less than 0.70 °С m?/W 
based on the area of pipe surface. 


8.6 Flow Control 


A flow control valve shall be installed to provide 
flow as specified in clause 9. 


8.7 Installation of Fossil Fuel Fired Auxiliary 
Energy Sources 


Natural draft auxiliary water heaters shall be 
equipped with a vertical extension of flue pipe 
connected to the draft hood outlet pipe as specified 
by the prevailing building code. In the absence of a 
building code, use the manufacturer's specifications. 


NUTUS ade иж 
| | CONTROL VOLUME 
1 I 
a I 
‘ = і 
| — I 
I o. ! 
І 2 І 
COLLECTOR ° | OPERATING 
- LOOP m | ЕМЕЕСҮ 
| HEATER V | 
| : | 
> I 

| m HEAT EXCHANGER 1 НОТ МАТЕР 
| $ТОВЕ 
| AUXILIARY 

I 

CONTROL 

| 216 5 ! COLD WATER 
| ' SUPPLY 
' NON- 
| IRRADIATED 
| мас | HEAT LOSSES 
і — FROM STORE, 
| PIPING, 
) COLLECTOR 
| | ARRAY ETC. 

l 
! 

| 
| SYSTEM | 
PUMP I 
=s... Лл hg mee ete ee J 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS FOR INDOOR TEST WITH NON-RADIATED 
COLLECTOR ARRAY 


8.8 Indoor Testing with a Solar Irradiance 
Simulator 


A solar irradiance simulator may be used in lieu of 
indoor testing using a non-irradiated collector array 
in series with a conventional heat source to 
determine the steady state thermal performance of a 
solar collect or under controlled conditions of wind 
and ambient temperature. Solar simulators 
employed in the testing procedure shall have the 
following minimum characteristics and shall be used 
in accordance with the noted guidelines and 
limitations. 


8.8.1 Spectral Qualities 


The simulator shall provide a spectral distribution of 
irradiance which duplicates the standard global 
radiation spectrum for air mass 1.5 and a total 
irradiance of 952 W/m?. Annex C gives the spectral 
distribution related to the total irradiance for 
100 wavelengths. The quality of simulation must 
meet the following requirement: The spectrum- 
weighted value of the transmittance-absorptance 
product at normal incidence or any other product of 
optical properties that characterises the collector 
under test, calculated using the measured solar 
simulator spectrum shall not differ by more than 
3 percent, from the value of the transmittance- 
absorptance product calculated using the standard 
spectrum. The relevant spectral optical properties 
shall be provided by the manufacturer of the 
collector under test. A method of calculating 
spectrum-weighted values are presented in Annex D. 
Spectrum-weighted values of the optical properties 
shall be reported for both the standard and solar 
simulator spectrum. Measurement of the solar 
simulator's spectral qualities shall be in the plane 
of the collector over the wavelength range of 
0.3 um to 3 um and shall be determined in 0.1 um 
or smaller bandwidths. Solar simulator spectral 
measurements shall be obtained for each new set of 
lamps installed. With certain lamp types, such as 
filament lamps, the simulator spectrum may change 
significantly during the lifetime of the lamps. 
Measurements should be made as necessary in 
order to ensure that the calculated spectrum 
weighted value of the transmittance-absorptance 
product for the system under test does not differ by 
more than 3 percent from the value calculated 
using the standard spectrum. 


8.8.2 Measurement Irradiance | and 


Irradiance Uniformity 


of Test 


The simulated solar irradiance shall be measured in 
the test plane of the solar collector. The test plane 
shall be taken as the front cover of a glazed flat-plate 
collector. The test plane shall be taken as the front 
cover of a glazed flat plate collector, the absorber 
plate of an unglazed flat, plate-collector or the 


11 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


aperture plane of a concentrating collector. The 
collector array may be shaded during this 
measurement provided the shaded area is less than 
three percent of the irradiated collector area during 
any hourly simulation period. Since simulated solar 
radiation usually varies somewhat in intensity over 
the collector aperture, the value of irradiance over 
the test plane shall be representative of the average 
of measurements of irradiance taken on a uniform 
rectangular grid of maximum spacing of 15.0 cm. 
The instrument used to measure the test plane 
irradiance shall be equivalent to that specified for 
outdoor testing or other instruments calibrated in the 
simulated solar radiation against such a device. The 
uniformity of the irradiance shall be such that the 
highest and lowest measure of values of irradiance 
shall not deviate from the average value by more 
than + 10 percent. Also, variations in the irradiance 
may occur during the test interval due to instability 
of the electrical supply and changes in the lamp 
output with temperature and age. The average value 
of irradiance shall not vary by more than + 2 percent 
over the duration of the test interval. The value of 
irradiance reported and used in the calculation of 
thermal performance shall be representative of the 
mean of the values experienced over the duration of 
each test interval. 


8.8.3 Collimation 


For typical flat plate collectors, the collimation shall 
be such that at least 90 percent of the energy 
received at any point in the collector test plane shall 
have emanated from a region of the solar simulator 
contained within a subtended angle of 20 degrees or 
less, when viewed from the point. This constraint 
limits the use of simulators to concentrating 
collector with concentration ratios less than 3 : 1. 
However, it should be noted that a higher degree of 
collimation may be required for certain 
concentrating collectors particularly those with the 
higher concentration ratios (near 3 : 1) and for 
collectors composed of glass tubes, such as the 
evacuated tubular collectors. In these cases it must 
be demonstrated that there is sufficient collimation 
relative to the collector. This might be demonstrated 
by indoor and outdoor test correlations. 


8.8.4 Indoor Ambient Air Temperature 


The ambient temperature sensor shall be housed in 
an asperated enclosure located behind the collector 
under test and shielded from direct irradiance. 


8.8.5 Air Flow across Collector(s) Indoor Test 


Fans or other means shall be used to simulate a 
substantially uniform flow across the collector 
during the pretest steadying and actual test periods. 
The temperature of the flowing air shall be within 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


+ 1.0 °C of the ambient temperature measured as 
prescribed in 8.8.4. The air flow direction shall 
originate in a horizontal plane and directed towards 
the collector within 30 degrees from the vertical 
plane containing the centrelines of the test collector 
(array). This simulated wind shall be maintained at 
a mean speed of (4.0 + 0.5) m/s and shall be 
measured, before and after each test period in a plane 
parallel to the collector aperture and between 50 mm 
and 150 mm from the outer cover of the collectors. 
The air speed measurement is to be an average value 
measured over at least the centre one-square-meter 
(1 m?) of the aperture with a non-uniformity of not 
more than + 0.5 m/s of the mean value. 


8.8.6 Ambient Temperature Variations 


The allowable range of the ambient temperature for 
solar simulator testing shall be between 15 °C and 
30 °C. During any test period, the ambient 
temperature shall not vary by more than + 2 °C. 


8.8.7 Tilt Angle 


The tilt angle of the collector during testing shall be 
as specified by the manufacturer of the collector. 
The specified tilt angle shall remain constant 
throughout the test. 


8.8.8 Long Wave Radiation 


The long wave (thermal) irradiance between 4 um and 
50 um shall be measured in the plane of the collector 
aperture by a pyrgeometer or other equivalent 
instrument. The long wave irradiance as measured 
during the test in the plane of the collector aperture 
shall not exceed that from a theoretical black body at 
ambient temperature by more than 50 W/m2. 


8.8.9 Solar Irradiance Simulator Incident Angles 


During simulation, the incident angle shall not 
exceed 60°. The incident angle during test shall be 
within 5° of the specified incident angle for a given 
hour of the test day (see Annex A). 


8.9 Indoor Testing with a Non-irradiated 
Collector Array in Series with a Conventional 
Heat Source 


A non-irradiated array in series with a conventional 
heat source may be used to simulate an irradiated 
solar collector array in lieu of using a solar 
irradiance simulator as described in 8.8. The 
collector is tested separately to provide the 
information required in 9.3.1 and the array’s thermal 
output in the system test is obtained by using a 
combination of the non-irradiated collector array 


and a heat source in series in the collector loop. 
8.9.1 Collector Controller Temperature Sensor 


The temperature sensor designed to be installed on 
or in the vicinity of the solar collector array and 
connected to the system controller for starting and 
stopping the collector loop pump or blower shall be 
installed on the surface or inside of the pipe or duct 
(under the insulation) downstream of the non- 
irradiated array and collector loop heater but as close 
to the exit of the second device as is practical. 


8.9.2 Electric Heaters 


If an electrical heating element is used in the 
collector loop heater, the heating element shall be 
immersed in the fluid stream of the transfer fluid and 
the thermal losses shall be less than 2 percent of the 
input. Under these conditions, the measured 
collector heater input can be taken as the heater 
output. If the losses are more than 2 percent of the 
input, a means of measuring the energy delivered to 
the fluid by the heater shall be provided. 


8.9.3 Peak Thermal Output 


The collector loop heater shall be sized to deliver the 
peak rate of solar collector absorbed energy. 


8.9.4 Pressure Drop 


The pressure drop across the collector loop heater 
shall be less than the pressure drop in an equivalent 
6 m length of pipe or duct in the collector loop. 


8.9.5 Time Constant 


The time constant of the collector loop heater shall 
be less than 2 minutes. 


9 EXPERIMENTAL DETERMINATION 
9.1 Introduction 


Procedures are described in this section for testing 
the performance of three categories of solar 
domestic hot water systems; solar-only systems, 
solar-preheater systems, and solar-plus- 
supplemental systems. The test can be done by 
assembling the complete system and irradiating the 
collector array by use of a solar irradiance simulator 
as described in 9.2. Alternately, the collector array 
may be non-irradiated if a controlled heating device 
(collector loop heater) is added in series with the 
collector array as described in 9.3. For either case, 
the system shall be tested for a test-day with no solar 
input. 


9.2 Indoor Testing with Solar Irradiance 
Simulator 


9.2.1 Solar Irradiance Simulator Output 


The daily total integrated irradiance shall be within 
+ 5 percent of the specified daily irradiation for the 
testing day as given in Annex A and Annex E. 


9.3 Indoor testing with a non-irradiated solar 
collector array in series with conventional heat 
source. If the non-irradiated solar collector array is 
used, it shall meet all the requirements of 8.9. 


9.3.1 Separate Test for the Solar Collector 


The solar collector shall have been previously tested 
in accordance with IS 12933 (Part 1 to Part 3 and 
Part 5) on: 


a) A curve of collector efficiency as a function 
of (tci - ta)/ G. with the collector 
operating at near-normal incidence to the 
beam of the sun; 


b) A curve of incident angle modifier as a 
function of incident angle q or the parameter 
[(1/cos q) — 1]; and 

c) The mass flow rate and the specific heat of 
the fluid used during the collector tests. 


The collector heat transfer fluid used in the solar 
water heating system shall be the same as that used 
in the collector tests. 


9.3.2 Control of the Collector Loop Heater 


The thermal output of the collector loop heater is 
calculated and changed in accordance with the time 
intervals (see Annex A and Annex E) specified by 
the test day using the equations governing their 
thermal output (see Annex B) and the values of tçi, 
Ms, and cy, that are measured (or calculated) prior 
to every change in input energy. 


9.3.3 Collector Loop Thermal Output 


The collector loop thermal output, tfi, and mg, 
should all be monitored as a function of time during 
the test. After the test is completed, a calculation of 
total daily collector array thermal output is required 
using the known variation of бү, and t, throughout 
the test solar day, the measured values of tz; and ms, 
and the collector thermal performance 
characteristics determined from the collector tests. 
The measured value of total daily collector loop 
thermal output from the system test must be within 
+5 percent of this calculated value. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


9.3.4 Calculation procedure for the collector loop 
heater thermal output. The calculation procedure to 
determine the desired thermal output of the collector 
loop heater is as follows: 


a) The incident radiation on the collector 
surface, бү, is specified as a function of time 
for the test solar day (see Annex A); 


b 


— 


The incident angle is specified or calculated 
as a function of time throughout the test day 
(see Annex A); 


Using the results of step (b) and the incident 
angle modifier data the incident angle 
modifier is calculated as a function of time 
throughout the day; 


с 


w 


d 


М7 


The value of Fp, is calculated as а function 
of time throughout the test day using 
equation (B.24); and 


e 


хи 


The quantity Qp is calculated as a function 
of time throughout the test day using 
equation (B.15). 


9.4 Solar-Only and Solar-Preheat System Test 
9.4.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to determine the 
performance of a solar-only hot water system or of 
а solar-preheat hot water system. This test may also 
be used to consider the “solar-only” performance 
capabilities of a system that has supplementary 
heating. 


9.4.2 Test Procedure 


The storage device(s) shall be filled with water at a 
specified temperature, on the morning of the first day 
(see Annex A). The system shall be energized and 
shall be allowed to operate in its normal mode during 
the day and each successive day of the test. Any 
device which is intended to limit or control the 
operation of the solar energy collection equipment 
shall be set as recommended by the manufacturer. On 
each test day, water shall be withdrawn from the 
system at times, rates, and duration as specified for 
the test day (see Annex A). The energy content of the 
water withdrawn shall be determined by installed 
flow-meters and temperature sensors. The delivery 
temperature shall be measured and recorded at no 
greater than 4.5 kg intervals throughout the 
withdrawal period (see Annex A). The test shall be 
performed until the daily system solar contribution 
(see equation 9.3) is within three percent (+ 3 percent) 
of the value on the previous test day. If after the end 
of the fourth test day this convergence criteria is not 
met, data for day 5 has to be obtained. Then stop the 
test and average the data for days 3, 4 and 5. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


9.4.3 Measurements 


During the test period, measurements of the daily 
energy consumed by the circulation system (pumps, 
controls, solenoid valves, etc) shall be made, and 
daily thermal energy output from the collector loop 
heater (if used) shall be determined from 
measurements. These shall be recorded at the end of 
each test day. The energy consumed by the by-pass 
loop controls, pump, fan, and valves if measured 
shall be obtained separately from the energy 
consumed by the solar domestic hot water system 
components. During the withdrawal period, the 
mixed temperature of the incoming water and the 
mass and mixed temperature of each withdrawal 
shall be measured. If the collector loop heater is 
used, the thermal energy output from the heater, the 
mass flow rate through the collector array, the 
entering fluid temperature, temperature increase 
across the collector loop which consists of the non- 
irradiated solar collector array and conventional heat 
source shall all be determined for time intervals 
specified by the test day (see Annex A). 


9.4.4 Calculation 


The daily system hot water load shall be calculated as: 
@ = DAT y таш ... (9.1) 


The daily net energy supplied by the solar energy 
shall be calculated as: 


Qs = 3, Cow (tsj LE tmain)mj .... (9.2) 
j= 
The solar contribution is given as: 


Sc = 05/0, -- (9.3) 
All measurements used in this calculation shall be 
those for the final test day when convergence 
according to 9.4.2 is met. Otherwise average the data 
for days 3, 4 and 5. 


9.5 Solar Hot Water System Test with Integral 
Supplement Heaters 


9.5.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this test is to determine the 
performance of a solar hot water system with 
integral supplemental heaters (solar plus 
supplementary system) for both a test day with solar 
energy input and a test day with no solar energy 
input. 


9.5.2 Test Procedure with Solar Energy Input 


The storage device(s) shall be filled with water at a 
specified temperature (see Annex A) on the morning 


of the first day. The system shall be energized, 
including integral heaters and controls, and shall be 
allowed to operate in its normal mode during the day 
and each successive day of the test. The time for the 
beginning of the first and subsequent 24 hour test 
days shall be specified by the test day 
(see Annex A). Any device which is intended to 
limit or control the operation of the solar energy 
collection equipment shall be set as recommended 
by the manufacturer. If the system is designed so 
that the temperature of the delivered water is 
controlled by a thermostatic control on the auxiliary 
energy delivery system, this thermostat shall be set 
to deliver water at tset. If the system is designed so 
that the temperature of the delivered water is 
controlled by a mixing valve, the mixing valve shall 
be set to deliver water at tset, and the control of the 
auxiliary heating system shall be set as 
recommended by the manufacturer. On each test 
day, water shall be withdrawn from the system at 
times, rates, duration, and temperature, tset, as 
specified by the test day (see Annex A). If the outlet 
water temperature from the system is not maintained 
at tset, an energy integrator may be used and the 
length of the time of the draw adjusted so that the 
same total amount of thermal energy output, 
measured above tmain , is delivered. The energy 
content of the water withdrawn shall be determined 
by the used of an installed flow meter and 
temperature sensors. The delivery temperature shall 
be measured and recorded at no greater than 4.5 kg 
intervals throughout the withdrawal period. The 
solar energy input (by 9.2 or 9.3) shall follow the 
specifications given in Table 5. The test shall be 
performed until the daily system supplemental 
energy required (Qayx) is within 3 percent of the 
value on the previous test day. If after the end of the 
fourth test day, this convergence criterion is not met, 
data for day 5 has to be obtained. Then stop the test 
and average the data for days 3, 4 and 5. 


9.5.3 Test Procedure with no Solar Energy Input 


All of the specifications in 9.5.2 shall be followed 
except that there shall be no solar energy input. 


9.5.4 Measurements 


For each test day, measurements of the daily energy 
consumed by the circulation system (pumps, 
controls, solenoid valves, etc) and the energy 
consumed for auxiliary heating shall be recorded 
and reported (see Annex A). The energy consumed 
by the by-pass loop controls, pump, fan, and valves 
if applicable shall be obtained separately from the 
energy consumed by the solar domestic hot water 
system components. The daily thermal energy 
output from the collector loop heater (if used) shall 
also be determined from measurements. All daily 
quantities shall be recorded at the end of each test 


day. During the withdrawal periods, the mixed 
temperature of the incoming water and the mass and 
mixed temperature of each withdrawal shall be 
measured. If the collector loop heater is used, the 
thermal energy output from the heater, the mass rate 
through the collector array, the entering fluid 
temperature, temperature increase across the 
collector loop which consists of the non-irradiated 
solar collector array and conventional heat source 
shall all be recorded for time intervals specified by 
the test day (see Annex A). 


9.5.5 Calculations 


The daily system hot water load with and without 
solar energy input shall be calculated respectively, as 


n 
Qis =X Cow(tw, — таш) with solar input 
j= 


... (9.4) 


01м = У Саха x= таш without solar input 
Да инээ (9.5) 


A rating number К has been defined and is given Бу 


R = (Qauxs + Orans)/ Qus -.. (9.6) 


The daily net energy supplied by solar energy can be 
estimated by 


Qs= 015 + Qros— Qauxs— Qpars (9.7) 


where 
0,05 = (Qauxns + Qparns) = QLNS --- (9.8) 


NOTE — The actual Qros is a function of the temperature 
distribution in the store(s) which may be quite different 
when there is solar energy input. Hence, the solar 
contribution is only a good estimate without knowing Qi os 
during the test day with solar input. 


The performance of the solar system shall be 
determined and reported using procedures in 
Annex À and Table 4. 

9.6 Hot Water — Continuous Draw Test 


9.6.1 Hot Water — Solar Energy Only 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


9.6.1.1 Purpose 


The purpose of this testis to determine the capability 
of the solar hot water system to deliver hot water 
with no auxiliary energy source operating and 
during a continuous draw-down. 


9.6.1.2 Test procedure 


The solar hot water system shall be installed, 
adjusted, and operated as described in 9.4.2 or 9.5.2. 
Ten minutes after the last draw on the final test day, 
a special draw test shall be conducted. All auxiliary 
energy source thermostats (if any) shall be disabled. 
The cold water supply shall be adjusted to supply 
water at tmain + 1.0 °C. Water shall be withdrawn at 
a uniform flow rate as specified in the test day (see 
Annex A). 


9.6.1.3 Measurements 


The temperature of the water shall be measured at a 
point as close to the storage tank(s) as possible and 
recorded immediately at the start of the draw and at 
not less than 4.5 kg intervals thereafter. The draw 
shall continue until the discharge temperature equals 
the inlet temperature within 3.0 °C. 


9.6.1.4 Calculations 


A curve with outlet water temperature as the 
ordinate and quantity of water withdrawn as the 
abscissa shall be drawn using the test results. 


10 DATA TO BE RECORDED AND TEST 
REPORT 


10.1 Test Data 


Table 3 lists the measurements which are to be made 
throughout the tests to determine the fraction of the 
daily total hot water-load supplied by solar energy. 


10.2 Table 4 specifies the data and information that 
shall be reported in testing the solar domestic hot 
water system. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 3 Measurements to be Made and Test Data and Information to be Recorded 


(Clause 10.1) 


SI No. Item Test Involving Test Involving 
Solar-Only or Solar-Plus- 
Solar-Preheat Supplemental 
Systems Systems 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Date x x 
ii) Observers x x 
iii) Equipment name plate data for system components x x 
iv) Number of collectors in system x x 
v) Collector aperture area, m2 x x 
vi) Collector gross area, m? x x 
vii) Storage tanks outside dimensions, m x x 
viii) Storage tanks volumetric capacity, m? x x 
ix) Number and location of integral heating elements — x 
x) Rating of integral heating elements — x 
xi) "Mass flow rate through collector during the collector tests, x x 
Me, kg/s 
xii) "Specific heat of heat transfer fluid used during the collector x x 
tests, ср kJ (kg °C) 
xii)  "Intercept of the collector efficiency curve determined in x x 
accordance with collector tests, (1, /А) Е (та), 2; 
dimensionless 
xiv) Slope of the collector efficiency curve determined in x x 
accordance with collector tests determined at a value of 
(tact — tst) /G,, at solar noon during the system test, 
Aa/Ag Ер, kJ/(h m? °C) 
xv) "The effective transmittance — absorptance product at x x 
normal incidence as specified in Section 8 (and Annex B) of 
this standard, (ra), n, dimensionless 
xvi) "Collector heat removal factor as determined in Annex B of x x 
this standard, Fp, dimensionless 
xvii) Collector overall heat transfer coefficient as determined in x x 
Annex B of this standard, (Л, kJ/(h.m? °C) 
xviii) Collector efficiency factor as determined in Annex B of this x x 
standard, F, dimensionless 
xix) Mass flow rate of the transfer fluid through the solar x x 
collector array during the system test (recorded at the 
specified time increments) m,, kg/s 
xx) "Specific heat of the transfer fluid through the solar collector x x 
array during the system test (determined at the specified time 
increments) cy, KJ/(kg °C) 
xxi) "Temperature of the transfer fluid entering the solar collector x x 
array during the system test (recorded at the specified time 
increments) tj, °C 
xxii) Temperature difference across the solar collector loop x x 
during the system test (recorded at the specified time 
increments) (tre - tri), °C 
xxiii) Ambient air temperature surrounding the system during the x x 


test (recorded at the specified time increments) t,, , °C 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 3 (concluded) 
SI No. Item Test Involving Test Involving 
Solar-Only or Solar-Plus- 
Solar-Preheat Supplemental 
Systems Systems 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
xxiv) "Energy output from the collector loop heater (if used) during x x 
the test (recorded at the specified time increments), 
Qourpur: kJ 
xxv) Energy consumed for auxiliary heating (recorded at the — x 
specified time increments), kWh 
xxvi) Inlet water temperature to the system during the test (recorded x x 
during every draw), tmain, °C 
xxvii) Outlet water temperature from the system during the test x x 
(recorded during every draw), tj, °C 
xxviii) Mass of water withdrawn from the system during the test x x 
(recorded during every draw), mj, kg 
xxix) Daily energy output from the collector loop heater (if used), x x 
Qourpur; kJ 
xxx) "Daily energy consumed by the system’s circulation and x x 
control apparatus (pumps controls, solenoid valves, etc), 
Qpar, kJ 
xxxi) Daily energy consumed for auxiliary heating Qayx, kJ — x 


NOTE — Only to be recorded if the collector loop heater is used. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 4 Data Information to be Reported 
(Clause 10.2) 


General Information 


Name of Manufacturer хог sau ад ымны breit iha ni ans hatay E MAE qayaq bes 


Construction details of the system: 

Collector aperture dimensions and area, m and гс имМмММм0ж1-Ч1-е2111001000000000000011088 
Collector gross dimensions and area, m and т?............................ дынын ыны 
Number of collectors in system t. -iess arean aeae aE ea m e ense e eme s e e e n he nennen 
(A,/ Ag)F вСта). 1. From’ collector tests) eee Dr IHR EL ERREUR eevee 


(А„/ Ag)F rU determined at a value of (tset - tat) / G. at solar noon during the system test (from collector tests) 


Diaitneter я. омеае на mbi em eto а аео ааа m 
Нео ы a а awka aaa iah Pa ak au e ur p au na gent tu m 
Insulation thickness ................................................................... m 


Description of the solar domestic hot water system including insulation, valves, circulation, piping, controls, and 
control set points 


Transfer fluid used and its thermal-physical properties (specific heat, density, viscosity) 


Specific heat: - а Re Ier eere er le icm eei Y Segen 
Пебву oec pereat re ox e o obey dope ay & Jans sei teo EO ERN RA 
VISCOSITY унаа йн CERT QUE ex TRECE YES ERE ease 


Description of test apparatus, including configuration and instrumentation used in testing (include photographs). 
For a thermosiphon system, include the piping size and elevation of the storage tank above the solar collector array 


Tests 
The solar contribution shall be determined and reported for the system under test. 


At the beginning of the tests to determine solar contribution and thereafter in time increments specified in the test 
day, the following shall be reported if the collector loop heater is used: 


QouTPUT Meet] hh n s] essi) |! n n n nnn kJ 
T EN °C 
цэгтээ ЭРЭ эн kg/s 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 4 (concluded) 


For each withdrawal of water from the system during the tests to determine solar contribution, the following shall 
be reported: 


Mj! «RaSh ade Ee uo m E ERE kg 
ЫН 0 хос хх SUMI “С 
Cac. алИХО МАЛ ИЛД НУ Цай °C 


On a daily basis during the test to determine solar contribution the following shall be reported: 


Quins ee kJ 
Qus ry kJ 
QAUX,NS ++ жж ж жж ххх kJ 
Onis | UHR EIL NODE kJ 
Ohannes | “ээ БӨ dnd е addit kJ 
ОТРЕЧЕ ИНРО kJ 
ООС. |) «хи арнал мы нана kJ 
C MEER kJ 

R 


For the hot water supply rating tests, a curve of outlet water temperature as the ordinate and quantity of water 
withdrawn as the abscissa shall be reported both with (if appropriate) and without the use of the auxiliary energy 
source. 


NOTE — Annex A is a mandatory part of the test report. 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Clauses 6.1.3, 6.1.4.1, 6.1.4.2, 6.1.5, 6.1.6, 8.8.9, 9.2.1, 9.3.2, 9.3.4, 9.4.2, 9.4.3, 9.5.2, 9.5.4, 9.5.5 and 9.6.1.2) 


DAY TEST SPECIFICATIONS 


This Annex provides a standardized set of test conditions for comparing the performance of different domestic 


water heating systems. 


51 No. Test Condition Energy Load or Energy Content Energy Supplied by Solar 
of Hot Water Delivered by System Energy 
(01) (05) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
D Solar only E Mj Cp,w (tset = finan) Xrhjcp (ts, j tmain) 
ii) Solar Pre-heat Уус (ес — main) Улус м (6, j^ tmain) 
iii) Solar Plus Supplemental Try Cow ( шээж tmain) Xmic,, (ts, j^ tnam) 


The test period can be shortened by at least one day if the system is preheated with 45 °C water before starting 


the test. 


Since the test is done indoors, the time for beginning each 24 hour period is arbitrary. However, in the rating day 
specifications given below, the clock time for beginning the first and subsequent test days for energy calculations 


is 1 700 hours. 
Example: 


Collector Tilt Angle 


Average Ambient Air Temperature, ta 
Input Water Temperature, tmain 

Set Temperature for Auxiliary Tank, tset 
Water Draw Rate 

Wind Speed 

Water Draw Schedule 


Solar Radiation Schedule 


45 °C from horizontal unless manufacturer specifies a 
different value 


(20+ 2) °С 

(15 +2) °С 

Specified by the manufacturer but not less than 49 °С 
(10 + 1) litres/minute 

See 8.8.5 


See Table 5. Five equal volume draws for a total draw of 
100 litres, 200 litres or 300 litres shall be used. For solar plus 
auxiliary systems, determine the draw volume during the no 
solar input test (see 9.2). In performing this test, first establish 
equilibrium. Take first draw at the specified flow rate. 
Monitor delivery temperature. Record the volume at which 
the temperature drops to 35 °C. Choose the daily draw volume 
as being that which is immediately below the volume at which 
the temperature dropped to 35 °C. For solar only systems, test 
volume shall be selected by the manufacturer from 100 litres, 
200 litres or 300 litres. The laboratory shall test for the 
specified conditions and measure/monitor the temperature 
during the draws. The solar energy contributed and the 
quantity of energy below and above 35 °C delivery 
temperature shall be recorded with the results. 


See Table 5. Diffuse irradiance is constant at 160 W/m? 
throughout the solar day. 


20 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 5 Conditions for Thermal Performance Test of SDHW Systems 


(Clause 9.5.2) 
SI No. Time Incident Radiation Hour Incident Load 
Angle Angle 
(h) Non-Solar Solar Day (°) (°) (Litres) 
Day 
kJ/(n?.h) бър Са 
kJ(mhh) EJ/(m°.h) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
1) 0 800 to 0 900 0 694 576 - 60 60 0.2 V 
1) 0 900 to 1 000 0 1 224 576 - 45 45 — 
iii) 1 000 to 1 100 0 1 624 576 - 30 30 — 
iv) 1 100 to 1 200 0 1 884 576 - 15 15 — 
v) 1 200 to 1 300 0 1 964 576 0 0 0.2 V 
vi) 1 300 to 1 400 0 1 884 576 15 15 — 
vii) 1 400 to 1 500 0 1 624 576 30 30 — 
viii) 1 500 to 1 600 0 1 224 576 45 45 — 
ix) 1 600 to 1 700 0 694 576 60 60 0.2 V 
x) 1 700 to 1 800 — — — — — 0.2 V 
xi) 1 800 to 1 900 — — — — — — 
xii) ] 900 to 2 000 — — — — — 0.2 V 
Total 0 12 816 5 184 — — V 


21 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 9.3.2 and 10.2) 


SPECTRUM DISTRIBUTION 


Use of a non-irradiated solar collector array in the solar domestic hot water system test. As outlined, the solar 
hot water system may be tested in the laboratory using a non-irradiated solar collector array with a collector 
loop heater installed downstream of the array and controlled to supply the collector absorbed energy to the flow 
loop. The purpose of this Annex is to derive the governing equations to be used in controlling the thermal output 
of the heater. 


The thermal performance of an irradiated solar collector operating under quasi-steady-state conditions can be 
described by-either of the following equations: 


Qu 
m K... Fr(t а) б: — ЕКШ (tri — ta) ... (B.1) 
or 
Ou 
хоо K, Cc @)enG — А (а ta) .4(В.2) 


Equating the two equations and solving for ty m 
Ka z G en 
tpm = Fa(tri — ta) + а (1— FR) + ta ... (B.3) 
If the collector were in the laboratory and not irradiated, equation (B.3) would reduce to: 


tp,m,non = Ек (їн == tai) + tal e (B.4) 


The above equations can be used to derive the equations for the required net energy output of a collector loop 
heater that will result in the same performance as with the irradiated collector. Collector loop heater downstream 
of the non-irradiated collector array. In order for the net energy output for the collector loop to be the same when 
using a collector loop heater and non-irradiated collector compared to the use of an irradiated collector: 


Q 
P = Петров ta1) = Ka F p(t о )елбу- FRU, (tc; — tat) .(В.5) 


а 

The left side of the equation (B.5) represents the net energy output from the collector loop in the laboratory when 
the collector loop heater supplies energy to the loop and heat loss occurs from the non-irradiated collector. The 
right side of the equation represents the net output that would occur from an irradiated collector. Note that the loss 
coefficient for the collector, (л. is assumed to be the same for both configurations. Since the collector loop heater 
is downstream of the non-irradiated collector, the inlet fluid temperature to the non-irradiated collector is identical 
to the inlet fluid temperature that would occur with the irradiated collector. Consequently, equation (B.4) can be 
introduced into the left side of equation (B.5) and the resulting equation solved for Qin: 


1 Aa Aa 
Qn = K, + Уны t a JenGtAg = а РАЛА (б = tat) ... (B.6) 


Equation (B.6) is for a one-collector module array. The analysis is readily extended to combination of M parallel 
rows of N collectors connected in series. Consider the situation where there are M collectors connected in parallel 
and no collectors connected in series (N = 1). Equation (B.6) becomes: 


: Aa Aa 
Qin = Ka: a, 18079) еп б:МАр К д FRULMAg( tay ш tat) sis (B.7) 


22 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Collector modules connected in series requires that the heat removal factor, Fr, in equation (B.7) be modified. 
For one solar collector module: 


mc AgFIU 
p L 
1 – exp – =— 

UL Ag MCp 


Ер = 


... (B.8) 


Where two collector modules are connected in series, each module has the same mass flow rate; however, the 
aperture area is doubled. With the assumption that (Л, and F are equal for the two collectors, equation (B.8) 
becomes: 


— hep |, ayy — APUL 
Faz = ТЕРУ E exp mn | ... (B.9) 
Algebraic manipulation of equation (B.8) and equation (B.9) yields: 
(Aa/Ag)FRULA 
Pd — 0л _ (B.10) 
Thus for two collectors in series: 
(FRUL)Aa 
(FRUL)2 = (FRU) E ET | ... (B.11) 
p 
and 
(FRUL)Aa 
[FRC € a enl, = [FRC т a eal E _ эн ... (B.12) 
Generalizing to any number, N, of identical collectors in series: 
(вал) = 28 fa — (1 - Erena)" B.13 
RUL)N = Wa. 2тсь ... (B.13) 
апа 
[бк] га ГК АЕ | (gx eae ` (B.14) 
R ently (FRUL)Aa ср ә. : 


Therefore, in the most general case where the heat source is located downstream of M rows of N collectors 
connected in series: 


: Aa Aa 
Qn=K, - a [FRC та Jen|GrMNAg— 32 (FRU) NMNAg(ta; g tat) .(В.15) 


Collector loop heater upstream of the non-irradiated collector array. Equating the net energy output from the 
collector loop for the two alternate test configurations (collector loop heater plus non-irradiated collector and 
irradiated collector) as was done above, 


01 * 
a вэ UL(t p,m,non ` tal) = Ky -FRC та )en Gí — FRU, (te; = tat) ves (B.16) 


The * indicates that t5 mon is different from the previous case because the collector loop heater is now upstream 
of the irradiated collector. Equation (B.4) is still valid except the inlet fluid temperature to non-irradiated collector 
is also different from the previous case due to the location of the collector loop heater: 


23 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


* 


t p,m,non— Fa(t ` — tal) + ta) ... (B.17) 


An energy balance on the collector loop heater results in the following expression for the exit fluid temperature 
from the heater (inlet fluid temperature to the non-irradiated collector, t *¢;) in terms of the inlet fluid temperature 
to the heater (identical to the inlet fluid to the non-irradiated collector in the previous case, tri): 


а= tg Qn ... (B.18) 


Thscp,s 
Solving equations (B.16), (B.17) and (B.18) simultaneously: 


On = Жет (Aa/Ag)FR(za)enGrAg—- (Aa/Ag)FRULAg(ta tat) 
Th 1-[(4a/Ag)(FRUL)Ag|/[thscp s] 


... (B.19) 


Equation (8.19) is for a one collector module array. For the case where there are M collectors connected in parallel 
and no collectors connected in series (N = 1), equation (B.19) becomes: 


- K a z (Aa/Ag)FR( z oJenGtMAg-(Aa/Ag)FRULMAg(ta]-ta.) 
Rm S ык AS sig - oc гэ ... (B.20 
Он а асга Хелм) А неса) ee) 


In the most general case of M rows of N collectors connected in series: 


Ka < (Aa /Ag)FR( z &)enGt¢MNAg—(Aa/Ag)(FRUL)NMNAg(ta1—tat) 
1-[(4a/Ag) FRULNMNAg]/[rtscp,s] 


On = .. (B.21) 


Within the limits of the assumptions made in the above analysis, either configuration using the non-irradiated 
solar collector array could be used provided the appropriate equations were used to control the collector loop 
heater [equation (B.15) or (B.21)]. However, locating the collector loop heater downstream of the collector array 
was chosen due to the simpler expression for Qin, equation (B.15). 


It should be noted with reference to equation (В.І) and (B.15) that the value of Fr is dependent upon mass flow 
rate and the specific heat of the transfer fluid. Therefore, if the flow rate of the transfer fluid through the collector 
in the operation of the solar hot water system is different from the value used during the tests on the collector, 
then the value of Fg used in equation (B.15) must be modified from that value obtained from the collector tests. 
This can be done utilizing the following procedure: 


1. Calculate (та), n for the solar collector. For an ordinary flat-plate collector: 


( T @ Jen = — me 220 (В.22) 


1-(1- zn) oa 


where 


pa = 0.16 for a one-cover glass system; 
0.24 for a two-cover glass system; and 
= 0.29 for a three-cover glass system. 


For concentrating or other types of collectors, the value of (1a), must be determined based on the geometrical 
and optical properties of the collector. 


2. Calculate the value of Fg from the collector tests by: 


Fr= Y intercept of the efficiency curve 
r (Aa/Ag)( т а )еп from step 1 above 


24 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


3. Calculate the value of the UL from the collector tests by: 


A 
A,FRUL 


А. FR 
Ag 


UL = 


where (Aa / Ag) FRUL, is the absolute value of the slope of the efficiency curve at a value of (tset x tat) /G at 
solar noon during the system test. 


4. Calculate the collector efficiency factor, Р” by: 


_ — тсбрс In [1 - e see (B.23) 


AaUL Thccp,c 


5. Once F’ is determined, Ек can be calculated for any system's transfer fluid flow rate and specific heat by 
using: 


MAaU F! 


_ ™MsCp,s — a Psp, 
R =. h e "scp | ... (B.24) 


It should be noted that the above correction technique is based on the assumption that the collector absorber plate 
efficiency factor, Р”, is not a function of flow rate. However, when using air as the transfer fluid the assumption 
is not valid. The correction technique should not be used under those conditions unless the flow rate per unit 
collector area of air through the array during the system test differs from that used in the collector tests by less 
than 25 percent. Otherwise, the collector tests should be repeated with the collector flow rates per unit area existing 
in the system test used. 


25 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 8.8.1) 


SELECTIVE ORDINATE FOR GLOBAL IRRADIANCE 
100 selected ordinates for global irradiance. Data given at the wavelengths (A, um) midpoints of the equal energy 


intervals (percent) for air mass 1.5 total hemispherical irradiance (951.53 W/m?), incident on a 37° tilted surface 
facing the equator and ground albedo of 0.2. 


SI No. Percent Ax 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) 0.50 0.330 0 
il) 1.50 0.349 9 
ili) 2.50 0.366 9 
iv) 3.50 0.381 0 
у) 4.50 0.393 3 
vi) 5.50 0.402 7 
Vii) 6.50 0.411 2 
viii) 7.50 0.419 5 
ix) 8.50 0.428 7 
х) 9.50 0.436 5 
xi) 10.50 0.443 5 
xii) 11.50 0.449 9 
xiii) 12.50 0.456 1 
xiv) 13.50 0.466 2 
xv) 14.50 0.468 6 
xvi) 15.50 0.475 0 
xvii) 16.50 0.480 8 
xviii) 17.50 0.487 2 
xix) 18.50 0.493 6 
xx) 19.50 0.499 9 
xxi) 20.50 0.506 2 
xxii) 21.50 0.512 6 
xxiii) 22.50 0.519 2 
xxiv) 23.50 0.525 5 
XXV) 24.50 0.531 8 
xxvi) 25.50 0.538 2 
xxvii) 26.50 0.543 0 
xxviii) 27.50 0.547 3 
Xxix) 28.50 0.552 3 
XXX) 29.50 0.558 9 
XXXi) 30.50 0.565 5 
xxxii) 31.50 0.572 2 
xxxiii) 32.50 0.579 3 
xxxiv) 33.50 0.586 3 
XXXV) 34.50 0.593 2 
xxxvi) 35.50 0.599 8 


26 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table (Continued) 

SI No. Percent Ак 
(1) (2) (3) 
xxxvii) 36.50 0.606 5 
xxxviii) 37.50 0.613 2 
хххїх) 38.50 0.620 1 
xl) 39.50 0.627 0 
xli) 40.50 0.634 0 
xlii) 41.50 0.640 9 
xliii) 42.50 0.647 8 
xliv) 43.50 0.654 9 
xlv) 44.50 0.662 0 
xlvi) 45.50 0.669 | 
xlvii) 46.50 0.677 6 
xlviii) 47.50 0.686 3 
xlix) 48.50 0.696 2 
1) 49.50 0.706 9 
li) 50.50 0.7178 
lii) 51.50 0.7234 
liii) 52.50 0.731 7 
liv) 53.50 0.741 0 
lv) 54.50 0.752 8 
Ivi) 55.50 0.763 1 
Ivii) 56.50 0.768 8 
Iviii) 57.50 0.775 6 
lix) 58.50 0.783 4 
Ix) 59.50 0.793 5 
Ixi) 60.50 0.805 7 
Ixii) 61.50 0.820 3 
Ixiii) 62.50 0.831 2 
Ixiv) 63.50 0.837 5 
Ixv) 64.50 0.845 9 
Ixvi) 65.50 0.856 0 
Ixvii) 66.50 0.865 6 
Ixviii) 67.50 0.875 0 
Ixix) 68.50 0.888 8 
Ixx) 69.50 0.907 1 
Ixxi) 70.50 0.923 9 
Ixxii) 71.50 0.948 4 
Ixxiii) 72.50 0.967 6 
Ixxiv) 73.50 0.981 4 
Ixxv) 74.50 0.987 3 
Ixxvi) 75.50 0.993 3 
Ixxvii) 76.50 1.0102 
Ixxviii) 77.50 1.027 6 
Ixxix) 78.50 1.044 5 
1xxx) 79.50 1.059 9 


27 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table (Concluded) 
SI No. Percent Ак 

(1) Q) (3) 

Ixxxi) 80.50 1.080 0 
1xxxii) 81.50 1.128 8 
Ixxxiii) 82.50 1.161 6 
Ixxxiv) 83.50 1.1820 
Їххху) 84.50 1.199 0 
Ixxxvi) 85.50 1.2150 
Ixxxvii) 86.50 1.2310 
Ixxxviii) 87.50 1.258 2 
Ixxxix) 88.50 1.289 1 
хс) 89.50 1.415 0 
xci) 90.50 1.5023 
xcii) 91.50 1.5404 
xciii) 92.50 1.578 8 
xciv) 93.50 1.620 6 
xcv) 94.50 1.652 7 
xcvi) 95.50 1.687 9 
xcvii) 96.50 1.774 7 
xcviii) 97.50 2.070 4 
xcix) 98.50 2.179 1 
c) 99.50 2.3111 


28 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 8.8.1) 


CALCULATION OF SPECTRUM WEIGHTED VALUES OF OPTICAL PROPERTIES 


The spectrum-weighted value of an optical property 
P can be computed as: 


n 
2, P(A)E ; iM 
SS 
> Е, АА 
= 


where Ел is the spectral irradiance at the wavelength 
Aj АЛ, is the wavelength interval, Р(Л,) is the 
average value of the optical property in the 
wavelength interval, and n is the number of 
wavelengths for which each E, is known. The 
wavelength intervals are given by: 


Аъ = А-1 


АЛ = 2 


29 


except for the first and last interval, which are given 
by: 


AA, = ъ= № 
and 
Ady = An — An-1 


Values of A; and Ёл, for the standard air mass 1.5 
solar spectrum are tabulated in Annex C. Values of 
E for the simulator shall be measured in accordance 
with 8.8.1. This spectrum weighting procedure shall 
be applied to the relevant product of spectral optical 
properties (for example, та, рта). 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 9) 


THE CALCULATION OF EQUIVALENT IRRADIANCE 


During thermal performance testing of SDHW systems, the effects of diffuse irradiance and the incident angle of 
beam irradiance occuring throughout the day should be accounted for Table 5 of Annex A gives values of diffuse 
and beam incident solar radiation to be applied to the solar collector array and the corresponding incident angles 
for beam irradiance. When testing with a solar simulator, it is often not practical or possible to produce these 
conditions by varying the simulator lamp-to-collector orientation or the level of diffuse radiation in the simulator 
enclosure. In these cases or when using a thermal simulator, it is necessary to use an “equivalent irradiance”. This 
is the power level (in the case of a thermal simulator) or radiation level that, when applied normal to the plane of 
the collector by a solar irradiance simulator, represents the irradiance that would have resulted had the conditions 
listed in Table 5 (Annex A) actually occurred, including the effects of direct and diffuse irradiance and incident 
angle. 


The thermal performance of an irradiated solar collector operating under quasi-steady-state conditions can be 
described as given in Annex B as: 


2 =K a .Ев(т @)еаб+— Ев. (е ta) ~ ED 
or letting 

tem = (tei ы {се)/2 ... (E.2) 

а К, pEX z a JenGt— ЁЧЛ (tem — ta) - R3) 


In both cases the value of K , . Сусар be as: 


Kar G= (К+ Gop + Ka Ga) ... (E.4) 


or for a particular incident angle 0, 
K,.(0) хс. = [K, (0) бьь+ Ka Gal ... (E.5) 
where, К,.(0) is the value of the incident angle modifier at an angle Ө to a normal to the collector aperture plane, 


and Gpp and Ga, are values of direct beam and diffuse solar irradiance incident on the aperture plane of the 
collector. For most cases, values of Kg may be estimated from: 


90° 
Ka= f, Ko: (0) x sin(2 0 )]d 0 ... (E.6) 


For collectors with essentially planar glazings and absorber surfaces; the value of K4 can be approximated by the 
value of K,,(60 ^ ), that is: 


Ka = K. (60°) 22 (E.7) 


For systems that use collectors in which the value of К, is not symmetrical, Ka may vary depending on which axis 
it is evaluated in (for example, horizontal versus vertical incidence angles); it may be necessary to complete a 
more complex calculation of Ka. These effects may be most significant for collectors employing tubular collectors 
or collectors employing trough structures, mirrors, or lenses such that the geometries are characterized by biaxial 
symmetry. 


30 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


To estimate the “equivalent irradiance” it is necessary to know the variation of incidence angle modifier, Кот, 
with respect to the incident angle of beam irradiance, 0, for the solar collector array used in the SDHW system 
under evaluation. Using these values, the “equivalent irradiance” may be calculated as described below, for each 
of the following cases. 


Testing with a solar simulator 
When a solar irradiance simulator is used and the lamp-to-collector orientation is adjusted to a value Om but the 


irradiance is effectively all direct beam radiation, the effects of diffuse irradiance as specified in Table 5 should 
be accounted for. In this case the “equivalent irradiance”, Geg, (measured in the aperture plane of the collector) is 


eq? 
given from: 
Geq Ka (8 m) = [Gop Ka -( 0) + Ga Kal ... (E.8) 
or 
Geq = [Gop Ka . (0) + Gakal/K a (0 m) ... (E.9) 


The “equivalent irradiance” can be related to the direct normal irradiance measured in a plane perpendicular to 
the direction of beam irradiance coming from the solar simulator, Срд m according to: 


Сед = Смт: Cos( O m) ... (E.10) 


For the case in which the lamp-to-collector orientation is adjusted each hour of the test such that; Ө, = 0; where 
0 represents the values given in Table 5 corresponding to the test hour, then; 


Geg = Gop + [Ga Ka/K a . C0 )] ... (E.11) 
where Gap and Ga are specified in Table 5 for the corresponding value of 0 during the test hour of the test day. 


For the case in which the lamp-to-collector orientation is fixed such that the radiation coming from the solar 
simulator is directly normal to the aperture plane of the solar collector such that 04, = 0°, then; 


Geq = [Gop Ka . (0) + Ga Kal/K a „ (0°) .. (E.12) 

which equals 
Geg = [Gop Ka . (0) + Ga Ка] ... (E.13) 

since by definition, K , . (0°) = 1. 
Testing with a thermal simulator: 
When testing with a thermal simulator, the power output of the heater should be determined by the method 
described in Annex B, accounting for the effects of diffuse irradiance and the incident angle of beam irradiance 
as specified in Table 5. In this case the value of K,, Сү, used in the calculation of the thermal simulator output 
(Annex B) should be given by: 


Kye G= |К, .(0) 6+ Ka Gal ... (E.14) 


where the values of Ө, бър, and Ga, are the values given in Table 5 corresponding to the hour of the test day. 


31 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Renewable Energy Sources Sectional Committee, MED 04 


Organisation 


Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 
Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 

Biogas Forum India, New Delhi 

CSIR - Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


CSIR - Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, 
Durgapur 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Consumer Coordination Council, Noida 


Emmvee Photovoltaic Power Private Limited, Bengaluru 


India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology (BHU), Mechanical Engineering 
Department, Varanasi 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 

Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited, 
New Delhi 


International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Maharashtra Energy Development Agency, Pune 


Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, New Delhi 


32 


Representative(s) 


DRA. K. TRIPATHI (Chairperson) 
SHRI AMRISH GUPTA 

SHRI A. R. SHUKLA 

DR P. SHANMUGAM 


DR CHANCHAL LOHA 
SHRI SUBHO SAMANTA 


SHRI RAJU GOYAL 
SHRI VAIBHAV GUPTA (Alternate I) 
SHRI MANMOHAN RATHI (Alternate ID) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR SINGH 
DR PRIYABRATA SANTARA(Alternate) 


SHRI VIMAL KUMAR 
SHRI RAJIV GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR MISHRA 
SHRIR. K. KAPLASH (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR C. R. 
SHRI MANJUNATH ULLUR H. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. SAWHNEY 
DR ANIKENDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR KANCHAN K. SINGH 
DR PANNA LAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIS. KUMAR SHUKLA 


SHRI J. K. NAYAK 
DR SHIREESH KEDARE (Alternate) 


PROF DIBAKAR RAKSHIT 
PROF K. RAVI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SOM PAL 
SHRI S. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBDAS GOSWAMI 
SHRI V. K. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ A. PISE 
SHRI HEMANT MANIK (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANAND V. KULKARNI (Alternate II) 
SHRI SAMEER GHODAKE (Alternate IIT) 


DR S. R. MEENA 
DR A. K. SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 


Organisation 
National Institute of Solar Energy, Gurugram 


Nuetech Solar Systems Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Rites Limited, Gurugram 


Rajagiri School of Engineering and Technology, Kerala 


Regional Test Centre, Pune 


Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research Institute, Mechanical 
Engineering Department, Vallabh Vidyanagar 


Solar Thermal Federation Of India, Pune 
The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (C-103 A, JVTS Garden Chaterpur 
Extension, New Delhi -110074) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 13129 (Part 1) : 2023 


Representative(s) 
DR CHANDAN BANERJEE 
SHRI KISHORE K. MENON (Alternate) 
SHRI SHRY ANANTH 


SHRI SHRI RUPESH KUMAR 
SHRI MANISH TIWARI (Alternate) 


DR VARGHESE 
SHRI JOEL GEORGE (Alternate) 


SHRI PROF SANDESH R. JADKAR 
DR ANAGHA M. PATHAK (Alternate I) 
PROF KIRAN DESHPANDE (Alternate II) 


SHRI E. R. ASIM KUMAR 
DR SHAISHAV SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIDEEP N. MALAVIYA 
SHRIN. K. RAM 


SHRI ATAM KUMAR 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


33 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 04 (21158). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


