Waa Wah IS 1443 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


unas — tifa afear 
( ZAT YO ) 


Laying and Finishing of Cement 
Concrete Tiles — Code of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30 


© BIS 2018 


mA AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM WH, 9 gN AHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
Vell” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2018 Price Group 3 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 5 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1959 and subsequently revised in 1972. This revision incorporates the experience 
gained with the use of this standard and brings the standard in line with the latest developments in this field. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been incorporated: 


a) Title of the standard has been modified from ‘Code of practice for laying and finishing of cement concrete 
flooring tiles’ to ‘Laying and finishing of cement concrete tiles — Code of practice’ as the standard 
covers laying of both floor and wall tiles; 

b) Preparation and use of cement mortar and lime mortar for bedding concrete tiles have been separately 
described; 

c) Permissible tolerances in laying of tiles have been specified; and 

d) Synthetic grinding wheel to be used for grinding and polishing has been specified and detailed. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value shall be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1443 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


LAYING AND FINISHING OF CEMENT CONCRETE 
TILES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


(Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the laying, finishing and 
maintenance of cement concrete tiles in floors, walls, 
staircases, pavings, etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 General Terms 


3.1.1 Base — The prepared surface on which the 
flooring is laid. 


3.1.2 Efflorescence — Patches of whitish scum formed 
by the deposition of soluble salts which appear on the 
flooring particularly noticeable on plain tiles. 


3.1.3 Grout or Slurry — Neat cement mixed with water 
to honey-like, if used for grouting joints of tiled 
consistency; it may include pigments floor. Sand, stone 
dust or any other aggregate shall not be added. 


3.1.4 Matrix — The binding constituent of the top layer 
of the tile which is chiefly Portland cement, either plain 
or mixed, with pigments. 


3.1.5 Pin Holes — These are tiny air-cells in terrazzo 
tiles which open up during the polishing process and 
are too small to be filled. 


3.1.6 Pores — Holes appearing in the surface of the 
hardened terrazzo tile after the initial grinding. 


3.1.7 Sub-floor — The structural floor upon which the 
base is formed. 


3.1.8 Tiles — The term ‘tile’ used in this standard shall 
apply to the following cement concrete tiles: 


a) Plain tiles; 
b) Plain coloured tiles; 
c) Terrazzo tiles; 


d) Chequered, embossed or 
manufactured non-slip tiles; and 


specially 


e) Precast staircase treads, risers, wall tiles, etc. 
3.2 Tools and Accessories 


3.2.1 Screed — Narrow strips of wood, bands of plaster 
or pieces of tiles laid on the floor to act as guides for 
bringing the whole of the work to a true and even 
surface. The screeds shall be removed after laying all 
the true and even surface. floor area for which they 
have been applied as guides. 


3.2.2 Screeding Board — A straight-edged wooden 
plank used for floating a plane surface. It is moved 
with a sawing action, the two ends resting on screeds 
or guides set at the correct height. 


3.3 Site Operation 


3.3.1 Bedding — A layer of mortar applied to the base 
or sub-floor and brought to a defined level. 


3.3.2 Damp-Proofing — Covering the sub-floor with 
a continuous layer of impervious material so as to 
prevent penetration of moisture. 


3.3.3 Filling — A plain or coloured cement paste with 
which the open pores of terrazzo tiles are filled or 
plastered after grinding. The term also refers to the 
operation of filling. 


3.3.4 Grinding — The process by which the aggregate 
of tiles is exposed by means of mechanical or manual 
grinding. 


3.3.5 Polishing — Rubbing of tiles mechanically or by 
hand with polishing stones after they have been laid, 
and bringing out their sheen. 


3.3.6 Screeding — Bringing the floor to a true and even 
surface by means of screeding boards and screeds. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 Sand 


The sand to be used for mortar for laying the tiles shall 
conform to IS 2116 and the sand shall have minimum 


IS 1443 : 2018 


fineness modulus 1.5. 


4.2 Cement 


Cement used for the floor work shall conform to IS 269 
or IS 455 or IS 1489 (Part 1) or IS 1489 (Part 2) or 
IS 16415. 


4.3 Lime 


Lime used shall be Class B or Class C conforming to 
IS 712. 


4.4 Tiles 


The cement concrete flooring tiles to be used shall 
conform to IS 1237. 


4.5 Shiner and Sealer 


Shiner and sealer can be used in the polishing of tiles 
shall be such as to give a satisfactory performance 
without detrimental effects. 


4.6 Pigments 


4.6.1 Synthetic or natural pigments may be used in 
mortar or for grouting to obtain desired shades of 
colours. The pigment used should result in durable 
colours of tile. It shall not contain matters detrimental 
to concrete. Pigments, either singly or in combination, 
conforming to IS 1237 may be used. Pigment quantity 
to be restricted to a maximum of 9 percent by weight 
of cement content. The fineness of pigment should be 
more than the fineness of cement. 


4.7 Water 


Water used shall be clean and free from oil, acid, alkali, 
organic or vegetable matter. Sea water shall not be used. 


5 COMPLETION OF WORK PRECEDING THE 
LAYING OF TILES 


5.1 All the inside walls, ceiling and outside walls shall 
be plastered and door frames and windows fixed in 
position. 


5.2 The sub-floor shall be finished to a reasonably true 
plane surface about 35 to 50 mm below the level of the 
finished floor, properly graded and free from loose 
earth, dirt or dust and lumps. 


5.3 Before tiling work is started, all points of level for 
the finished tile surface shall be marked out. This is 
particularly necessary in the case of finished staircase 
landings. Wherever slopes in finished floors are desired 
points of level and outlets shall be correctly marked 
and outlet openings made beforehand. 


5.4 Protection Against Dampness 


Wherever it is feared or suspected that dampness may 


percolate on to the top of the sub-floor or base during 
any time of the year, the same shall be treated or covered 
with any of the recognized damp-proofing methods to 
prevent dampness or water rising to the top of the sub- 
floor or base. Where it is suspected that water may 
percolate from the side walls, the same shall also be 
properly waterproofed up to at least 15 cm above the 
level of the sub-floor. 


6 BEDDING 


6.1 Preparation of Mortar 


Both cement mortar as well as lime mortar can be used 
for preparation of bed for laying of tiles. The method 
of preparation and laying of each type of mortar shall 
be as given in 6.1.1 to 6.1.4. 


6.1.1 Cement Mortar 


Cement mortar shall consist of one part of Portland 
cement and five parts of coarse sand by volume 
thoroughly mixed. The minimum quantity of water 
necessary to give sufficient plasticity and workability 
for laying shall be added and mixed manually or by 
using a mechanical mixer. A high water-cement ratio 
will give a screeded bed with drying and shrinkage 
cracks, hence a high water-cement ratio should be 
avoided. 


6.1.2 Spreading of Cement Mortar 


Before spreading of cement mortar, it is essential to 
ensure that the base is well compacted and the surface 
is rough to form suitable key. The base shall then be 
cleaned of all scum, laitance or plaster droppings or 
any other loose foreign matter. It shall be properly 
wetted without allowing any water pools on the surface. 
The mortar shall then be evenly spread over the base 
for two rows of tiles and up to 3 m in length with thread 
level fixed at both ends to act as a guide to avoid the 
optical illusion of depression. The top of mortar shall 
be kept rough so that cement slurry can be absorbed. 
The thickness of the bedding shall normally be not less 
than 10 mm and not more than 30 mm in any one place. 
Immediately after, the laying of tiles shall start as 
described in 6.2. 


6.1.3 Lime Mortar 


Lime mortar may be prepared in any of the following 
proportions: 


a) 1 lime,1 Surkhi, 2 Coarse sand; or 
b) 1 lime, 3 Surkhi; or 
c) 1 lime, 3 Coarse sand. 


The ingredients shall be thoroughly mixed by volume 
in dry form. Care shall be taken to ensure that there are 
no hard lumps present. Water shall then be added and 
the ingredients thoroughly mixed as in 6.1.1. 


6.1.4 Spreading of Lime Mortar 


Cleaning and wetting of the base shall be done in the 
same manner as specified in 6.1.2. Lime mortar shall 
then be evenly and smoothly spread over the base and 
levelled with a screed batten to a slightly rough surface 
for providing key for the tiles. The thickness of mortar 
shall be the same as in the case of cement mortar, that 
is, 10 mm minimum and 30 mm maximum at any one 
place. Screeds properly levelled shall be fixed at the 
correct height to suit the thickness of the screeded bed. 
The area of bedding should be as much as can be 
covered with tiles during the following day. The freshly 
laid portion of the mortar bedding shall be protected 
from damage by providing suitable barricading. 


7 LAYING OF TILES 


7.1 After the tiles have been laid in a room or the day’s 
laying work is completed, the surplus lime/cement 
slurry and the joints shall be cleaned and washed fairly 
deep with the help of a broom stick. It shall be seen 
that the slurry is cleaned before it sets hard. 


7.2 The day after the tiles have been laid, the joints 
shall be filled with lime/cement grout of the same shade 
as the colour of the matrix of the tile. The freshly laid 
portion of the tiles shall be prevented from damage by 
providing suitable barricading. 


7.3 Tiles which are fixed in the floor adjoining the wall 
shall penetrate about by 10 mm under the plaster, 
skirting or dado as may be required. For this purpose, 
the wall plaster should be left unfinished about 50 mm 
above the level of the proposed finished flooring/ 
skirting/dado level. The unfinished strip shall be 
plastered later on after the tiles are fixed. 


7.4 After fixing, the flooring should be kept moist and 
allowed to mature undisturbed for seven days so that the 
bedding and joints set properly. After this, it may be used 
for light traffic. Heavy traffic shall not be allowed on 
the floor for at least ten days after fixing the tiles. 


7.5 Wherever big areas of floor, above 3 m in length or 
width, are to be tiled, the level shall be fixed at in every 
3 m intervals. The central portion of the floor shall be 
kept about 3 to 5 mm higher than the level marked at 
the walls unless specified otherwise. This is normally 
done to avoid the optical illusion of a depression in the 
central portion of the tiled hall. 


7.6 The localized deviation shall not exceed 3 mm ina 
3 m straight edge after the laying of whole floor is 
complete. 


8 SKIRTING, DADO WORK AND STAIRCASE- 
TREADWORK 


8.1 Tile skirtings/dado, where required, shall be fixed 
only after laying of the floor tiles is complete. 


IS 1443 : 2018 


8.2 Before fixing tiles on brick or concrete wall, the 
wall surface shall first be wetted with clean water. 
Thereafter, in case of dado the wall surface shall be 
evenly and uniformly covered with about 10 mm thick 
level plaster of cement mortar (1 cement : 4 coarse 
sand). In the case of skirting, the tiles can be fixed 
directly on the wall with cement mortar (1:4 coarse 
sand) at the back of each tile backing. On dado the 
back of tiles shall be covered with a thin layer of neat 
cement paste and the tile shall then be gently tapped 
against the wall with a wooden mallet to achieve the 
required line and level. The fixing shall be done from 
the bottom of the wall upwards. Each tile shall be fixed 
as close as possible to the one another to give an even 
surface. The localized deviation shall not exceed 3 mm 
in a 3 m straight edge after the laying of whole dado is 
complete. 


8.3 Precast treads and risers tiles for staircases shall be 
laid as described for flooring. 


9 GRINDING AND POLISHING 


9.1 Grinding and polishing of the tiles shall commence 
only after the floor as well as the joints have properly 
set and in no case earlier than ten days of laying. 


9.2 For grinding terrazzo tile flooring, synthetic 
grinding stone of 80 grit may be used. When the floor 
is rubbed even and chips show uniformity it shall be 
cleaned with water making bare all pin holes. Grouting 
in the same shade is then briskly applied so that all pin 
holes are properly filled in. The grout shall be kept 
moist for a week for proper setting. Thereafter, the 
second grinding operation 100 grit is commenced. The 
floor is grouted again to fill in fine pin holes. After 
curing, the floor is left as it is till other works in the 
room/hall are completed and all workers quit. Before 
the final grinding the floor is swept clean. Final grinding 
is done with synthetic grinding stones of numbers 2 
to 7, to get polishing sheen. Finally a tin oxide powder 
spread with nylon pad fitted in the machine add little 
water and run the machine in all direction and leave 
the area for a while. Then clean the surface with water. 
A coat of sealer or shiner can be applied to avoid 
absorption of oil. 


9.3 Grinding of skirting preferably should be done using 
a handheld machine. 


9.4 When grinding and polishing of dado, staircase 
tread and risers is done with hand held machine, the 
grinding and polishing shall be carried out in the same 
sequence as described in 9.2. 


9.5 In the case of plain cement and coloured tiles the 
process of polishing shall be the same as described 
in 9.2 except that initial grinding with synthetic grinding 
stone of 80 grit may not be necessary. 


IS 1443 : 2018 


9.6 Chequered or grooved tiles normally do not require 
polishing. 


10 APPEARANCE 


10.1 The finished floor shall have an even, smooth and 
shining surface. Joints should be in correct alignment 
and pattern as shown in the drawings. 


NOTES 


1 Normally, all freshly laid tile-floors and dado work may show 
efflorescence even after the tiles are polished. This may be 
particularly noticeable in plain-tile floors. This may not affect 
the quality of the tiles or of the finished floor; the same may 
acquire a natural sheen after two to three months of daily 
cleaning. When all the salts from the concrete have come to the 
surface and are washed off, there will be no more trouble from 
this cause and the floor will require less work for its upkeep. If 
quality tiles have been used, their natural gloss will improve 
with age and wear. 


2 Minor variations may occur in the shades of cement used in 
the matrix, in the colour and shade of the marble chips and in 
the distribution of the chips over the tiles. 


11 MAINTENANCE 


11.1 Care Immediately After the Work 


11.1.1 After laying, the floor shall be allowed to remain 
clean and free from cement, oil, paint, distemper, plaster 
droppings and all materials likely to stain or spoil the 
tiles. If appliances, such as trestles, ladders, steps, etc, 


have to be used for electrician’s, plumber’s and other 
light work, it shall be ensured that parts contact with 
the flooring are padded by the contractor doing such 
work and no sliding the appliances on the finished 
flooring is permitted. The owner shall also take care, 
when the floor is used for subsequent operations, that 
staining, damaging or pitting of the tile-work is entirely 
prevented. 


11.1.2 Stair finishes, particularly nosings, are liable to 
be damaged by dragging or dropping of articles up or 
down the stairs. It is, therefore, necessary to protect 
the stairs against such causes of damage. 


11.2 Subsequent Maintenance 


11.2.1 Polished tile-floors shall be regularly swabbed 
with clean water followed by brisk rubbing with dry 
linen. If they are very dirty, water and soap may be 
used. Care shall be taken to remove any soap film 
deposited in washing, as failure to do so will result in 
the floor becoming slippery and dull-looking. Use of 
soda, acid, etc, shall be avoided. 


11.2.2 Resistance to staining is, to a great extent, 
dependent upon the degree of maintenance. Where bad 
stains have occurred, the advice of the manufacturer of 
the tiles may be sought for their removal. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
269 : 2015 Ordinary portland cement — 
Specification (sixth revision) 


455 : 2015 Portland slag cement — 
Specification (fifth revision) 

456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 

712 : 1984 Specification for building limes 
(third revision) 

1237 : 2012 Cement concrete flooring tiles — 


Specification (second revision) 


IS No. Title 

Portland pozzolana cement — 
Specification 

Fly ash based (fourth revision) 
Calcined clay based (fourth 


revision) 


1489 


(Part 1) : 2015 
(Part 2) : 2015 


2116 : 1980 Specification for sand for masonry 
mortars (first revision) 
16415 : 2015 Composite cement — Specification 


IS 1443 : 2018 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, New Delhi) 
Ardex Endura India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Carborundum Universal Limited, Chennai 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Naroda 
CSIR — Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Navi Mumbai 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Mumbai 
Gyan Construction Company, Mumbai 


H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & Sanitaryware, New Delhi 


Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi 
Lloyd Insulation (India) Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


Mapie Construction Products India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, New Delhi 


Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi 


Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Mumbai 


MYK Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


Representative(s) 


Suri ASHOK KHuRANA (Chairman) 


Suri K. P. PAULSON 
Suri GOPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Gupta 
Suri Pankas Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAJAGOPALAN 
Dr N. RAMASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR KAUSHAL 
Suri ARUN Kumar Tyaci (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
Suri ACHAL Kumar MITTAL (Alternate) 


Dr SATYENDRA NATH MISRA 
Dr RAKESH KUMAR 


Suri R. D. MATHUR 
Suri RamesH Basappa (Alternate) 


SHRI UPEN PATEL 
SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi JAIN (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (Dwk) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


CoL INDRA Kumar JAGGI 


Suri J. K. BHAGCHANDANI 
Suri AKHILESH Maurya (Alternate) 


SHRI B. KUMAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI G. S. PATNAIK 
Suri Arun Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN Rao 
Suri P. K. Suarma (Alternate) 


SHRI K. K. KAPILA 


SHRI Mouit KHANNA 
Suri K. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


Dr G. S. Ravi SHANKAR 
Suri Asuyit Dutta (Alternate) 


Surimati MaLa MOHAN 
SurMaTI Namrata Konui (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KAPOOR 
Suri KaMeswar Rau (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH JETPARIA 
Suri JERAM Mapuav Kavar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr P. ARJUNAN 
Suri N. RADHAKANTH (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. BREJA 


IS 1443 : 2018 


Organization Representative(s) 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi Suri S. C. JINDAL 
Suri R. P. KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


National Test House, Kolkata Suri D. V. S. PRASAD 
Suri ALOKE Dev (Alternate) 


National Tiles Corporation, Panchkula SHRI PREM CHAND GUPTA 
Suri S. R. Gara (Alternate) 


New Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE 
Premier Polyfilm Limited, Ghaziabad Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Suri R. K. Naran (Alternate) 
Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Ministry of EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (WoRrxs) 
Railways, Lucknow SHRI AsHUTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Responsive Industries Limited, Mumbai SHRI RISHABH AGARWAL 


SHRI ABHISHEK AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, New Delhi Dr P. K. KAICHER 
Dr Laxmi Rawat (Alternate) 


Somany Ceramic Ltd, Bahadurgarh Suri G. G. TRIVEDI 
Dr AsHuTosH GoeL (Alternate) 


Super Tiles and Marble Private Limited, Mumbai SHRI ASHOK RAJPUROHIT 
SHRI SUDHAKAR Moni (Alternate) 


Xebec Design and Facilities Private Limited, New Delhi SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SAMIR BANERJI (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General Suri SANJAY PANT, Scientist ‘F’ AND HEAD (Civil ENGG) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 05 (10640). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


