NAT Alan IS 900 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


SICUT Alert ch чето, HETAT 
эйч этчтагот f {9 ASAT 
( TERT JATT ) 


Code of Practice for Storage, 
Installation and Maintenance 
of Induction Motors 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 29.160 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM 5101 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH ИТТ, 95 Reef - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 13 


Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee, ETD 15 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Rotating Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1956 and subsequently revised in 1965 and 1992. The first revision of this 
standard incorporates the prevalent practices applicable to motors rated voltage up to 11 kV and having outputs 
from 60 kW to 250 kW. The second revision incorporates some of the additions like handling and storage of 
motors, temperature rise, etc. Opportunity has also been utilized to update the references wherever applicable. 


The third revision of the standard is undertaken to include the following points: 
a) Storage instructions for indoor storage, outdoor storage and extended storage. 
b) Requirements of qualified personnel and safety instructions are included in this revision of the standard. 
c) DOL starting and its frequency. 
d) More elaborated handling instructions 


e) Suitable tightening torque value to avoid the damage of non-metallic terminal block from overtightening 
of connectors. 

f) VFD operation and vibration limits of motor system. 

g) Reasons of motor not performing/motor failure under different headings. 

h) Insulation resistance values. 

j) Deletion of references of Class A and Class E insulations. 
Apart from the information concerning installation and maintenance of motors, this standard also gives additional 
information regarding selection of various types of drives available for transmission of power from the motor 
shaft to the driven machine. 
This standard is intended to serve as a ‘guide to installation engineers, contractors and users of electric motors. 
It has been drawn up in a somewhat more detailed manner than the corresponding standards in other countries in 
the hope that it would be of greater use to all those concerned in the use, installation and maintenance of electric 
motors to ensure best possible service under conditions generally obtaining in this country. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value shall be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 900 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STORAGE, 
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 
OF INDUCTION MOTORS 


( Third Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers storage, installation and 
maintenance of three-phase induction motors covered 
by IS 15999 (Part 1) and equipment generally associated 
with such motors operating at voltages up to 11 kV. 


1.2 Commutator motors and flameproof motors and 
their associated equipment are outside the scope of this 
standard. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreement based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Induction Motor — An alternating-current motor 
without a commutator, in which one part only, either the 
rotor or the stator, is connected to the supply network, 
the other working by induction. 


3.2 Slip-ring Motor — An induction motor, the stator 
of which is fed by the supply network, the winding of 
the rotor being connected to slip-rings. 


3.3 Squirrel-cage Motor — An induction motor in 
which the rotor windings comprise bars in a laminated 
core with their ends short-circuited by end rings. 


3.4 Direct-on-line Starting — A method of starting, 
applicable to three phase squirrel-cage motors, by 
connecting the motor directly to the supply, the 
connections of the motor remaining the same as in the 
running position. 


3.5 Star-delta Starting — A method of starting 
applicable to three-phase squirrel cage motors 


connected in delta under normal working conditions; it 
consists in connecting the three-phases temporarily in 
star connection while starting. 


3.6 Auto-transformer Starting — A method of 
starting applicable to three-phase squirrel-cage motor, 
by connecting the three-phases temporarily through an 
auto-transformer so as to reduce the applied voltage at 
the time of starting. 


3.7 Resistance Starting — A method of starting 
applicable mainly to slip-ring motors, whereby a 
variable resistance is inserted in the rotor circuit 
at starting which is gradually cut out. Sometimes, 
resistance is inserted in the stator circuit of squirrel- 
cage motor to reduce the starting current to some 
desired value. 

NOTE — The resistance in the rotor circuit is not necessarily 

in series with the rotor winding. In case of delta-connected 

rotor, resistance is in fact in parallel with the rotor winding. 


3.8 Flameproof Enclosure — An enclosure for 
electrical machinery or apparatus that will withstand, 
when the coven or other access doors are properly 
secured, an internal explosion of the flammable gas or 
vapour which may enter or which may originate inside 
the enclosure, without suffering damage and without 
communicating the internal flammation (or explosion) 
to the external flammable gas or vapour in which 
it is designed to be used, through any joints or other 
structural openings in the enclosure. 
NOTE — The term 'flameproof' as used here is synonymous 
with the term 'explosion-proof' as used in the USA or 
‘explosion proof type - d protection’ used in Germany and 
other continental countries. 


3.9 Circuit-breaker — Ап  electro-mechanical 
switching device having two positions of rest and 
capable of making, carrying and breaking currents 
under normal circuit conditions and also under pre- 
determined conditions carrying for a given time and 
breaking currents under abnormal circuit conditions, 
such as those of short-circuit. 


3.10 Starter — A device (or assembly of devices) 
designed for starting a motor or controlling an 
apparatus. 


IS 900 : 2019 


3.11 Controlling Device — A device to actuate the 
starter, such as a push button. 


3.12 Isolator (Disconnector) — A device used to 
open (or close) a circuit when either negligible current 
is interrupted (or established), or when no significant 
change in the voltage across the terminals of each pole 
of the isolator occurs in the open position, it provides an 
isolating distance between the terminals of each pole. 


NOTES 


1 Negligible currents imply currents, such as the capacitance 
currents of bushings, busbars, connections, very short lengths 
of cables and currents of voltage transformers and, devices. 
The manufacturer may give information concerning the ability 
of isolators to make and break small inductive and capacitive 
currents. 


2 There are isolators whose fixed and moving contacts of each 
pole are not fixed on a common base or frame. In this case, 
special instructions for the erection may be necessary to secure 
the isolating distance. 
3.13 Under-voltage Release — A release which permits 
a mechanical switching device to open or close with 
without delay when the voltage across the terminals of 
the release falls below a pre-determined value. 


3.14 Over-current Release — A release which 
permits a mechanical switching device to open with or 
without delay when the current in the release exceeds a 
predetermined value. 


3.15 Interlocking Device — A mechanical, electrical 
or other device which makes the operation of an 
apparatus dependent on the state or the - position of one 
or more devices other than the controlled apparatus. 


3.16 Medium Voltage — Any voltage normally 
exceeding 250 volts and not normally exceeding 650 
volts. 


4 EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 


4.1 The electrical engineer responsible for the 
installation of equipment covered by this code shall be 
informed, by the persons requiring the equipment, as to 
its exact duties and the location and conditions under 
which it is expected to operate. This information should, 
if possible, be exchanged before the construction of 
the building and before any electrical equipment is 
ordered, thus enabling the electrical engineer to detail 
any special-building features required and to specify 
the most suitable type of equipment for the operational 
requirement involved. 


4.2 Details of the electric supply available and of any 
special requirements regarding the ratings of equipment 
and the conditions under which the equipment may be 
connected to the supply should be ascertained from the 
supply authorities. 


4.3 General Instructions 


All personnel working in the assembly, operation 
or maintenance of electrical installations, must be 


continuously informed and updated on the service safety 
instructions and standards. They are advised to strictly 
comply with them. Before starting any operation, the 
officer in charge is responsible for making sure that 
all instructions were duly observed and respective 
staff was made alert about the dangers inherent to the 
operation to be performed. 


When inappropriately used, or victim of poor 
maintenance, or handled by non-qualified personnel, 
the motor may cause severe personnel and/or property 
damage. Therefore, it is recommended that these 
services are performed by qualified personnel. 


a) Qualified personnel 


A qualified person is one who is familiar with 
the installation, construction and operation of the 
equipment, and the hazards involved. In addition, he 
has the following qualifications: 


1) By reason of education level, training, 
experience, instruction, and knowledge of 
the relevant, product and safety standards, 
regulations, accident prevention rules and 
knowledge of working conditions, is authorized 
to perform the appropriate activities required, 
and therefore is able to recognize and prevent 
potentially dangerous situations. 


2) Is trained and authorized to energize, de- 
energize, clear, ground, and tag circuits and 
equipment in accordance with established 
safety practices. 


3) Is trained in the proper care and use of 
protective equipment such as rubber gloves, 
hard hat, safety glasses or face shields, flash 
clothing etc., in accordance with established 
safety practices. 


4) Is trained in rendering first aid procedures and 
has knowledge of local rescue organizations. 


b) Safety instructions 


1) Dangerous voltages are present in the motor 
components which can cause serious injury, 
electrocution and equipment damage. To 
avoid serious injury and/or equipment damage 
before any adjustments, servicing, wiring, parts 
replacement or any other act requiring physical 
contact with the electrical or mechanical 
working components of this equipment is 
performed, all equipment must be de-energized, 
disconnected and isolated to prevent accidental 
contact with live or rotating parts. 


2) During operation, the motor is energized 
with high voltage and there are rotating parts. 
Therefore operation with open terminal boxes, 
unprotected couplings to be strictly avoided. 


3) Firefighting equipment and first aid notices 
must be available in visible and easily 
accessible locations within the work area. 


4) The success and safe operation of motors is 
dependent upon proper handling, storage, 
installation, operation and maintenance, as 
well as upon proper design and manufacture. 
Failure to follow certain fundamental 
installation and maintenance requirements 
may lead to personal injury and the failure and 
loss of the motor as well as damage to other 
property. 

Only qualified personnel should be involved 
in the inspection, maintenance and repair 
procedure and all plant safety procedures must 
be observed. 


5 


— 


6) Motor must be installed and earthed as per 
local and national codes. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Standard Specifications 


This code applies primarily to motors covered by 
IS 15999 (Part 1). It also presupposes the use of 
controlgear and other associated equipment and 
connection complying with relevant Indian Standards 
or, where these are not available, with other approved 
standards. 


5.2 Inter-changeability 


Where a number of similarly rated units are to be used, 
arrangements should preferably be made for such units 
to be interchangeable as regards essential dimensions, 
such as those affecting the fixing arrangement, space 
occupied, height to centre of shaft, distance from centre 
line of motor to the centre line of driving pulley, etc. 


5.3 Compliance with Indian Electricity Rules and 
Other Regulations 


5.3.1 АП electrical installations shall be checked 
for compliance with the requirements of the current 
Indian Electricity Rules and Regulations made there 
under, together with any other regulations that may be 
applicable. It is recommended that the local authority 
concerned in the administration of the rules and 
regulations in the matter ofthe layout of the installation 
of medium voltage industrial motors and their control 
gear be consulted to ensure that the requirements under 
the rules and regulations are complied with. 


5.3.2 The electrical installation shall be carried out by 
persons competent to undertake such work under the 
regulations that may be in force indifferent states. 


5.3.3 Earth Connection 


The frame of every motor and its associated controlgear 
shall be earthed by two separate and distinct 
connections with earth through an earth electrode. 
Where practicable, the earth connections should be 
visible for periodical inspection. 


IS 900 : 2019 


5.3.3.1 Earthing shall be done in accordance with 
IS 732. 


5.3.3.2 Reference is also invited to IS 3043 for earthing 
of equipment. 


5.3.4 Controlling of power supply to motor shall 
be ensured by linked switch or circuit breaker or 
emergency tripping device placed adjacent to the 
motor or group of motors readily accessible and easily 
operable by authorized personnel (see also 6.4). 


5.4 All wiring shall be done in accordance with IS 732. 
6 INSTALLATION DESIGN 


6.1 General 


The construction of all apparatus and conductors shall 
be such that operating temperatures of components do 
not exceed the safe figures laid down in the relevant 
Indian Standards having regard to the conditions in 
which the equipment is used. The equipment shall be 
installed, operated and maintained as to ensure that 
such safe temperatures are not exceeded. 


6.2 Power Factor Correction 


Information on power factor correction is given in 
Annex B. 


6.3 Electrical Protection of Circuits and Apparatus 


All apparatus and associated cable-work shall be 
protected at the origin of the circuit against the effects 
ofelectrical faults in that circuit by a suitable automatic 
protective device. Such a protective device maybe 
in the form-of a circuit-breaker or fuse of adequate 
breaking capacity to deal with the effects of any likely 
alterations or extensions to the installation. Auxiliary 
light current circuits shall have separate fuses. 


6.3.1 Where medium voltage wiring is enclosed in 
conduits, the ends of the conduits shall be securely 
fastened to the motor terminal box and-to the terminal 
box of the control gear and other switches used in 
connections therewith. 


6.3.2 When the motor is mounted on slide rails, for 
adjustment of bolt tension, rigid conduit shall not 
be connected to the motor terminal box but flexible 
metallic conduit with approved adaptors shall be 
utilized for final connection to the motor, keeping good 
electrical and mechanical continuity throughout with 
metal-to-metal joint between solid conduit and flexible 
tube. The ends of the conduit shall be fitted with some 
suitable type of bushing to protect the insulation of the 
cable from damage. 


6.4 Isolation of Equipment 


Each motor and a group of motors and associated 
control gear shall have means of disconnection to 


IS 900 : 2019 


supply and such means shall be so placed as to be 
readily accessible from the position where danger may 
arise. 


6.4.1 In cases where the driven machinery is of a 
dangerous character, such as grinding stones, saws, 
etc., and the normal means of control are of indirect 
nature (push-button), the unless mechanical means for 
rapidly disconnecting the machinery from the driving 
motor are provided, isolation shall be effected by as 
witch arranged in such a way that the supply may be 
immediately interrupted; the switch shall be so placed 
as to be readily accessible from the position where 
danger may arise. 


6.4.2 While making provision for isolation in 
accordance with 6.4 and 6.4.1 due regard should be 
paid to the necessity for isolating all control, pilot and 
interlocking circuits where these are derived from the 
main source of supply or independently. The principle 
to be observed is that any device which purports to 
isolate an installation should do so without exception. 
If it is not practicable to carry out complete isolation 
with a single device, clear instructions shall be affixed 
to the apparatus in a permanent manner setting out the 
procedure to secure complete isolation. 


6.4.3 Additional precautions to be taken for isolation in 
the case of electrical equipment installed on machine 
tools shall be as mentioned in IS 1356 (Part 1). 


6.5 Emergency Supply 


Where sudden failure of supply may cause danger 
or inconvenience, the desirability of installing an 
emergency supply should be considered. Such an 
emergency supply may be limited in capacity in 
accordance with the capacity of the minimum essential 
plant which has to be kept in operation. An automatic 
change-over panel may be provided for switching over 
to the emergency supply and back. Measures shall be 
taken to prevent paralleling of the normal and emergency 
supplies unless normal supply has been specifically 
designed and permitted by the supply authority for 
parallel operation with the emergency supply. 


6.6 Types of Enclosures 


This standard refers particularly to motors with types 
of enclosures specified in IS /IEC 60034-5 and the duty 
conditions generally associated with such enclosures in 
accordance with IS 15999 (Part 1). 


6.6.1 This standard may also be found useful in 
installing and maintaining motors in certain locations 
where other types of enclosures might be called for brief 
information with respect to a few such applications is 
given under 6.6.1.1 to 6.6.1.3. 


6.6.11 Flammable 
atmospheres 


surroundings or explosive 


Motors and control gear for use under these conditions 
shall be of the certified flameproof type a and those 
with suitable flameproof accessories shall be installed 
and maintained in flameproof condition (see 1.2). 
Where, however, it is possible to install electrical 
apparatus in a position not exposed to flammable 
surroundings or an explosive-atmosphere, this course 
should .be preferred and may find application where 
the drive from a motor can be transmitted to a machine 
through a gland in-the wall separating the apparatus 
from the area of risk. 


6.6.1.2 Dusty atmospheres 


In locations where dust or a similar product of 
manufacturing process is liable to be present in such 
quantity, or 1s of such nature, that without special 
precautions it is likely to accumulate sufficiently to 
interfere with the normal operation of the equipment, 
the motors and associated apparatus shall be of the 
dust-proof or dust-tight type [see IS/IEC 60034 (Part 
5)] as may be appropriate for the particular type of 
apparatus concerned. 


6.6.1.3 Damp or corrosive atmosphere 


Where motors are to run under damp conditions 
or exposed atmospheres it is desirable that the 
manufacturer be informed at the time of placing 
the order so that special precautions, like coating 
the windings with protective paint, may be taken. In 
certain circumstances, it may be practicable to resort to 
heating to maintain a temperature above the dew-point. 


7 MOTOR CIRCUITS 


Information on methods generally adopted for 
installation of wiring for two or more motors is 
contained in Annex C. 


7.1 Cable Ratings 
7.1.1 General 


The maximum current that will flow under normal 
conditions of service in a motor circuit shall be taken 
as that corresponding to the full-load current of the 
motor when rated in accordance with the relevant 
current rating as given in IS 12615. The size of cables 
used shall be capable of carrying the full-load currents 
corresponding to the rating of the motor. 


7.1.2 Overload Conditions 


The size of cables shall be so chosen as to take care 
of the starting or accelerating current and also the 
short circuit current, where a starting or accelerating 
current in excess of the rated current has to be carried 
at frequent intervals. 


7.1.3 Rotor Circuit 


The maximum current that flows in the rotor circuit of 
a slip-ring motor under normal conditions of service 


shall be taken as the marked on the rating plate of the 
motor. The size of cables for such circuits shall be 
suitable for the maximum current, as mentioned under 
7.1.1 except that where the motor is provided with slip- 
ring short-circuiting equipment the continuous rating 
of the rotor cables need only be half the starter and 
rotor short-circuiting equipment shall be interlocked 
with main switch 


7.1.4 Starting Conditions 
7.1.4.1 Star-delta 


With star-delta-connected motors, where six main 
connections are used behave the control gear and the 
motor, the maximum current that will flow under normal 
conditions of service shall be taken as 58 percent of the 
current rating and the size of cables chosen shall be as 
stated under 7.1.1 and 7.12. 


7.1.4.2 Resistance 


The size of the cables shall be chosen in accordance 
with the requirements of the circuit, if a resistance 
or other current-limiting device is to be mounted 
separately from the starter or controller with which 
it issued. If, however, the cables are in circuit 
only during starting, their continuous rating may 
be only half of the current rating as determined in 
7.1.4.1. 


7.1.5 It is recommended, therefore, that in the case 
of direct-on-line starting, the cable size be correlated 
with the starting current, particularly in the smaller 
sixes of cable with low thermal capacity, and the cable 
size be selected such that the permissible maximum 
temperature is not exceeded during starting. 
NOTE — In the case of motors of sufficient size or importance 
to justify the installation of a circuit —breaker at the origin of 
the circuit, this difficulty may be overcome by the inclusion 
of an inverse or definite time lag device, according to the 
starting characteristics of the motor, designed to accommodate 
the starting current for the motor, designed to accommodate 
the starting current for the requisite period and an earth- 
leakage trip, to protect the cable against sustained earth fault 
conditions. 


7.1.6 Voltage Drop 


In motor circuits, the sizes of conductors shall be 
so chosen that the voltage at the terminals of the 
motor, when running under full load conditions, is 
not less than 95 percent of the rated motor voltage. 
Furthermore, when the starting or accelerating current 
is considerably in excess of the full-load current, it 
may be necessary in order to ensure adequate starting 
and accelerating torque to consider the conductor 
sizes in relation to the voltage drop that may occur 
at the motor terminals when the excess current is 
flowing. 


IS 900 : 2019 


7.2 Starting Methods 


7.2.1 Squirrel-cage Motors 


The principal methods of starting three-phase squirrel- 
cage motors are: 


a) direct-on-line, 

b) start-delta, 

C) soft starter, 

d) frequency converter, and 


€) auto-transformer. 


7.2.1.1 When using to direct on-line arrangement, the 
only control gear is a switch or current-breaker which 
serves to isolate the motor from the supply. Some 
starters have two positions for the operating handle, 
‘OFF’ and ‘ON’ (or ‘RUN’, while others have three 
positions ‘OFF’, ‘START’ and ‘RUN’. The ‘START’ 
position on the latter type cats out the overload coils 
and this is the only difference between the two types 
of starters. 


7.2.1.2 When using the two- position type of starter the 
handle should simply be moved smartly from ‘OFF’ to 
‘ON’ (or *RUN?)- when using the three-position type 
of starter, the handle shall first be moved from ‘OF to 
‘START and the motor then be given time to run up to 
speed. As soon as the motor comes up to full speed, the 
handle should be moved smartly from the ‘START’ to 
the *RUN' position. 


7.2.1.3 If the motor fails to start when the starter handle 
is moved to the ‘START position, the handle shall not be 
moved over to the ‘RUN’ position but shall immediately 
be returned to the *OFF' position as otherwise damage 
may ensure to both motor and starter. 


7.2.1.4 Direct online starting 


Whenever possible, the start-up of a three-phase 
induction motor must be direct (at full voltage) through 
a contactor. This starting method is the simplest and 
most viable method, thought it must only be used when 
the start-up current does not disrupt the power supply. 


It is important to consider that the starting current in 
induction motors is 6 to 7 times the rated current. It is 
vital to ensure that such high current does not affect 
other consumers ‘power supplies, due to a higher 
voltage drop in the power supply. 

This starting is possible: 

a) When the power supply is “strong” enough and 
the motor starting current is insignificant related 
to the power supply capacity. 

b) Motor starting with or without load should be in 
such a way that the duration of starting current and 
voltage drop is tolerable to other consumers also. 


c) When the direct start-up is properly authorized by 
the local power utility company. 


IS 900 : 2019 


Extremely high starting currents may generate the 
following hazardous consequences: 


a) High voltage drop in the power supply system, 
causing interferences in the equipment installed in 
the system; and 


b) Electrical installation components 
contactors) must be over dimensioned, 


(cables, 


Fines applied by the power utility company that limit 
voltage drop in the power supply system. 


7.2.1.4.1 Direct online starting frequency 


Since induction motors have high starting current, 
the acceleration time in case of high inertia loads 
results in a rapid motor temperature rise. If the time 
interval between consecutive starts is too short, it will 
result into a still further rapid winding temperature 
rise, reducing the useful life or even burning of the 
windings. 


When load inertia is not exceeding motor inertia, 
motor can withstand two consecutive starts from 
cold condition (first one with windings at ambient 
temperature and the second one immediately after, but 
only after when, motor has coasted down to zero speed) 
and one restart from hot condition, that is, when the 
windings are at stabilized hot condition. 


The first condition simulates a scenario in which the 
motor first start-up is incomplete, for instance, because 
of turning it off using the motor protection, when a 
second start-up is immediately allowed. 


The second condition simulates a scenario of sudden 
shutdown while in normal operation, for instance, due 
to lack of power supply, and immediately starting up 
the motor right after power supply is restored. 


Too many starts of the motor will overheat the windings 
and reduce the insulation life of the motor. The 
permissible switching frequency is determined by the 
total inertia of the system, the load torque requirement 
during acceleration, the rated speed of the motor and 
hot thermal withstand time of the motor. 


7.2.1.5 Reduced voltage starting 


In case a direct on line starting is not possible, the 
following methods with lower starting current, may be 
used: 

a) With a star-delta starter; 

b) With an auto-transformer; 

c) With a soft starter; and 

d) With a frequency converter. 


Motors used on reduced voltage starting should be 
carefully selected for power supply conditions and 
driven load requirements. The motor starting torque 
gets reduced when using reduced voltage starting. 


7.2.2 Slip-ring Motors 


Control gear for slip-ring motors usually consists 
of a switch or a contactor or a circuit-breaker in the 
starter circuit and a variable resistance in the rotor 
circuit. When starting the motor, the handle of the short 
circuiting gear, if such gear is fitted, shall be placed in 
the ‘START position and the rotor resistance control 
handle should he in the ‘OFF’ or ‘START’ position. 
The stator switch or breaker shall then be closed and 
the rotor controller handle moved step by step to the 
‘ON’ or ‘RUN’ position, pausing slightly on each stop 
to allow the motor to accelerate. When the controller 
handle has been moved to the last stop and the motor 
comes up to full speed, the short circuiting gear handle, 
if fitted, should then be moved to the ‘RUN’ position. 


7.2.2.1 If the motor fails to start fails rest as soon as 
the stator switch is put on or does not run up to full 
speed within 30 s after the rotor controller handle is 
operated, the stator switch or breaker should be opened 
and the starter handle returned to the ‘OFF’ position 
immediately. 


7.2.2.2 Provision shall be made for an interlock between 
the starter and the circuit-breaker in the stator circuit so 
that the circuit-breaker may be switched on only when 
the full resistance of the starter is in the rotor circuit 
when starting. 


7.3 Protection 


The arrangement of a motor circuit and the type of 
its protection and control apparatus vary according to 
the size and duty of the motor, but the following safe 
guards should be observed in arranging the protective 
systems. 


7.3.1 The system should provide protection against 
the current consumption becoming excessive due 
to overloading of the motor (see 8.6). The overload 
protective device should be such that it does not trip 
due to heavy normal starting current but affords 
full protection in case of sustained overload. It is 
recommended that an ammeter of suitable range be 
provided, preferably on the main circuit-breaker or 
starter. This would enable the load on the motor to be 
readily checked and preventive action taken in the case 
of overloads occurring on the driven machinery. On 
the larger sizes of motors, an ammeter phase selection 
switch shall be an advantage as unequal loading of the 
phases due to unequal resistance in the rotor circuit 
caused by the bad connections, or single phasing, 
would be readily detected. 


7.3.2 Starting Current 


Where the starting current of a motor is of such a value, 
or the starting period so prolonged that the fuses used 
for the protection of the motor and motor circuit, if 


rated for normal running conditions would blow during 
starting, it may be necessary to install fuses of higher 
rating or of increased time-delay characteristics or both. 
Such circumstances are particularly associated with the 
direct-on-line method of starting and, if cables rated 
only for full-load current are installed and the fuses 
at the origin of the circuit are set to accommodate the 
heavy starting and accelerating current, the cables may 
not be protected in accordance with their current rating. 
It is necessary, therefore, to select a fuse rating which 
having regard to the starting conditions, shall provide 
the narrowest tolerable margin below the fusing point. 
If the fuse ratings to be adopted are unavoidably higher 
than are necessary for full-load conditions, it may be 
necessary to increase the cross sectional area of the 
cables in order that they may be adequately protected. 


7.3.2.1 Where fuses are provided to protect the cables 
in a motor circuit as given under 7.3.2, the motor itself 
should preferably be protected by an over current 
device on the starter. The device shall be so arranged 
as to afford sufficient time delay for starting while 
providing adequate protection to the motor and the 
cable between the starter and the motor during normal 
running. Alternatively, the starter may be fitted with 
a changeover switch, the selective positions of which 
are connected to fuses or other over current devices 
rated for the starting current and the running current 
respectively, so connected that the former are in circuit 
during starting and the latter during normal running 
conditions. 


7.3.3 Selection of Fuses 


If the fuses selected are too small, there is danger of 
one fuse blowing before the motor starter trips with 
consequent liability of damage to the motor due to 
operation on one phase open of the supply (single 
phasing) (see also 8.7). The rating of the fuse shall be 
co-related to the characteristics of all the connected 
equipment, like cables and motor control-gears 
reference is also invited to IS 10118. 


8 CONTROL OF MOTORS 


8.1 Every motor shall be provided with efficient means 
of starting and stopping, which shall, if practicable, 
be within sight of a person at the motor, and shall be 
so arranged as to be easily operated by the person in 
control of the motor. 


8.2 At every place in which a machine is driven by a 
motor, there shall be means at hand either for switching 
off the motor or stopping the machine. 


8.2.1 In cases where machines are of dangerous 
character, a step push-button on the machine shall be 
inserted close to the operator to stop the machine in 
case of emergency. 


IS 900 : 2019 


8.3 Where danger may arise due to a motor being 
restarted without the consent of the person who, 
by operating a stop switch, caused it to be stopped, 
arrangements shall be made to prevent restarting of the 
motor until the stop switch involved has been reset; any 
such switch, therefore, shall not be of the self-resetting 


type. 


8.4 Every motor shall be provided with a starter or 
other control device complying with relevant Indian 
Standard. The requirements of the supply authority, 
which may, in certain cases, permit direct-on-line 
starting without the need for any current-limiting 
device, shall be ascertained when the type of starter to 
be used is under consideration. 


8.5 Where injury to persons or to machines or both may 
result from the automatic restarting of an electric motor 
on the restoration of the supply after an interruption, the 
motor starter shall be provided with a suitable device to 
prevent automatic restarting of the motor on restoration 
of the supply. 


8.6 Every electric motor circuit should be provided 
with means of disconnecting the supply in the event 
of the current consumption becoming excessive owing 
to mechanical overloading of the motor. Generally 
speaking, this protection is necessary in addition to the 
protection given by means of circuit-breakers to the 
cable feeding the motor circuit. It may itself take the 
form of a circuit-breaker, or may be advice acting in 
conjunction with the under-voltage release, and fitted 
on the starter. 


8.7 Three-phase motors may be damaged or may give 
rise to fire risks 1f they continue to run after supply 
to one phase has been interrupted. Adequate means 
should, therefore, be provided to ensure automatic 
disconnection of the remaining phases of the supply in 
such a contingency. 

NOTE — This protection is provided for by the normal over 

current trips. In the case, of delta-connected motors, these trips 


should preferably be connected within the interconnection of 
the delta winding. 


8.8 Where a built-in thermal cut-out is fitted to a motor 
and the automatic restarting of the motor is attended 
by danger, the cut-out should incorporate a manually- 
operated resetting device. 


8.9 When the motor is liable to start and stop repeatedly 
by the operation of protection devices, a suitable 
interlock to prevent closure shall be provided. 


8.10 Push-button Control Devices 


‘START’ and ‘STOP’ push-buttons for normal control 
shall be adequately shrouded to prevent inadvertent 
operation. Push-buttons for emergency operations shall 
be so designed as to facilitate such operation. 


IS 900 : 2019 


8.11 Electro-mechanical Brakes 


Where electro-mechanical brakes are used, these shall 
normally be so arranged as to be applied mechanically 
and released electrically in order to provide for 
automatic operation in case of failure of electric supply. 
A hand-operated device shall, however, be provided to 
release the mechanical brake, in the case of motors for 
operating lifts, winders, etc., to bring the same to the 
landing or desired position should a sudden failure of 
electric supply occur. 


8.12 Rapid Braking 


Where extremely rapid braking is required, dynamic 
braking or a similar form of retardation may be 
preferable to mechanical braking from the point of 
view of rapidity of action, smoothness of operation and 
reduction of wear and tear. 


9 HANDLING OF MOTORS 


Motors should be handled very carefully to increase its 
life and service. The following precautions should be 
taken in handling the motors: 


a) Steel cables and hoisting equipment must have 
capacity to bear the motor weight. 


b) Failure to follow the following instructions, may 
result in the motor falling over, or slipping in the 
lifting tackle. The result can be death, serious 
damage, or material breakage: 


1) When lifting the motor, the correct hoisting 
points, the weight of the motor and the 
operating capacity of the hoisting crane must 
be matched. Motors packed in wooden crates 
must always be lifted by their own eyebolts/ 
lifting lugs or by a proper forklift, and must not 
be lifted by its wooden crates. 


2 


МУ 


For lifting the motor, only the lifting еуе- 
bolts provided with motor, are to be used. The 
eyebolts are designed for the motor weight 
only. Never use the eyebolts to lift the motor 
with additional loads, such as pumps, gear 
boxes, fans or any other driven equipment. 


3 


— 


Use all lifting eye-bolts together, that are 
provided, for sharing the load. (If motor is 
provided with two eye-bolts, use both eye- 
bolts and not one). Ensure that the eyebolts are 
fully tightened upto their supporting surface, 
before lifting. 


4 


— 


The packing (wooden crate with motor) must 
not be dropped. It is to be carefully placed on 
the floor without impact to avoid the damage 
to the bearing. Jerks and jolts must be avoided. 


5) Do not use any other part of the motor for 
lifting including shaft. 

6) Do not use shaft projections for dragging the 
motor. 


7) Do not roll or drag the motor on the floor. 


8) Motors must not be kept in vertical position 
with external fan cowls as base. 


9 


— 


In vertical lifting, uncontrolled rotation of the 
motor must be prevented. Do not lift other 
equipment with motor lifting points only. 


10 


— 


During movement of the motor from one place 
to other place, the shaft must be locked with 
the locking device supplied with the motor (if 
any).The shaft locking device to be removed 
just before the installation of the motor. 


10 STORAGE OF MOTORS 


10.1 Prior to installation, the machine should be stored 
in a clean and dry place. The machined parts have a 
protective coat of anti-rust preservative which should 
not be taken off during normal storage periods. In 
case of long storage periodic examination should be 
carried out and fresh preservation should be applied, if 
required, after any rust or moisture has been removed. 
Preservation can be easily taken off by using paraffin or 
other solvent. 


10.2 During the storage period and during installation 
as well as their working life, the machine should be 
protected from moisture, acid and alkali, oil, gas dust, 
dirt and other injurious substances except, of course in 
the case the machine is specially designed to withstand 
such conditions. 


10.3 Special precautions should be taken when the 
machine is idle for considerable period to avoid corrosion 
of the bearings and loss of grease. It is advisable to rotate 
the shaft periodically as the grease tends to settle at the 
bottom of the housings. Before a machine is started 
after a long idle period, the bearing covers should be 
removed and grease in the housing pressed with thumbs 
between the races of the bearing. If any deterioration of 
grease is apparent, the old grease should be removed 
and new grease pressed in the bearing housings. 


Storage instructions for motors 


a) If the motor is not installed immediately after 
receipt, it must remain inside its packing and 
stored in a storeroom. 


b 


wm 


For practical purposes, motor is considered to be 
in storage not only when it is in the storeroom but 
also when: 


1) it has been delivered to the jobsite and is 
awaiting installation; 

2) or, It has been installed but regular operation 
is delayed/pending completion of plant 
construction; 

3) or, there are long, idle periods between 
operating cycles; and 

4) or, the plant or department is shut down. 


The recommendations given here apply to conditions 
commonly found in indoor storage. Personnel 
responsible for care of the equipment should use good 
discretion in adapting these recommendations to the 
particular situation. Common sense and sound safety 
rules need to be followed. 


a) Indoor storage wholly controlled atmosphere 
or partially controlled atmosphere 


1) Storage room must be clean, dust free and 
dry. The room must be properly covered and 
closed. 


2) Maintain temperature in the range 20 degree to 
50 degree in the storage room. 


3) Maintain uniform temperature throughout 
the room (Temperature variations causes 
condensation of moisture). 


4) Relative humidity to be 50 percent or less. 


5) Ensure absence of harmful fumes and vapours, 
gases such as chlorine, sulphur dioxide and 
corrosive agents. 


6) Vibration free area to avoid bearing damage. 


7) Space heater should be energized if temperature 
falls below 10°C or humidity is more than 50 
percent to prevent harmful effects of moisture 
condensation. 


8) Ensure that no water dips on motor and no 
water accumulates under the motor. 


9) Ensure that all plugs originally provided are 
in place (for example cable entry hole plugs, 
drain plugs and plug in fan cowl for greasing. 
If plugs are missing, all the openings to be 
covered with an adhesive plastic cloth. 


10) The enclosing structure should be designed to 
protect the motor from flying debris or other 


damage from high winds. 


11) Cover the motor completely in a strong, 
transparent plastic bag to exclude dirt, dust, 
moisture, and other foreign materials. Before 
sealing this bag, small bags of silica-gel 
desiccant should be put inside the bag, around 
the motor. 


12) Rodents, insects and other animals, like 
to house inside motors in search of warm 
surroundings or food. Some of them attack the 
insulating materials. Their access to the motor 


must be avoided. 


13) Do not remove the corrosion protection from 
the machined surfaces like shaft and flange. 
These protections must remain in place until 


the final assembly. 

14) Any damage to the painting or to the rust 
protections on the machined surfaces must be 
corrected. 


IS 900 : 2019 


b) Outdoor storage 


1) Dry climate (Conditions usually found) — 
Dust, sand, heat from the sun, and occasional 
rain or snow. 


2) Humid climate (Conditions usually found) — 
Dust, rain and snow, organic (fungus) growth 


3) Salty and industrial atmospheres (Conditions 
usually found) — Moisture impregnated with 
salts or other acidic/alkaline chemicals, salty 
dust, sand, rain or snow, fungus growth, fumes, 
coal and chemical dust soot. 


All precautions indicated in indoor storage to be taken. 
The storage location to be safe from flooding water and 
mud. Also, repair all damages to the packaging before 
storing the motor. 


Place the motor on platform or foundations to protect it 
against ground humidity and from sinking into the soil. 
Free air circulation beneath the motor must be assured. 


In addition, after the unit is covered as explained in 
those instructions, a shed should be erected to protect 
it from direct rain, snow, and excessive direct sun 
heat. At a bare minimum, a heavy water-proofed cover 
should be slipped over it. This cover must not be in 
direct contact with the motor surface. In order to ensure 
free air circulation between the motor and cover, use 
wooden block as spacers. 


c) Extended storage 


When the motor is stored for long duration (two 
months to two years), before operation, it is subjected 
to different atmospheric conditions, such as ambient 
temperature variations, moisture, corrosive vapours 
etc. Empty spaces inside the motor are exposed to 
humidity and corrosive agents. The winding insulation 
resistance may drop below acceptable value. Grease in 
the bearings, loses its lubricating properties. It becomes 
highly risky, to start the motor after such extended 
storage. 


All preventive measures described below including 
storage, maintenance, packaging, periodical 
inspections, must be followed and recorded. This is 
applicable, even when an operating motor is idle for 
two or more months. 


1) Storage Location 


In order to ensure the best storage conditions 
for the motor during long duration, the storage 
location must strictly meet the following 
conditions. 
i) Indoor storage 
All precautions as per clause 3.3.1 to be followed. In 
addition, following points to be observed. 
a) The environment must present an air-filtered 
ventilation system. 


b) Protection against dirt and dust accumulation. 


IS 900 : 2019 


c) Fire detection system to be available. 


d) The location must have power supply to the space 
heaters. 


In case the storage location does not meet any of these 
requirements, additional protections in the motor 
packaging during the storage period, is recommended 
as follows: 


a) Closed wooden crates or similar with proper 
electrical installation, providing power to the 
space heaters. 


b) Ifthere is risk of infestation and fungus growth, the 
package must be protected on the site by spraying 
or painting it, with proper chemical agents. 

c) Package proportion must be carefully executed by 
experienced personnel. 


d) Outdoor storage 
Outdoor storage is not recommended. 


In the case outdoor storage is unavoidable, follow all 
the steps mentioned above at various places. 


Here, the motor is to be covered with water proof cover 
and also a shed to be constructed to protect the motor. 


In case the motor is stored for long duration and/or idle 
period, it is must to inspect it regularly. 


10.4 Space Heaters 


The space heaters provided with the motor must be kept 
on during storage to avoid moisture condensation within 
the motor, and to keep winding insulation resistance 
within acceptable limits. If motor is not having space 
heater, the motor has to be wrapped with an air-tight 
bag including sufficient amount of desiccant, keeping 
the enclosed volume dry. 


Space heaters should be on when ambient temperature 
falls below 10 degree C or relative humidity is more 
than 50 percent. 


10.5 Insulation Resistance 


During the storage period, motor winding insulation 
resistance must be measured and recorded every month, 
before the motor is installed. 


Any drop in the insulation resistance must be 
investigated immediately. 


10.6 Exposed Machined Surfaces 


a) All exposed machined surface (e.g. shaft end and 
flanges) are protected with a coat of rust inhibitor 
when dispatched from works, which should not be 
taken off during normal storage periods. 


b 


wm 


Periodic inspection of this coating is must during 
long duration storage. This protection film must 
be reapplied at least twice a year or when removed 
and/or damaged. 


Cc 


ме 


Protective coat сап Бе easily taken off by using 
paraffin or other petroleum solvents. 


10 


10.7 Grease Lubricated Bearings 


a) The bearings are filled with grease at the factory, 
for proper lubrication. 

b) Special precautions need to be taken when the 

machine is idle for considerable period to avoid 


corrosion of the bearings and loss of grease. 
c 


— 


During the storage period, every week, the shaft 
lock should be removed and the shaft should 
be rotated (at 30 rpm for minimum 15 s.) and 
always finishing in a different position, in order 
to distribute grease inside the bearing (grease has 
tendency to settle at the bottom of the housing) 
and to maintain good bearings conditions. 

d) After two months, the bearing covers should be 
removed and grease in the housing pressed with 
thumbs between the races of the bearing. If any 
deterioration of grease is apparent, the old grease 
should be removed and new grease pressed in the 
bearing housings. 


e 


wm 


After 4 months of storage and before operating the 
motor, the old grease to be removed completely 
and the bearings must be filled with fresh grease 
again. 

If the motor remains stored for 18 months or 
more, the bearings must be disassembled, cleaned, 
inspected, and lubricated. 


Каи 


Spare bearings (if in stock) to be given a coat of 
light oil or grease and packed in polythene bags 
for protection against moisture. 


5 


10.8 Terminal Вох 


When the insulation resistance of the motor winding is 
measured, the main and auxiliary terminal boxes must 
also be inspected, considering the following points: 


a) The inside of terminal box must be dry, clean, and 
free of any dust accumulation; 


b) The contact elements cannot be corroded; 


c) The sealing must remain under appropriate 
conditions; 


d) The cable inlets must be correctly sealed; 
e) No insect, rodents inside the terminal box; and 
f) If any of these items is not correct, the parts must 
be cleaned or replaced. 
10.9 Complete Motor 


When storage may last over one year, repaint all 
surfaces previously painted, before putting motor into 
service. 


11 INSTALLATION WORK 


11.1 General 


Where the magnitude of the installation justifies the 
cost, a set of record plans shall be provided by the 


installation engineer or contractor, clearly indicating 
the complete layout of the installation. 


11.1.1 There is always the possibility that hair, hands or 
clothing of persons may be caught in moving parts of 
electrical devices which should, therefore, be so located 
or guarded as to minimize the risk of such injuries. In 
the case of equipment, subject to the provisions of the 
Indian Factories Act, such mechanical protection is a 
statutory requirement. 


11.1.2 All equipment shall be carefully unpacked and 
checked against the advice notes received from the 
manufacturer to ensure that there has been no loss or 
damage during transit. The rating plate details shall 
be checked for the requirement of purchase order. The 
motor or control gear or any other equipment, connected 
with the operation of the motor, when received, shall be 
carefully checked to ensure that everything is in proper 
condition so that the installation work may proceed 
without interruption. 


11.2 Location of Motors and Control Apparatus 


Apparatus shall be so located that all current-carrying 
parts are adequately ventilated to avoid losses due to 
non-dissipation of heat. 
NOTE — In no circumstances should a motor he enclosed in a 
box or other covering that restricts or excludes the ventilating 
air to a significant extent. Such restriction may result in the 
burning out of the motor when a sustained load approaching 
the full value is reached. 


11.2.1 The motor and control apparatus shall not be 
located where they are liable to exposure to water, 
corrosive liquid, oil, steam, carbon, metallic dust, dirt 
or other adverse conditions or to risk of mechanical 
damage, unless they are suitably enclosed to withstand 
such conditions. 


11.2.2 Adequate access shall be provided to all working 
parts. The possible need for facilities for removing the 
equipment at a later date for repairs or maintenance 
should be considered in relation to the accessibility of 
the equipment. 
NOTE — For handling heavy equipment, it is often advisable 
to arrange for the incorporation of a lifting beam in the 
structure of the building the beam being located immediately 
over such parts of the equipment as may require attention and 


being capable of supporting the maximum weight involved 
(see 4.1). 


11.2.3 The placing of apparatus in situation where 
inflammable materials may be present should be 
decided in relation to the fire risk involved, and where 
it is impracticable to segregate the apparatus from such 
material, the use of flameproof apparatus should be 
considered. 


11.2.4 Resistors likely to be operated at high temperature 
shall be adequately spaced away from combustible 
materials, such as wood-work, in order to combat the 


11 


IS 900 : 2019 


risk of fire. Wherever the temperature of the casing 
of the apparatus is liable to exceed 90°C, the casing 
should be so located or guarded as to prevent accidental 
contact by persons or with combustible materials. 


11.3 Foundation and Levelling 


A solid, substantial foundation of concrete shall be 
provided for the installation of motor. A good mixture 
of concrete for this purpose consists of one part best 
grade cement, two parts clean sand and, three to four 
parts broken stones. The materials shall be thoroughly 
mixed whilst dry, water being added subsequently and 
slowly until the mixture is just sufficiently wet to pass 
freely into all the crevices and corners. The foundation 
depends upon the size and weight of the motor and the 
nature of ground. 


11.3.1 In case of motors with 315 frame and above, 
preparation of civil foundation shall be carried out 
taking care that: 


a) The foundation for the motors shall be designed 
for static as well as dynamic loads. All natural 
frequencies shall be away from resonance zone 
with respect to the operating speed of machine. 
The dynamic amplitudes at the foundation level 
shall be well within the acceptable limits given in 
IS 2974 or as recommended by the manufacturer. 
Foundation shall be cast using concrete mix (as 
per design) in accordance with IS 456 and IS 
2974. It shall be ensured that foundation is free 
from defects “like cavities, pits, surface cracks, 
etc. It shall be ensured that concrete foundation 
is cured completely. The soundness of concrete 
foundation block should be tested by the standard 
method laid down in relevant standard. 

b) Foundation shall be cast using concrete mix (as 

per design) in accordance with IS 456 and IS 2974. 

It shall be ensured that foundation is free from 

defects “like cavities, pits, surface cracks, etc. 


It shall be ensured that concrete foundation is 
cured completely. The soundness of concrete 
foundation block should be tested by the standard 
method laid down in relevant standard. 


11.3.2 Where the anchor or rag bolts which hold down 
the motor are to be embedded in concrete, their location 
should be determined with great accuracy, otherwise, 
they may not be in line with the holes in the base or 
bedplate of the motor. For this purpose, a wooden 
template made with holes corresponding to those in 
the motor base should be used. Where the motor rests 
directly on the foundation, great care should be taken 
in the levelling of the foundation so that the motor is 
not strained or distorted when the mounting bolts are 
tightened. 


c) 


11.3.3 A motor mounted on slide rails or on solid 
concrete foundation shall be carefully levelled up and 


IS 900 : 2019 


paralleled and grouted-in using motor with one part 
cement, two parts clean sand and three-quarter part fine 
broken stones. The slide rails shall be packed up about 
15 mm above the concrete bed to allow a sufficient 
thickness of grout. Holes, preferably pipe lined, shall- 
be left in the foundation block for foundation bolts. 


11.3.4 Threaded rods with a nut on each end are 
preferred for use as foundation bolts in clearance 
holes, usually with the bottom of each bolt in a pocket 
provided with an opening to the outside of the concrete 
foundation wall. A blind pocket may be used if a thick 
drilled and tapped plate is used instead of the retaining 
washer. The bolts in clearance holes with the bolt head 
grouted in the foundation permit bending or distorting 
the bolt to take care of adjustment of base plate or sole 
plates. If necessary, the bolts should be grouted in after 
the slide rails have been set, allowing the grout to be 
about 15 mm above the bottom of the rails. 


11.3.5 Special Positions 


Motors intend for mounting on a wall shall be fixed on 
slide rails in the usual way and a suitable angle bracket 
fixed on the wall to carry the rails and motor. A motor 
required for inverted running that is suspended from 
roof girders should preferably be housed in a fixture. It 
is not advisable to use the ordinary cast iron slide rails 
for this method of mounting without first consulting 
the makers. In the case of oil-lubricated bearings, it is 
important to see-that the oil well is arranged with the 
cover horizontal by suitably shifting both end brackets. 


11.3.6 Resilient Mounting 


It shall be ensured that undue amount of vibration from 
other machinery is not transmitted to the motor. Though 
motors are normally required to be rigidly fixed, 
resilient mounting, that is using springs, rubber or other 
similar material may be necessary where transmission 
of vibration is likely to cause inconvenience or harm. 
Where silence in running is essential or transmission of 
sound undesirable, special precautions shall be taken in 
the mounting of the apparatus or all iteratively sound- 
absorbing treatment should be applied to the equipment 
as a whole. 


11.4 Insulation Resistance 


Insulation resistance of the motor shall be measured 
between the windings of the machine and its frame by 
means of a meggar. Often the motors are kept in a store 
for some time or they are transported under very damp 
conditions and in such cases, the insulation resistance 
generally becomes low and it is dangerous for the 
motor to he connected up before the condition has been 
rectified. 


11.4.1 Drying Out 


If the measured insulation resistance of the motor is 
less than 30 MQ (for motor up to rated voltage 1 kV) 


12 


and 100 MQ (for motors with rated voltage above 1 
kV) when the machine is cold, it should first be dried 
out before full voltage is applied to the terminals of the 
motors. 


For motors with rated voltage above 1 kV minimum 
polarisation index shall be 2.0. 


11.4.1.1 Principles of drying out 


Whatever method is employed for drying out a motor, 
the general principle is to apply heat continuously for a 
considerable time so as to drive out any moisture which 
may have become entrapped in the windings. Severe 
damage can result from improper beating of winding. 
Avoid too rapid beating. Provide some ventilation to 
carry off moisture and to ensure circulation of heated 
air. During drying out period, it is recommended to take 
measurement of the insulation resistance periodically. 
It will generally be found that at the beginning of the 
drying out, the insulation resistance decreases. This is 
due to the fact that as the heating starts the moisture 
Is redistributed in the windings. After some time, the 
insulation resistance value reaches a minimum and then 
stabilises at this for some time, after which it begins to 
increase until it reaches its maximum value. When the 
maximum value of the insulation resistance has been 
reached, it is safe to put the motor into service. 


11.4.1.2 The convenient method of drying out the 
motor is to place heaters or lamps around it and inside 
it also. It is recommended to employ suitable guarding 
and covering arrangements so as to conserve the heat. 
Heating by infrared lamps may also be used for drying 
the windings. 


An alternative method of drying out is to block the 
motor so that it cannot rotate and then apply such allow 
voltage to the starter terminals that full-load current 
flows in the starter. 


The temperature of the windings should not be allowed 
to exceed 90. 


11.4.1.3 If it is not possible to use any of the two 
methods given in 11.4.1.2, hot air may be blown into 
the motor but the air should be clean and dry and at a 
temperature of not more than 90 percent. If no other 
means are available, coke braziers or electric radiators 
may be placed round the machine. Carbon filament 
lamps, placed inside the machine, may be employed 
quite satisfactorily, but care should be taken that the 
hot bulb is not in contact with any windings. If it is 
not possible to reach a sufficiently high temperature, 
the ventilation may be reduced by covering the stator 
with a tarpaulin. 


11.4.1.4 Close supervision is necessary during the 
process of drying out by the methods given under 
11.4.1.2 and 11.4.1.3. The heat generated in the 
windings is not easily dissipated and one part of the 
winding may be exceedingly hot before another part has 


had time to expel the moisture. This may be obviated 
to some extent by taking every precaution to exclude 
draughts from the exposed parts of the windings. 


11.4.15 The method of heating employed for drying out 
shall be continuous and the process shall be carefully 
watched to ensure that the winding does not attain a 
temperature sufficiently high to damage the insulation. 
The maximum safe temperature of the windings 
measured by thermometer is 90°C. At the same time, 
the temperature should not be allowed to fall too low as 
otherwise reabsorption of moisture would take place. 


11.4.1.6 In some cases, the insulation resistance will be 
found to drop considerably as the motor warm up will 
read the minimum and then remain constant for some 
time depending up on the dampers of the machine and 
as the drying proceeds, the insulation resistance will 
gradually rise. The drying out should be continued 
as long as the insulation resistance rises, or until a 
sufficiently high value, as per clause 11.4.1. 


11.4.1.7 During the drying out period, readings of 
temperature and insulation resistance shall be taken at 
least once an hour in order to see how the drying out is 
progressing. The temperature of the motor should be 
kept as constant as possible, otherwise the insulation 
resistance reading may be misleading. 


11.4.2 If it is found that the insulation resistance of 
the motor does not rise even after drying out or is 
extremely low and persistently remains so, damage 
in the windings should be suspected. In some cases, 
this damage can be located by visual inspection but in 
case this damage has taken place either in the slots or 
in the bottom layer of the windings, cause should be 
investigated and defect remedied as it is very dangerous 
to put the motor into service if the insulation resistance 
is very low. If the windings insulation is very dirty and 
wet, insulation resistance may not increase by drying 
with heat. Then it has to be flushed with water jet and 
dried by beating. In case, insulation resistance does not 
improve, manufacturer may be consulted. 


11.5 Alignment 
11.5.1 Selection of Drives 


Some general notes regarding selection of drives are 
given in Annex D. This is intended to be a guide only 
and is necessarily not exhaustive. 


11.5.2 One of the considerations in alignment is that 
the motor shaft should be preferably level. This is 
necessary as otherwise undue loading may occur on 
the bearings of the motor, even when flexible couplings 
are used, under the influence of the drive forces. The 
motor shaft cannot be made level unless the shaft of 
the driven machine is already levelled. It is, therefore, 
recommended to ensure that the driven machine or 
driven shaft is level in the first instance. Provided this 


13 


IS 900 : 2019 


has been done, the principle to follow with a direct 
coupled drive is to ensure that both the shafts are inline; 
and in case of gear or pulley drive to ensure that both 
the shafts are parallel. 


11.5.3 Direct-coupled Drives 


With direct-coupled drives the two shafts should be in 
accurate alignment. This is ofutmost importance owing 
to the possibility of there being eccentricity of coupling 
periphery with shaft axis, cut of squareness of coupling 
faces with the shaft axis, and axial movement of shafts 
during process of alignment. It may be emphasized 
that it is the shaft that requires to be lined up and not 
the couplings. If a driven shaft has been levelled, it 
is recommended to bring the two* couplings close 
together and line them up. If it is found that the driven 
coupling is lower, arrangements should be made to lift 
the driven machine or to cut down the top ofthe concrete 
foundation to lower the motor. If on the other hand, the 
motor shaft is found lower than the driven shaft, then 
the motor should be packed up bring the two couplings 
into line. The packing should be inserted close to the 
foundation bolt. If the packing is too far removed from 
the foundation bolts the bedplate will bend when they 
are tightened down. The correct and incorrect methods 
of putting the packing are shown in Fig. 1. 


11.5.3.1 When the two shafts have been lined up, it is 
recommended that the motor or slide rail base should 
be lifted at least 3 mm from the top of the concrete 
foundations by means of packing pieces. This space 
may be filled later with the grouting mixture. Alignment 
is achieved by checking the following: 


a) Axial positioning of shaft — Small and medium 
size motors normally have a small end play and the 
motor should be positioned so that with its shaft 
fully extended towards the driven shaft and vice 
versa the specified gap between half couplings is 
obtained; 


b 


wm 


Paralleling of shaft — coupling gap readings 
should be taken at 12 O’clock and 6 O’clock 
positions and the two half-couplings rotated 
together through 180° when a second set of 
readings at 12 O’clock and 6 O’clock should be 
taken. The algebraic difference between readings 
should be equal for correct alignment in the 
vertical plane. A similar set of readings should 
be taken at the 3 O’clock and 9 O’clock positions 
on the coupling and if the algebraic difference is 
equal, it will indicate alignment in the horizontal 
plane; and 


с 


wm 


Cantering of shafts — this should preferably 
be done with driving motor and driven shaft sat 
normal working temperature. The clock gauge is 
securely clamped to one-half coupling with the 
gauge needle on the other half coupling. Both half 
coupling are rotated through one full revolution, 


IS 900 : 2019 


CORRECT 


BEDPLATE 


CONCRETE 
BASE 


INCORRECT 


Fic. 1 PACKING AND BED PLATE FOR GROUTING 


gauge readings being taken at 12 O’clock, 
3 O'clock, 6 O'clock and 9 O'clock positions. The 
same clock gauge reading should be obtained in 
all angular positions of the coupling. Adjustment 
may be made by shimming. Checks should be 
made on previous settings, if any adjustment is 
made. 


11.5.4 Chain Drives 


With chain drives, the alignment should be correct and 
the driving and driven shaft parallel with each other and 
the chains running centrally on their sprockets at right 
angles to the shaft, otherwise the life of the chain may 
become very short and an excessive end thrust imposed 
on the motor. Vertical chain drives should be avoided. 
The chain should not be drawn up tight as this is likely 
to produce destructive vibrations and prove harmful to 
the bearings. The chain drive should be provided with a 
self-oiling device by means of pump and sump. 


11.5.5 Gear Drives 


With gear drives, alignment is equally important. The 
centre of the pinion should be in line with the centre of 
the spur wheel and the two wheels perfectly parallel, 
the latter being checked by means of feeler gauges 
between the teeth of the respective wheels. The gear 
wheels should be fully meshed both in depth and along 
their width of face and the check for meshing should 
be made all the way round the driven wheel in case it 
is out of truth. Should the driven wheel be out of truth 
and the meshing adjusted correctly at the lowest point 
of the driven wheel, the gears may jam when the high 
parts engage and probably bend the motor shaft. 


11.5.5.1 Bevel or single helical gears impose an end 
thrust on the motor shaft, and are, therefore, not 
recommended unless provision is made to take the 
thrust. Double helical gears may also transmit an end 
thrust if the end-play in the bearings of the driven gear 
is greater than the end-play in the motor bearings. 


14 


Where mechanical conditions are severe, it is sometimes 
necessary, particularly in the case of larger motors, to 
employ an outboard bearing for the motor shaft and in 
some cases to mount the driving pinioning two separate 
bearings and couple it to the motor through a suitable 
flexible coupling. A flexible coupling is invariably 
necessary when a motor is coupled to a self-contained 
gear box. It is advisable, when any drive of the types 
mentioned above or similar types are considered, that 
this be specified so that provision may be made to suit 
the conditions 


11.5.6 Flexible Coupled Drives 


Flexible couplings require as accurate an alignment 
as solidly coupled machines. Poor alignment could 
quickly ruin flexible couplings and may damage 
bearings and shafts. Use flexible type couplings which 
will accommodate small inaccuracies of an alignment 
between motor and driven member. Ensure that this 
shaft does not project beyond the face of the coupling 
and that there is small amount of axial clearance 
between the faces of the two halves of the couplings 
so that the motor bearings are not subjected to the end 
thrust. 


11.5.7 Final Alignment 


When carrying out final alignment, it is necessary in 
the case of all types of drive, to ensure that the packing 
pieces placed between bedplates or slide rails and the 
top of the foundation block are positioned correctly, 
that is, they shall be at the position of the foundation 
bolt holes and not in between those positions, and there 
shall be enough of these supports to ensure that where 
foundation bolts are tightened down the bedplate or 
slide rails will not be bent. 


11.5.8 After alignment of any drive, it is always 
essential that the motor be turned over slowly by 
hand if possible. Feel for any increase of resistance or 
jerkiness. If it is not possible to turn the motor by hand, 


the motor should be used (after wiring up) at slow speed 
watching the ammeter for any sudden increase of load. 


The final check should always be done after the 
bolts have been finally tightened down and any tight 
spot which is indicated by fall or sudden increase in 
ammeter reading should be investigated and eliminated 
before the drive is put into service. 


11.6 Fitting of Pulleys and Couplings 


Clean both shaft and coupling bore and smear lightly 
with oil. Clean keyway and make sure key is fitting 
properly on the sides of the keyway in both shaft and 
coupling. The key should have clearance at the top and 
should not fit tightly both top and bottom faces. If force 
has to be applied to put the pulley or coupling on shaft, 
it is desirable that non-driving end pressure or hammer 
blows are not borne by the bearings. While fitting 
pulleys, couplings, etc., to motor shaft, excessive force 
shall not be used as the bearings may get damaged. 
Where no tapped holes arc provided by the makers, the 
pulley, pinion or coupling should be a good tapping fit 
and the opposite end of the shaft should be supported 
to take the shock of the blows of a mallet. If the pulley, 
pinion or coupling does not go on to the shaft with 
the application of moderate force, it is recommended 
that it be warmed up to 100 to 120 and then tapped 
on. If it does not goon easily under this condition, the 
bore should be checked. The shaft shall not be filed 
or otherwise reduced in diameter as the motor would 
cease to be interchangeable. Pulleys, pinions and 
couplings shall not be removed by using a pinch bar 
between the bearing housing pulleys or coupling boss, 
as the bearing housing may be broken or the shaft bent. 
Withdrawing tackles shall be used. 


11.7 Belt Drive 


Arrange the drives so that the slack side of the belt is 
uppermost. Do not over tighten the belt and avoid a belt 
fastener which knocks the pulley as this may damage 
the bearings. Avoid vertical drives. Pass and loose 
pulley drives should be arranged so that the drive is 
on the fast pulley when the belt is nearest to the motor. 


NOTE — check for proper alignment of pulleys before starting 
with belts. 


12 CHECKS BEFORE COMMISSIONING 


12.1 General 


All equipment shall be inspected and tested by 
competent persons before being actually put into 
service. 


12.2 Mechanical Checks 
Machines shall be checked for alignment to ensure that 
undue stresses are not imposed on their bearings. 


12.2.1 Where oil-lubricated bearing are employed, care 
shall be taken to see that oil does not penetrate onto 


15 


IS 900 : 2019 


windings or other insulation. Oil should be checked to 
see that it is clean and up to the right level, and of the 
correct grade as specified by the manufacturer. 


12.2.2 In case of motors with pedestal bearing, the air 
gaps between stator and rotor shall be checkedbefore 
commissioning and recorded for future reference. 


12.2.3 Mechanical operation of motors, controlgear and 
protective devices shall be checked for freedom from 
foreign matter, care being taken when commissioning 
to see that all packing materials are removed. 


12.2.4 In the case of motors and controlgear, attention 
should be paid to all contacts, the contact pressure and 
contact area being checked and verified as being proper 
to the operating conditions involved. 


12.2.5 If ball or roller bearing motors have been kept 
idle for periods longer than six months, whether new, 
spare or stand-by plant, the bearing covers shall be 
removed for inspection of grease. If it is found that the 
grease has a skin over the surface, the bearings shall 
be washed thoroughly in petrol to which a few drops 
of oil have been added. The bearing housings shall 
be repacked with new grease of the grade and quality 
recommended by the makers, care being taken to ensure 
that the balls or rollers will not chum in the grease. One 
of the chief functions of grease is to prevent the entry 
of dust into the bearing, very little being required for 
lubrication. 


12.3 Electrical Checks 


The terminal markings of motors shall be checked 
for conformity with clause 9 of IS 12615. Before 
connecting it to the mains, all connections shall be 
checked with the wiring or circuit diagram applied, use 
cables of adequate size to carry the full load current 
marked on the motor rating plate and also large enough 
to carry the starting current without excessive voltage 
drop. In general, the starting current may be 6 to 7 
times full load current on full voltage depending upon 
the speed a when the motor is switched on the line. 
The motor body should be earthed in accordance with 
5.3.3. 


12.3.1 All fixed connections shall be checked for 
tightness and where heavy currents are involved, 
a check shall be made to see that proper contact, 
adequate in area and pressure to prevent undue heating, 
is effected between all contact surfaces. 


12.3.2 The rating of fuses shall be checked by inspecting 
the marking on the cartridge in the case of cartridge 
type fuses or the gauge and type of wire in the case of 
rewirable type fuses. Where practicable, the operation 
of overload, no-volt and other types of protective 
devices should also be checked. The results of such 
checking should be related to the ascertained resistance 
of the earth-fault current path so as to determine the 


IS 900 : 2019 


prospect of the protective device operating in the event 
of a fault. 


12.3.3 Protective fuses shall be examined regularly. 
Where relays are used in conjunction with current 
transformers, the test should preferably simulate 
working conditions by utilizing the injection method 
whereby current is passed through the relays by 
the application of a variable injection voltage from 
transformer designed for the purpose. 


12.3.4 The main and looped earth wires shall be 
continuous. To ensure this, all earth connections shall 
be checked for tightness and the earth resistance shall 
be measured and recorded. 


12.3.5 All oil dashpots shall be checked to ascertain 
that they contain the correct grade and quantity of oil. 


12.3.6 In the case of oil-filled equipment, the insulating 
oil level shall be inspected and checked against the 
indicated correct level for the equipment concerned. 
The dielectric strength of the oil shall be tested in 
accordance with IS 335. 


12.3.7 On completion of installation of a three phase 
motor, the construction engineer or the contractor 
concerned shall submit a completion report in the form 
given in Annex E. 


12.3.8 Tightening Torque Values for Terminal 


Connections 


All motors are equipped with threaded terminal blocks 
with three or six studs and all necessary nuts, washers 
to make electrical connection (Y or A). 


a) The phase conductor ends must be equipped with 
cable lugs suitable for fitting to the stud thread 
size. 


b) For mounting the cable lugs by solder or 
crimping, use applicable tools and follow the 
recommendation of cable lug supplier. 


The material of the terminal block base is an insulating 
plastic which can be easily damaged by over Tightening. 


c) Stay below the maximum tightening torques for 
individual thread sizes to avoid damage but ensure 
to be above minimum tightening torque to ensure 
proper tight connections. 


13 COMMISSIONING OF MOTOR 


13.1 Starting Up 


Before the equipment is put into service, it shall be tested 
for insulation resistance; other tests as maybe necessary 
should also be made. Continuity tests shall be carried 
out, particular attention being given to the secondary 
connections of current transformers. Before switching 
on for the first time, protective devices shall be set at 
their minimum current values and at the minimum time 
setting in order to minimize the consequence of any 
fault condition which may arise. After all the checks as 
mentioned above and in 10 have been made and found 
satisfactory, start the motor gradually, being ready to 
stop, should the rotation be in the wrong direction or 
should anything suddenly appear to be wrong. 


13.1.1 In case the motor runs in the wrong direction on 
starting up, it is quite simple to reverse the rotation by 
changing over two of the three leads of a three-phase 
motor. 


13.1.2 If everything is found satisfactory, increase the 
speed slowly waiting for some time on each step for the 
motor to accelerate. When motor comes up to full speed, 
observe that there are no excessive vibration and noise 
and that the drive is running smoothly. If the motor is of 
the slip-ring type with brush lifting and short-circuiting 
gear, care should be taken that the brush lever is in the 
start position before closing the stator switch, and as 
soon as motor comes up to full speed, the brush lifting 
and short-circuiting handle is moved smartly to the run 
position. 


13.2 VFD operation of motor may make avoidance of 
natural frequencies impractical. The speed range over 
which motor is going to operate, may include speeds 
that are resonant with the motor itself or with the driven 
load and/or supporting foundation structure. Some 
VFD controls have the ability to skip over the resonant 
frequency. However, even when the resonant frequency 
is skipped, the load will be accelerated through that 
speed if the motor is set to run at any speed above this 
resonant speed. Decreasing the acceleration time can 
help to minimize the time spent in resonance 


It is of particular importance that the motor not to be 
operated other than momentarily at any speed where 


Table 1 Recommended Bolt-tightening Torques in kg m 
for the Assembly of the Motor or its Parts 


( Clause B-3.3.1 and 3.3.2) 


Size M4 М5 мб м8 M10 M12 M16 M20 M24 
Torque for metal to Min 13 2:3 4.6 11.4 23.5 34 83 160 280 
metal fastening Max 1.5 3.3 5.5 13.8 28.2 4l 99.6 192 336 
Torque for metal to Min 0.7 1.5 2.5 6.3 12.9 18.6 45.5 87.7 153.4 
insulation fastening Max 0.85 1.82 3 7.6 15.5 22.3 54.6 105.3 184 


16 


a resonant condition exists. Such resonant points 
correspond to the mechanical natural frequencies of the 
load or support structure/foundation. 


Natural frequency problems are typically difficult to 
correct, because it may require rework of the foundation. 


13.3 Failure to Start 


If upon attempting to start the motor, it is found that 
it fails to revolve or does not accelerate beyond a 
certain speed, the starting handle shall be returned to 
the ‘OFF’ position at once, otherwise the winding may 
be damaged. Before attempting to start again, a careful 
inspection shall be made to ensure that: 


a) The connections are correct and in accordance 
with the diagrams supplied; 


b) Voltage is present at the starter terminals (make 
sure that no section main switch is open and there 
are no fuses drawn on the motor circuit); 


c) All terminals are tight, and there are no bad 
contacts in either cabling or control circuits; 


d) The brush gear handle is in the start position; and 


e) The line voltage is not dropping excessively when 
the starter is operated. 


13.3.1 After this inspection, if everything is found 
satisfactory, another attempt should be made to start 
the motor. If the motor still does not start or accelerate 
to full speed, the driven machine should be uncoupled 
from the motor and a fresh attempt made to start the 
motor. 


13.3.2 When the motor runs up to full speed, load may 
be applied to the driven machine. 


13.4 Failure to Take Load 


If the direction of rotation is correct and motor runs 
satisfactorily while it is not loaded, but trips out when 
load is applied to the driven machine, a check should 
be made that the overload trips are correctly set and 
that time lags, if any, are suitably adjusted. A check 
should also be made that the load is not excessive. It 


IS 900 : 2019 


is also recommended to check that no tight point has 
developed in the drive under loading conditions. If it 
is found that the motor still refused to carry the load, 
the manufacturers of both the motor as well as driven 
machine should be consulted. 


14 TEMPERATURE RISE 


The temperature of the motor running at its rated load 
as judged by hand is not a reliable indication as the 
insulations of the windings in contact with core will 
withstand a maximum temperature rise as mentioned in 
individual motor specification. For general information, 
the following Table 2 may be taken as guidelines 
for limits of temperature rise of windings, when the 
ambient has not exceeded 40?C: 


15 OVERHEATING OF MOTORS 


Overheating of motors may result from overloading of 
motors, too low supply voltage, frequency fluctuations, 
over greasing, dirt, foreign material in the air gap 
between the stator and rotor. Do not overload or under 
load the motors. Overloading is the result of making 
motor carry too great a mechanical load. It may also be 
due to wrong application or excessive friction within 
the motor itself. Under loading of the motor results in 
low power factor. 


16 VIBRATION 


Motors are balanced to achieve the vibration limits 
according to IS 12075 (except when the purchase 
agreement specifically provides different limits). 


The appropriate vibration limits for a particular 
application are dependent upon several factors such as 
motor speed, size, design and criticality of the process. 
Allowable motor vibration limits depend upon what the 
user is willing to tolerate and what the motor can safely 
tolerate. 


Recommended maximum, motor operation vibration 
levels, when used along with the driven equipment, are 
specified in the Table 3. 


Table 2 Guidelines for Limits of Temperature Rise of Windings 
( Clause 14 ) 


Thermal Class 


F Class 


Method of measurement : R = Resistance; ETD = Embedded R 


temperature detector 


Item | Part of Machine 


la) 


1b) (or KVA), but less than 5 000 kW (or KVA) 


AC windings of machines having outputs of 5 000 kW 
(or KVA) or more 


AC windings of machines having outputs above 200 kW 


80 85 105 110 125 130 


80 90 105 115 125 140 


lc) | (or KVA), but less than 600 W (or KVA) 


AC windings of machines having outputs above 200 kW 


80 - 105 - 125 - 


1d) 600 W (or KVA) 


AC windings of machines having outputs but less than 


85 - 110 - 130 - 


IS 900 : 2019 


These values are for general guidance purpose only. 
The specific application conditions must be considered. 


Table 3 Motor Operation Vibration Levels 
( Clause 16 ) 


Rated Rotation 
Speed (rpm) 
600 <n < 1 800 Alarm 5.7 mm/s 
Shutdown 7.1 mm/s 
1 800 <n <3 600 Alarm the values will be 
as agreed between 
manufactures and 
user 
Shutdown the values will be 
as agreed between 
manufactures and 


user 


The most frequent causes for vibrations are: 


a) Misalignment between the motor to the driven 
equipment; 

b) Inadequate fixation of the motor to the base, with 

“loose shims” under one or both of the motor feet, 


and loose fixing screws; 
с) 
9) 


Inadequate ог not sufficient strong base; 


Vibration measured at the motor foot to be less 
than 30 percent of the vibration measured at the 
motor bearing. (The measurement axis to be same 
in both cases.) If this condition is not met, then 
it implies the case of weak foundation. A weak 
foundation results in high (1 x motor rotation 
frequency) vibrations, and mostly in the horizontal 
direction; and 


External vibrations from other devices. 


Note — Operating the motor with vibration levels above the 
values provided in the table may damage its useful life and /or 
performance. 


17 MAINTENANCE AND PERIODICAL 
CHECKS 


17.0 General 


When an electric motor has been properly installed, 
it requires little attention later on to keep it working 
properly. Ifthe motor is kept clean and dry, and properly 
lubricated periodically, it will give trouble free service 
for a long time. All maintenance work should be done 
correctly under the supervision of an experienced 
electrician having in mind the fine clearances and the 
precision construction of the modern motors. 


17.1 The main aim of maintenance work should be to 
prevent trouble rather than allow it to occur and then 
deal with it. To achieve this, the operation of cleaning, 
lubrication and inspection at regular intervals should 
be carried out according to a schedule, and proper 
records should be kept of what has been done on 
each occasion. This is always better than adopting a 


18 


haphazard method of waiting for trouble to develop 
and then dealing with it, because when a breakdown 
occurs it usually spreads to other parts also which were 
perfectly sound earlier. 


17.1.1 Protection of Exposed Surface 


Protective paint and varnish should be maintained in 
good condition by re-painting or re-varnishing when 
necessary. In many instance, such as that of windings, 
spraying is the only effective means of application of 
such protection. 


17.2 Motors 
17.2.1 Cleaning of Motors 


Motors should be cleaned by blowing air at regular 
intervals to keep their ventilating passages clear, it 
being emphasized that many types of totally enclosed 
motors also require such attention, particularly when 
operating in dusty atmospheres. 


17.2.1.1 Moisture, oil, grease and metallic dust are 
the principal causes of breakdown. The motor should, 
therefore, be kept clean and dry; water dropped on 
the machine will soon cause trouble, unless the motor 
has been designed to withstand such conditions. The 
stator and rotor windings should be kept free from oil, 
grease, dampness and dirt. Periodic cleaning with dry 
compressed air bellows or a brush is very necessary. 


17.2.1.2 All motors require to be examined and 
dismantled from time to time and the frequency of 
successive cleanings will depend upon the conditions 
under which the machine operates. During periodic 
cleanings, care should be taken to clear air passages in 
the stator and rotor of any accumulated dirt. 


17.2.1.3 Terminals and screw connections shall be kept 
clean and tight. If they become dirty or corroded, they 
should be disconnected and all contact surfaces made 
clean and smooth. Bad contact leads to sparking and 
ultimate breakdown. 


17.2.1.4 After reassembly, the gaps shall be tested as a 
precautionary measure by means of a feeler gauge. 


17.2.1.5 If it is found that the air gap measurements 
of two diametrically opposite points differ by about 25 
percent or more, the motor shall he examined, because 
the brackets or bearing housing may not be correctly 
aligned. Gap measurement should always follow 
reassembly, since rubbing between stator and rotor will 
cause extensive damage. 


17.2.2 Insulation Resistance 


The insulation resistance of the winding shall he tested 
periodically during service and where this is found to 
drop below as per 11.4.1 the motor shall be dried out 
and then put into service. If weak insulation resistance 
becomes a regular feature, the windings should be given 


a coat of good insulating varnish after the machine has 
been dried out. 
NOTE — Extra care in respect of insulation resistance is 


necessary in cases where the motor is subjected to dampness, 
chemical fumes, etc. 


17.2.3 Ball and Roller Bearings 


Climatic conditions affect the lubrication and it is 
necessary to ensure that the hearings do not run hot. 
Higher or lower temperatures are not dangerous in 
themselves but increasing temperature or noise are sure 
signs that the hearings need immediate attention; it may 
be that the addition of a small amount of grease arrests 
and cures the trouble. 


17.2.3.1 Every three years, the complete grease charge 
should be removed, the hearings and housings washed 
with petrol to which a few drops of oil have been added 
and thoroughly dried; all old grease should be removed 
from pipes and passages and replaced by new grease. 


17.2.3.2 When opening up hearings for inspection and 
cleaning, all dirt and foreign matter shall be removed 
from the neighborhood of the bearing caps. The caps 
shall then be removed and the bearings, caps and 
housings washed with petrol to which a few drops of 
oil have been added; all old grease also being removed 
in the process and the parts thoroughly cleaned. If 
the hearing is in good condition, fresh grease shall be 
pressed well between the cage, races, balls and rollers. 
After packing the hearing, any superfluous grease 
should be wiped off. If the bearing appears dirty or if 
the grease has become bard or disintegrated, the bearing 
should be removed from the shaft, withdrawn from the 
housings and closely inspected for signs of wear. 


17.2.3.3 Only the required quantity of grease should be 
put into the bearings as too much grease may also cause 
overheating in the same ways as too little grease. 


17.2.4 Sleeve Bearings 


Motors using oil-filled hearings shall be inspected 
frequently and when necessary the hearings shall be 
drained, flushed out and then refilled with the correct 
grade of new or reconditioned oil. 


17.2.4.1 When filling the bearings, oil shall be poured 
in slowly, with the rotor stationary, until the oil reaches 
the prescribed level. Quick pouring leads to overfilling 
and the escape of oil into the windings. 


17.2.4.2 The oil rings shall be examined to see that they 
run freely and pick up oil from the well when the motor 
is running. 


17.2.4.3 If a bearing runs hot, the depth of oil in the 
well shall he examined and increased, if necessary. 


17.2.4.4 Heating may arise from insufficient lubrication, 
lack of alignment, dirt in the oil, too tight a belt, or a 


19 


IS 900 : 2019 


bent shaft. Belts and other gear should be slackened 
and the speed of the machine reduced. If the bearing 
continues to be hot, the machine should he brought 
almost to a standstill, keeping the rotor moving slowly 
until the hearing has cooled, to prevent seizing. 


17.2.4.5 It is essential for satisfactory operation of 
machines with small air gaps that the bearing clearance 
should not be excessive. 


17.2.4.6 All new hearings up to 250 mm diameter 
shall have a diametral clearance of one-thousandth of 
diameter. It is recommended to re-metal the worn out 
bearings when this clearance becomes two-thousandth 
of the diameter. 


17.2.5 Slip Rings and Brush Gear 


These parts require careful inspection and attention 
dust, oil and moisture should not be allowed to 
accumulate. The brushes should slide freely in the 
holders without being slack; stiffness of movement 
or clogging should be remedied without delay. The 
tension springs should press squarely on the tops of 
the brushes and their operating mechanism should 
function freely. Any short-circuiting gear fitted to 
the motor should he lightly lubricated at regular 
intervals. 


17.2.5.1 The slip rings shall he smooth and free from 
oil and dirt. If roughened by sparking, they shall be 
cleaned with fine glass paper mounted on a wooden 
block shaped to the curvature of the rings. Emery 
cloth should not be used. If ridged or out of truth, 
they should be turned or ground in laths to a smooth 
finish. 


17.2.5.2 When new brushes are to be fitted, they shall 
be bedded to the surface of the slip rings by placing 
them in their holders and interposing between 
them and the slip rings a strip of glass paper, rough 
side outward. The strip should be worked backward 
and forward unit the brush face has acquired the 
curvature of the ring. All dust should be carefully 
removed. The new brushes shall he of the 
recommended grade. 


17.2.5.3 The correct brush pressure is of paramount 
importance from the point of view of brush and ring 
wear. Ifthe pressure is too light, the brushes will chatter 
and cause sparking, disintegration of the brushes and 
blackening and burning ofthe rings. Too much pressure 
will produce scoring and overheating from frictional 
losses. The correct pressure is about 0.15 kg/cm2 
to 0.2 kg/cm? of brush area and this should he tested 
occasionally by means of spring balance attached as 
near as possible to the end of the brush spring that 
makes contact with the brush. 


17.2.5.4 Sparking at the slip rings is harmful and should 
he eliminated. 


IS 900 : 2019 


17.2.6 Controllers, Starters and Rheostats 


The contacts and insulating part shall be kept 
thoroughly free from dirt and moisture and there shall 
be firm metallic connection between fixed and moving 
contacts when they come together. The covers should 
be removed periodically for inspection. 


17.2.6.1 Fuse contacts and terminals shall he examined 
periodically for cleanliness and tightness. When a fuse 
wire or strip has to be renewed, care should be taken 
that the new one is of the correct metal and size. 


17.3 Oil Filled Control Equipment 


The insulating oil level in all oil-filled starting and 
control equipment, other than capacitors, shall be 
periodically checked and samples of the oil taken and 
tested for breakdown voltage, acidity and moisture. 
If the tests indicate that the oil is unsatisfactory, 
it should be immediately replaced by new or 
reconditioned oil. 


Where small quantities of oil are involved, periodical 
replacement of the oil at intervals determined by 
experience and sampling tests may be adopted as an 
alternative to periodical testing. 


17.3.1 In the case of oil-filled equipment, such as 
switchgear and starters, whereby design arcing takes 
place under the surface of the oil, carbon is formed, thus 
necessitating the periodic re-conditioning of the oil to 
remove the carbon. Such equipment should, therefore, 
be regularly inspected and the oil reconditioned at the 
appropriate time. 


17.3.2 Tanks or other enclosures for electrical apparatus, 
which have held oil may contain vapour in an explosive 
concentration; thus naked flames or non-flame proof 
electrical equipment shall not he used in such situations 
nor shall welding operations be undertaken either inside 
or outside such enclosures until all traces of vapour and 
oil have been removed. 


17.4 Earthing 


Periodic tests shall he made of the resistance of earth 
electrodes and of earth-continuity conductors to check 
the effectiveness of the earthing system. 


17.4.1 The effectiveness of the earth-leakage protective 
devices, if provided, shall be periodically checked. 


17.5 Safety Devices 


Remote tripping devices and limit switches, which are 
provided for safety reasons but which may not he called 
upon to function under normal operations which the 
interlocks are designed to prevent. 


17.5.1 Interlocks designed to prevent unsafe operations 
shall he checked periodically by a competent person by 
making a deliberate attempt to perform the operations 
which the interlocks are designed to prevent. 


20 


17.5.2 Where an emergency supply as specified under 
6.5 is provided, the source of supply and all ancillary 
apparatus shall be checked periodically. 


17.6 Maintenance Schedule 


A recommended schedule for periodical checks and 
maintenance of motors is given in Annex F. 


18 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR OVERHAUL 
OF MOTORS 


18.1 The general procedure for overhauling of motors as 
recommended by the manufacturer should be followed. 
However, the following gives the general guidance for 
overhaul of motors: 


a) Dismantle the motor without using excessive 
force and without hammer blows. If possible, do 
not open cartridge bearing housings. Do not force 
the hearing on the shaft by pressing the outer race. 
To remove hearings from shaft apply the grips of 
bearing puller to the inner ring of the bearing; 


b 


wm 


Clean every part of dust, dirt, oil and grit using a 
blower, compressed air hose, bellows or brushes, 
and wash with petrol to which a few drops of oil 
have been added, as necessary. Complete removal 
of foreign matter is essential; 


c) Check all parts for damage or wear, and repair or 
replace as necessary; 


d) Measure insulation resistance and dry out, if 
necessary, until correct value is obtained. Repair 
or replace any damaged windings: 

e) Re-enamel or re-varnish all windings and internal 
parts except stator bore and rotor outer iron 
surface, dry thoroughly; 

f) Reassemble without using any excessive force. 
Make sure that the machine leads ate on the correct 
terminals and that everything is well tightened; 


g) Check insulation resistance again; 
h) Check the air gaps; and 


j) Put back to work after making all checks and 
applying all rules as for initial starting. 


18.2 Bearing Replacement 


Before replacing the bearings, it is recommended to 
heat the new bearing in medium oil or equivalent at a 
temperature not exceeding 90°C for about one hour to 
enable easy mounting by push fit and avoid hammering 
of bearings which may result in premature failure of 
the same. 


When bearings are removed from motors or uncovered 
due to partial dismantling wrap them in clean paper 
immediately to keep them clean and free from dirt. 


18.3 Breakdown of Motor 


In the event of a breakdown before calling the service 
engineer, the following should be checked: 


a) Make sure that the rated supply voltage is reaching 
the motor terminals (use voltmeter); 

b) Check all connections against diagram, see that 

there are no breaks in the cable or wires and all 


terminals ate clean and tight; 


Make sure that the motor is not overloaded. This 
may be checked by starting the motor uncoupled 
from load; 


c) 


Examine for bad contact and open circuits; 
e) Examine that the brushes are making proper 
contacts and proper pressure is maintained (for 


slip ring motors); 


Make sure that there is no drop within the supply 
voltage system; and 


For squirrel cage motors with autotransformer 
starting, make sure that proper tapping is used. 


g) 


19 DIAGNOSIS OF COMMON FAULTS AND 
THEIR REMEDIES 


Information in regard to some of the common faults, 
their causes and remedies is given in Annex-G. It is 


21 


IS 900 : 2019 


recommended that a chart giving this information be 
kept readily available for assistance to the maintenance 
staff. 


20 MARKING 


20.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The induction motor may also be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


20.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 2016 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details ofthe conditions under which the licence for use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


NOTE — The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well- 
defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which 
is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. 
Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. 


IS 900 : 2019 


IS No. 
335 : 2018 
456 : 1978 
732 : 2018 
1356 (Part 1) : 1972 


2551 : 1982 
2974 

3043 : 1987 
10118 : 1982 


12075 : 2008 
12615 : 2018 
13107 : 1991 
IS/TEC 60034 (Part 5) 


: 2000 
IS 15999 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


New insulating oils (fifth revision) 
Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision) 
Code of practice for electrical wiring insulations 


Electrical equipment of machine tools: Part 2 Electrical equipment of machines for 
general use (second revision ) 


Danger notice plates ( fist revision) 
Code of practice for design and construction of machine foundations (all parts) 
Code of practice for earthing 


Code of practice for selection, installation and maintenance of switchgear and 
control gear 


Mechanical vibration of rotating electrical machines with shaft heights 56 mm and 
higher — Measurement, evaluation and limits of vibration severity 


Line operated three phase a.c. motors (IE CODE) “efficiency classes and 
performance specification" ( third revision) 


Guide for measurement of winding resistance of an ac machine during operation at 
alternating voltage 


Rotating electrical machines: Part 5 Degrees of protection provided by the integral 
design of rotating electrical machines (IP code) — Classification 


Rotating electrical machines: Part 1 Rating and performance ( first revision) 


22 


IS 900 : 2019 


ANNEX B 


( Clause 6.2 ) 
CORRECTION OF POWER FACTOR 


B-1 EXPLANATION OF POWER FACTOR 


B-1.1 The general supply of electricity in this country 
is being standardized to alternating current. With 
alternating current, the flow of electricity 1s not steady 
like gas or water through a pipe, but consists of a series 
of waves following each other in rapid succession. 
The frequency of these waves is usually 50 c/s and, 
therefore, it is referred to as a 50 cycles supply. The 
power of this supply depends upon two factors: 


a) Voltage, and 
b) Amperes (or current). 


B-1.1.1 Either of the two factors mentioned under 
B-1.1 might be represented individually by its own 
set of waves. If these waves coincide entirely, which 
means that they are in step with each other, the whole of 
the current in the circuits is doing useful work. 


B-1.1.2 If however, the two sets of waves are out of 
step, only a part of the current flowing through the 
lines can be usefully employed. There is, therefore, a 
ratio between the true power doing useful work and 
the apparent power of the supply system. This ratio 
is called the power factor. In a circuit in which both 
voltage and current are in step, the power factor is 100 
percent or unity. For certain technical reasons, such 
as the inductive effect of a motor or other apparatus, 
the current may lag behind the voltage. Then, as stated 
above, only a part of the current becomes available for 
doing useful work, and it is referred to as the lagging 
power factor. For example, if only 75 percent current 
does useful work the true power is 75 percent of the 
apparent power, and in this instance the-power factor 
is said to be 0.75. The remaining 25 percent of current 
in the circuit is termed wattless or idle current. It does 
not do useful work, but tends to heat up the cables. 
This current, which is virtually wasted, has to be paid 
for. Many supply authorities, therefore, either penalize 
the consumer for a bad power factor, or give a rebate 
for a satisfactory power factor which allows a better 
employment of their distribution system. 


B-2 CAUSE OF LOW POWER FACTOR 


All induction motors take current at a power factor 
lower than 100 percent or unity. The power factor gets 


23 


lower as the load on a motor is reduced and is lower 
on slip-ring and/or slow-speed motors than on squirrel- 
cage motors or any motor running at a higher speed. 
It is important, therefore, that apart from first cost or 
other considerations, motors that would be as nearly 
as possible fully loaded and run at as high speed as 
possible, consistent with good drive conditions, be 
installed. 


B-3 CORRECTION OF POWER FACTOR 


B-3.1 Most supply companies make no surcharge if the 
total power factor is not less than 0.95. The efficiency 
and power factor of motors at various loads may be 
obtained from the manufacturers. The average power 
factor may be obtained from the meters employed by 
the supply company when a rate including surcharge 
for low power factor is in force. 


B-3.2 The power factor is expressed by the ratio of true 
power to the apparent power. 


B-3.2.1 True power is the reading given by a wattmeter. 
Apparent power is the product of volts and ampere 
(multiplied, in the case of a three-phase system, by 
or 1.732). Most supply companies use a three-phase 
integrating watthour meter for measuring the true 
power and an integrating sine meter for measuring the 
wattless component in which case the ratio: 


Wattless kVA Hours 
kW Hours 


is equal to the tangent of the angle of lag and 
the equivalent cosine may readily be found from 
mathematical tables. The cosine of the angle thus found 
is the power factor of the circuit. 


B-3.3 Table 4 shows the factor by which the load in kW 
has to be multiplied to obtain the reactive capacity, as 
given below, KVA to improve the existing power factor 
to the proposed corrected one: 


Reactive kVA = Load in kW x Factor 


B-3.3.1 The graph in Fig. 2 has been compiled for ease 
of calculation and may be used in place of Table 4. 


IS 900 : 2019 


Table 4 Factors for Obtaining Reactive Capacity from Load 


( Clause B-3.3 ) 


Existing 
Power 
Factor 


0.40 
0.41 
0.42 
0.43 
0.44 


0.45 
0.46 
0.47 
0.48 
0.49 


0.50 
0.31 
0.52 
0.53 
0.54 


0.55 
0.56 
0.57 
0.58 
0.59 


0.60 
0.61 
0.62 
0.63 
0.64 


0.65 
0.66 
0.67 
0.68 
0.69 


0.70 
0.71 
0.72 
0.73 
0.74 


0.75 
0.76 
0.77 
0.78 
0.79 


0.80 
0.81 
0.82 
0.83 
0.84 


0.85 
0.86 
0.87 
0.88 
0.89 


Proposed Power Factor 


24 


IS 900 : 2019 


Table 4 (Concluded) 


Existing Proposed Power Factor 
Power 
Factor Бькы OOO 0 
0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 Unity 
0.90 = — — 0.155 0.484 
0.91 - — — 0.124 0.453 
0.92 — — — 0.097 0.426 
0.93 — — — 0.066 0.395 
0.94 — — — 0.034 0.363 
0.95 — — — m 0.329 
0.96 — - — — 0.292 
0.97 — = — — 0.250 
0.98 m = — - 0.203 
0.99 = — = 0.143 


POWER FACTOR 


Fic. 2 Power FACTOR IMPROVEMENT — CAPACITOR OUTPUT 


B-3.3.2 To use the graph, draw a line from the zero 
axis to intersect the curve at the value of the corrected 
power factor required and read off kvar per kVA from 
the line to the circle at the original power factor. As 
this is usually 0.95 that line has been shown. For 
example, to correct a load of 100 kVA from 0.7 to 0.95 
lagging, take the vertical distance from the line shown, 
at 0.7 power factor, to the circle, which is 0.48 kvar 
approximately. Therefore, 48 kvar will be required. 
This can be checked from Table 4, thus 100 kVA at 0.7 
power factor is 70 kW and there active КУА required is, 
therefore, 70 x 0.691 = 48.370. 


Fig 3A shows connections of capacitors to three phase 
motor. The capacitors are delta-connected, which is 
standard practice on three-phase supply 32 A separate 


25 


switch ‘CS is provided for the capacitor. This refers to 
a case where the corrected power factor exceeds 0.95. 


B-4 POWERFACTOR CORRECTION DEVICES 


B-4.1 Correction Devices 


There are two practical methods of power factor 
correction as given below: 


a) By means of shunt capacitors, and 
b) By means of synchronous motors or condensers. 


B-4.1.1 The method at B-4.1 (b) is mainly applicable 
to large installations and is consequently beyond the 
scope of this code. Attention 1s, therefore, confined to 
the first method only. 


IS 900 : 2019 


B-4.2 Location 


Best results are obtained by connecting the capacitors 
close as possible to the motor or other apparatus which 
requires power factor correction. In practice, however, 
this is not always possible. In cases where one capacitor 
has to correct the power factor of several motors, the 
capacitor should be connected across the LT side of the 
mains, and always on the load side of the supply meter. 


B-4.3 Correction 


Group correction is often advisable, especially 
when the total average load represents only a part 


CAPACITORS 


3A Shows connections of capacitors to three-phase motor. The 
capacitors are delia-connected, which is standard practice 


on three-phase supply 
to 5 
SUPPLY 
cs 


CAPACITOR 


3C Aseparate switch ‘CS is provided for the capacitor. This 
refers іо a case where the comected power factor exceeds 
0795 


of the installed motor rating and is fairly constant. 
If, however, the existing power factor is as low as, 
says, 0.6 or less, and the load not constant, skilled 
attendance for the switching operation may be 
required. In such cases the human element may be 
eliminated by adopting individual correction which is 
also recommended where motors are being added to 
an existing installation. However, each case has to be 
treated on its merits. 


B-4.3.1 Details of connections are illustrated in Fig. 3 
and 4. 


SUPPLY 


CAPACITOR 


ЗВ The switch 'S' which controls the motor, simultaneously also 
switches the capacitor ON or OFF 


To JS 55 
—ю 
SUPPLY 


CAPACITOR 


3DN: separate capacitor switch is shown. Where isolator "IS" 
and ‘SS are in existence, the capacitor is connected to a 
point between these switches 


Fic. 3 INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS 


то м5 


SUPPLY 
b 


TO LOAD 
oo 
pom 


4A The capacitor ‘C is connected to the mains on the load side 
of the meter ‘M. Where the capacity of the capacitor іп kVA. 
does not exceed the kVA of the corrected load, ће capaci- 
tor switch ‘CS may not be required provided a leading 


power factor is immaterial 


TO $ 
Soper ? 


CAPACITORS 


TO 1040 


4B Capacitors are located close to each section of the total 
load. Their point of connection is on the load side of the 


respective sub-circuit breakers ‘SCH’. The capacitor 
switches ‘CS may be omitted in certain cases 


TO LOAD 


CAPACITOR 
BANK 


АС Inthis isshownan arrangement of capacitors for fully automatic regulation. As ће powerfactorofthe loadvaries, several sections 
of a capacitor bank can be switched on or off by a relay maintaining a predetermined power factor. A comparatively small capacitor 


"С may be permanently connected 


Fic. 4 Group CONNECTIONS 


26 


B-4.4 Where a capacitor is connected across the 
terminals of an induction motor, care should be 
taken that the current taken by the capacitor does not 
exceed the motor magnetizing current as otherwise 
dangerous over-voltages may be setup when the motor 
is switched off due to the self excillation effect, values 


IS 900 : 2019 


of magnetizing current can be obtained from the 
manufacture but the following table gives capacities 
that, it is recommended, should not be exceeded. 
If a greater capacity is required, the excess should 
be connected at some other convenient point in the 
distribution system. 


Rating of Motor Capacitor Rating 
kvar 

kW 750 rev/min 1 000 rev/min 1 500 rev/min 
3.7 3.5 2.5 2.0 
7.5 5.5 4.5 4.0 
11 7.5 6.0 5.0 
15 9.0 7.0 6.0 
18.5 11.0 9.0 7.0 
22 12.0 10.0 8.0 
30 15.0 13.0 11.0 
37 18.0 16.0 13.0 
75 30.0 27.0 23.0 


27 


IS 900 : 2019 


ANNEX C 


( Clause 7.0 ) 


METHOD FOR INSTALLATION OF WIRING 
FOR TWO OR MORE MOTORS 


C-1 CIRCUITS FOR MOTORS 


C-1.0 General 


Where wiring is to be installed for two or more motors, 
any one of the circuits given under C-1.1 to C-1.3 
to suit particular requirements may be used, keeping 
in view the degree of protection necessary and the 
economy that can be obtained. 


C-1.1 Two alternative methods of wiring of two or 
more motors are shown in Fig. 5 and 6. 


3- PHASE 415 VOLT FEEDER 
à 


C-1.2 In the method shown in Fig. 5, a separate circuit 
is run to each motor from a fuse distribution board; 
the use of fuses may be dispensed with, in case the 
branch circuits are of ample capacity, and are otherwise 
protected. In the method shown in Fig. 6, a separate 
circuit is run to each motor from a distribution or 
sub-distribution board instead of a fuse distribution 
board. The distribution and sub-distribution boards" 
incorporate linked switches with fuse. 


C-1.3 A feeder comprising bus-bars enclosed in metal 
casing may be carried overhead around the building 


(СТР) IRONCLAD TRIPPLE POLE LINKED SWITCH OR SWITCH 
FUSE (TO BE INSTALLED NEAR THE FUSE DISTRIBUTION BOARD) 


___ 3-FOLE FUSE DISTRIBUTION BOARO (INDUSTRIAL TYPE) 


“| NOTE-FUSES IN THE FUSE DISTRIBUTION BOARD МАУ 
Г NOT BE USED, IF THE BRANCH CIRCUITS ARE OF 


Ра 
LI 
! 
a Е: AMPLE CAPACITY АМО ARE OTHERWISE PROTECTED. 


Hj 


MOTOR 


ICTP LINKED SWITCH OR SWITCH FUSE 
(TO BE INSTALLED NEAR THE MOTOR) 


MOTOR STARTER 


NOTE — If means for isolation are provided within the motor starter no separate isolator switch will be necessary. /C7P near the starter is 


necessary only if the fuse board is away from the motor. 


Fic. 5 WIRING CIRCUIT FOR Motors CONNECTED FROM A FUSE 
DISTRIBUTION BOARD 


3-PHASE 415 VOLT FEEDER 


=al 


MOTOR 


MOTOR STARTER 


ICTP LINKED SWITCH OR SWITCH FUSE(TO BE INSTALLE D 
NEAR THE DISTRIBUTION OR SUB-DISTRIBUTION BOARD) 


| 
| DISTRIBUTION OR SUB-DISTRIBUTION BOARD 


! СТР LINKED SWITCH WITH FUSE 


ICTP LINKED SWITCH OR SWITCH FUSE 
(TO BE INSTALLED NEAR THE MOTOR) 


NOTE. — Ifmeans for isolation are provided within the motor starter no separate isolator will be necessary. ICTP near the starter is necessary 


only if the fuse board is away from the motor. 


Fic. 6 WIRING CIRCUIT FOR Motors CONNECTED FROM A DISTRIBUTION OR 
SUB-DISTRIBUTION BOARD PROVIDED WITH A LINKED SWITCH WITH FUSE 


28 


with branch circuits tapped off the feeder. This 
would normally require an over-current protective 
device for each branch circuit. From economic 
considerations this method is generally used where 
there are a number of motors in a bay or row 
(see Fig. 7). 


NOTE — If means for isolation are provided within the motor 
starter no separate isolator will be necessary. ICTP near the 


3- РНАЅЕ 15 VOLT FEEDER 
(BUS TRUNK TYPE) 


"SST ww ww wr ewe н ау 
' 
і 


– | 


IS 900 : 2019 


starter is necessary only if the fuse board is away from the 
motor. 
C-1.4 General arrangement of wiring for motors 
conforming to the recommendations given in this code 
and complying with the relevant Indian Electricity 
Rules is shown in Fig. 8. 


C-1.5 General arrangement of wiring for motors with 
remote control arrangement is shown in Fig. 9. 


ICTP LINKED SWITCH OR SWITCH FUSE 


(TO BE INSTALLED NEAR THE MOTOR) 


MOTOR STARTER 


MOTOR 


NOTE = If means for isolation are provided within tbe motor starter no separate isolator will be necessary. JCTP near the starter is necessary 


only if the fuse board is away from the motor. 


Fic. 7 WIRING Circuit FOR Motors iN Row ов ВАУ 


>] 
g 


= 


| ОИ 


A «Supply company’s metering panel 


DOTTED LINES SHOW EARTH CONNECTION 


B -iron-dad main switch with overload releases or enclosed cut-outs 


C =Power panel ( see Fig. 5) 


D « Triple pole iron-dad switch near motor, also near power panel it this is some distance from main switch (shown dotted) 
E 2 Motor starter fitted with over-current end no-volt protective devices 


Е =Motor 
G =Danger notice plate in accordance with IS 2551 : 1952 


H =All cables to be steel armoured or bunched in a metal conduit 
J =Card with instructions for resuscitating persons suffering from electric shock 
K =Earthed metallic tubing protecting cables from starter to motor 


FiG. 8 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF WiRING CIRCUIT FOR MOTORS 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE CODE 


29 


IS 900 : 2019 


SWITCH BOARD INCOMING s uP PLY 


SWITCH FUSE COMBINATION | 
R 


о 
| CIRCUIT BREAKER 


STARTERS 


ISOLATING” | 


SWITCHE TN 


ово qos 


PUSHBUTTONS У 


*in case motor 18 away from the switchboard. 


FiG. 9 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF WIRING FOR MOTOR 
wiTH REMOTE CONTROL ARRANGEMENT 


30 


IS 900 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 11.5.1 ) 
GENERAL NOTES ON SELECTION OF DRIVES 


D-1 GENERAL 


D-1.1 There are several methods of transmitting power 
from the motor shaft to the driven shaft, such as direct 
coupling, gear drive, chain drive, flat belt drive, vee- 
belt drive, cotton rope drive, etc. The type of drive to be 
selected would depend on the application. 


D-1.2 When calculating the sizes of components 
needed in transmitting the power developed by an 
electric motor, it is essential to consider not only the 
full output rating of the motor as given on the nameplate 
but also any overload provision which may have been 
made in the design of the motor, if it is intended to take 
advantage of this. 


D-1.3 The following may be taken as a guide to the 
limits of belt drives with standard motors: 


Full Load Speed Maximum Output Rating 
of Motor A 
(rev/min) 
Flat Belt Drive Vee-Belt Drive 
(Kw) (kW) 
2 850 15 Not 
1 450 30 recommended 
950 55 55 
750 110 110 
150 


D-1.3.1 For output ratings larger than those mentioned 
under D-1.3, and extended shaft and outboard bearing 
to support the pulley at both sides should be used. This 
arrangement is also generally necessary in cases where 
the ratio of driving pulley to driven pulley exceeds 1 : 6 
in the case of vee-belt drives. 


D-2 FLAT BEET DRIVE 


D-2.1 Flat belt drive is a long centre drive with a limited 
degree of slip. In the design of the drive, it is preferable 
to ensure that the slack side of the belt is at the top 
so that the natural sag of the belt increases the arc of 
contact on the two pulleys. The centre distance and 
minimum pulley size depend upon the thickness of the 
belt. The following types of flat belting are normally 
available: 


a) Hair belting, 

b) Solid woven cotton belting, 

c) Rubberized cotton ply belting, 
d) Leather belting, 


31 


e) Nylon belting, and 
f) Terylene belting. 


D-2.2 All types of belting given under D-2.1 
have different power transmitting capacities and 
manufacturers “figures should be strictly adhered to. 


D-2.3 Whatever material (leather, balata, hair or 
cotton) is used for the belt, the following points should 
be observed: 


a) The ratio of the diameter of pulleys should not 
exceed 6 to | unless a device like a jockey pulley 
is used to increase the arc of contact; 


b) The arc of contact also depends on the distance 
between the two pulleys and as a general rule the 
distance between the centers of the driving and 
driven pulley should be not less than four times 
the diameter of the larger pulley, unless some form 
of idle or jockey pulley is employed; 


c) The stipulated belt speed should not be exceeded; 
and 


d) Vertical and right angle drives should be avoided 
as far as possible. 


D-2.4 The maximum powers transmitted by single 
leather belts at various speeds are given in Table 5. 


D-2.4.1 The figures given in Table 5 may be adjusted as 
follows for different belts: 


a) Light double leather Increased by 50 percent 
b) Heavy double leather Increased by 80 percent 
c) Ваа 3 ply Decreased by 16 

2/3 percent 
d) Balata 4 ply Increased by 12 percent 
e) Balata 5 ply Increased by 40 percent 
f) Balata 6 ply Increased by 66 


2/3 percent 


D-2.4.2 Belts should be chosen to transmit 100 percent 
above the normal power rating of the motor for started 
direct-on-line and 25 percent above the normal power 
rating for all other methods of starting. 


D-2.5 Beltor Rope Drive 


With a belt or rope drive, it should be checked that the 
driving and driven pulleys are perfectly parallel and 
inline by placing a straight-edge across the edges of the 
pulleys. Where it is not possible to adopt this method 


IS 900 : 2019 


Table 5 Maximum Power Transmitted by 
Single Leather Belts at Various Speeds 


( Clauses D-2.4 and D-2.4.1 ) 


Velocity Width of Belt (mm) 
m/min 

50 100 160 200 250 315 

KW KW KW KW KW KW 

60 0.45 0.90 1.34 1.79 2.24 2.69 
90 0.67 1.34 2.01 2.69 3.96 4.03 
120 0.91 1.82 2.73 3.64 4.59 5.48 
150 1.13 2.27 3.40 4.54 5.67 6.80 
185 1.36 2.72 4.07 5.43 6.79 8.15 
215 1.58 3.16 4.74 6.33 7.91 9.49 
245 1.81 3.61 5.42 722 9.03 10.83 
275 2.03 4.06 6.09 8.12 10.15 12.17 
305 2.25 4.51 6.76 9.01 11.26 13.52 
460 3.39 6.77 10.16 13.55 16.93 20.32 
610 4.52 9.04 13.56 18.08 22.60 27.12 
765 5.65 11.31 16.96 22.62 28.27 33.93 
915 6.71 13.43 20.14 26.86 33.57 40.28 

1 070 7.31 14.62 21.93 20.24 36.55 43.86 
1 220 7:59 15.19 22.78 30.38 37.97 45.57 
1 375 7.56 15.13 22.69 30.26 37.82 45.39 


a line may be used but extra care should be exercised 
and several checks taken to eliminate possible errors. 
The checking of alignment should be carried out before 
any grouting is done. Belt or rope drives should be so 
arranged that the slack side of the belt or rope is at the 
top. 


D-2.5.1 All joints should be smooth and flexible 
and all pulleys shall be well balanced. Belts should 
not be tightened more than is necessary to prevent 
slipping otherwise too great a strain would be put on 
the bearings. Drives should be arranged as near to the 
horizontal as possible. Vertical and right angle drives 
should be avoided as far as possible. 


D-3 COTTON ROPE DRIVE 


D-3.1 Cotton rope drive is a long centre drive with less 
slip than with flat bolts but is not very much in use. 
General considerations are the same as under D-2.3. 
D-3.2 The maximum powers transmitted by cotton 
ropes at various speed are given in Table 6. 


D-3.3 Diameter of Pulley 


The minimum diameters of pulleys for different rope 
diameters are given below: 


Diameter of 19 22 25 32 
rope (mm) 34 44 51 

Diameter of 250 250 355 500 
pulley (mm), 800 1000 1600 

Min 


32 


D-3.4 Centre Distance 


If the centre distance is less than three times the 
diameter of the larger pulley, increase the number of 
ropes required by 20 percent, if less than twice the 
diameter, increase the number by 40 percent. 


D-4 VEEBELT DRIVE 


D-4.1 Vee-belt drive is a short centre silent drive with 
negligible slip, suitable for motors from fractional upto 
and including 450 kW in standard industrial sizes with 
special types to accommodate higher output ratings. 
Power transmitting capacity of vee-belt drives depends 
on the following: 


a) Vee-belt speed, and 
b) Pitch circle diameter of the pulley used. 


D-4.1.1 Wherever possible, it is recommended that 
pulley with the maximum diameter for any given belt 
size and the highest possible belt speed be used. The 
working range of speeds of vee-belts is 150 to 1500 
m/min. Special application maybe catered for at lower 
speeds by the use of steel cable vee-belts or link 
belts. When designing vee-belt drives, it is essential 
to ensure that the vee-belt is not subject to more than 
5 000 flexings per minute, that is, a belt passing over 
two pulleys and having an inside length of 50 cm 
should not exceed 1 250 m/min in speed. 


IS 900 : 2019 


Table 6 Maximum Power Transmitted by Cotton Ropes 
( Clause D-3.2 ) 


Velocity Diameter of Rope (mm) 
m/min 19 22 25 32 38 44 51 
Power Transmitted in kW 

305 1.87 2.61 3.36 5.30 7.61 10.44 13.58 
460 2.76 4.03 5.00 7.91 11.41 15.67 20.22 
610 3.80 522 6.79 10.60 15.29 20.89 27.23 
765 4.63 6.27 8.21 12.83 1843 25.4 32.82 
915 5.30 7.16 9.40 14.77 21.19 28.87 37.60 
1070 5.82 7.98 10.37 16.26 23.42 31.93 41.03 
1220 6.27 8.80 11.04 17.31 24.92 33.94 4431 
1375 6.42 8.73 11.41 17.90 25.74 35.06 45.80 


D-4.2 For drives employing vee-belts, it is considered 
sound practice to maintain a distance between shaft 
centres greater than the diameter of the large pulley 
and not more than the sum of the diameters of both the 
driving and the driven pulleys in order to obtain the 
maximum arc of contact on the small pulley. 


D-4.3 For vee-belt drives, the drive should be such that 
the arc of contact on the smaller vee-pulley should be 
not less than 90° and not more than | 300°. It has been 
found that an arc of contact of 108° gives the greatest 
efficiency but the maximum speed ratio is then 4.5 to 1. 


D-4.4 Normal Sections 
The following are the belt sections normally employed: 


Power Transmitted Belt Section 


Up to 3.7 kW A Section (13 mm x 8 mm) 
3.7 to 93 kW B Section (17 mm x 11 mm) 
93 to 37 kW C Section (22 mm x 14 mm) 
37 to 110kW D Section (32 mm x 19 mm) 


D-4.5 Power transmitted at 600 mm/mm for the 
different sections is approximately as follows: 


Section Power Transmitted 
kW 
A 1.27 
B 1.72 
С 4.10 
D 7.46 


D-4.5.1 The values given under D-4.5 are subject to 
correction for arc of contact, type of drive, etc. Different 
manufacturers supply their own recommended tables. 


33 


D-5 CHAIN DRIVE 


D-5.1 Chain drive is a short centre drive having no 
slip but particular care should be taken in aligning 
machines. The initial tension required with a belt is 
unnecessary with a chain and the bearing friction due 
to it is, therefore, eliminated. 


D-5.2 The maximum gear ratio available with chain 
drive is 7.1. 


D-5.3 The centre distance should be such that the arc 
of contact between the chain and wheel is not less than 
] 200 with at least 7 teeth in engagement. 


D-5.3.1 The maximum centre distance is approximately 
given by the following formula: 


a) For speeds from 450 to 900 meters per minute: 


Teeth inWheel 
rev.minof Pinion 


Maximum Centre = | 6 


Distance (meter) 


b) For speed below 90 meters per minute: 


Maximum Centre 


Distance (meter) = 


4 0.05 pitch (mm) х teeth in wheel x teeth in pinion 


IS 900 : 2019 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 12.3.7 ) 
RECOMMENDED FORM OF REPORT TO CONSUMER 


We beg to inform you that the installation at your premises has been completed as under: 


Motor Rating Speed Location Insulation Resistance of Remarks 
kW rev/min Resistance Earth Circuit 
M-ohm 
1 2 
Ohm Ohm 


Signature of Contractor. ................. sess 


Contractor's Licence No. ................................ 


34 


IS 900 : 2019 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 17.6 ) 
RECOMMENDED MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE 


F-1 DAILY MAINTENANCE 


Е-1.1 Examine visually earth connections and motor 
leads. 


Е-1.2 Check motor windings for overheating (the 
permissible maximum temperature is above that which 
can be comfortably felt by hand). 


F-1.3 Examine control equipment. 


F-1.4 In the case of oil ring lubricated motors: 


a) Examine bearings to see that oil rings are working; 
b) Note temperature of bearings; 

c) Add oil, if necessary; and 

d) Check and play. 


NOTE — In order to avoid opening up motors, a good 
indication is to observe the shell temperature under normal 
working conditions. Any increase not accounted for, for 
example by seasonal increase in ambient temperature, should 
be suspected (see Annex G, SI No. xiii). 


F-2 WEEKLY MAINTENANCE 

F-2.1 Check belt tension. In cases where this is 
excessive, it should immediately be reduced and in the 
case of sleeve bearing machines the air gap between 


rotor and stator should be checked. 


F-2.2 Blow out windings of protected type motors 
situated in dusty locations. 


F-2.3 Examine starting equipment for burnt contacts 
where motor is started and stopped frequently. 


F-2.4 Examine oil in the case of oil ring lubricated 


bearings for contamination by dust, grit, etc. (This can 
be roughly judged from the color of the oil.) 


F-3 MONTHLY MAINTENANCE 
F-3.1 Overhaul controllers. 
F-3.2 Inspect and clean oil circuit breakers. 


F-3.3 Renew oil in high speed bearings in damp and 
dusty locations. 


F-3.4 Wipe brush holders and check bedding of brushes 
of slip-ring motors. 


35 


F-4 HALF YEARLY MAINTENANCE 


F-4.1 Clean windings of motors subjected to corrosive 
or other elements; also bake and varnish, if necessary. 


F-4.2 In the case of slip-ring motors, check slip-rings 
for grooving or unusual wear. 


F-4.3 Check grease in ball and roller bearings and make 
it up where necessary taking care to avoid overfilling 
(see 17.2.3). 


F-4.4 Drain all oil bearings, wash with petrol to which a 
few drops of oil have been added; flush with lubricating 
oil and refill with clean oil. 


F-5 ANNUAL MAINTENANCE 


F-5.1 Check all high speed bearing and renew, if 
necessary. 


F-5.2 Blow out all motor winding thoroughly with 
clean dry air. Make sure that the pressure is not so high 
as to damage the insulation. 


F-5.3 Clean and varnish dirty and oily windings. 


F-5.4 Overhaul motors which have been subjected to 
severe operating conditions. 


F-5.5 Renew switch and fuse contacts, if damaged. 
F-5.6 Check oil (see 17.3). 


F-5.7 Renew oil in starters subjected to damp or 
corrosive elements. 


F-5.8 Check insulation resistance to earth and between 
phases of motor winding, control gear and wiring. 


F-5.9 Check resistance of earth connections. 
F-5.10 Check air gaps. 


F-5.11 Test the motor overload relays and breakers. 
F-6 RECORDS 


Maintain a register giving one or more pages for each 
motor and record therein all important inspection and 
maintenance works carried out from time to time. 
These records should show past performance, normal 
insulation level, air gap measurements, nature of 
repairs and time between previous repairs and other 
important information which would be of help for good 
performance and maintenance. 


IS 900 : 2019 


G-1 MOTOR BURNT OUT 


Trouble 


ANNEX G 
( Clause 19 ) 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


Motor burnt out. (Indicated by 
burning odor or smoke before the 
motor stopped, and/or bubbled or 
burnt paint) 


Input power troubles, starting 
troubles, troubles while running, 
Or excessive noise or vibrations, 
physical damage to the bearings, or 
bad bearings. 


Install a new motor Always 
determine the failure cause as 
indicated in following sections. 
Otherwise, the replacement motor, 
may also fail before it delivers a full 
life expectancy. 


G-2 TROUBLES RELATED TO SURROUNDING ATMOSPHERE 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


Motor dirty 


Ventilation blocked, dirt 
accumulated over cooling ribs, end 
windings filled with fine dust or 
lint (dust may be cement, saw dust, 
rock dust, grain dust, coal dust etc.) 


Remove the accumulated dust on 
motor body. Dismantle entire motor. 
Clean fan and fan cowl. Clean all 
windings. Clean motor will run 
10 to 30?C cooler 


Rotor winding clogged 


Clean and grind slip rings. 


Clean and treat windings with good 
insulating varnish. 


Bearing and end shields 


Clean and wash with cleaning 
solvent. 


Motor wet 


Subjected to dripping 


Wipe motor and dry by circulating 
hot air over motor. 


Install canopy type cover over 
motor for protection. 


Drenched condition due to rain 


Cover the motor to retain heat and 
shift the rotor position frequently 


Submerged in flood water 


Dismantle and clean the parts. 


Bake windings in oven at 90?C for 
24 h or until insulation resistance is 
minimum 10 mega ohms. 


G-3 TROUBLES RELATED TO STARTING OF THE MOTOR 


Trouble 


Probable cause 


Possible remedy 


Motor connected but does not 
start (No hum or heating) 


Note — Reset the overload relays, if 
tripped. Then try to restart the motor. 


Faulty starting apparatus (Motor 
controller will not operate) 


No supply voltage (main supply 
switched off) 


Check for proper functioning of 
the starting apparatus. Replace the 
defective controller. 


Check main switch. Check fuse and 
switch contacts and test lines for 
continuity. 


Check voltage in all three phases at 
the motor terminals. If there is no 
input voltage, locate and correct the 
problem in the input side. 


36 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble 


Probable cause 


Possible remedy 


Motor connected but does not 
start (Just hum and heats up) 
Note — Immediately switch off the 


power to prevent motor burning. The 
overload relays may trip. 


a) One phase open due to blown 
fuse, faulty switch contact or 
broken lead. (Motor input side 
single phased that is, no voltage 
in one or two phases, can be a 
temporary condition) 


b) Voltage too low than rated 


voltage of the motor 


Check main switch. 


Check fuse and switch contacts and 
test lines for continuity. 


Check voltage in all three phases 
at the motor terminals. If single 
phase condition exists, correct the 
problem. 


Rotor control gear defective. 


Bad bedding of carbon brushes 


a) Examine each step of the control 
gear for bad contacts or open 
circuit; and 


b)Make sure, that brushes are 
making good contact with the 
slip rings. 

c) Check for continuity between 
rotor leads and starter. 


Starting torque required for load 
too high 


a)For squirrel cage motor with 
autotransformer starting, change 
to a higher tap. 


b) For slip ring motor, lower the 
starting resistance 


Rotor defective 


Poor stator coil connections. Inter- 
turn short in stator coil. 


Look for broken bars and/or rings. 
New rotor may be required as 
repairs are usually temporary 


Remove end shields and locate the 
loose connections with test lamp. 
For inter-turn short, use surge tester. 


Mechanical locking in bearing or at 
air gap 


Dismantle and repair. 


Clean air gap if choked. 


Wrong connections 


Check with connection diagram 
supplied by manufacturer. See that 
connections are right. 


Motor does not come upto speed 


Motor may be overloaded. 
(Rotor and driven load is locked) 


Wrong selection/supply 


Disconnect the motor from driven 
load, to see if motor starts and 
achieves full speed in uncoupled 
condition. If so, then the trouble 
is with the load. Reduce starting 
load or install larger motor. If 
autotransformer is used, try higher 


tapping. 
Consult supplier for proper type 


Voltage too low at motor terminals 
because of line drop. 


Check voltage at motor terminals. 


Use higher voltage tap on 
transformer terminals or reduce 
load. 


If slip ring motor, improper 
operation of secondary control gear 
resistance. 


Correct secondary control gear. 


Starting load too high 


Check the load, motor is supposed 
to carry at start. 


37 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble Probable cause Possible remedy 

Poor/no contact between brush and | Check that all brushes are riding 

slip ring (brushes resting loose on | on slip rings for all three phases. 

slip rings) (Appropriate spring pressure 
required) 
Check secondary connections 
thoroughly and tighten the 
connections. 

Poor secondary connections Check all secondary connections. 
Leave no leads poorly connected. 

Broken rotor bars Look for cracks near the rings. 
Replace the rotor 
New rotor may be required as 
repairs are usually temporary. 

Open primary circuit Locate fault with testing device and 
repair. 

Motor stalls Wrong application Change type or size and consult 

manufacturer 

Overloaded motor Reduce load. 

Low motor voltage See that nameplate voltage is 


maintained/available at motor 
terminals. 
Open circuit Replace fuse, check overload 


relays, starter and push button. 


Incorrect control resistance of slip 
ring rotor 


Check control sequence. 
Replace broken resistors. 
Repair open circuits. 


Mechanical locking in bearing or at 
air gap 


Dismantle and repair. 
Clean air gap if choked. 


Poor contact at cable connections 


Check supply cable connections at 
both sides. 


Motor runs and then dies down 


Power failure 


Check for loose connections to line, 
to fuses and to control gear. 


Overload 


a) Examine if overload relay trips 
and see that they are set correctly 
to approximately 100 percent 
full load current. 

b) See that the dash-pots are filled 
with correct quantity and grade 
of oil. 


Motor takes too long time to 
accelerate (10 or more seconds 
upto 180 frame, 12 or more second 
for 200 to 250 frame, 15 s or more 
for 280 and above frames) 


Excessive starting load or high 
inertia loading 


a) Reduce load/inertia or allow 
ample time for acceleration at 
low voltage. 

b) Install a larger motor. 

c) If motor is driving a heavy load, 
or is starting up a long line of 
shafting, start more slowly, allow 
time for acceleration. 


Applied voltage too low. (Excessive 
voltage drop- running more than 
2-3 percent below line voltage) 


Use higher voltage 
transformer terminals. 


tap on 


38 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble 


Probable cause 


Possible remedy 


Inadequate motor starting torque 
when using a reduced voltage 
starting system (star-delta, part 
winding or auto transformer 
starting) 


a) Reduce the starting load or use a 
larger motor. 


b)Use a starting system which 
develops higher starting torque 
(VFD or slip ring motor or fluid 
coupling) 


Poor rotor resistance circuit. 


Check for high external rotor 
resistance. 


Defective squirrel cage rotor. 


Replace with new rotor. 


Improper connections of motor 
leads to supply lines. 


Correct connections. 


Over current relay trips during 
starting 


Motor overloaded 


Reduce starting load or install 
larger motor 


Starter operated too quickly (Slip 
ring starter) 


Start more slowly to allow current 
to fall as much as possible in each 
step. 


Time setting too low 


Readjust time lag and fill with 
correct quantity of suitable oil, if it 
is oil filled type. 


Mains voltage lower than rated 
voltage of the motor (resulting high 
starting time) 


Check mains voltage. Ensure that 
rated voltage of motor is same as 
main voltage. 


Overload relays undersized 


Use the relay size suitable to motor 
nameplate current. 


G-4 TROUBLES RELATED TO RUNNING OF THE MOTOR 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


Wrong rotation 


Wrong sequence of phases 


Reverse two phase connections at 
switchboard or at motor. 


Unbalanced line currents drawn 
by the motor 


Unbalanced terminal voltage at 
motor terminals 


Check loads and connections 


Single phase operations 


Check for open contacts 


Poor rotor contacts in external 
resistance of slip ring motor 


Check control devices 


Brushes not in proper position in 
slip ring motor 


See that brushes are properly seated 
and flexible shunts are in good 
condition. 


Motor overheats while running 
under load. 


Motor overloaded. This can be 
confirmed by measuring input 
current in all three phases. 


Reduce load. See that current 
drawn by the motor does not exceed 
nameplate value of the current. Use 
larger rating motor 


Poor ventilation. Air intake area in 
fan cowl may be clogged with dirt, 
dust or cotton fluff. 


Very less space for fan to suck the 
air. 


Clean the clogged suction area 
meant for ventilation. 


Keep sufficient space for fan to 
suck the air. 


Verify that cooling air is flowing 
freely over the motor. 


Higher ambient temperature 


Install motor designed for specific 
ambient conditions. 


39 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


Motor may have one phase open 


Earthed coil 


Check to make sure that all three 
phases are well connected. 


Locate the fault and repair. 


Unbalanced terminal voltage 


Check for faulty leads, connections 
and transformer. 


Shorted stator coil 


Repair and then check watt-meter 
reading. 


Voltage too high or too low 


Check motor terminal voltage. 


Faulty connection 


Correct the connections 


Rotor rubs stator bore. 


Replace worn out bearings. 


Switching too frequent. 


Too many intermittent overloads 
during the operating cycle. 


Use specially designed motor to 
suit frequent starting. 


Reduce the number of starts, the 
number of intermittent overloads, 
the size of overload peaks, or install 
a larger motor. 


Motor sparking at slip rings 


Motor may be overloaded 


Reduce the load 


Brushes may not be of correct 
quality and may be sticking in the 
holders. 


Use brushes of the grade 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


Brush pressure may be too light or 
too high. 

Slip rings may be rough, dirty or 
oily. 


Adjust the brush pressure correctly. 


Clean the slip rings and maintain 
them smooth, glossy and free from 
oil and dirt. 


Slip rings may be 
eccentric. 


ridged or 


Turn and grind the slip rings in a 
lathe to a smooth finish. 


G-5 TROUBLES RELATED TO BEARINGS 


Trouble 
Hot bearings (general) 


Probable Cause 
Bent or sprung shaft 


Possible Remedy 
Straighten or replace the shaft 


Excessive belt pull 


Decrease belt tension 


Pulleys too far away from shaft 
shoulder 


Move pulley closer to bearing 


Pulley diameter too small 


Use larger pulley 


Misalignment 


Correct by realignment of drive 


Hot bearings (ball or roller) 


Insufficient/no grease 


Maintain proper quantity of grease 
in bearings 


Deterioration of grease or lubricant 
contaminated (dirt and foreign 
matters in the bearing grease) 


Remove old grease, wash bearings 
thoroughly in petrol (to which a 
few drops of oil have been added) 
and replace with new grease. 


Excess grease 


Heat from hot motor or external 
source 


Reduce quantity of grease. 
(Bearings should not be more than 
half filled) 


Protect bearings by reducing motor 
temperature 


40 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


Overloaded bearings 


Check alignment with driven 
equipment, excessive belt tension 
and/or end thrust. Reduce the load 
on the bearings. 


Broken ball or rough races Replace bearings. Clean the 
housing thoroughly. 
Incorrect assembly Ensure bearings assembled 


squarely on the shaft. 


Hot bearings, sleeve 


Oil grooving in bearing obstructed 
by dirt 


Remove bracket or pedestal with 
bearing and clean oil groove and 
bearing housing, renew oil 


Bent or damage oil rings 


Repair or replace oil rings 


Oil too heavy 


Use a recommended lighter oil 


Oil too light 


Use a recommended heavier oil 


Warning — The use of too light a gra 
to seize up. 


de of oil is likely to cause the bearing 


Insufficient oil 


Fill reservoir to proper level in 
overflow plug with motor at rest 


Too much end thrust 


Reduce thrust induced by driven 
machine or supply external means 
to carry thrust 


Badly worn bearing 


Replace bearing 


Oil leakage from overflow plugs 


Stream of overflow, plug not tight 


Remove, re-cement thread, replace 
and tighten 


Cracked or broken overflow plug 


Replace the plug 


Plug cover not tight 


Fit cork gasket; or if screw type, 
tighten 


G-6 TROUBLES RELATED TO NOISE AND VIBRATIONS 


Note — The troubles like vibration, mechanical noise and bearing noise are mostly caused by poor or deteriorating installation of 


the motor base, motor, driven load, sheaves or coupling. The motor and driven load must be mounted firmly and solidly with precise 
alignment or vibration will develop leading to mechanical failures. Foundations must be secure and stable. Shims must be as few in 
number as possible to insure that all motor feet are mounted in the same geometrical plane. Consider tapered shims, if necessary. 


These are common failures. If motors and driven load are properly mounted, these failures can be virtually 


eliminated. 

Trouble Probable Cause Possible Remedy 
Motor vibrates during running | Motor shaft and driven equipment | Check the alignment between 
and/or mechanical noise (1 | shaft misaligned, in close coupled | the motor shaft and driven load. 


may originate in the driven load, 
coupling, or motor) 
Note — Loosening one motor foot at a 


time and listening may identify stresses 
caused by an improper mounting. 


application. 


Realign the motor and driven 


equipment. 


Weak foundation 


Strengthen the motor foundation. 


Poor or loosened motor or driven 
load mounting 


Ensure that the foundations for the 
motor and the driven load are rigid. 
Mounting bolts are tight. Check 
any grouting for cracks. 


Unlevelled motor feet with 


foundation 


Make proper leveling with the base. 
Ensure that the feet are properly 
shimmed and in the same plane. 


41 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


Unbalance in driven equipment 


Disconnect the motor from the 
load and restart. If the noise and 
vibration are vanished, the problem 
is in the load. Balance the driven 
equipment 


Unbalance in coupling/pulleys 


Remove the coupling/pulley. 
Secure a half key in the motor shaft 
keyway and restart the motor. If the 
vibration and noise is vanished, the 
trouble is in the coupling/pulley. 
Balance the motor coupling/pulleys 


Motor out of balance 


If the problem persists after 
disconnecting coupling/pulley, 
recheck the motor mounting. If the 
mounting is OK, the problem may 
be bad bearings, or a bent shaft or 
unbalanced rotor. 


Defective ball or roller bearings 


Replace the bearings 


Bent shaft 


Replace the motor. Always 
determine the root cause of the bent 
shaft to prevent recurrence of the 
problem. 


Rotor balancing weights shifted 


Rebalance the rotor. 


Line up properly 


Bearing not in line 
Slip ring rotor rewound/coils 
replaced 


Rebalance the rotor. 


Three phase motor running on two 
phases. 


Check for open circuit. 


Excessive end play 


Dismantle motor and add thrust 
washers between bearing and end 
shield. 


Breaking of rotor bars/rings in case 
of built up copper rotor 


Replace the  bars/rings and 
rebalance the rotor. 


Scrapping or mechanical noise 


Fan rubbing air guide (SPDP 
motors) 


Fan rubbing end shields/fan cowls 
(TEFC motors) 


Remove interference 


Normal motor noise amplified by 
resonant mounting. Motor loose on 
bedplate. 


Tighten holding bolts. Cushion the 
mounting or dampen the source of 
the resonance 


Dirt in air gap 


Irregular noise. Dismantle and 


clean the motor. 


Loose accessories on motor 


Check and retighten such loose 
accessories parts. 


Magnetic noise 


Air gap not uniform 


Check and correct bracket fits or 
bearing 


Loose bearings/worn bearings 


Correct or replace bearings 


Rotor unbalance 


Rebalance the rotor, dynamically. 
Shaft straightness to be checked 
and corrected, if required. 


42 


IS 900 : 2019 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


relays. 


System single phased. Motor may 
overheat and trip the overload 


Switch off the power and let motor 
come to rest, then again switch on. 
If the motor hums and heats, but 
does not start, single phasing exists. 


A certain amount of magnetic 
noise is inherent in some low 
speed designs and should not be 
cause of alarm. 


Bearing noise 


Dirty bearings 


Poorly fit or damaged bearings 


Listen to each bearing for the 
following sounds: 


1) Smooth mid-range hum-normal 
fit, bearing OK. 


2)High whine-tight internal fit. 
Replace the bearing and check 
the fit. 


3) Low rumble: Loose internal fit. 
Replace the bearing and check 
the fit. 


4) Roughclatter- Bearing destroyed. 
Replace the bearing. 
Always determine the root cause 


of the bearing failure or the trouble 
may reoccur. 


5)Check bearing condition by 
SPM. Replace the bearings if 
damage confirmed. 


Wash out with turpentine, repack 
with grease and refit. If used for 
a long period beyond rated life, 
please replace bearings. 


Note — For long bearing life, avoid the following. 


Poor or loose mountings, misalignment, excessive 
vibrations and high belt tension. 


G-6.1 Over Greasing 


More damage is done by excessive grease and 
contaminants introduced during greasing than by lack 
of greasing. Do not grease more than recommended by 
the motor manufacturer. 


Water, dirt, or chemicals entering the motor. Consider 
totally enclosed motors when such contaminants exists. 


Mixing of different types/makes of greases in the 
bearing. 


G-7 TROUBLES RELATED TO INPUT POW- 
ER CIRCUIT 


Note — These troubles as well as motor overloads are best 
identified by making following checks. Completing the entire 
process is also recommended even when the problem appears 
to be solved with an early step. It is to be noted that, the troubles 
can be intermittent and will not necessarily be identified during 
these checks. Knowing the history of recurring problems is 
crucial to arrive at final solution. 


43 


Step 1: Reset the overload relays, (if tripped) and start 
the motor. 


Step 2: Measure the current in all three phases with 
the motor operating under load. If there is more than 
5 percent deviation between phases, immediately switch 
off the power. See the remedies against *unbalance 
currents". If the currents are balanced, and overload 
relay is tripping, then the motor is probably overloaded. 
Go to step 3. To confirm an overload, note the current 
values with respect to the nameplate full load current 
value and proceed to step 4. 


Step 3: Measure the voltage in all three phases with 
the motor off and with the motor running. Take the 
meter readings at the supply side and motor side of the 
controller and in the motor terminal box. If the voltage is 
10 percent (or more) above or below the motor 
nameplate voltage with the motor both stopped and 
running, see the remedies against "high current in all 
three phases". 


Step 4: Disconnect the motor from the load start the 
motor and measure the no load current in all three 


IS 900 : 2019 


phases. If the no load current matches the value given by motor manufacturer, but the full load current is high, the 


motor is overloaded. 


Trouble 


Probable Cause 


Possible Remedy 


High current in all three phases 


Line voltage 10 percent (or 
more) above or below the motor 
nameplate voltage. 


Adjust the transformer tap to get 
correct nameplate voltage. 


Replace the motor with correct 
voltage rating. 


Motor overloaded (voltage OK 
and load current high confirmed by 
normal no load current) 


Reduce the load or install a larger 
motor. 


Unbalance currents in the phases 
(5 percent or more deviation 
between phases from the average 
current) 


Unbalanced line voltage, measured 
at the motor terminals, caused by 
the following: 


Unbalanced power supply 


(Unequal transformer tap settings) 


Unbalanced system loading 
High resistance connection 
Capacitor bank faulty 


Defective motor (Uneven air gap, 
wrong winding) 


Damaged supply cable. 


Poor connections at various stages. 


Locate and correct the cause of 
unbalance (power line or motor). 


Note — A small voltage unbalance will cause a large current unbalance. Depending upon the magnitude of the unbalance and size of 
the driven load, the current in or two phases may exceed the rated motor current. 


44 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 15 (11690). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.Т.Т. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, ГУ Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


