( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 10106 ( Part l/Set 4 ) - 1984

hdian Standard
PACKAGING CODE
PART Section
Packaging
Chairman SHIU M. R. SU~BAMANIAN Members SHRI H. S. A~ARWAL SHRI R. K. GUPTA (Allematc ) SHRI S. P. KOHLI ( Alternate ) SHRI A. S. ATWALYE SHRI J. BANERJEE SHRI A. N. SRIVARTAVA ( SHRI S. P. CHATTERJEE SHRI B. R. DAVE Sam R. N. GANJOO SHRI B. JOSHI ( Alternnte ) SHRI S. K. KESHAVA SHRI A. C. SEKHAR SHRI C. K. S~MANY SHRI R. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. H. PA~IKH ( Alternafe ) Dn K. K. TALWAR DR RAW TALWAR ( Alternat ) SHRI H. K. UPAUHAYAYA SIIRI K. VISWANATHAN SIIRI P. S. Dax, Director ( MCPD ) Secretary SHKIMATI SHA~HI S.4nElE-7 Deputy Director ( MCPD ), ISI Ministry of Railways ( Railway Board )

4 4

PACKAGES Glass Containers
Committee, MCPD 24

Code Sectional

Rejrescnting Indian Institute of Packaging and Transport, Packages Sectional Committee, MCPD 18, IS1

Technology Transfer, Bombay Directorate of Standardization ( Ministry Defence ), New Delhi Alternate 1 India Foils Ltd, Calcutta The Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur BASF India Ltd, Bombay

of

I. T. C. Limited, Calcutta Wood and Wood Products Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 16, IS1 Hindustan National Glass & Industries Ltd, Calcutta The Paper Products Ltd, New Delhi Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay Paper & Flexible Packaging Sectional Committee, MCPD 14, IS1 Director Gcncral, IS1 ( E.@icio Member )

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the In&n Copyr$rt Act ( XIV of 19.57 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the of copyright under the said Act. publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 4 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
PACKAGING
PART 4 Section 4

CODE

PACKAGES Glass Containers

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD
4 ) was adopted
after the draft been approved Council. by the Indian finalized by the by the Marine,

Indian Standard (Part 4/Set Standards Institution on 3 1 January 1984, Packaging Code Sectional Committee had Cargo Movement and Packaging Division

0.2 The packaging code is being one or more sections: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 2 3 Product Packaging Ancilliary Packages Packaging Storage Testing (Part Packaging operations packaging materials materials

issued in the following

parts each having

4
5 6 7 8

and transportation machinery 4/Set 4 ) of the packaging code deals with

0.2.1 This section glass containers.

0.3 Glass containers, manufactured in a great diversity of shapes and sizes, are an accepted packaging medium for almost every conceivable solid ( granular or powered ), semisolid or liquid product. The milk bottle, They are jam jar, beer bottle are familiar examples in every day life. also being widely used for pharmaceuticals, chemicals, perfumes, cosmetics, oils, detergents and many other household products. In this part various types of glass containers have been covered with a brief outline of their usage, technical specification with respect to their raw materials and composition and selection for various products. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance derived from BS 1133 : Section 18-1967 Packaging code, Glass issued by the British Standards Institution ( BSI ). has been containers

2

IS : 10106 ( Part

Q/Set 4 ) - 1984

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 4/Set 4 ) gives guidance on the types of glass containers available for packaging purposes and describe factors for their selection. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this section of the code, the definitions given in IS : 6654-1982* shall apply. 3. INTRODUCTION 3.1 Glass can be defined as an inorganic product of fusion which is cooled to a rigid condition without crystallizing. The main raw materials for normal white flint container glasses, consist of high purity sand, limestone and soda ash usually mixed with a proportion of cullet to assist in the melting process. 3.2 With very few exceptions, glass is chemically inert. It has no inherent powers of action and hence it is compatible with almost all the products. It is impermeable and non-porous and combines with these roperties the important qualities of clarity, transparency and ease of c P eaning. The mechanical strength and thermal resistance of glass containers permit their use on high speed filling and sterilizing plant. Glass is also readily produced in a number of colours which are of intrinsic appeal and may also protect sensitive products against harmful light rays. 4. TYPES OF GLASS CONTAINERS

4.1 The range of types, sizes and shapes of glass containers is extremely wide. For general purpose, they may be conveniently classified into three main types according to size and method of manufacture : tubular glass containers including ampoules and vials, glass bottles and jars as such, and large containers such as carboys. 4.2 Tubular Glass Containers

4.2.1 As the name indicates, these are made from glass tubing. They are therefore all cylindrical in shape. With some exceptions the dimensions of tubular glass containers vary between 5 to 35 mm in diameter, and 20 to 200 mm in length and the capacity may vary between 0.5 to 100 ml. Depending on the purpose for which the container is required, it may be manufactured from soda glass or neutral glass tubing. Tubular glass containers may be divided into three main groups. 4.2.2 Straight Sided Tubes - Suitable for all products where it is important that the opening does not restrict the passage of the contents, for
*Glossary of terms relating to glass containers (jrst
reuision )_

3

IS : 10106 (. Part Q/Set 4 ) - 1984 example, tablets or powders. cork, plastics or rubber. Closures used in this type of tube are usually

4.2.3 I'ials -- Suitable for a wide variety of products where a small capacity container is required. Most neck finishes, including sprinkler, are available. Cork, rubber, plastics and metal threaded and snap-on closures are in general use [ see IS : 1984 ( Part 1 )-1971* 3. 4.2.4 Ampoules - Made from neutral or soda glass tubing of two main types, that is, narrow stem for liquids and wide stem for powders. The stems are sealed in or drawn off by the application of gas burners. [ For more detail see IS : 489 ( Part 1 )-1973t and IS : 489 ( Part 2 )-1973f 1. 4.3 Glass Bottles and Jars

4.3.1 Types of glass containers are usually defined by reference to their size, capacity and neck finish. The `finish' depends on the closure selected These glass containers may be broadly for the container ( see 5.2 ). divided into three classes, that is, sprinkler top, narrow and wide mouthed - the latter two corresponding roughly with the descriptions of `bottles' and `jars'. Various cross-sectional shapes lead to corresponding description, for example, rounds, ovats, triangulars, hexagons, squares, flats and panels. `The term `flask' as applied to commercial containers is associated with a narrow mouthed container and roughly rectangular or oval cross section, commonly used for spirits. 4.3.2 Indian Appendix A. Standards covering glass bottles and jars are listed in

4.4 Carboys - As glass has a high chemical resistance, it is popular for packing variety of chemicals which otherwise attack many other packaging materials. For this purpose glass carboys have been developed. Glass carboys may be either cylindrical or pear-shaped. Large narrow neck glass containers are available in nominal capacities of 15 to 60 litres. Glass carboys are generally made of colourless or pale green glass. 5. `NfECK FINISHES AND CLOSURES

finish is the most important feature in 5.1 Neck Finishes - Neck description of glass containers. Depending upon the product to be packed, its processing and dispensing, suitable neck finish is selected. A variety of neck finishes are now being produced by the glass container industry. Most of these are suitable for high speed filling and capping operations.
*Glass vials for pharmaceutical preparations: Part 1 Vials for parenteral preparations ( prst reuision ) . tGlass ampoules: Part 1 Ampoules for liquid injcctablrs ( second revision ). $Glass ampoules: Part 2 Ampoules for lyophilizcd injectables ( second reuisiorr ).

4

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 4 ) - 1984 A summary sheet of different types of threaded finishes has been given in IS : 7511-1974*. They and non-threaded neck are described beIow.

5.1.1 Continuous Tkread Glass Finiskes - Suitable for pre-threaded closures for capping operation on non-automatic filling lines. Depending upon the neck size, the neck finishes are chosen as: a) shallow continuous b) tall continuous
NOTE-For

thread

finishes,

and

thread

finishes.

detailed dimensions sezTables 1 and 2 of IS

: 751 l-1974*.

for capping operations on 5.1.2 Roll Seal ( RS ) Finishes - Suitable automatic filling and capping lines. Depending upon the pilfer-proof requirement of the product, the neck finish is further classified as: a) pilfer-proof ( RSPP ), and ). b) nonpilfer-proof NOTE( RSNP

For detailed dimensions see Tables 3 and 4 of IS : 751 l- 1974*.

be opened without 5.1.2.1 Pilfer-proof means, a seal that cannot partially destroying the cap or, otherwise, showing evidence of tampering. 5.1.3 Non-threaded Glass Finish

5.1.3.1 Crown cork ( cap ).finisk - Th ese types of containers can retain the extremely high internal pressure developed when carbonate drinks or other gaseous drinks are contained in the bottle ( see Table 5 of IS : 751 l1974* ). 5.1.3.2 Vial goldie seal Jinisk - A neck finish to suit cork, metal, rubber or plastic stoppers or plastic caps. This is specifically meant for injcctibles ( see Tahlc 6 of IS : 751 l-1974* and IS : 2123-1977f ). 5.1.3.3 Dual glas.sJinisk - This is a combination with screw cap finish ( see Table 7 of IS : 7511-1974* for food preserves like sauces and ketchups. 5.2 Closures of crown cork finish ). This is suitable

5.2.1 Closures are of many and varied types. They form an essential C%xures part of an efficient pack in conjunction with glass containers. are manufactured in a wide range of materials and can be produced in arly desired size and with the necessary precision to CIISLUV,upon corrrct application, the effective sealing of the glass containers after fillin,rr. Closures are made for sealing solids ( powders ), liquids, creams, pastes,

l Sllmmary shret on glass containers neck fini*hm. tSpecjfication for vial ( goldie ) seals (Jirsl revisiorr 5

).

IS I 10106 ( Part 4/&x 4 ) - 1984
hygroscopic materials, detergents, bleaches, beverages ( soft carbonated cosmetics, etc, and if necessary, they can or alcoholic ), pharmaceuticals, be designed to withstand pasteurization and sterilization process. Closures other than corks have almost always to be fitted with liners wad to make a good seal, but certain thermoplastic closures can sometimes be The closure itself may incorporate features for used without liners wad. dispensing and measuring the product and improving the pouring characIn addition, where required, closures may be teristic of the container. composed of material which are specific, for example non-toxic, odour free or non-bleaching. 5.2.2 Metal Closures - Tinplate or aluminium sheets are the main basic materials used. Laquering and decorating of tinplate or aluminium sheets is carried out prior to fabricating the closure and this too gives partial protection against corrosion as well as ease of formation of closure. Tinplate is used for closures of the more robust type, and which are fully formed before application to the container, although there are exceptions to the latter rule; the most notable exception being the familiar crown Aluminium can be drawn or formed to various shapes with cork ( cap ). comparative ease as metal screw corresponding to the various neck finishes. ( For details see IS : 1994-1971*, IS : 2123-1977t, IS : 8393-19771 and IS : 8932-1970$. ) 5.2.3 Plastics Closures - Plastics closures can be moulded in a wide range of shapes and sizes strong enough to make a good seal on glass containers. They are light in weight and can be produced in any colour; These can be divided into two basic opaque, translucent or transparent. types: thermosetting and thermoplastic. Thermoplastic materials with their range and grades are suitable for screw threaded and plug type closures, whereas the thermosetting materials are generally used for screw threaded applications only. 6. DESIGN

6.1 The

design should firstly be economic to produce, acceptable to the packer and convenient to use by the consumer. It shall withstand warehousing and transportation without undue brcakazr.

6.2

Strength

a spherical shaped container is 6.2.1 For any given glass weight, Giving a container of round cross section an theoretically the strongest. index of 10 ( hall' of the strength of a spherical shape ) the strength of an
*Specification tSpecification fSpecilication $SlwcificatL>n for for for fOr crown closures. vials ( goldie ) seals (jirsf reoision ), roll seal pilfer-proof closures. preformed metal SCIPW raps for grass containers.

6

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 4 ) - 1984 elliptical cross section container can be expressed as 5 and that of a square with well rounded corners as 2.5 although these shapes would be of Sharp corners and shoulders should be adequate strength in general use. Bottle to bottle contact should be minimized. avoided. 6.2.2 uniform Resistance to thermal distribution of glass. shock is improved by thinner walls and

6.3 Weight - The lightweight containers have proved stronger in use than their heavier predecessors, breakages have been reduced and savings achieved in handling and freight costs. The closer the design approaches the natural shape of blown <glass, the sphere, the greater the saving in weight of glass. should be capable of 6.4 Stability - During handling, glass containers being conveyed without toppling. This should be taken into consideration in design, for instance, by a low centre of gravity and a flat base. 6.5 Specifications - Some external dimensions are invariably important, for example, body diameter and height and tolerances shall be negotiated between the glass container manufacturer, machinery manufacturer and the packer according to the size and shape of the container. Capacity tolerance is specially important, The dimensional relationships of bottles for carbonated products and non-carbonated products is laid down in IS : 10133-1982*. 6.6 Appearance - Within the design considerations mentioned above there is extreme diversity in shape and design available to glass container users, and in most cases the best functional designs are also acceptable from the point of view of their appearance. It must be taken into account how the glass container will display at retail level and handle in the Special designs are an obvious way of achieving individuality. home. Individuality can also be readily achieved by different labelling and surface decoration, colour of glass and variety of closure. Rough surfaces and irregular contours may increase difficulty particularly in labelling, washing and sterilizing bottles. 6.7 Colour - By the addition of suitable materials to the batch mix glass may be produced in a very wide range of colours and certain products arc traditionally linked with glass container made in particular shades, for example, beer in amber bottle. Some important colours are: amounts of carbon The shade ranges a) Amber - Usually obtained by adding various and sulphur or iron and manganese oxide. from a light yellow to a deep reddish brown. *SpcciIiration for glass bottles

DimPnaional rplatinnships and tolrranceu.

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 4 ) - 1984

1)) Blue -

Made by adding cobalt oxide or less commonly oxide to produce glasses of various hues. by varying additions

copper and

c) Green - Obtained chromium oxide.

of iron, manganese

d) Opal - An opaque or milky glass which is usually white but can be coloured; made by the addition of fluorides and alumina. e) Ruby - Usually sulphide. 7. QUALITY made by adding selenium and cadmium

CONTROL

AND TESTING

7.1 Routine tests are carried out at regular intervals by glass container manufacturers during production, to ensure that all the necessary measurable properties of the container are maintained at the appropriate Testing will normally be carried out at regular fixed intervals, standard. but on occasions the frequency of testing may be increased, for example, in the early stages of a production run. The method of sampling in these cases is invariably to take complete ` rounds ' of containers, that is, one or more from every mould, or, if the moulds have multiple cavities, from every cavity of the machine.
7.1.1 To ensure the randomness of selection the procedure given in may be followed and to determine the sample size and IS : 4905-1968* acceptance number of defective samples, the sampling tables given in IS : 2500 ( Part I )-19731_ may be referred to. 7.1.2 In a few cases, the object of a user's tests may be to determine the average value of one of the measured characteristics of a consignment of containers, rather than to use the test for acceptance purposes. In this case it might be better for the user to make tests on ` rounds ' of containers selected from the consignment rather than to use random samples. This, depends on the nature of the property concerned, and is a however, matter which should be discussed with the manufacturer. 7.1.3 Regardless of the reasons for the testing, the principles involved in the tests will be exactly the same for each of the three cases discussed. There may be small differences in details of tcchniquc, for example, between one manufacturer and another, but all the methods in Current use are usuallv capable of producing reproducible and useful results. The Principles'involved in the main types of tests arc discussed below. Details of testing will be given in Part 8 of this code. dimensions of glass 7.2 Dimensions - The most important are usually the dimensions and exact form of the container's
*Methods
-f.Sam~~ling

containers neck and
by count of

of random
innprctiotl

sampling. tables:

Part

1 Inspection

by

attributes

and

defects

( jirsl twhiotr ).

8

IS t 10106 ( Part Q/Set 4 ) - 1984 finish, the overall height and the body diameter or similar cross-sectional All these may readily be checked by means of go/no-go dimensions. gauges, vernier caliper, vernier height gauge or any other suitable instrument. 7.3 Condition of Annealing - The annealing of containers is checked regularly by manufacturers by means of a polariscope or ,strain viewer, in which any strain in a transparent article appears as a characteristic colour A quantitative in an otherwise uniform field of coloured illumination. assessment of annealing is normally carried out by comparison in the strain viewer of the glass container under test with standard glass strain discs. The detailed method is given in IS : 9153-1978.* 7.4 Internal Pressure Strength - For any container which has to withstand internal pressure in service, it is important that the ` bursting safety margin. The pressure ' should be sufficient to provide an adequate detailed methods of test are given in IS : 105 16- 1983t. 7.5 Thermal Shock Tests - The term thermal shock is used to refer to the strain produced if a temperature difference is suddenly established between the inner and outer walls of a container, for more details see IS: 6506-1972f. 7.6 Capacity - It is convenient to test container capacities a s bulk test `, in which the aggregate capacity is determined a sample of several bottles. The number of bottles in the depend on several factors but is usually within the range 12 to Due consideration should also be given to any legislative relating to filled containers. by means of directly on sample may 24 inclusive. requirements

7.6.1 Containers may be tested for capacity, either brimful, that is, the condition in which the container is filled with water so that the centre of the liquid meniscus is level with the rim of the neck of the container, or alternatively if it is essential to know the capacity when the container is filled to a certain height, the test can be carried out accordingly, using a suitable de th gauge or extractor gauge to adjust the height. The total capacity o P the sample may be determined by weight, by subtracting the empty weights from the filled weights, or by a volumetric method in which the filled bottles are emptied into a graduated measure. For details see IS : 10497-19835. 7.6.2 Capacity control is achieved by variation should not, therefore, be assumed that glass weights in bottle weight. are constant. It

*Methods of DolariscoDic examination of nlasswares. jMethods of lest for internal pressure resstance of glasscontainers. SMethods for thermal shock tests on glassware. �Method of test for the determination of brimful capacity of glass by gravimetric method.

containers

9

IS : 10106 ( Part 4/Set 4 ) - 1984 7.7 Limit for Alkalinity Test For this test see IS : 2303-1963*.

8. FILLING OF GLASS CONTAINERS

8.1 When

glass containers are filled with liquids, it is most important to have the correct vacuity, that is, free expansion space above the liquid and below the closure. It is essential that the correct vacuity is determined for each separate product to be sealed.

9. PACKING

OF GLASS CONTAINERS

9.1 Fibreboard

cases are increasingly used for consignments of filled glass containers. Wooden crates are used in some instances. For details see IS : 69451973t.

10. LABELLING 10.0 Labels may be readily applied to a container either in printed form, usually at the time when the container is filled and capped or by enamelling or vitreous enamel decoration, a process carried out by the glass containers manufacturer. 10.1 Labels are generally glued before applying to the bottles. Labels are also available backed with a composition which is softened by heat The latter dispenses with gluing mechanisms, but before application. These labels cannot be so readily requires instead a heating mechanism. Pressure sensitive labels are also removed from the returned bottles. available. 10.1.1 Design of label must be considered in relation to the glass container, type of labelling machine to be employed, and subsequent usage. Some of the factors to be considered are included in the following:

4 b) c)

The surface to which the label is to be applied should and flat, or curved in a single direction.

be smooth

Sudden changes in curvature of surface should be avoided, since label edges are liable to lift away and machine application is rendered more difficult or impossible. For machine labelling, particularly .at high speeds, labels should be positioned so that they can be effectively ` wiped ' to ensure a smooth fit. accuracy of labels is very important for machine labelling, to ensure proper extraction from the label magazine and good registration on the bottle.

d) Dimensional -~
_

*Method of grading glass for alkalinity. tCode of practice for packaging glass and glassware.

10

IS : 10106 ( Part

4/Set 4 ) - 1984

e)

Due allowance must be made for changes of dimension. Wet labels shrink as they dry whereas heat seal labels tend to expand with moisture pick-up from the air. Convex surfaces will give rise to least trouble from these effects. preserve the appearance of the labels, they should tioned where they are not liable to be scuffed in handling. recess on the container is very useful from this point though it calls for correct registration of the bottie in the machine. be posiA slight of view, labelling

f > To

10.1.2 For satisfactory results, it is highly desirable that the container manufacturer and the labelling machine manufacturer be consulted before the type, size and disposition of labels is finally decided.

APPENDIX ( Clause4.3.2 )
INDIAN IS : 1106-1957 IS : 1107-1974 IS : 1108-1975 IS : 1392-1971 IS : 1494-1971 IS : 1662-1974 IS : 1945-1961 IS : 2091-1983 IS: IS: 2351.1963 6654-1982 STANDARDS RELATED

A

TO GLASS CONTAINERS

Distilled water glass bottles Aerated water glass bottles, crown cork type (jrst revision ) Pharmaceutical glass containers ( second revision )

Glass milk bottles ( second revision ) Glass containers for preserved fruits industry and domestic fruit preserves (,first revision ) Glass liquor bottles ( secorzdrevision ) Glass bottles for fluid inks Multi-trip glass beer bottles ( second revision )

Marble stoppered aerated water glass bottles Glossary of terms relating to glass containers (Jirst revision ) Code of safety for caustic potash ( ReaJhmed Summary sheet on glass containers 11
1979 )

IS : 6954-1973 IS : 7511-1974

neck Gnishcs

IS : 10106 ( Part Q/Set 4 ) - 1984 IS : 8697-1977
IS : 9780-1981 IS : 9781-1981 IS : 10133-1982 IS: 10497-1983 Code of practice ware Glass bottles for export packaging of glass container

for tomato

ketchup and marmalades relationship and tolerances of brimful method capacity test of for

Glass jars for jam, jellies Glass bottles dimensional

Methods of test for determination glass containers by gravimetric Methods of test for internal glass containers

IS : 10516-1983

pressure

resistance

12

