**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2511 (1963): Polycrystalline Semi-conductor Rectifier 
Stacks [ETD 31: Power Electronics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



'2*S> W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR POLYCRYSTALLINB 
SEMI-CONDUCTOR RECTIFIER STACKS 



Second Reprint MAY 1984 

( Incorporating Amendment! No, 1 and 2 ) 



UDC 621-314-632 




O Copyright 1973 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUE SHAH ZAPAR MARO 
NBW DBLHI JI0002 

Gr 6 December 1963 



IS t 2511- 19*3 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR POLYCRYSTALLINE 
SEMI-CONDUCTOR RECTIFIER STACKS 

Power Converters Sectional Committee, ETDC 31 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi J. D. Malhotra Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Members 

Shbi S. K. Kanji Lal ( Alternate to 
ShriJ. D. Malhotra) 
Additional Chief Engineer Directorate General of Posts and Telegraphs 

'Ministry of Transport & Communications), 
Jabalpur 
Director of Telegraphs (L) ( Alternate ) 
Divisional Engineer Trle- 
qbafhs (P) (Alternate) 
Shbi M. G. Bhat Automatic Electric Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi R. R. Kabandikab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. W. Bbazxl The Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shbi K. K. Bosk ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. Cbawla The Fertilizer Corooration of India Ltd, Naya 

Nangal 
Shbi G. R. Sethi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. Gofalkbibhnan Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi R. K. Ckabi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. R. Kabhih Central Water & Power Commission ( Power 

Wing) 
Shbi S. M. Khbb Hind Rectifiers Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. M. Mane ( Alternate) 
Shbi P. V. Rao Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi U. S.£avakoob Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Ins- 

pection Wing ) ( Ministry of Economic & 
Defence Co-ordination ) 
Shbi D. T. Gubeahani ( Alternate ) 
Shbi M. T. Shivdasani Kaycee Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. I. Shth ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. M. Siholaib Heavy Elect rica Is ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal 

Shbi Y. S. Vbhhatxswabah, Director, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Deputy Director (Electro- 
technical ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. K. Taneja 
Extra Assistant Director ( Electrotechnical j, ISI 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS 1 2511 -1963 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR POLYCRYSTALLINE 
SEMI-CONDUCTOR RECTIFIER STACKS 

0. FOREWORD 

04 This' Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 27 November 1963, after the draft finalized by the Power Con- 
verters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0*2 Rectifier equipments making use of polycrystalline semi-conductor 
rectifier units are being widely used due to the fact that for all moderate 
sizes the semi-conductor rectifier units have been found more convenient 
and economical than the vacuum tube or mercury vapour rectifier. 
The manufacture of such rectifier units is yet to be fully developed 
in this country; therefore, it has been felt that an Indian Standard 
on the subject will serve as a proper instrument for guiding the 
production. 

0.3 This specification relates to the polycrystalline rectifier units, such as 
those of selenium and copper oxide. It is intended to cover the general 
requirements and tests applicable to the completed rectifier equipment in 
a separate standard which is under preparation. 

0*4 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following: 

IEC Publication No. 119-1960 Recommendations for Polycrys- 
talline Semi-conductors Rectifier Stacks and Equipment. 
International Electrotechnical Commission. 
B. S. 2709 : 1956 Semi-Conductor Rectifier ( Metal Rectifiers ). 
British Standards Institution. 

0.5 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this speci- 
fication, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the 
standard. 

0*6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values (Revised). The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS t 2511 - 1963 

0.7 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions 
relating to polycrystalline semi-conductor rectifier stacks, and it does not 
include all the necessary provisions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to polycrystalline semi-conductor rectifier stacks 
and stack assembly used for supplying dc power from ac sources at 
frequencies up to 2 000 c/s. 

1.2 This standard does not apply to telecommunication rectifiers other 
than those for power supplied to such apparatus, nor to rectifiers used 
as auxiliaries to measuring instruments. Further, it does not include 
the main transformer or other, associated transformers and apparatus, 
nor does it apply to rectifiers based on mono-crystalline semi-conductor 
materials. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Rectifier — A device for converting an alternating or oscillating 
current into a unidirectional current, either by inversion or suppression of 
alternate half-waves. 

2.2 Semi-conductor Rectifier-— A rectifier using the properties of a 
semi-conductor as the basis of operation. 

2.3 Rectifier Cell — A basic rectifier, consisting of a combination of 
semi-conductors or a semi-conductor and a metal or metals in contact with 
one another, which presents an asymmetrical conductance according to 
the polarity of the voltage applied to it ( see Fig. 1 ). 

2.4 Rectifier Stack ( Unit) — A single structure of one or more rectifier 
cells with its (their) associated mounting(s), cooling attachment (s), if 
any, ( for example a blower or fan ) and connections whether electrical or 
mechanical ( see fig. 2 ). 

2*5 Rectifier Stack Assembly — An electrically and mechanically com- 
bined structure of one or more rectifier stacks, complete with all its 
connections together with the means for cooling, if any, ( for example a 
blower or fan ) in its own mechanical structure ( see Fig. 3 ). 

2*6 Rectifier Equipment — An operative assembly comprising one or 
more rectifier stacks, together with transformers and other auxiliaries, if 
any, for conversion of ac into dc ( see Fig. 4 ). 



IS i 251 1-1963 







Fig. 1 Rectifier Cell 




Fio. 2 Rectifier Stack ( Unit ) 
4 



IS 1 2511 - 1963 




Fi$. 3 Rectifier Stack Assembly 




Fio. 4 Rectifier EQUipyENT 
5 



Mi 2511 -1963 

2.7 Rectifying Element — A circuit element bounded by one positive 
and one negative terminal, and having the characteristic of conducting 
effectively only in one direction (see Fig. 5 ). 

Note — In practice, a rectifying element may be derived from one cell, or a 
number of cells interconnected in either series, parallel or series-parallel arrangement. 
Therefore, the corresponding component may either be a part or the whole of a stack, 
a stack containing a single cell, or a stack assembly. 



Fio. 5 Rectifying Element 

2*8 Rectifier Connection — A connection of one or more rectifying ele- 
ments for conversion of ac into dc ( see Fig. 6). 





43 



Fio. 6 Rectifier Connection 

2*9 Arm of m Rectifier Connection — One rectifying element of a rectifier 
connection ( see Fig. 7). 



9 



r- 
v 



— T 




— O 



i .+ o 

Fio. 7 Arm of a Rectifier Connection 

240 Forward Direction — The direction of a rectifying element which 
has the higher conductance. ' 

2.11 Reverse Direction— The direction of a rectifying element which 
has the lower conductance. 

2.12 Average Forward Current — The average value of the current in 
the forward direction of a rectifying element excluding the reverse current 
and measured over a full cycle. 



IS 1 2511 -1*3 

2.13 Average Reverse Current — The average value of the current in 
the reverse direction of a rectifying element excluding the forward current 
and measured over a full cycle. 

2*14 Forward Voltage Drop — The voltage drop which results from 
the flow of forward current through a rectifying element. 

2.14.1 Average Forward Voltage Drop — The average value of the forward 
voltage drop of a rectifying element excluding the reverse voltage and 
measured over a full cycle. 

2.15 Reverse Voltage — The voltage which is applied to a rectifying 

element in the reverse direction. 

2.15.1 Working Reverse Voltage — The peak value of the reverse rated 
voltage (excluding transient over voltage) divided by \/2. 

2.16 Forward Power Lose — The power loss resulting from the flow of 
current in the forward direction. 

2*17 Reverse Power Lom — The power loss resulting from the flow of 
current in the reverse direction. 

2*18 DC Blocking — The action of rectifying element which essentially 

prevents the flow of direct current in the reverse direction in a dc circuit. 

2.19 DC Blocking Voltage — A substantially smooth dc voltage applied 
in the reverse direction of a rectifying element. 

2.20 Barrier Layer — The layer within a semi-conductor rectifier cell* 
which has the asymmetric conductance. 

2.21 Forming — Electrical and/or thermal treatment of semi-conductor 
cells or stacks for the purpose of increasing the effectiveness of the barrier 
layer. ( An increase of the effectiveness of the barrier layer may also 
take place in service or during storage. ) 



2.22 Loo* jpf Forming — A partial loss in the effectiveness of the barrier 
layer. 

2.23 Re-forming — The operation of restoring by an electric treatment, 
the effectiveness of the barrier layer after loss of forming. 

2*24 Ageing — A gradual persisting change, except failure, which takes 
place in the forward or reverse resistance characteristic, when the rectifier 
is in use. 

2.25 Shelf Ageing — A gradual persisting change, except failure, which 
takes place in the forward or reverse resistance characteristic, when the 
rectifier is not in use. 



18 1 2511 -1963 

2.26 Positive Creep Effect — A gradual increase in the reverse current 
which may occur when a substantially smooth dc blocking voltage 
(see 2*19) is applied to a semi-conductor rectifying element. 

2.27 Stack Temperature — - The stack temperature of a semi-conductor 
rectifier stack measured at the hottest accessible point. 

2*28 Conversion Efficiency — The ratio of the product of the average 
value of dc voltage and direct current to the input active power on the 
ac side. ( Expressed in this way the maximum efficiency for the single- 
phase bridge connections on resistance load with sinusoidal supply is 0*81. ) 

2*29 Ratings — A statement of the performance of rectifier under the 
rated conditions assigned by the manufacturer. 

2*30 Rated Service Conditions — The service condition for which the 
ratings apply. 

2.30*1 Service Conditions — All external factors ( ambient temperature, 
air humidity, type of load, etc) which may have influence on the 
performance of the rectifier. 

2*31 Rated Service Time — The period of time for which the rectifier is 
rated to give the rated value of the voltage between the dc terminals at 
the rated current. 

232 Ambient Temperature — The temperature of the ambient air 
immediately below the rectifier stacks. 

2.33 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity with the 
requirements of this specification. These are intended to prove the 
general qualities and design of a given type of rectifier stack* 

2*34 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on each rectifier stack to check 
requirements likely to vary during production. 

3. RATINGS 

3*1 Semi-conductor rectifiers shall be rated in terms of ac rms input 
voltage of approximately sinusoidal form and of mean dc output voltage 
and current. 

34.1 Basic Circuit — The basic rating shall be for operation on a 
single-phase bridge circuit with a purely resistive load with unaided and 
unimpeded convection cooling in clean air* 

The ratings of a rectifier stack may be calculated from the rating 
of the reference rectifier stack in the basic circuit. A manufacturer may, 
therefore, give the ratings of a series of stacks comprising one type 

8 



18 1 2511-1963 

of cells by referring to the rating of a reference stack, composed of the 
same type of cells. 

3.1.2 Ambient Temperature — - The basic rating snail apply to 40°C 
ambient temperature. 

3.1.2,1 Other ambient temperatures of 45°C, 55°C and 70°C are also 
recognized and the manufacturer shall, on the request of the purchaser, 
provide a rating for the required temperature (s). 

3.1.3 Basis of Rating —The basis of rating is such that during the first 
2 000 hours under the conditions specified in 3.1.1 and with the rating 
appropriate to the ambient temperature (see 3.1.2), the output voltage 
does not fall below 90 percent of the rated voltage. 

3.2 Rated Direct Current — The rated dc output current shall be given 
as the average value of the direct current at the dc terminals of the 
reference rectifier stack for continuous service 24 hours a day. 

3.3 Rated DC Voltage — The rated dc voltage shall be given as the 
average value of the voltage between the dc terminals which can be 
obtained during the entire rated service time ( see 7*1 ) without the rated 
ac voltage being exceeded. 

3.3.1 Due to the ageing in the forward direction, the rated dc 
voltage shall be given with a margin for the expected increase in voltage 
drop. In order to obtain the rated dc voltage, therefore, a new stack 
shall be run at a recommended ac voltage lower than the rated ac voltage. 

3.4 Rated AG Voltage — The rated ac voltage shall be given as the rms 
value of the maximum continuously permissible line-to-line ac voltage 
to be applied to the rectifier stack. 

3.4.1 The manufacturer shall also state the value of the commencing 
ac voltage below the rated ac voltage at which a new stack gives rated 
dc voltage ( see 3.3*1 ). Rated ac voltage shall not exceed the commencing 
ac voltage by more than 15 percent. 

3.5 Duty JFactor — The duty factors, intermittence (see 3.5*1) or 
utilization factors ( see 3.5.2 ), shall be stated. The manufacturer shall, 
if requested) advise the purchaser about the rating for required duty 
factors. 

Where no duty factors are stated, it shall be taken to mean con- 
tinuous service 24 hours a day. 

3.5.1 Intermittence Factor — This factor shall be stated as the ratio 
between load time and total time between the beginning of two sequential 
load periods for intermittent loads, where the load period is too short to 
give stationary temperature conditions. 



Mi 2511 -W3 

3.5.2 Utilization Factor — This factor shall be stated as the ratio between 
the load time and the total time for non-continuous load where each load 
period is long enough to give practically stationary temperature conditions. 

3.6 Types of Load — For the purposes of rating, the type of rectifier load 
should be specified, that is resistive load, inductive loaa, capacitive load, 
battery load,' machine load or combination of loads. If not otherwise 
specified, the load shall be taken to be resistive. 

3*7 The rating of rectifiers may be increased by assisted cooling; on the 
other hand, if rectifiers are used under conditions of restricted cooling, the 
rating will be reduced. 

3*8 Under conditions of use not covered by the standard, the manufac- 
turer, in consultation with purchaser, will specify an appropriate rating. 

3*9 For some useful information on the basis of ratings see Appendix A. 

4. METHODS OF CONNECTION 

4*1 Rectifier stacks may either be completed in one of the forms given in 
the following list, or more than one stack may be used to complete such a 
form of circuit connections: 



Item 


Connection 


Name 


Pulse 
Number 


1 


a: 


Half-wave connection 


1 






Back-wave connection 




i 


"tr 


1 






Centre-tap connection 




3 




■ t: 


2 




-*- 








rn . u 


Single-phase bridge connection 




4 


*Hf 


2 








5 


tpvt 


Voltage-doubler bridge connec- 
tion 


2 









10 



is 1 25ii -ms 



Item Conbbotion 



Namb 



Pulss 

NUMBBB 



cffi 



Two-step voltage-doubler connec- 
tion 



I ■ I *~[ _ 
7 I r***]* »« i • One-pulse voltage multiplier 



8 1 "nlni k'ii iff*"* Two-pulse voltage multiplie 



I^It'. 1 '! 




J 



Three-phase star ( shown with 
zig-zag transformer as an 
example ) 



10 




Six-phase star 



11 






Double three-phase star ( with 
interphase transformer ) 



12 



Qb 



Three-phase bridge 



11 



18 12511-1963 

5. MARKING 

5*1 Each rectifier stack shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the 
following information: 

a) The manufacturer's name and/or trade-mark, 

b) Date of manufacture ( may be given by quarter ), 

c) Country of manufacture, 

d) The following symbols or colours for the terminal markings: 

Terminal Symbol Colour 

AC ~ Yellow 

DC positive + Red 

DC negative — Blue 

5.2 The code designation as given in Appendix B shall also be marked on 
the stacks. 

5.3 Where suitable, the forward direction of stacks forming rectifying 
dements shall be indicated by an arrow (for example, on rod-shaped 
stacks). 

5.4 Rectifier stacks may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark* 

Note— The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by die provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
'of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by ISf and operated'by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 

fc VOLTAGE-CURRENT CHARACTERISTIC CURVES, DATA AND 
POWER LOSSES 

6.1 Yoltrnf-Garrent Ckmracteriatic* and Data 

6.1.1 All data given for the stacks shall refer to the ambient tempera- 
ture for which the new stacks are rated. 

6.1.2 The currents and voltages in the circuit to which the charac- 
teristic curves and data refer shall be stated. 

12 



IS 1 2511- 1963 

6.1.3 Characteristic curves shall preferably be given for rectifying 
elements or single cells of a rectifier. 

6.1.4 It shall be clearly stated whether a characteristic curve refers to 
stationary dc values, average values during rectifier operation or instan- 
taneous values during rectifier operation. 

Note — In most cases, the characteristics of a rectifying element valid for stationary 
dc do not apply at rectifier operation because of the dynamic physical phenomena in 
the cells. 

6.1.5 Unless otherwise specified, the characteristic curves for rectifier 
operation shall be taken to apply for single-phase bridge operation with 
resistance load ( see also 3.1.1 ) . 

6.1.6 Drawing of characteristic curves in either of the two alternatives 
given in Fig. 8 is recommended. 



FORWARO 
CURRENT 




REVERSE 
VOLTAGE 



FORWARD 
/VQLTAOE PROP 



REVERSE 


FORWARD 




CURRENT 


CURRENT 


?/ 




*# 




91 


PI 




**# 


***! 




<->/ 


Or/ 




£/ 


Of 




6/ 


UjI 




of 


*l 




<*/ 


&l 




*/ 

*/ 


7 




of 






U.I 


FORWARO 
YQVTAQG Q*QP 




Averse 






VOLTAGE 



REVERSE 
CURRENT 

-ALTERNATIVE 1 ALTERNATIVE II 

Fio. 8 Characteristic Curves 



6.2 Power Loss** 

6.2.1 The power losses given shall apply to the new stack and specified 
service conditions. 

6.2*2 It shall be stated whether the losses given apply to rectifier cell, 
rectifier stack or other configuration. 

6.2.3 When giving data for stacks being built from certain types of 
cells, the losses per cell shall preferably be given ( see also Appendix G )• 



13 



ISt25U-1963 

7. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

7.1 Service Time 

7*1.1 During the service time, which applies for rated service (com- 
prising a given duty factor ) and includes the off time, the ac voltage has 
to be increased for maintaining the rated dc voltage on account of the 
steady increase in the forward voltage drop. But at the end of the rated 
time, the ac voltage necessary shall be the rated ac voltage and shall not 
be increased further. As the forward voltage drop is steadily increasing, 
the rated dc voltage can no longer be obtained ( see Fig. 9 ). 



VOLTAGE 



l 



oeaUlR£O rt ,.. oE J RATE0 ALTERNATING VOLTAGE 



RATED DC VOLTAGF 



RATED SERVICE TIME 
(INCLUDING OFF TIME) 
AT GIVEN DUTY FACTOR 



TIME WHEN RATED OUTPUT 
CAN NO LONGER BE OBTAINEO 



<~ 



y<^ 



*>^~ 



.A. 



-TIME 



START OF 
SERVICE 



ENO OF RATED 
SERVICE TIME 

Fio. 9 Service Time 



7.1*2 The storage period before the rectifier is put into operation is not 
included in the rated service time. 

7.2 Reverse Voltage 

7*2.1 A stack shall withstand, without damage or permanent change of 
its characteristics, operation at 110 percent of the rated ac voltage and the 
maximum permissible ac reverse voltage respectively at no load for a 
period of 5 minutes each. 

7-2*2 A rectifier stack, when required by application and so specified 
by the purchaser, shall continuously withstand its rated dc voltage 
applied to the dc terminals when the alternating current is interrupted. 

7*2*3 When a stack, having been out of service or having been in 
service at low voltage, cannot be directly connected to its rated ac 
voltage and rated reverse voltage respectively, without damage or 



14 



IS 1 2511- 1963 

permanent change in its characteristics, the manufacturer shall state, if 
required, the procedure for re-forming the stack. 

7.3 Insolation 

7*3*1 The insulation between the cells and the spindle as well as 
different insulated parts of the same stack shall be tested. 

7.3*2 The insulation shall withstand, unless otherwise specified, an ac 
rms voltage having a frequency between 40 and 60 c/s and given by the 
formula, 

2x?i + l 000 V 
V2 

with a minimum of 2 0C0 V for a period of one minute. U p is the peak 
value of the highest voltage which occurs between two terminals of the 
stack at rated service. 

7.3*3 Where -j^ is not higher than 90 V, insulation may be tested at 

a lower voltage than given in 7*3*2, which shall be clearly stated by the 
manufacturer. 

8. TESTS 

8*1 Type tests for approval and routine tests during manufacture shall be 
applied as detailed below: 

Type Test Routine Test 

Inspection ( 8*2 ) Inspection ( 8.2 ) 

Forward Voltage Drop ( 8.3 ) Forward Voltage Drop ( 8.3 ) 

Reverse Leakage ( 8.4 ) Reverse Leakage ( 8*4 ) 

High Voltage ( 8.5 ) High Voltage ( 8.5 ) 

Outgut Voltage ( 8*6 ) 
Conversion Efficiency ( 8.7) 
Load (8.8) 
Shelf Life (8*9) 

8*1*1 The type tests shall be made by a recognized testing authority 
which may be the manufacturer itself. 

8*2 Inspection 

8*2.1 The rectifiers shall be subjected to a general inspection for the 
quality of workmanship and finish. 

15 



IS 1 2511 -1963 

8.3 Forward Voltage Drop Test 

8*3.1 The average voltage drop measured at the temperature of 27 ± 5°C 
and between adjacent pairs of terminals shall not exceed T5 volts per 
series connected cell when the normal rated dc output current of the 
section under test is caused to flow in the conducting direction of the 
rectifier ( see also Appendix C ). 

8.4 Reverse Leakage Test 

8*4.1 The rectifier stack or stacks shall be connected as a single-phase 
bridge, the output terminals of the bridge being unconnected. The rated 
ac input voltage shall be applied to the input terminals of the bridge and 
input current measured by a moving coil rectifier instrument at a 
temperature of 27 ± 5°C. The mean value of this current shall not exceed 
7 percent of the rated dc load current for the bridge after an interval of 
30 seconds from the application of the voltage ( see also Appendix G ). 

8.5 High Voltage Test 

8.5.1 All the terminals in the same circuit shall be connected together 
and the test voltage in accordance with 7.3 shall be applied between the 
terminals and the spindle and between the different circuits, if there are 
more than one on the same spindle, for a period of one minute. There shall 
be no breakdown or other evident deterioration. 

8.6 Output Voltage Test 

8*6.1 For this test, the rectifier unit in association, if necessary, with 
others of the same type shall be connected into a single-phase bridge 
circuit and operated on resistance load at its rated current and input 
voltage. The input shall be obtained from a low impedance source of 
sinusoidal voltage. 

8*6.2 The dc output voltage shall be measured and shall not be less 
than the manufacturer's rated figure. 

8.6*3 Where it is also important that a maximum value shall not be 
exceeded, the purchaser shall draw the attention of the supplier to this 
fact at the time of enquiry and order. 

8*7 Conversion Efficiency Test 

8*7*1 Under the test conditions of 8*6, the measurement of input voltage, 
input watts, mean output currents and mean output voltage shall be 
recorded and the conversion efficiency calculated ( see 2*28 )• 

16 



IS 1 2511 - 1963 

8.8 Load Test 

8.8.1 At the commencement of the test the conditions shall be as 
in 8.6.1. The rectifier shall be loaded in an ambient temperature of 40°C 
continuously for the rated service time. The load resistance shall be kept 
constant. The input voltage shall be started at a recommended lower 
value (see 3.3.1). At the end of the service time, the rated ac input 
voltage shall not give less than the rated output dc voltage. 

8.8*2 Where rectifiers have been specified for operation at other 
ambient temperatures (see 3.1 .2.1), this test shall be carried out at the 
appropriate ambient temperature and rating. 

8.9 Shelf Life Test 

8.9.1 The rectifier stack shall be stored for a period of six months under 
clean and dry condition and at all times in equilibrium with the atmos- 
pheric conditions of the room. At the end of this period, the rectifier 
stack shall be capable of meeting the requirements of 8.2 to 8.6 after 
re-forming, if necessary. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.9 ) 

RATINGS OF RECTIFIER STACKS 

A-l. BASIS OF RATING 

A-l.l The rectifier stacks are largely rated on thermal basis, that is ratings 
are chosen so that the corresponding internal heat losses will not result in 
excessive stack temperatures. 

A-l. 1.1 Internal heat losses in stacks consist of: (a) the forward loss due 
to the passage of load current, through the forward resistance of the cells, 
and (b) the reverse loss due to the flow of reverse or leakage current 
through the reverse resistance of the cells. 

A-l. 1*2 Since the forward resistance decreases with increasing cell 
temperature, the forward loss also decreases with increasing temperature 
at any given load. Also since the reverse voltage .remains substantially 
constant for a given load, the reverse loss increases with increasing tempe- 
rature because of the decreasing reverse resistance. 

17 



II i Mil- 1963 

A-l.1.3 The total internal heat loss in watts is the sum of the forward 
and reverse losses and may vary directly or inversely with the cell 
temperature or may remain substantially constant over a wide range of 
temperature depending upon the choice of voltage and current per cell. 

A-l.1.4 In general, standard cell ratings will give a substantially 
constant value of internal heat loss over the normal range of indoor 
ambient temperatures. The shape of the loss curve is so matched to the 
heat dissipation curves of the various types of stack structures so that 
stable operation will result after the cells are fully aged or if the ambient 
temperature, for any reason, should occasionally exceed the specified value. 

A-1.2 When a rectifier stack has more than one cell in series per element, 
it is only necessary to multiply the voltage rating for the specified circuit 
by the number of cells in series to get the total voltage rating of the stack. 
Likewise, when there is more than one cell in parallel per element, the 
current rating should be multiplied by the number of cells in parallel to 
get the total current rating of the stack. 



APPENDIX B 

{Clause 5.2) 

CODE DESIGNATION OF STACKS 

B-l. CODE DESIGNATION 

B-l.l The following different codes should be included in the code 
designation. 

B-l. 1.1 Structure Code — A code giving the structure of the stack with 
regard to connection and number of cells in series and parallel per arm. 

B-l.1.2 Rating Cade — A code giving ratings of the stack. 

B-l.1.3 Manufacturer's Code — A code specified by the manufacturer to 
give such information which is not included in the stricture code. 

B-2. DESCRIPTION OF CODE 

B-1.1 The code consists of letters and figures in 10 positions, in which 
the last five positions are the structure code according to this specification 

18 



IS 1 2511 -1963 

and the first five positions arc the manufacturer's own code for other 
indications not given in the structure code, such as ratings, brackets, 
finish, etc. 



X X X X X 
Manufacturer's Code 



X X X X X 
Structure Code 



B-2*2 The first two positions of the structure code should normally be 
figures indicating the number of cells in series per arm, including for 
numbers below 10. The third position shall normally be a letter indicating 
the stack connection according to B-2.3. The fourth and fifth positions 
shall normally be figures indicating the number of cells in parallel. When 
one of these numbers needs 3 positions, the letter is moved one step to the 
right or left. 



Example 1 : 



X X X X X 12 



02 



Cells in parallel per arm 

- Connection 

- Cells in series per arm 



Example 2: 

X X X X X 123 A 1 



B-2.3 Code letters according to the following table shall be used for 
designating the stack connection. 

Note — As these designations refer only to the structure of stacks, these 
connections maybe used for several purposes. The connections F and £ may be used 
with or without interphase transformer. More stacks may be combined to form 
another connection, for example two D stacks may be used to make a single-phase 
bridge. 

19 



IBs 2511 -1963 



Item 



Connection 



Name 



Code 
Letteb 



UpJ 



Half-wave 



Centre-tap. positive C 



I \ m m ^ 1 






Centre-tap, negative N 



Voltage doubler 



f^f^H 



#>/ 




Single-phase bridge, 
negative outer 



Single-phase bridge, 
positive outer 



20 



IS: 2511 -1963 

Item Connection Name Gods 

Letter 

7 1 »| t l« 1 H t » M Open bridge, single ^ 

+ - 

8 » mi ■ i« ' I w , Three-phase star, 

common positive E 



+ + 



V-^ 



9 J _ ^ I J ^ Three-phase star, 

""' *"* common negative Y 



10 1 »| » N I I » H N 1 I »l i W 1 Six-phase star, 

common positive F 



+ * """ + 

it I . IT T T T Six-phase star, 

11 ' W t H j ' W t »l » ' W | W ' common negative S 



J T ?,. 

A* A - A A 



f-i Three-pulse bridge G 






" I W • N | | H 1 »l i I H * H | Open bridge, thrce- 



rnriri 



phase K 



B-2.3.1 The manufacturer's code shall always end with a letter, as the 
next position is the first figure of the structure code. 

21 



18 1 2511- 1963 

APPENDIX G 

( Clauses 6.2, 8.3 and 8.4 ) 

TEST METHODS 

C-0. GENERAL 

C-0.1 Power losses, forward voltage drop and reverse current are prefer- 
ably measured with the same arrangement. Unless otherwise specified, 
these measurements shall be carried out for rated dc voltage and direct 
current. 

CM. PROCEDURE 

G-1.0 The simplest method is a short-circuit and open-circuit test, where 
the loss values are calculated from the measured values. 

C-l.l The rectifier is connected to the instruments in accordance with 
Fig. 10. 

C-1.2 The short-circuit test gives the forward power losses and forward 
voltage drop. The open-circuit test gives the reverse power losses and 
reverse current. 

C-1.3 As the waveshape of the forward current is different from that in 
actual service, the measured value of forward power losses has to be 
corrected according to the following formula: 

ft-C.P 

where 

Pi = actual value of forward power losses, 
P « measured value of forward power losses, 

'.-^['-(^/Hf)' 

n = number of cells in series per arm, 

U th := threshold voltage of the cells ( see below ), 

lax = rated direct current, 

In — rms value of alternating current at rated service, and 

I L sa rms value of alternating current on the measuring 
connection. 

22 



r&i 



& 




e~ 



D 
O 



IP 



Wf W £ 



o f 







o 
u 
or 



a 
o 



fz? 






eft 
I) 

•5 

M 

C 



a 
2 

& 

> 

I 



r©n- 



*> 

i-g 



IS 1 2511- 1*3 



M 

1.1 
II 

II 
l# 



rj 




i* 






o 

x 



I 1 

I * 
i 1 

" C 3 

ill 

§ § 8 
S 83 

II II I) 



11 



ceo 



3 

O 

S 
Q 





o 



o 
to 



ii 

is 

<o 



S js 

o 

c 



23 



IS 1 2511 -1963 

The threshold voltage U th is the voltage which has to be overcome 
before any appreciable current flows in the forward direction. It only 
needs to be known with ± 20 percent accuracy for the calculation of the 
correction factor ( see also Fig. 8 ): 

C-1.4 The forward voltage drop is measured during the short-circuit test 
with the voltmeter V x . As the voltmeter V x indicates the rms value, the 
average forward voltage drop is obtained by dividing the indicated voltage 
by 2*22 for both the single-phase and the three-phase bridge connections. 

C-1.5 When desirable, the forward power losses in single-phase connection 
can be measured with sinusoidal current by connecting a resistor in series 
on the ac side of the connection shown in Fig. 10, left. The resistor shall 
absorb a voltage about 5 times the voltage drop of the stack. When such 
a resistor is used, the voltage measured by the voltmeter V x is no longer 
sinusoidal and the true average value can only be obtained by using 
an instrument indicating average value. The measured value of power 
loss is the correct value and does not need any correction as suggested 
in CIA 

C-1.6 The milliammeter A z indicates twice the average reverse current. 
As the waveshape can vary, a moving coil instrument with a rectifier shall 
be used to get the average value. 

Notb — In this measurement the capacitivc current component is included. This 
component might influence the measured value considerably and is less significant 
than the ohmic component of the reverse current. 



24 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Units 

Quantity 

Length 
Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 

temperature 
Luminous intensity 
Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity 

Plane angle 
Solid angle 

Derived Units 
Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Unit 
metre 
kilogram 
second 
ampere 
kelvin 

candela 
mole 



Unit 

radian 
steradian 



Unit 



Symbol 
m 
kg 
s 
A 
K 

cd 
mol 



Symbol 

rad 
sr 



Symbol 



newton 


N 


joult 


J 


watt 


W 


weber 


Wb 


tesla 


T 


hertz 


Hz 


Siemens 


S 


volt 


V 


pascal 


Pa 



Definition 

N — I kf.m/s" 
J - I N.m 
W - 1 J/s 
Wb « 1 V.s 

T - 1 Wb/m 8 
Hz — 1 c/s (s< 1 ) 
S - 1 A/V 
V - 1 W/A 
Pa - 1 N/m f 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 26 60 21, 27 01 31 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 



Regional Offices : 

Western : Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 

Eastern : 5 Chowringhee Approach 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus 

Northern : B69, Phase VII 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamcd Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

•F Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square 

Gangotri Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T,T. Nagar 

22B Kalpana Area 

5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg 

R 14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme 

117/41* B Sarvodaya Nagar 

Patliputra Industrial Estate 

Hantei Bldg (2nd Floor), Ely Station Road 



BOMBAY 400007 
CALCUTTA 700072 
MADRAS 600113 
S.A S. NAGAR 
(MOHAL1) 160051 



Telephone 

89 65 28 

27 50 90 

4124 42 

8 78 26 



AHMADABAD 380001 2 03 91 

BANGALORB 560002 22 48 05 

BHOPAL 462003 6 27 18 
BHUBANESHWAR 751014 53627 

HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

JAIPUR 302005 69832 

KANPUR 208005 472 92 

PATNA 800013 6 2808 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 



Printed at Seema Offset Press, Delhi, India 



