**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6707 (1972): willow logs for artificial limbs [CED 9: 
Timber and Timber Stores] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 6707 - 1972 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ] 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WILLOW LOGS FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

( Fiist Reprint JANUARY 1998 ) 
UDC 674.031.34-412: 615.477.2 



©Copyright 1973 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Gr 2 April 1973 



IS : 6707 - 1972 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WILLOW LOGS FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

Timber Sectional Committee, BDC 9 



Chairman 
Shri T, N. Srivastava 



Representing 
Ministry of Agriculture 



Shri Y. 



Members 
P. Bawa 



Shri B. K. Bhalla 

Shri G. C. Das 

Shri V. N. Deshpande 

DiRECTORt Naval Construction 

Shri D. P. Ghosh 

Shri S. A. Hejmadi 

Shri K. C. Jain 

Dr Joseph George 

Dr D. C. Roy (Alternate) 
Dr S. Krishna Swamy 
Shri K. S. Lauly 

Shri K. S. Nair (Alternate) 
Shri J. S. Matharu 



Directorate General of Civil Aviation (Ministry 

of Tourism & Civil Aviation) 
Western India Match Company Ltd, Bombay 
National Test House. Calcutta 
Engineer-in-ChiePs Branch (Ministry of Defence) 
Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence) 
Ministry of Defence ( DGI) 
Ministry of Agriculture 

Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh 
Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 

Ministry of Railways 

Federation of Indian 

New Delhi 



Plywood & Panel Industry, 



Shri J- N. Mullick 
Shri Bimal Nao 



Dr A. N. Nayer 

Shri U. B. 
President 
Dr A. V. R. Rao 

Dr R. S. Ratra (Alternate) 
Shri K. Ramesh Rao 



Directorate General of Technical Development 
(Ministry of Industrial Development) 

Forest Department, Government of Himachal 
Pradesh 

Assam Railways & Trading Company Ltd, 
Margherita (Assam) 

Ministry of Defence (R&D) 
Kanchan (Alternate) 

Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

National Buildings Organization 



Shri A. C. Sekhar 
Shri Sharan Singh 



Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Wood 

Anatomy Branch), Dehra Dun 
Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Timber 

Mechanics Branch), Dehra Dun 
Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1973 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV, of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 

the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 5 6707 -1972 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri N. K. Sharma Forest Department, Government of Madhya 

Pradesh 
Shri R. C. Saxena ( Alternate) 
Shri M. Swarup Paharpur Timbers Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri D. Ajitha Simha, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director (Civ Engg) 

Secretary * 

Shri K. M. Mathur 

Assistant Director (Civ Engg), ISI 

Timber Conversion and Grading Subcommittee, BDC 9 : 10 

Convener 
Shri A. C. Sekhar Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Members 

Shri Y. P. Bawa Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation) 
Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of West Bengal 
Shri D. P. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri R. N. Vaidya {Alternate) 
Shri B. R. Gupta Forest Department, Government of Jammu and 

Kashmir 
Shri K. C Jajn Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh 

Joint Director (Timber), Rail- Ministry of Railways 
way Board 
Assistant Director (Speci- 
fication), RDSO,Lucknow (Alternate) 
Shri N. Laxmtnarayana Timber Merchants Association, Andhra Pradesh 

Shri M. Venkat Raja (Alternate) 
Shri J. S. Matharu Directorate General of Technical Development 

(Ministry of Industrial Development) 
Shri J. N. Mullick Forest Department, Government of Himachal 

Pradesh 
Officer-in-Charoe, Timber Forest Research Institute & Colleges (Timber 

Logging Branch Logging Branch), Dehra Dun 

Shri N. K. Sharma Forest Department, Government of Madhya 

Pradesh 
Shtu R C. Saxena (Alternate) 
Shri R. T. Somaiya Bombay Timber Merchants Association Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri D. P. Panthanki (Alternate) 



IS : 6707 - 1972 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
WILLOW LOGS FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 2 December 1972, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0*2 For the manufacturing of artificial limbs, timber is obtained from the 
forest department in the form of logs which shall have certain special 
requirements. This standard has been prepared in order to utilize the 
available logs of willow to the maximum advantage, and also to cover such 
requirements. 

0.3 Assistance has been rendered by the Directorate General of Armed 
Forces Medical Services, Ministry of Defence and Forest Research Ins- 
titute and Colleges, Dehra Dun, in the preparation of this standard. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, ex- 
pressing the results of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2- 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the minimum requirements for logs of willow 
species ('Salix spp) for use in the manufacture of artificial limbs. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS: 707- 1968f 
shall apply. 

3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The logs shall be free from brashness, dead and loose knots, wounds, 
cup shakes, any kind of decay and insect attack. Plugging of defects shall 
not be permitted. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). 

TGlessary of terms applicable to timber and timber products (first revisiok). 



IS : 6707 * 1972 

4. DEFECTS 

4.1 Defects to the extend specified in 4.2 to 4.6 shall be permissible. All 
defects shall be measured as in IS: 3364 -1965*. 

4.2 Centre-heart (pith) shall be permissible provided it runs straight 
through the structural centre of the log within a radius of 50 mm from 
the same. 

4.3 Bend shall be permissible to the extent that logs can be cross cut of 
60 cm length straight billets. 

4.4 Live knots measuring up to 50 mm in diameter shall be permissible 
provided their number does not exceed 6 in 2*5 m length. 

4.5 End Split — The longest end splits at each end shall be measured, 
which shadl not exceed 5 cm and the total length of the longest end 
splits shall not exceed 12 cm in 2*5 m length. 

4.6 Surface cracks exceeding 25 mm at any portion shall not be 
permissible. 

5. DIMENSIONS AND MEASUREMENT 

5.1 Dimensions — The minimum length of the log shall be 1*5 m and 
minimum girth 55 cm. 

5.2 Measurement — The length and the girth of the log shall be measured 
as specified under 5.2.1 and 5.2.2. The length shall be measured in 
metres, and shall be rounded off to the nearest lower 0*05 m. Girth shall 
be measured in centimetres and shall be rounded off to the nearest lower 
centimetre. 

5.2.1 Length — When the logs are cross cut by a saw or snouted and the 
end surfaces are parallel to each other, the length shall be measured from 
one end to the other end; when the end surfaces are not parallel to each 
other, the length shall be measured by the shortest distance between the 
other end and the slot. 

5.2.2 Girth 

5*2.2.1 The girth in case of log without any protuberance at mid-girth 
shall be measured at the mid-girth of the log. 

5.2.2.2 In the case of log with protuberance at mid-length, the girth 
shall be measured at each side of the protuberance as near to it as possible 
but at equal distance from the middle of the log and the average taken. 

5.2.2.3 In measuring girth, measurement shall be taken without the 
bark on and excluding protuberance. Where girth measurements are taken 

•Methods of measurement and evaluation of defects in timber. 



IS: 6707 -1972 

with bark on, 10 percent reduction on over bark girth measurement shall 
be made as bark allowance. 

5.2.3 Volume — The volume of a log shall be calculated as follows: 



-(f) 



2 

XL 



where 

V = volume in m 3 , 
G = girth in m, and 
L = length in m. 

6, END TREATMENT 



6.1 Soon after inspection, logs at the ends and the portions uncovered 
of bark shall be coated as specified in IS : 1141 - 1972*. 

Note — If required, after inspection the ends could be further given prophylactic 
eatrfient as specified in IS : 401 - 19671- 



treat 



♦Code of practice for seasoning of timber (first revision). 
tCode of practice for preservation of timber ( second revision ). 



