\
UDC 629-13

: 533-6-01 : 001-4

IS : 7879 ( Part

IV ) - 1980

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

1 ;s1

I

GLOSSARY OF AERONAUTICAL AND ASTRONAUTICAL TERMS
PART IV AERODYNAMICS

I. Scope -

This part covers the standard

definitions

for terms

relating

to aerodynamics.

?. Terminology SECTION No. 1101 11G2 1103 Term Aerodynamic Aerodynamic Airspeed Angles 1104 Angle of Attack ( Angle of Incidence ) The angle between a reference line in a body (for an aerofoil the chord is usually used ) and the projection of the velocity relative to the ambient undisturbed air on to the plane symmetry.
Note-Not dence. to be confused with rigging angle of inci-

41

GENERAL Definition

Centre Twist

The point about which the rate of change moment with incidence is zero. Variation of the zero-lift or other aerofoil. The speed of an object turbed air.

of pitching

line along the span of a wing relative to the ambient undis-

1105

Effective

Angle of Attack

The angle between a reference line on a body and the mean direction of a non-uniform disturbed airstream ahead of the body. The angle between the projections on to the plane of symmetry of the local and undisturbed flow directions. The angle between the direction flow and the plane of symmetry. of the undisturbed

2106

Angle of DownwashlUpwash

1107

Angle of Sideslip Angle of Sidewash

$108

The angle between the projections of the local and undisturbed flow directions on to a plane perpendicular to the plane of symmetry and parallel to the undisturbed flow. The approximation that the sound is the same for longitudinal distribution particular, it is equal to of that area distribution. wave drag at the speed of all bodies with the same of cross-sectional area. In that of a body of revolution

4109

Area Rule, Sonic

4110

Area Rule, Supersonic

A method of estimating the wave drag in inviscid supersonic flow for smooth bodies in terms of the areas of sections taken obliquely at the Mach angle. Continuous rotation of a body resulting from the action of air forces and not sustained by control inputs.

4111

Autorotation

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. Axes 4112 Body Axes A system of rectangular co-ordinate axes fixed in the aircraft, usually with the origin at the centre of gravity. The x-axis is usually forward of and in ( or parallel to) the plane of symmetry, the y-axis is to starboard, and the z-axis perpendicular to these so as to form a right handed system. The xz plane is generally a plane of symmetry. Body axes in which the x-axis coincides with (or is parallel to) the projection on to the plane of symmetry of some datum velocity of the origin relative to the ambient undisturbed air, Body axes that coincide with the principal inertia through the centre of gravity. The x-axis of a system of body axes xz plane is the plane of symmetry. The r-axis of a system of body axes xz plane is the plane of symmetry. They-axis of a system of body axes xz plane is the plane of symmetry. axes of Term Definition

4113

Aerodynamic-body axes ( Wind-body Axes)

4114

Principal

Body Axes

4115

Longifudinal

Axis

in which

the

4116

Normal

Axis

in which

the

4117

Transverse Axis ( Lateral Axis ) Cross-Wind Axis

in which

the

4118

The straight line through the centre of gravity perThe positive pendicular to the lift and drag axes. direction is to port. The straight line through the centre of gravity parallel to the direction of the undisturbed flow. The positive direction is downstream. The straight line through the centre of gravity in the plane of symmetry and perpendicular to the drag axis. The positive sense is in the dorsal direction. The point on some reference line (for chord of an aerofoil) about which moment is zero. example, the the pitching

4119

Drag Axis

4120

Lift Axis

4121

Cenfre of Pressure

Drag 4122 Cooling Drag Drag associated etc. with the cooling of the power plant,

4123

Form Drag

For shock-free flow, the normal-pressure vortex drag. Drag

drag less

the

4124

Liff-Dependent

The difference between the drag at a given lift coefficient and the drag at some specified datum I ift coefficient. Drag arising pressures from the resolved components normal to the surface. of the

4125

Normal-Pressure

Drag

4126

Post-Exif

Drag

The force in the drag direction deduced from the resolved components of the normal pressure on the outside of the equivalent post-exit streamtube. 2

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. 4127 Term Pre-Entry Drag Definition The force in the drag direction deduced from the resolved components of the normal pressure on the outside of the pre-entry streamtube. Drag associated with boundary layers. and the skin-friction losses in total pressure in the It is the sum of the form drag drag.

4128

Profile Drag ( Boundary-Layer Ram Drag

Drag )

4129

The force, acting in the downstream direction, which would arise if the momentum of the internal flow at It is the effective infinity of a body were destroyed. sink drag of an air intake. Drag arising The from the removal of fluid from the flow. intake flow

4130 4131

Sink Drag
Spillage Drag

difference between the drag at a given and drag at some specified intake flow.

4132

Additive

Drag

Additive drag is a component of the spillage drag occurring during subcritical flow of an intake. It is equal to the sum of the pressure forces acting parallel to the free stream direction over the diverging portion of the pre-entry streamtube. Drag arising tangential Drag arising Drag ) Drag arising from Formerly called A surface the formation induced drag. a boundary of trailing vortices. from the resolved components forces on the surface of a body. from the formation of shock waves. of the

4133

Skin-Friction Drag (Surface-Friction Drag ) Wave Drag (Shock-Wave Vortex Drag ( Trailing-Vortex External Surface Flows

4134

4135

Drag )

4136

that forms

of the external

flow.

4137

Datum Intake

Flow

The intake flow that would occur if the boundary of the pre-entry streamtube were unaffected by the presence of the intake. The flow of fluid which passes around a body.

4138 4139

External

Flow

Full Intake Flow

The intake flow that occurs when with a pre-entry compression body in position, the boundary of the pre-entry streamtube is unaffected by the presence of the remainder of the intake. If there is no preentry compression body, then full intake flow is the same as datum intake flow. The flow of a body. fluid which passes through a duct of

4140

Internal

Flow

Forces 4141 4142 Cross-wind Drag Force The component of the total aerodynamic direction of the cross-wind axis. The component of the total aerodynamic direction of the undisturbed flow. flight, contributions to this component thrust are excluded. The component of the total direction of the lift axis. 3 aerodynamic force in the

force in the In powered arising from force in the

4143

Lift

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. 4144 4145 4146 Term Longifudinal Force ( Axial Force ) Normal Force The Definition component of the total aerodynamic the x-axis ( or longitudinal axis ). force along force along

The component of the total aerodynamic the x-axis ( or normal axis). The component of the total aerodynamic the y-axis ( or transverse axis ). The aerodynamic system. force attributed to the

Transverse Force ( Lateral Force ) ( Side Force ) Thrust Posf-exit Thrust

force along

4147 4148

propulsive

The force in the direction of motion deducted from the resolved components of the normal pressures on the inside of the post-exit streamtube. The force in the direction of motion deducted from the resolved components of the normal pressures on the inside of the pre-entry streamtube.

4149

Pre-entry

Thrust

4150

Ground

Effect

The effect of the proximity of the ground or other surface on the aerodynamic characteristics of an aircraft. The moment about the hinge axis of a control hinged surface due to aerodynamic forces. or other

4151 4152

Hinge Industrial

Momenf Aerodynamics

Aerodynamics of non-aeronautical engineering applications, such as buildings, bridges, stacks, vehicles, duct flows, fans, ventilation, combustion. The aerodynamic influence of bodies on one another. of the internal flow.

4153 4154 4155

Interference Infernal Limifing Surface Velocity

A surface

that forms a boundary

The maximum steady velocity attainable by an aircraft along a straight flight path at any specified angle to the horizontal under given atmospheric and propulsive conditions. The hyoothetical streamtube, extending from fhe body to infinity downstream, that is assumed to separate the internal flow from the external flow in the absence of mixing. The streamtube extending to the entry of a ducted body from infinity up-stream and separating the internal flow from the external flow.

4156

Posf-exit

Sfreamfube

4157

Pre-enfry

Sfreamf

ube

4158

Scale

Effecf

The effect upon any non-dimensional aerodynamic coefficient of a change in the size of a body, other conditions remaining unchanged. More generally, the effect of a change in the Reynolds number. A popular term for the large changes in the aerodynamic characteristics of an aircraft approaching the speed of sound, formerly believed to make supersonic flight unattainable. The amount specified The by which the intake flow is less than some intake flow.

4159

Sound

Barrier

4160 4161

Spillage Sfall

progressive breakdown of attached flow over an aerofoil, leading to marked changes in aerodynamic characteristics, in particular loss of lift [ see term 2231 in IS: 7879 ( Part II )-I975 ` Glossary of aeronautical and astronautical terms: Part if Motion of aircraft ' 1. 4

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
Term
4162

Definition 1. The highest value of the limiting velocity.

Terminal

Velocity

2. The velocity for which the drag of a freely falling body just balances the weight at a given altitude.
4163 4164

Vertical Zero-Lift

Thrust Line

Margin

( VTM

1

The amount, on a VTOL aircraft, by which thrust exceeds the aircraft weight. A line through the trailing parallel to the direction when the lift is zero.

the vertical

edge of an aerofoil section of the relative air stream

SECTION
4201

42

STABILITY

AND CONTROL is contrimoments

Aerodynamic

Damping

That part of the damping of a system which buted'by the aerodynamic forces and/or called into play by the motion.

4202

Aerodynamic

Stiffness

That part of the stiffness of a system which is contributed by the aerodynamic forces and moments called into play by the motion. A displacement A disturbance ( see 4234 ). from steady state conditions. which increases without oscillation or

4203 4204 4205 4206 4207 420%

Disturbance Divergence Lateral Divergence Divergence )

A divergence involving rolling, any combination of these. A divergence

yawing,

sideslipping

Longitudinal

in the plane of symmetry. to a spiral descent

Spiral Divergence ( Spiral Instability Instability

A lateral divergence which tends with increasing rate of turn.
l

The quality whereby any disturbance from steady motion tends to increase. An aircraft is unstable, if following a disturbance from a given type of steady motion, it does not return to its initial steady motion without movement of the controls by the pilot (see 4223 ).

Motions
4209 4210 4211 4212 4213

Lateral

Motion Motion Motion Coupling Margin with

Motion involving rolling, combination of these: Motion

yawing,

sideslipping

or any

Longitudinal Coupled Inertia

in the plane of symmetry. and longlof the

Motion of an aircraft involving both lateral tudinal motion at the same time. Coupled motion aircraft. due to the inertial

properties

Manoeuvre Stick Fixed

The distance of the centre of gravity, forward of the manoeuvre point with stick fixed, expressed as a fraction of the longitudinal reference dimension. It is a measure of the displacement of the control column necessary to produce a given normal acceleration in a steady pull-out. The distance of the centre of gravity forward of the manoeuvre point with stick free, expressed as a fraction of the longitudinal reference dimension. It is a measure of the force in the control column necessary to produce a given normal acceleration in a steady pull-out, 5

4214

Manoeuvre Stick Free

Margin

with

LS : 7879 CPart IV ):- 1980
No. 4215 Manoeovre Term Point with Stick Definition ' the to not

Fixed

The position of the centre of gravity for which displacement of the control surface required maintain a steady normal acceleration does depend on the acceleration.

4216

Manoeuvre

Point

with

Stick

Free

The position of the centre of gravity for which the force on the control column required to maintain a steady normal acceleration do`& not dep"end on the acceleration. The centre of gravity position for margin with stick fixed is zero. which which the the static static

4217 4218

Neutral Neutral

Point Point

with Stick with Stick

Fixed Free

The centre of gravity position for margin with stick free is zero.

Oscillations 4219 4220 4221 4222 Lateral Oscillation Oscillation Oscillation Longitudinal An oscillation involving rolling, or any combination of these. An oscillation The yawing, sideslipping,

Longitudinal Phugoid

in the plane of symmetry. longitudinal oscillation changes in airspeed. involving

long-period predominantly

Short-Period Oscillation

An oscillation, in which the aircraft's forward speed remains substantially constant, involving predominantly changes in incidence and attitude. It is so called because the period is usually, but not necessarily, small compared with that of the phugoid. The quality whereby any disturbance of steady motion tends to decrease. A given type of steady motion is stable if the aircraft will return to that state of motion after disturbance without movement of the controls by the pilot ( see 4208). yawing, sideslipping or

4223

Stability

4224 4225

Directional Dynamic

Stability Stability

Stability of motion involving any combination of these.

Complete stability of motion when aerodynamic forces, gravity and inertial are all taken into account. It is also the time history of the moments of a body in response to its static stability tendencies following an initial disturbance from equilibrium. Stability of motion involving slipping or any combination rolling, yawing, of these.

4226 4227 4228

Lateral

Stability Stability

side-

Longitudinal Static Stabilify

Stability

of motion

in the plane of symmetry.

Stability when only aerodynamic stiffness is taken into account. It is also the initial tendency of the body to return to the equilibrium attitude following a disturbance. Stability The tendency of a body to turn into the relative wind.

4229 4230

Weathercock Stability

Derivatives

Quantities expressing dynamic forces changes in the velocity, etc. Stick Fixed

the rate of change of the aeroand moments with respect to components of velocity, angular

4231

Static

Margin

with

A measure of the stick movement required to produce a given change in the trim speed at constant lift or, more generally, at constant aerodynamic resultant force. 6

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. 4232 Static Margin with Stick Free Definition A measure of the stick force required to produce a given change in the trim speed at constant lift or, more generally, at constant aerodynamic resultant force. The increase in force on the control column exerted by the pilot to produce an increase in normal acceleration of 1 g. decreases without oscillation A disturbance which ( see 4204 ). 43 PERFORMANCE

4233

Stick

Force

per g

4234

Subsidence

SECTION
Ceilings

4301

Absoluf

e Ceiling

The altitude at which the maximum rate of climb of an aircraft becomes zero in the international standard atmosphere under specified conditions. The altitude at which the maximum rate of climb of an aircraft has a defined value approximating to the lowest practicable for a'service operation. That point between two positions from which it will take an aircraft equal time to reach either position. Slow ascent, due to the progressive reduction in weight from fuel consumption, at constant throttle setting and constant Mach number. The equivalent airspeed giving continuous cruising speed. the lowest acceptable

430 2

Service

Ceiling

4303 4304

Critical

Point

Cruise Climb ( Drift up ) `Cruising Drift Threshold

4305 4306

Down

4307 4308 4309

Endurance Prudent Equivalent Limit of Endurance Tail) Wind (PLE)

The gradual descent of an aircraft, from its normal cruise altitude to its cruise altitude at reduced power, following an engine failure. The length of time an aircraft can continue flying under given conditions without refuelling. The time during which an aircrart and still retain a safety margin can remain of fuel. airborne

Head-(

4310 4311 4312

Mach

Number Mach Number

That wind which, blowing uniformly along the track of the aircraft, would result in the same duration of flight as the actual system of winds. The ratio of the airspeed to the speed of sound under prevailing atmospheric conditions ( see 4456 ). The reading of a Machmeter errors only. corrected for instrument

indicated Performance

Those properties of an aircraft which determine its operational usefulness (that is, maximum speed, rate of climb, ceiling, range, all-up weight and runway length requirements ). That part of the difference between the rectified and indicated airspeeds due to the recorded static pressure not being equal to the ambient pressure. This discrepancy may arise from the location of the pressure head on the aircraft or the conditions of motion, or both.

4313

Posit ion Error

Pressures

4314

Fiight

Pitot

Pressure

The pitot pressure corresponding to the true airspeed of an aircraft under the prevailing atmospheric conditions. Correction The correction that must be added to the pressure applied at the aircraft pitot pressure source to obtain the flight pitot pressure. 7

4315

Pitot

Pressure

Error

IS : 7879 ( Part IV) - 1980
NO.

Term Pressure Error The

Definition error in a pressure measurement, such pressure or static pressure, due to the fact true pressure is not applied at the source. as pitot that the

4316

4317

Static

Pressure

Error

Correction

The

correction that must be added to the pressure applied at the aircraft static pressure source to obtain the ambient static pressure.

4318

Radius

of Action

The maximum distance an aircraft can travel away from its base along a given course with normal load and return without refuelling, allowing for all safety and operating factors. The distance an aircraft can travel tions without refuelling. under given condi-

4319 4320

Range Most Economical Range

The range when an aircraft is continuously flown under conditions giving maximum fuel economy for Ihe weight and prevailing wind. The horizontal distance that can be flown for a given programme of speed and altitude in the international standard atmosphere in still air on the usable fuel remaining after starting, warming and running up the engines, taxing and taking-off, excluding the distance in gliding from altitude at the end of the flight but including the distance in climbing to altitude at the best climbing speed at the start.

4321

Still

Air Range

4322

Equivalent

Still

Air Range

The theoretical range of an aircraft at specified cruising altitude, true airspeed power and fuel carried. No allowance is made for engine run-up, taxiing, taking off, climbing, descending, landing, wind or reserve fuel. The vertical component conditions. of the true airspeed in stated

4323 4324

Rate Screen

of Climb

An imaginary obstacle of specified height assumed in determination in take-off and landing performance,

Speeds 4325 Calibrated (Rectified Airspeed Airspeed) ( CAS ) The airspeed which, under sea-level conditions in a standard atmosphere, would give the same impact pressure as that at the aircraft's location.
indi-

by correcting the airspeed Note - It can be obtained ca ior reading for position and instrument error.

4326

Equivalent

Airspeed

( EAS 1

The

product of the true airspeed and the square root of the ratio of the air density at the prevailing conditions to that at sea level in standard atmosphere.
VelOCitY

4327 4328 4329

Ground Indicated Maximum

Speed Airspeed Flying ( IAS 1 Speed

The horizontal component of an aircraft's relative to the earth's surface. The reading of an airspeed indicator.

The maximum true airspeed of an aircraft in straight and level flight in the international standard atmosphere under specified conditions. The lowest possible speed of a multi-engined aircraft a which, at a constant power setting and aircraft configuration, the pilot is able to maintain a straight course after failure of one or more engines. 8

4330

Minimum

Control

Speed

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. 4331 Minimum Term Flying Speed Definition The minimum airspeed at which an aircraft can be maintained in straight and level flight in the international standard atmosphere under specified conditions. The lowest speed above the minimum flying speed at which, in the take-off configuration and after failure at take-off power of the engine most affecting control, a safe margin of control by the pilot is ensured. The speed of an aircraft disturbed air. SECTIONS 4401 Act uaf or Disc 44 AND 45 FLUID MOTION relative to the ambient un-

4332

Take-Off

Safety

Speed

4333

True Airspeed

( TAS )

A concept in the momentum theory of rotors, in which the rotor is treated as equivalent to .an infinite number of elementary blades capable of producing a discontinuous, urriformly distributed pressure rise. The heating of the surface of a body by virtue of its motion through a gas; it becomes significant at high speed. The thin layer of fluid adjacent to a surface, the viscous forces are dominant. Layer A boundary layer ( see 4434 ). in which the flow is in which laminar layer,

4402

Aerodynamic Heating (Kinetic Heating ) Boundary .Laminar Layer Boundary

4403 4404 4405 4406 4407

Laminar Sub- Layer ( Viscous Sub-Layer Turbulent Boundary Boundary Layer

1 Layer

A very thin layer of laminar flow in a boundary next to the body and beneath a turbulent layer. A boundary layer ( see 4444 ). in which the flow is

turbulent

Control

Control by artificial means of the development of the boundary layer with the object of affecting its transition or separation. Boundary layer control by injecting into the boundary layer. Boundary layer control boundary layer. Boundary porous by air or other air from gas the a a

4408 4409 4410 4411 4412

Boundary Boundary Area

Layer Blowing Layer Sucfion

withdrawing

Suction

layer suction by withdrawing or perforated surface. by withdrawing

air through air through

S/of Suction Momentum Coeficient

Boundary layer suction slot in the surface.

A non-dimensional coefficient for boundary layer blowing. It is equal to the ratio of the product of the mass flow rate and the velocity of the ejected air or gas ( often taken to be that attained after expansion to the static pressure in the undisturbed flow) to the product of the dynamic pressure of the undisturbed flow and a specified surface area. The surface area used for a wing may be only that portion of the area corresponding to the spanwise extent of the boundary layer control. A non-dimensional coefficient equal to the ratio of the jet reaction to the product of the wing area and the dynamic pressure of the undisturbed stream. 9

4413

Jet-Reaction

Coefficient

IS:7879 (Part IV)-1980
No. 4414 Term Quantity Coeficlen t ( Flow Coefficient ) Definition A non-dimensional flow rate coefficient. It is defined as the ratio of the mass-flow rate to the product of a specified surface area and the speed and density of the undisturbed flow. The surface area used for a wing may be only that portion of the area corresponding to the spanwise extent of the boundary layer control. The additional circulation round an aerofoil which occurs when air or gas is blown along the upper surface at a rate greater than that required to suppress boundary-layer separation. Thickness The distance from a surface at which the conditions approximate closely to those in the potential flow just outside the boundary layer, as expressed either by the velocity in the case of hydrodynamic boundary layer, or by the temperature in the case of thermal boundary layer. A A hypothetical boundary layer thickness which is a measure of the mass flow defect in a boundary layer. hypothetical measure of layer. boundary the energy layer thickness which is a flow defect in a boundary

4415

Supercirculation

4416

Boundary-Layer

4417 4418

Displacement Energy

Thickness

Thickness

4419

Momentum

Thickness

A

hypothetical boundary layer thickness which is a measure of the momentum flow defect in a boundary layer-

4420

Choking

A condition which arises in the flow through a duct as the mean speed approaches the sonic value in which, at a given up-stream pressure, a decrease in the down-stream pressure produces no increase in the rate of mass flow. tion The integral of the component of the fluid velocity along any closed path with respect to the distance round the path. An elementary type of flow represented mathematically by the limiting form taken by a source and sink of equal strength, when their respective strengths increase indefinitely as their distance apart along the line joining them (the axis of the doublet) approaches zero in such a manner that the product strength times distance (the strength of the doublet 1 remains finite. An element qf fluid having intense vorticity.

4421

Circola

4422

Doublet

4423 4424

Eddy Eddy Diffusivity Coefficients

Coefficients of eddy flux (for example, of momentum, heat, water vapour, etc) in turbulent flow, defined as the ratio of the rate of flux of a quantity to the mean gradient of the quantity in the direction of the flux. The line adjoining the positions at any instant of all particles that have passed through a given point in the fluid.

4425

Filament Line ( Streak Line ) Flows

4426 4427

Adiabatic Choked

Flow

Flow of a fluid in which tion of heat. See Choking 10 4420.

there is no addition

or extrac-

Flow

IS : 7879 ( Part IV )- 1980
No. 442% 4429 Term Compressible Continuum
Flow

Definition Flow at speeds such fluid can no longer that the density changes be neglected (see 4431 ). in the

Flow

Flow of a fluid under conditions for which the density is sufficiently high that the molecular structure of the fluid can be ignored and the fluid can be considered as physically continuous. Flow where the mean free path of the molecules near the body is appreciably larger than a typical linear dimension of the body. Flow in which density changes neglected (see 4428 ). Flow in a region in which in the fluid can be

4430

Free Molecule

Flow

4431 4432 4433 4434 4435 4436 4437 4438 4439 4440

Incompressible lrrotational Isentropic Laminar Couette Poiseuille Mixed Flow ( Transonic Flow Flow Flow Flow Flow

Flow

there is no vorticity. of each element of fluid adjacent in relative of a and is

Flow in which the remains constant.

entropy

Flow in which there is no mixing between layers ( except on a molecular scale ). Laminar flow of a fluid between two surfaces motion parallel to one another. Laminar flow, in a pipe of circular gas or of a liquid which entirely Flow in which there supersonic speed. are regions fluid

cross section, fills the pipe. of both subsonic

Flow )

Potential Flow ( lrrotational Flow ) Rotational Slip Flow Flow

Flow of an ideal, inviscid zero everywhere. Flow in a region in which

in which

the vorticity

there is vorticity.

Flow where the mean free path of the molecules is a significant fraction of a typical linear dimension of the body and fluid adjacent to a solid surface is not necessarily at rest relative to the surface. Flow Flow Flow Flow ) Flow Velocity Flow in which Flow in which the speed is everywhere the speed is everywhere subsonic. supersonic. betare

4441 4442 4443 4444 4445 4446

Subsonic Supersonic Transition ( Knudsen Turbulent

The flow of gases under conditions intermediate ween continuum flow and molecular flow. Flow in which irregular fluctuations superposed on a mean flow. The velocity of the undisturbed immersed in it. The fluid with relative time

Free Stream Froude

to a body

Number

velocity divided by the square root of the product of a typical length and the acceleration due to It expresses the square root of the ratio of gravity. the inertial to the gravitational forces.
Note - Alternatively,
taken as the square of the above.

4447

Grashof

Number

The product of, the cube of a typical length, the acceleration due to gravity and a representative temperature difference divided by the product of the square of the kinematic viscosity and the absolute temperature. In free convection for gases, it expresses the ratio of the product of the inertial and buoyancy forces to the square of the viscous forces. 11

IS : 7879 ( Part
NO.

IV ) - 1380 Term Deflnifion Coefficient A non-dimensional quantity determining the rate of transfer of heat between a surface and a fluid flowing past it for given aerodynamic and surface conditions. An Tube apparatus in which total are produced by exploiting flow ( see 4521 ). of viscosity temperature differences the properties of vortex of a fluid divided by its to a

4448

Heat Transfer

4449

Hilsch Tube ( Hilsch-Rankine Vortex Tube ) Kinematic Knudsen

4450 4451 4452

Viscosity Number

The coefficient density.

The ratio of the mean free path of the molecules typical linear dimension in the flow field.

Lewis Number

The product of the density, the material diffusivity and specific heat at constant pressure of a fluid divided by its thermal conductivity. It expresses the ratio of the diffusivity of matter to that of heat through a fluid. A simple mathematical model of the flow around a wing (or aerofoil ) in which the bound vorticity of the wing is assumed concentrated on to a single line. It is used for the calculation of the induced velocities away from the wing. The angle between the direction and the Mach line; its cosecant number at the point. of flow at any point is equal to the Mach

4453

Lifting

Line

4454

Mach Angle

4455

Mach Line

A line on a Mach surface such that the tangent at any point is co-planar with the direction of flow and with the normal to the Mach surface at their point.

l

Mach 4456

Numbers The ratio of the fluid speed to the local speed of sound. It expresses the square root of the ratio of the inertial to the elastic forces in a fluid. The free stream Mach number at which velocity on the surface of a body first equal to the local speed of sound. the peak becomes

Local Mach Number

4457

First

Critical

Mach Number

4458 4459 4460

Mach Surface ( Characteristic Mach Cone Magnus Effecf

Surface )

A surface indicating the wave front of an infinitesimal disturbance in a supersonic flow. . A Mach surface in a uniform supersonic flow.

The additlonal aerodynamic forces, produced on a rotating body ( especially a body symmetrical with respect to the relative stream ) moving through a. fluid, due to the component of velocity normal to the axis of rotation. The classical case is the lift on an infinite circular cyl.inder rotating about its axis in a stream normal to the axis. The product of the rate of heat transfer per unit area and typical length divided by the product ,of the thermal conductivity and a representative temperature difference. It is the ratio of convective to conductive heat transfer. The track of any infinitesimal fluid. 12 element or particle of a

4461

Nussel t Number

4462

Particle

Path

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980 No.
4463 4464 Term Peclet Number Prandtl-Meyer Expansion The product number. Definition of the Prandtl number and the Reynolds

A hornentropic, two-dimensional supersonic flow in which an expansion wave is produced at the junction of two plane boundaries. The product of the viscosity and specific heat at constant pressure of a fluid divided by its thermal conductivity. It expresses the ratio of the transport of momentum to that of heat through a fluid.

4465

Prandtl Number

Pressures 4466 Dynamic Pressure The difference between the total pressure and the static pressure. It is equal to half the product of the fluid density and the square of the speed. Pressure ) The difference between static pressure. the pitot pressure and the

4467 4468

Impact Pressure ( Indicated Dynamic Kinetic Pressure

The kinetic energy per unit volume of a fluid. It is equal to half the product of the fluid density and the square of the speed. In incompressible flow, it equals the dynamic pressure and was so called formerly. The momentum flux per unit area across a surface It is equal to the product normal to the local flow. of the fluid density and the square of the speed. The pressure measured by a pitot tube correctly aligned with the local direction of flow. At a point where the flow is subsonic, it is equal to the total pressure; at a point where the flow is supersonic, it is equal to the total pressure behind a normal shock wave ( see 5529 ). The sum of the static pressure. pressure and the momentum where

4469

Momentum

Pressure

4470

Pitot Pressure

4471 4472 4473

Reaction Stagnation

Pressure Pressure

The pressure at a stagnation fluid is brought isentropically

point on a body to rest.

Static Pressure

The mean of the normal components of stress on three mutually perpendicular elements of surface at rest relative to a fluid. It is the pressure which would be measured by an infinitesimally small instrument at rest relative to the fluid. The pressure which would to rest isentropically. The product number. arise if a fluid number and were brought the Prandtl

4474 4475 4476

Total Pressure Rayleigh Number Reynolds Number

of the Grashof

The product of a typical length and the fluid speed divided by the kinematic viscosity of a fluid. It expresses the ratio of the inertial forces to the viscous forces. A means of visualizing or photographing an airflow pattern by use of the effect of the density variations on the refractive index. The viscosity of a fluid divided by the product of the density and the material diffusivity. It expresses the ratio of the transport of momentum to that of matter through a fluid. 13

4477

Schlieren

System

4478

Schmidt

Number

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. 4479 Term Separation ( Breakway ) Boundary Dead-Air Laminar Layer Separafion Region Separation Definition Detachment of the flow from a solid it has been in contact. The separation either laminar A separated region of a flow or turbulent. in which having the fluid when surface with which layer,

4480 4481 4482 4483 4484 4485

a boundary velocity

is low. layer is

Boundary layer separation still laminar. Re-adherence separation. of the

the boundary surface

Re-attachment Separated Region Separation Bubble

flow the flow

to a solid

after the

A region over which surface.

is separated

from

The region bounded by a re-attaching solid surface between the positions and re-attachment. Boundary-layer A stall brought wave. separation after transition.

flow and the of separation

4486 4487 4488

Turbulent Shock-Stall

Separafion

on by separation

of flow behind a shock

Shock Wave

A narrow region, crossing the streamlines, through which there occur abrupt increases in pressure, density and temperature, and an abrupt decrease in velocity, accompanied by an increase in entropy. The normal component of velocity relative to the shock wave is supersonic upstream and subsonic down-stream. It is called attached or detached according to whether it does or does not appear to be in contact with the body originating it. It is described as normal or oblique according to whether it is perpendicular or not to the direction of flow in a supersonic flow field. In the mathematical representation at which the fluid is absorbed. of fluid flow, a point

4459 4490

Sink Sonic Bang ( Sonic Boom 1 Source Speeds

The noise heard when shock waves from an aircraft flying at or above the speed of sound reach the observer. In the mathematical representation from which the fluid emanates. of fluid flqw, a point

4491

4492 4493 4494 4495 4496

Sonic Speed Subsonic Supersonic Hypersonic Transonic Speed Speed Speed Speed Range

The local speed of sound. A speed below sonic speed. A speed above sonic A very high speed sonic speed. The speed. usually more than five times the

range of undisturbed stream speeds near the local speed of sound when mixed flow regions occur in the neighbourhood of the body.

4497

Stagnation

Point

The point, at or near the nose of a body in motion in a fluid where the flow divides and where, in a viscous fluid, pressure is at a maximum, and in an inviscid one the fluid is at rest. 14

IS : 7879 ( Part IV)
No. 4498 Stanton Term Number Definition

- 1980

The ratio of the Nusselt number to the Peclet number. In forced convection, it expresses the ratio of the heat abstracted from a fluid to the heat passing within it. A line such that, at any instant, the local direction flow at any point on it is in the direction of tangent. A surface formed on a transverse of the

4499

Streamline

4500 4501

Streamtube Superaerodynamics

by streamlines whose intersections plane form a closed curve. (for example, pressure is so flow no longer

The study of fluid motion in conditions at high altitude) in which the fluid low that the conditions of continuum apply.

Temperatures 4502 Static Temperature The actual temperature at a point in a fluid. Ideally, it is the temperature measured by an infinitesimly small instrument which is at rest relative to the fluid. ) The temperature which would brought to rest adiabatically. arise if the fluid were with the to

4503 4504 4505

Total Temperature ( Stagnation Temperature Tip loss Transition Vortex Vortex

Loss of lift at the tip of an aerofoil formation of tip vortices. Of a boundary layer. turbulent flow. The

associated from

change

laminar

4506

A region of fluid in circulatory motion, having a core of `intense vorticity, the strength of the vortex being given by its circulation. A virtual vortex formed by the vortex surrounds the surface of a body. A vortex left behind 1 A vortex free to travel downstream as a tip vortex. with the fluid, such when sheet which

4507 4508 4509 4510

Bound Vortex Casf-Off Vorfex ( Starting Vortex Free Vorfex Tip Vortex

a body is set in motion.

A free vortex arising at the tip of an aerofoil owing to the flow of air around the tip from the high-pressure region to the low-pressure region. Vortex A vortex consistina of a vortex transverse to the airstream with a trailing vortex springing from each of its ends. The transverse vortex may be either a bound vortex to replace an aerofoil or a free vortex to represent vorticity in the wake. A system of horseshoe vortices is used for purposes of simplification in aerofoil theory. A vortex A cross flow. A vortex body. in which section extending the vorticity of a line is concentrated in two from in a line.

4511

Horseshoe

4512 4513 4514 4515

Line Vortex Point Vortex Trailing Vortex

vortex

dimensional of a

downstream

the surface

Vortex Trail ( Tip Trail )

vortex made visible by the condensation of A trailing water vapour in the atmosphere in regions of reduced temperature, for example downstream of the tip of a wing or propeller. 15

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
NO. 4516 4517 4518 4519 Vortex Vortex Vortex Vorfex Term fine Ring Sheet Layer A line such vorticity. A vortex A surface velocity that Defmif ion is everywhere that of the

its direction

having

a toroidal

core. in the

across which there is a discontinuity component tangential to the surface.

A diffuse vortex sheet. A thin two streams in which there tangential velocity. A regular mately behind

layer of fluid between is a large gradient in

4520

Vorfex

Street

arrangement of line vortices in two approxiparallel rows, which is sometimes formed two-dimensional bodies.

4521

Vortex-Tube

A surface formed by vortex lines whose inter-sections on a transverse plane form a closed curve ( see 4449 ). An infinitesimal vortex-tube.

4522 4523

Vortex Vortex

Filament Generator

A device, often a small vane attached to a surface, to produce one or more discrete vortices which trail downstream adjacent to the surface, promote mixing in the boundary layer and delay boundary layer separation. Generally, rotational motion in a fluid, defined, at any point in the fluid, as twice the mean angular velocity of a small element of fluid surrounding the point. The component vorticity in a given direction at a point in a fluid is equal to the circulation round an elementary surface normal to the direction divided by the area of the surface. The region pressure body. SECTION 46 MODEL of fluid behind a body in which the total has been changed by the presence of the

4524

Vorficify

4525

Wake

TESTING

4601

Blockage

Of a subsonic wind tunnel. The effect of the presence of a model on the equivalent free stream speed in the working section. The contribution to blockage due to the obstruction the stream by the model itself. The contribution of the stream A bell-mouth to blockage due to the displacement by the wake from the model. of an open working section. of

4602 4603 4604 4605

Solid Blockage Wake Blockage

Collector Diffuser

downstream

A device for transforming kinetic energy of a fluid into pressure energy; in subsonic flow, a duct which increases gradually in section along the direction of flow (see 4609 ). Throat Cone-Angle A convergent-divergent of the working section diffuser placed down-stream of a supersonic wind tunnel.

4606 4607

Second Diffuser

The angle between the axis and the generator of a right circular cone for which the rate of change of cross-sectional area with distance along the axis is the same as that of the diffuser. 16

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980 No.
4608 Dynamic ( Inertial Term Model Model ) A De finif ion model for which the mass distribution and linear dimensions have been so scaled that certain features of the motion of both model and full-scale aircraft are the same, apart from the effect of scale (Reynolds number ) on the aerodynamics. the pressure ( see 4605 >. energy of a

4609

Effuser

A device for transforming fluid into kinetic energy An

4610

Confraction

effuser, or part of an effuser, in which the crosssectional area of the duct is progressively decreased with the objects of accelerating the fluid and obtaining a more nearly uniform flow. ratio of the cross-sectional area at the beginning of the contraction to that at the working section of a wind tunnel.

4611

Contraction

Rafio

The

4612

Nozzle

I. An effuser, or part of an effuser, in a supersonic wind tunnel in which the fluid is accelerated from subsonic to supersonic speed by means of a convergent divergent duct and a region of uniform flow is achieved. It is sometimes called a supersonic eff user. 2. The contraction of a subsonic open working section. wind tunnel having an

4613

Elasf ic Model

A model in which the distribution of stiffness as well as the linear dimensions are so represented as to make the aeroelastic behaviour of the model correspond to that of the full-scale aircraft. Radial vanes installed near the fan in a wind tunnel to counteract the rotation of the stream produced by it. A solid wind tunnel boundary whose shape can be adjusted in order to vary the Mach number, the pressure gradient in the working section or the extent of the tunnel constraint. A trade name for a range of compounds. Some are used in the gaseous form in supersonic research or other tests. Shock wave patterns in Freen are similar to those in air at higher Mach numbers. A cascade of fixed vanes which guide round the bends in a flow duct. the fluid stream

4614

Fan Sfraighfeners

4615

Flexible Wall

4616

Freen

4617

Guide Vanes ( Cascade ) Gust Tunnel

4618

A tunnel in which the air flow can be modified to simulate a gust or in which the model can be moved rapidly ( for example, on a rocket track) across a moving airstream for the same purpose. A grid of intersecting reduce large-scale the flow. surfaces in a wind tunnel to disturbances and to straighten

4619

Honeycomb

4620

Liner

An interchangeable wall inserted upstream of the working section of a supersonic wind tunnel and shaped ' to form one side of a two-dimensional nozzle. 17

IS: 7879 (Part No.
4621 4622

IV)
Term

- 1980
Definition A sled that runs on a rail or rails ( rocket track) and is accelerated to high velocities by a rocket engine. A gauze screen placed across the stream in a wind tunnel for reducing spatial disturbances and turbulence levels. A long tube in which a shock wave is created usually by bursting a diaphragm initially isolating the high pressure region from the low pressure one. The shock wave travels along the tube and increases the pressure and temperature of the gas into which it travels. Shock tunnel is a modified version of the shock in which the desired Mach number is obtained the help of a nozzle. A form of shock tube in which generated by a moving piston. the shock tube with is,

Rocket Sled Screen

4623

Shock Tube

4624

Shock Tunnel

4625 4626

Gun Tube Sting Tanks

wave

An arm, projecting upstream in a wind tunnel, to the forward end of which a model can be attached.

4627

Controlled-launching

Tank

tank into which
lled conditions

when landing 4628 Ditching Tank ( Free-Launching Towing Tank Tank)

models are launched under controfor observation of their behaviour on water. for on to on

large tank into which models are freely launched observation of their behaviour when landing water. long channel provided with a travelling carriage which models are attached for testing in or water. A section An An An of minimum area in a duct.

4629

4630 4631 4632 4633

Throat Water Channel Water Tunnel Whirling Arm

open channel for investigating the flow past a stationary body in a stream with a free surface. apparatus for producing a controlled stream of water or other liquid for fluid dynamic experiments. apparatus for making experiments models or instruments at the extremity rotating in a horizontal plane. by carrying of an arm of air

4634 4635 4636

Wind Tunnel Blow-Down Wind Tunnel Wind Tunnel

An apparatus for producing a controlled stream or other gas for fluid dynamic experiments. A wind tunnel in which the driving - power from gas stored in pressurized vessels. A wind tunnel in which compressed working fluid in order to obtain Reynolds numbers. A wind tunnel that is designed the stream usually being corn pressor.

is derived.

Compressed-Air

air is used as the high values of the

4637

Continuous

Wind Tunnel

to run continuously, driven by a fan or

4638

Direct-Discharge

Wind Tunnel

A wind tunnel driven by connecting the up-stream to a compressed air storage vessel and/or downstream end to an evacuated tank. 18

end the

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
Term 4639 ,464O Free-Flight Heated-Air Wind Tunnel Wind Tunnel A wind tunnel free flight. in which Definition the model can be observed in

A wind tunnel in which the air is heated, for example, at high values of the Mach to avoid ii ,quifaction number. air or other gas A wind tunnel in which compressed is used to induce the flow through the working section. A wind tunnel that can run for a limited period only, the source of power being pressurized and/or evacuated vessels which require pressur'izing or evacuating between runs. slip flow or free A wind tunnel capable of producing molecule flow, characterized by a low stagnation pressure small compared with that of the atmosphere. A wind tunnel not provided with a duct between the downstream end of the diffuser and the upstream end of the contraction. A wind tunnel with an open working section.

4641

Induced-Flow

Wind Tunnel

4642

Intermittent

Wind Tunnel

4643

Low-Density

Wind Tunnel

4644

Non-return-Flow (Straight-Through Tunnel ) Open-Jet

Wind Tunnel Wind

4645 4646

Wind Tunnel Wind Tunnel

Return-Flow

A wind tunnel provided with a duct between the downstream end of the diffuser and the upstream end of the contraction. A wind high flight by a tunnel in which the high Mach numbers and stagnation enthalpy associated with hypersonic are simulated by expanding the flow generated shock tube through a nozzle.

4647

Shock Tunnel

4648

Spinning Tunnel ( Free-Spinning Wind Tunnel

)

A wind tunnel with a vertical air stream in the working section, for testing the spinning characteristics of unconstrained models. A wind tunnel in which the driving from evacuated vessels. An power is derived

4649

Suck-Down Wind Tunnel ( Vacuum Tunnel ) Wind Tunnel Balance

4650

apparatus for measuring aerodynamic forces and moments acting on a model supported in the working section of a wind tunnel. wind tunnel balance for measuring aerodynamic forces and moments while the model is rotating about a longitudinal axis. wind tunnel balance for measuring a complete system of forces and moments about three axes, three compolift, drag and

4651

Rolling

Balance

A

4652

Six-Component

Balance

A

4653

Three-Component

Balance

A wind tunnel balance for measuring nents of forces and moments, usually pitching moment. That part of a wind or water tunnel are made. where

4654

Working Section

experiments

4655

Closed Working

Section

A working 19

section

that is bounded

by solid

walls.

IS : 7879 ( Part IV ) - 1980
No. 4656 4657 Term Open Working Slotted Section ) Walls Definition A working section that is not bounded by walls: ,PI. Tunnel walls with slots ( perforations ) to reduce tunnel constraint, particularly to enable wind tunnels to be used at transonic speeds. A working section whose boundaries are partly open ( slotted longitudinally, perforated or porous ), especially for experiments at transonic speeds.

( Perforated

4658

Ventilated

Working

Section

EXPLANATORY
This standard astronautical terms. ..

NOTE
on the glossary of aeronautical and

is one of a series of Indian Standards Other standards in this series are: Glossary of aeronautical of aeronautical of aeronautical of aeronautical

IS : 7879 ( Part I )-1975.

and astronautical and astronautical and astronautical and

terms : Part I General terms : Part II -Motion terms : Part III Structures terms : Part VI Space of

IS : 7879'( Part II )-I975 Glossary -aircraft IS : 7879 ( Part III )-1975 IS : 7879 ( Part VI )-1979 Glossary Glossary terms

astronautical

The present standard provides standard definitions of technical terms peculiar to aeronautics, Terms in general use in other branches of engineering are also astronautics and related subjects. The other parts included where they have some special relevance to aeronautics or astronautics. of the standard cover terms specific to a particular feature, type of aircraft, equipment and services. However, in certain cases the relative The general arrangement of the terms is alphabetical. terms have been given together under a heading or general definition. Where two or more synonymous terms are in use, the term which is favoured is given first with the intention that it The alternative terms are given in parenthesis. should gradually displace the others. c Each term has been assigned a 4-digit or 5-digit number. The first one (or two ) digit, in the This part number with the following digit in the thousandth place, represents the part number. The last two digits represent the position of the definihundredth place represents the section. tion within a section. Thus, the term 4215 is the 15th definition of section 42 which is in Part IV. Assistance has been derived from BS : 185 `Aeronautical and Astronautical the British Standards Institution, in the preparation of this Indian Standard. 20
Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja,lndia

Terms'

issued

by

