IS 14501 (Part2): 1998 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

PULSETECHNIQUESANDAPPARATUS
PART 2 PULSE MEASUREMENT AND ANALYSIS, GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

ICS

33.120.10

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002

NEW DELHI June 1998

Price Group

5

a.

Electronic

Measuring

Instruments,

Systems and Accessories

Sectional Committee,

LTD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electronic Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The objective of this standard is to standardize the definition of terms and the description of techniques and procedures which are applicable to the determination of the characteristics of practical and hypothetical pulses regardless of the applicable limits of error and to a wide range of technologies and disciplines. This standard covers pulse measurement definitions. and analysis, general considerations. The Part 1 covers pulse terms and

This standard is largely based upon IEC Pub 469-2 (1987) `Pulse techniques and apparatus: Part 2 Pulse measurement and analysis, general considerations', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998

Indian Standard

PULSE TECHNIQUES AND APPARATUS
PART 2 PULSE MEASUREMENT AND ANALYSIS, GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 1 SCOPE This standard provides definitions and descriptions of the techniques and procedures for time domain pulse measurements. The definitions and descriptions provided arc independent of specific devices, apparatus, instruments or computing devices which may be used in pulse measurements and are necessary for: efficient communication of the results of pulse measurement, standards for pulse apparatus, and standards for apparatus which employ pulse techniques. 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard given below is a necessary adjunct to this standard: IS No.
Title

-

instruments and auxiliary e+upment to be used; the essential adjustments required; the procedures to be used in making essential adjustments; the operations to he performed and, their sequence; the corrections that will ordinarily need to be made; the procedures for making suchcorrections; and the conditions under which all operations are to be carried out.

3.1.3 Pulse Measurement Process A realization of a method of pulse measurement in terms of specific devices, apparatus, instruments, auxiliary equipment, conditions, operators and observers. 3.1.4 State of Statistical Control In a pulse measurement process, that state wherein a degree of consistency among repeated measurements of a characteristic, property or attribute is attained. 3.1.5 Error
The difference between the result of the application of

Pulse techniques and apparatus: IS 14501 (Part 1) : 1998 Part 1 Pulse terms and definitions 3 DEFINlTIONS For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS 14501 (Part 1) shall apply. in addition to the following. 3.1 Pulse Measurement Terms The pulse measurement terms defined in this clause are applicable to measurement in general and are not defined in order to draw a distinction between pulse measurement and measurement in general. 3.1.1 Pulse Measurement
The assignment of a number and a unit of measurement

a pulse measurement process and the true value of the characteristic, property or attribute being measured. 3.1.6 Dispersion
The degree of mutual disagreement among the results

of independent measurements of a pulse characteristic, property or attribute yielded by repeated applications of a pulse measurement process. 3.1.7 Resolution The smallest change in the pulse characteristic, property or attribute being measured which can unambiguously be discerned or detected in a pulse measurement process. 3.2 Statistical Terms Statistical terms are given in IS 7920 (Part 1) `Statistical vocabulary and symbols: Part 1 Probability and general statistical terms'. 3.3 Waveform Formats Waveforms may exist, be recorded or stored in a variety of formats. Throughout this standard, it is
assumed that:

to a characteristic, property or attribute of a pulse wherein the number and unit assigned indicate the magnitude of the characteristic which is associated with the pulse. Typically, this assignment is accomplished by comparison of a transform of the pulse (its pulse waveform) with a scale or reference which is calibrated in the unit of measurement. 3.1.2 Method of Pulse Measurement A method of making a pulse measurement comprises: the complete specification of the functional characteristics of the devices, apparatus,

IS 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998 waveform formats are in terms of Cartesian co-ordinates or some transform thereof, conversion from one waveform format to any other is possible, and such waveform format conversions can be made with limits of error, dispersion and resolution which are consistent with the limits of error desired in the pulse measurement process. measurement waves. 3.4 Waveform on a'different wave in a sequence of

Epoch Expansion and Contraction

3.4.1 Waveform Epoch Expansion A technique for the determination of the characteristics of a transition waveform (or pulse waveform) wherein the transition waveform epoch (or pulse waveform epoch) is expanded in time to a pulse waveform epoch (or waveform epoch) for the determination of magnitude and/or time reference lines. The reference lines determined by analysis of the pulse waveform (or waveform) are transferred to the transition waveform (or pulse waveform) for the determination of characteristics (see Fig. 1). In any waveform epoch expansion procedure, two or more sets of reference lines may exist, and the set of reference lines being used in any pulse measurement process shall be specified. 3.4.2 Waveform Epoch Contraction

3.3.1 Pictorial Format A graph, plot or display in which a waveform is presented for observation and/or analysis. Any of the waveform formats defined in the following clauses may be presented in the pictorial format. 3.3.2 Equational Format

One or more algebraic equations which specify a waveform wherein, typically, a first equation specifies the waveform from to to tl, a second equation specifies the waveform from tl to t2, etc. The equational format is typically used to specify hypothetical, ideal or reference waveforms. 3.3.3 Sampled Format A waveform which is a series of sample magnitudes taken sequentially or non-sequentially as a function of time. It is assumed that non-sequential samples may be rearranged in time sequence to yield the following sampled formats. 3.3.3.1 Periodically sampled real time format

A technique for the determination of the characteristics of individual pulse waveforms (or pulse waveform features) wherein the waveform epoch (or pulse waveform epoch) is contracted in time to a pulse waveform epoch (or transition waveform epoch) for the determination of time and/or magnitude characteristics (see Fig. 1). In any waveform epoch contraction procedure, two or more sets of time and/or magnitude reference lines may exist and the set of reference lines being used in any pulse measurement process shall be specified. 3.5 Reference Pulse Waveforms A reference pulse waveform [see 2.4.1.3 and 2.8.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)] may be specified by any of the waveform formats defined in 3.3. The characteristics of the devices, apparatus, techniques, or algorithms used in producing or deriving a reference pulse waveform shall be specified. 3.51 Defined Reference Pulse Waveform

A finite sequence of magnitudes mo, ml, m2,.....mn each of which represents the magnitude of the wave at times ro, to+At, to+2At, . . . . .. . . fo+nAt, respectively, wherein the data may exist in a pictorial format or as a list of numbers. 3.3.3.2 Periodically sampled equivalent time format

A format which is identical to the periodically sampled real time format, except that the time coordinate is equivalent to and convertible to real time. Typically, each datum point is derived from a different measurement on a different wave in a sequence of waves. 3.3.3.3 Aperiodically sampled real time format

A reference pulse waveform which is defined without reference to any practical or derived pulse waveform. Typically, a defined reference pulse waveform is an ideal pulse waveform. 3.5.2 Derived Reference Pulse Waveform A reference pulse wav;eform which is derived by a specified procedure or algorithm from the pulse waveform which is being analyzed in a pulse measurement process (.yee Fig. 2 for an example of a derived reference pulse waveform and its algorithm). 3.53 Practical Reference Pulse Waveform

A format which is identical to the periodically sampled real time format, except that the sampling in real time is not periodic and wherein the data exist as co-ordinate point pairs, tl, ntl ; t2,mz; .. ... .. . tnmn. 3.3.3.4 Aperiodically sampled Pquivalent timeformat

A format which is identical to the aperiodically sampled real time format, except that the time coordinate is equivalent to and convertible to real time. Typically, each datum point is derived from a differ&t 2

A reference pulse waveform which is derived from a pulse which is produced by a device or apparatus.

IS 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998
PORTION OF PULSE WAVEFDRU EPOCH INCLUDED IN TRANSITION WAVEFORU EPOCH PORTION OF WAVEFORM EPOCH lNCl.UDED IN PULSE WAVEFORM EPOCH (PULSE TRAIN EPOCH)

b CRANSITION WAVEFORM _EPDCH _

4

6' _

b

t,

ti

6" c-

rd

t;
4

t;'

[EUL;

WAVEFORY

_

WAVEFORM EPOCH

WAVEFORM EPOCH ap, WAVEFORM EPOCH

EXPANSION COtVtRACnON

FIG.

1 WAVEFORMEPOCH EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION

mm_----_-

TOP

UNE

PULSE

WAVEFORY YESIAL POINT

DERIVED REFERENCE PULSE WAVL FORU

------1

b
NOTES $41 =

b

tr

I I 4

Segment of the base line.
Straight line through first transition proximal and distal points. Segment of the top line. Exponential curve through last transition proximal, mesial and distal points.

fr-t? = b-4 = b-t4 =

FIG. 2 DERIVED REFERENCE PULSEWAVEFORM
4

MEASUREMENT CHARACTERISTICS

OF PULSE

manifestations, representations, or visualizations of these phenomena [see 2.2 and 2.3.1 of IS 14501
(Part I)].
NOTE s Throughwt the remander
of this standard. the terms UC' used in the tcllowing and

4.1 The Distinction Waveforms

Between Waves and transitions drawn; the state of a latter are 3

The distinction between waves, pulses and and their respective waveforms is ciearly former are modifications of the physical medium, or phenomena, while the

`pulse' Inclusive

and `pulse srube

w:lvelorm'

aj
h)

`P.k' and `pulse waveform` mcfude `trrulsitiou' `tranwion waveform', respcctivzly: <and

In so fx u is applicable. `pulse' and `pulse wnvetorm` Include `wave' alld `wavcform`. respectively

I!3 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998 4.2 Description of the Pulse Measurement Prows

The object of any pulse measurement process is the determination, within some limits of error, either expressed or implied, of the magnitude of a characteristic, property or attribute of a pulse. Figure 3 shows the constituent steps of any pulse measurement process where, as indicated, the process involves two distinct sequential sub-processes: a) Pulse to pulse waveform conversion, and b) Pulse waveform analysis.

The qalidity of final assertion or assumption is depewent on the combined validity of the first two steps. The vast array of devices, apparatus, instruments and techniques which may be configured in virtually limitless combinations to provide pulse to pulse waveform conversion renders the discussion of specific implementations beyond the scope of this standard. Such discussion is deferred to other standards, recommendations, documents or specifications which describe or define the characteristics or methods concerned with specific devices, apparatus, instruments or techniques. A state of statistical control shall be achieved before a pulse measurement process can be considered to be a realix&ion of a method of pulse measurement. 4.3 Puke to Pulse Waveform Conversion Item (a) of Fig. 3 shows the five basic operations transduction, transmission, conversion, correction and storage - which, in some sense, are always present in pulse to pulse waveform conversion. The order in which these basic operations occur is not necessarily

Thus, the pulse measurement process involves: the conversion of a pulse into its transform, its pulse waveform; analysis of the pulse waveform to determine the magnitude of a pulse waveform characteristic, the assertion or assumption that the magnitude of the pulse waveform characteristic thus determined is, within some limits of error, identical to the magnitude of the pulse characteristic.

-

OPERATION
KQANSDUCTlON

AGENCY t

PULSE

AUXILIARY

OPERATIONS

TRANSDUCER I t \ \

TltiE AND MAGNl'Kl~ STANDARDS t TRANSFER FUNCTlON INFORMATION I

I

TRANSMISSION

SlGNAL PATH 1 t //

I

a> CONVERSION I

1 1

`,INSTRUMENT

CORRECTION

t OPERATOR ALGORITHM OR INSTRUMENT t

-------

1 1

STORAGE ---------

PULSE WAVEFORM

------_--_____

b)
ANALYSIS

t
OPERATOR ALGORITHM OR APPARATUS I REFERENCE MAGNITUDES

t
PULSE CHARACTERISTIC

a) = Pulse to pulse waveform b) = Pulse waveform analysis.

conversion.

FIG. 3 PULSEMEASUREMENTPROCESS
4

IS 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998
that shown in the figure and, frequently, occurs more than once. an operation

Three of the basic operations, transduction, transmission and conversion involve apparatus or devices whose transfer functions must be known to limits of error consistent with the overall limits of error desired in the pulse measurement process. The determination of transfer functions is indicated in item (a) of Fig. 3 by the broken lines leading to auxiliary operations. In these auxiliary operations, which may be other pulse measurement processes, the transfer functions of the apparatus are: a) b) adjusted to predetermined values, that is, the apparatus is calibrated, or determined and retained for subsequent the correction operation. use in

or apparatus. Correction shall be performed with limits of error which are consistent with the overall limits of error desired in the pulse measurement process.
4.3.5 Storage Storage is a transitional operation between pulse to pulse waveform conversion and pulse waveform analysis. Storage may be effected in numerous ways and display is not required, but the stored data must be available or retrievable for pulse waveform analysis. Typically, storage is effected in one of the waveform formats defined in 3.3. 5 PULSE WAVEFORM ANALYSIS Analysis

5.1 Generality of Pulse Waveform

Item (a) of Fig. 3 also shows that the determination or adjustment of transfer functions entails comparison, either directly or indirectly, with basic or derived time and magnitude standards. The following clauses describe each of the five operations which are present in pulse to pulse waveform conversion. 4.3.1 Transduction Pulses propagate in numerous modes in gases, liquids, solids, in vacuum and in networks made up of such media. In transduction, a device or apparatus abstracts energy from the medium in which the pulse propagates and converts the energy to a form suitable for transmission. 4.3.2 Transmission Transmission may occur over signal paths which utilize radiative, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or mechanical phenomena or analogue to digital or digital to analogue conversion techniques. 4.3.3 Conversion Typically, the conversion operation involves an instrument which relates its input signal to real or equivalent time. Such an instrument may provide a display of the relationship of the input signal to time. Such displays frequently function as the storage operation (see 4.3.5). Display is not necessarily an attribute of the conversion operation. 43.4 Correction

Pulse waveform analysis has broad utility since, when it is combined with waveform epoch expansion and contraction or applied to waveforms which are produced by operations on pulse waveforms [see 5.5.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)], its principles and techniques apply to: a) transition waveform analysis, b) analysis of complex waveforms, c) analysis of the constituent pulse waveforms of a pulse train or pulse burst, and d) analysis of the top and base envelopes of a pulse burst.

and are necessary for: i) analysis of the time relationships between different waveforms, and ii) analysis of,distortion, jitter and fluctuation. 5.2 Waveform Epoch Determination
5.2.1 Selection of the Pulse Waveform Epoch A pulse waveform epoch [see 23.2 of IS 14501 (Part l)] is the span of time for which waveform data are known or knowable and any analysis is based on the data within the epoch. These data may be augmented by reference lines which are determined by waveform epoch expansion or contraction. In any pulse measurement process, sufficient data shall be present to yield base and top magnitudes [see 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 of IS 14501 (Part 1)] which are consistent with the limits of error desired in the pulse measurement process. 5.2.2 Exclusion of Data from Analysis Data in a pulse waveform epoch may be excluded from the analysis under certain conditions, for example: base magnitude may be determined solely from data which precede the first transition. a pulse waveform may include feature or events which are non-pertinent in the circumstances of or to the application of the

The correction operation combines the results of the conversion operation with the transfer function information to yield a pulse waveform which is a more accurate transform of the pulse. Correction may be effected by: (a) a mental process by an operator, (b) a computational process, or (c) a compensating device
5

IS 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998

.

pulse. Non-pertinent data may be excluded from analysis. However, such exclusions may only be made on the basis of demonstrable information or knowledge. When data within a pulse waveform epoch are excluded from analysis, the following shall be specified: the extent, in time/or magnitude, of the excluded data; the demonstrable information or knowledge which justifies the exclusion; and whether the excluded data are ignored (that is, the waveform which is analyzed is discontinuous) or replaced (that is the excluded data are replaced with other assumed or derived data).

together. There is, however, no requirement to use the same algorithm for both determinations. 5.3.1.1 Mean of density distriburion The algorithm is based on determinations of the means of the occurrence density distribution of a pulse waveform. A graphical description follows:

a) Assume that a pulse waveform, such as that
shown in Item a) of Fig. 4 has a superimposed rectangular grid in which each elementary rectangle has dimensions & and Am.

b) Develop the occurrence density histogram as
follows: 9 For each horizontal element, of width m, count the number of elementary rectangles through which the pulse waveform passes. ii) At the magnitude corresponding to the location of the horizontal element, draw a histogram element whose length is proportionaltothecountinItem(a).This procedure yields the truncated bimodal histogram of Item b) of Fig. 4, in which PB, the base histogram, and Pr, the top histogram, are identified.

5.3 Analysis of the Single-Pulse Waveform Pulse a) b) c) waveform analysis may be effected by: a mental process by an operator, a computational process, or an apparatus or instrument.

In all cases, the pulse waveform is opera&d upon by the analyzing algorithm(s) and the same principles apply regardless of the pulse waveform f&mat or the analyzing agency. Throughout this clause, it is assumed that the analysis is performed by a computing device since this method: a) is the most general, b) is potentially the most accurate, and c) fully illustrates the operations which an operator or apparatus shall, in some sense and to some limits of error, perform. The analysis of the single pulse waveform requires the sequential determination of the: base magnitude and top magnitude; pulse amplitude; proximal, mesial, and distal lines and points; and magnitudes of all other pulse waveform characteristics expressed as computed differences between line and/or point pairs.

cl Consider the histograms PB and Pr separately
and calculate the magnitudes (on the magnitude axis) of the means of b and P-r and take the magnitudes of these means as the base line magnitude and the top line magnitude, respectively. This algorithm is best suited to the analysis of pulse waveform with bases and tops of significant relative duration when the smallest error in the analysis is desired. A graphical solution yields crude results, but as A t and Am become smaller, numerical calculation of the magnitudes of the means of the fi and Pr yields more refined measures of the base line magnitude and top line magnitude respectively. 5.3.1.2 Mode of the density distribution This algorithm is based on determinations of the modes of the occurrence density distribution of a pulse waveform and is identical to the algorithm described in 5.3.1.1 above, except for 5.3.1.1 (c). This algorithm is best suited to the analysis of pulse waveforms with bases and tops of significant relative duration when results which are compatible with visual observation and mental analysis by an operator are desired.

Typically, each of the above determinations is a necessity for the succeeding determination. Thus, algorithms for the determination of base magnitude, top magnitude and pulse amplitude only are described below since the determination of all other pulse waveform characteristics proceeds directly from these determinations [see 3 of IS 14501 (Part l)]. 5.3.1 Base and Top Magnitude Algorithms In the following clauses, algorithms for determining base magnitude and top magnitude are described 6

IS145Ol(Part2):1998

m

P

4 a) Pulse waveform with superimposed grid b) Probability density histogram FIG. 4 5.3.1.3 Peak magnitude Determine magnitudes a) the positive peak and negative of the pulse waveform: peak GRAPHICAL DETERMINATIONOF OCCURRENCEDENSITY

4

waveform eu(t), whose pulse amplitude is unknown, and a practical reference pulse waveform et(t) are alternately delivered to an instrument: which has an input impedance of R ohms, which can perform the integrations shown in equations (1) and (2), below, and which indicates when the equalities specified in equations (1) and (2) are satisfied.
e,(t)

take the positive peak magnitude as the top (base) magnitude of a positive (negative) pulse waveform, and take the negative peak magnitude as the base (top) magnitude of a positive (negative) pulse waveform.

b)

This algorithm

is best suited to the analysis of pulse waveforms with bases (tops) of negligible or relatively short duration.
t

dt =
tr,

er (t) dt
h

... (1)

tw

5.3.1.4 First (last) base point (l/R)
Determine the magnitude of the first (last) base point [see 3.3.5.2of IS 14501 (Part l)]. Take the magnitude of the first (last) base point as the base magnitude. 5.3.2 Pulse Amplitude Algorithms

L,

I

[t e.(t)]*

dt = (l/R)

I [e,(t)]* dt ... (2) t,,

5.3.2.1 Determination of pulse amplitude by the integral technique
Pulse amplitude is the algebraic difference between the top magnitude and the base magnitude [see 3.2.3 of IS 14501 (Part I)]. Where the absolute magnitude of the base (or top) magnitude is either immaterial in a pulse waveform analysis or known from other measurements, the determination of pulse amplitude is Sufficient. Figure 5 illustrates the determination of pulse amplitude by the integral technique wherein the pulse

when the equalities are satisfied, the pulse amplitude of the unknown pulse waveform, e"(t), is taken as equal to the pulse amplitude of the practical reference waveform, er(t). It is not necessary to evaluate the integrals of e"(t) and e,.(t) between identical limits; in fact, as is indicated for e"(t) in Fig. 5 it is preferable to adjust the extent of the integration(s) so that distortions which precede and follow the pulse waveform(s) do not contribute to the integral(s). This algorithm is best suited to analysis in which an unknown pulse waveform and a practical reference pulse waveform with very nearly identical pulse shapes are compared. A reference pulse waveform may be specified by any of the waveform formats defined in 3.3. The charac7

IS 14501( Part 2 ) : 1998
--

a(I) \,

PULSE

I

AMPlmJDE:

FIG.

5 J%TERMINATIONOF PULSE,bW'LlTUD3 BY TH& h'i'@GRAL TIXHNIQW 7.1 Analysis of Combinations of Pulses and Tran&ionk~

teristics of the devices, apparatus, techniques or algorithms used in producing or deriving a reference pulse waveform shall be specified. 5.3.3 Determination ofthe Other Pulse Characteristics When (a) the base magnitude and top magnitude, or (b) the base magnitude and pulse amplitude of a pulse waveform have been determined, the determination of all other pulse characteristics follows directly from existing definitions of: a) proximal, mesial, and distal lines and points [see 3.2.5 and 3.2.6 of IS 14501 (Part I)]. b) the magnitudes of all other pulse waveform characteristics as computed differences between line and/or point pairs [see 3.3 of IS 14501 (Part I)]. 6 ANALYSIS OF TRANSITION WAVEFORMS Transition waveform analysis is a special of pulse waveform analysis in which the analysis is made on a specified transition waveform of a pulse waveform. Waveform epoch expansion may be used to establish the time and magnitude reference lines required in a transition waveform analysis. 7 ANALYSIS OF COMPLEX WAVEFORMS Typically, involves: the analysis of complex waveforms

Double pulse, bipolar pulse or staircase waveforms [MC 5.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)] may be analyzed by decomposing the waveform into constituent pulse and transition waveforms. Typically, the decomposition is effected by subdividing the waveform at specified time reference points.
of Waveforms nitudesuperpooitbn

7.2 Analysis

Produced

by Mag-

Offset or composite waveforms [see 5.2 of IS 14501

(Part l)] may be_ analyzed by decomposing the waveform into its constituent constant, pulse waveforms and transition waveforms. Typically, the decomposition is effected by a process which is the inverse of magnitude superposition. 7.3 Analysis of Waveforms Trains
Produced by pulse

The constituent pulse waveforms of a pulse train [see 53.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)] may be analyzed by decomposition. Typically, the decomposition is effected by sub-dividing the pulse traininto pulse train
epochs [see 5.3.2.8 of IS 1450 1 (Part l)] each of which includes a single constituent pulse waveform. 7.4 Analysis of Waveforms Produced by Pulse

Bursts The constituent
pulse waveforms of a pulse burst [see 5.4.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)] may be analyzed in a

decomposition of the complex waveform into more elementary constituent pulse waveforms, or conversion of a multiplicity of constituent elements into pulse waveforms.
In any analysis of complex waveforms, procedures algorithms or used decomposition or conversion shall specified. the in be

manner identical to that described in 7.3. The overall characteristics of a pulse burst may be analyzed by conversion of the pulse burstinto its pulse burst top envelope and pulse burst base envelope [see 5.5.2 and 5.5.3 of IS 14501 (Part l)]. These envelopes are then analyzed as single pulse waveforms. 8

IS l4501( Part 2 ) : 1998 8 ANALYSIS OF TIME RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN DIFFERENT WAVEFORMS The time relationships between different waveforms may be analyzed by: a) applying the methods described in 5.6 and 7 in the analysis of the different waveforms, and b) determining the time relationship between different waveforms [see 6 of IS 14501 (Part l)] as computed intervals or durations. 9 ANALYSIS OF PULSE WAVEFORM DISTORTlON Pulse waveform distortion and pulse waveform feature distortion entail the determination of the differences between a pulse: waveform and a reference pulse waveform [see 7.1 of IS 14501 (Part I)]. In any distortion determination, the type of reference pulse waveform, which may be any of the types defined in 3.5, shall be specified. jitter and fluctuation are both present in significant amounts, these components shall be separated. Typically, separation is accomplished by first measuring fluctuation at points of zero waveform slopi and subsequently applying the known fluctuation as a correction in the determination of jitter. 10.1 Analysis of Jitter The analysis of jitter involves: a) the repeated determination of a time characteristic of the constituent pulse waveforms in a pulse train, and b) the determination of the instability of the measured time characteristic with respect to a reference time, interval or duration [see 73.1 of IS 14501 (Part l)]. Jitter analysis thus involves the application of the methods of measurement described in 5,6,7 and 8 as required to a multiplicity of the constituent pulse waveforms in a pulse train. 10.2 Analysis of Fhtuation The analysis of fluctuation involves: a) the repeated determination of a magnitude characteristic of the constituent pulse waveforms in a pulse train, and b) the determination of the instability of the measured magnitude characteristic with respect to a reference magnitude characteristic [sefY73.2 of IS 14501 (Part l)]. Fluctuation analysis thus involves the application of the methods of measurement described in 5,6,7 and 8, as required, to a multiplicity of the constituent pulse waveforms in a pulse train.

When the reference pulse waveform is a practical reference pulse waveform or a defined reference pulse waveform, it shall be properly located, in time and magnitude, relative to the pulse waveform being analyzed. When the reference pulse waveform is a derived reference pulse waveform, its location relative to the waveform be'inganalyzed is fixed by definition
and shall not be altered.

10 ANALYSIS OF JI'ITER AND FLUCTUATION
The measurement of jitter only or fluctuation only in

the substantial absence of the other is, typically, a relatively straightforward process. When, however,

9

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Sand&s Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizs, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addres.&d to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as lhe need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a statidard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest.issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. LTD 21( 1431).
Amendments Issued Since Puhlicrrtion

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern
:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 91 2@
{

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUlTA 700054

:

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAI 600113

602025 60 38 43

{ 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western
:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 4ooO93

1 832 92 78 95,832 91,832 78 58 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

