Waa Wah IS 12889 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ma Sha wan c& few gA 
am at West Westar 
(Ween JITRO) 


Performance Evaluation of Materials 
Used for Liquid Penetrant Test 


(First Revision) 


ICS 19.100 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM FH, 9 Teg St Art, ae feeet-110002 
Vesela” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2018 Price Group 7 


Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1989 and with the experience gained over these years, the need for 
alternate testing method for determination of Ionic Chloride contents has arisen as certain dyes do not get decolorized 
by ISO AmylAlcohol method. In addition the clause pertaining to other test requires modifications which are also 
incorporated. 


For the purpose of deciding whether particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12889 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MATERIALS USED 
FOR LIQUID PENETRANT TEST — SPECIFICATION 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers materials used for the liquid 
penetrant test of metals, non-porous ceramics and 
plastics parts (if compatible) to find out the existence 
of any discontinuity open to the surface. The 
temperature of the part under examination shall be in 
between 15°C to 50°C. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 
5522 : 2014 Stainless steel sheets and strips for 


utensils (third revision) 
3 PENETRANT MATERIALS 


The term penetrant materials shall include cleaning 
agents, penetrants, penetrant removers (solvents), 
emulsifiers, developers, etc, used in the examination 
process. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


4.1 Penetrants 


4.1.1 The penetrant inspection materials shall be of 
three groups. The group denotes the family of penetrant 
system. The groups are classified by the visibility of 
discontinuities when exposed to white light or black 
light. 


— Visible 
— Fluorescent 


a) Group I 

b) Group II 

c) Group III — Visible and fluorescent (dual 
mode) 

4.1.2 The test methods are classified by the 

removability of the penetrants. 


a) MethodA — Water washable 

b) Method B — Post emulsifiable (lipophilic 
or hydrophilic) 

c) Method C — Solvent removable 

4.2 Developers 

a) Dry developer; 

b) Non-aqueous wet developer; and 

c) Aqueous wet developer. 


4.3 Solvent Removers 


Solvent removers covered by this standard shall be of 
the following classes: 
a) Class I 
b) Class II 


5 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF PENETRANT 
MATERIALS 


— Halogenated 
— Non-halogenated 


5.1 Toxicity 


All penetrant materials shall have no adverse effect on 
the health of personnel when used for its intended 
purpose. However, use of proper personal protective 
devices and conducting the test in well-ventilated area 
is recommended. 


5.2 Corrosive Properties 


All items included in each group of materials shall be 
non-corrosive and non-tarnishing. Metal strips of 
aluminium, copper, yellow brass, mild steel and stainless 
steel of approximate dimension 100mm x 25 mm shall 
be kept immersed in various products for a minimum 
period of 48 h. The test shall be carried out at the ambient 
temperature between 15°C and 45°C. The metal strips 
shall show no evidence of pitting, etching, cracking or 
tarnishing when examined using 10x magnification. 
Corrosion test may be carried out on any other material, 
if required by the user. 


5.3 Flash Point 


For all penetrants and lipophilic emulsifiers, intended 
for use in open tanks or open containers, the minimum 
flash point shall be 50°C. The flash point shall be 
measured by Abels Closed Cup or Pensky Martin Closed 
Cup Method as applicable. 


IS 12889 : 2018 


In case of penetrant materials packaged in aerosol cans, 
since the containers may contain flammable 
hydrocarbon gases or gases with low flash points, the 
containers shall be labeled suitable by including such 
warnings as necessary either in writing or by suitable 
logos. The flash point measurement is not applicable 
to the penetrant materials supplied in aerosol cans. 


5.4 Fluorescent Brightness 


Fluorescent brightness shall be adequate for use. 


5.5 Storage Stability 


The storage stability shall be certified by the 
manufacturer as per the following procedure. A filled 
and closed container of each item of a family shall be 
stored for one year at the temperature range of 15°C to 
50°C without exposure to direct sunlight. At the end of 
the storage period, the material shall be subjected to 
the quality conformance tests as applicable to the item 
given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Quality Conformance Test 
(Clause 5.5) 


Test Reference 
Flash point 5:3 
Developer fluorescence 9.0 
Temperature stability 7.0 
Water tolerance 8.0 
Reentrant removability Annex A 
Developer removability Annex B 
Net content of aerosol containers Annex C 


Visual examination of the container shall also be done 
to see if the penetrants or the products stored have had 
any deleterious effects (corrosion) on the container. 


5.6 Penetrant Removability 


Removability test of penetrant is performed as per 
Annex A. The penetrant shall leave substantially no 
more residual penetrant than left by reference sample. 


6 CONTROL OF CONTAMINANTS 


6.1 All the penetrant materials used on nickel based 
alloys and austenitic stainless steel shall be analyzed 
for sulphur content as per Annex E as they have been 
found to be subject to corrosion and embrittlement by 
contact with sulphur in the form of sulphate ions at 
elevated temperature. 


6.2 All penetrant materials used on austenitic stainless 
steel and titanium based alloys shall be analysed for 
ionic halide content for the same reason stated in 6.1. 


6.3 For general applications, the values for total 


sulphur and halide content shall not exceed 1.0 percent 
each by weight for special applications, such as, in 
nuclear, space, etc, the values for total sulphur and ionic 
halide content shall not exceed 500 ppm and 25 ppm 
respectively. 


7 TEMPERATURE STABILITY 


The temperature stability of the penetrant shall be tested 
by subjecting 50 ml of the penetrant in a closed glass 
tube to two complete cycles of the temperature ranging 
from 10°C to 55°C. Each cycle shall extend over a 
minimum time period of 8 h. After the temperature 
cycling has been completed, the material shall be 
allowed to return to room temperature. The samples 
shall be visually examined at room temperature for any 
precipitation and separation of constituents. In case, 
sample is tested at different temperature range, the 
manufacturers shall state the range in which the 
penetrant materials have been tested and found 
acceptable. 


8 WATER TOLERANCE 


This process is applicable for water washable penetrant 
and lipophilic emulsifier materials used in tank type 
system. 50 ml of material under test shall be taken in a 
100 ml glass beaker and 0.5 ml of water is added at a 
time, using a burette and after each addition the solution 
is shaken well. This process is repeated till the endpoint 
is reached when the test material turns cloudy or 
thickens or coagulates. The amount of water added in 
percentage of test material gives the water tolerance 
for test material. The water tolerance can be calculated 
by the formula. 


x 100 


B 
Water Tolerance = 04B 
where 

B = burette reading in millimetre. 
The manufacturers shall specify the water tolerance of 
their products. 


9 DEVELOPERS 


All developers, dry or wet, shall provided a good 
contrasting white background to the penetrant for which 
it is intended. Developers shall not exhibit fluorescence 
when exposed to black light of 365 nanometer wave 
length. All developers shall be easily and completely 
removed from the test surface according to the 
procedures given in Annex B. 


9.1 Dry Developers 


9.1.1 Dry developers shall be light, fluffy and free from 
moisture and lumping. 


9.1.2 The bulk density of the developer powder shall 


be less than 0.2 g/cc. To measure the density of dry 
developers, one litre beaker shall be accurately weighed 
and the weight recorded. The beaker shall then be filled 
with the dry developer, which has been heated to 105°C 
for 1 h. The beaker is tapped lightly on the side, to 
cause settling of the developer. The edge of a ‘spatula’ 
or other suitable instrument shall be scrapped across 
the top of the beaker in such a manner that the surface 
of the developer is in level with the top of the beaker. 
The filled beaker shall then be accurately weighed. The 
weight of the empty beaker shall be subtracted from 
the total weight of the developer obtained shall not be 
more than 200 g. 


9.2 Non-Aqueous Wet Developers 


9.2.1 Non-aqueous wet developers shall be solids 
suspended in non-aqueous liquid. They shall be ready- 
mixed in pressurized or non-pressurized containers. 
Each container shall be provided with a pallet to aid in 
agitation of the material and to indicate proper mixing. 


9.2.2 To check the precipitation rate, the settling rate 
test may be performed as given below: 


Shake the non-aqueous wet developer well. A 
50 ml of material shall then be poured into a 
50 ml stopper-graduated cylinder. Shake the 
material well and keep the cylinder in a rest 
position. Developer powder will start settling. 
Start the stopwatch as soon as level of 
developer powder crosses the 50 ml mark of 
the cylinder. Measure the settling time for 
every 5 ml volume of settled developer 
powder up to total 25 ml of settled developer 
powder. The value of settling period should 
be near to the value declared by the 
manufacturer in their specification. 


9.3 Aqueous Wet Developers 


9.3.1 The aqueous wet developers shall be supplied 
in wet or dry condition. Instructions for mixing shall 
be provided by the manufacturer. 


9.3.2 The water soluble developer shall be mixed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. A 25 
ml of solution shall then be poured into a graduated 
measure and allowed to stand for 4 h. After this, when 
visually examined, no precipitation shall be observed. 


10 SOLVENT REMOVERS 


Solvent removers may be suitable commercial 
formulations or proprietary formulations prepared from 
suitable solvents and shall be identified by the 
manufacture as to which class they belong to. Solvent 
removers shall not leave any residual penetrant on the 
test surface. In addition, they shall also not leave any 
oily residue. 


IS 12889 : 2018 


11 BLACK LIGHT 


Black light used for fluorescent penetrant inspection 
shall emit ultra-violet radiation having wavelength in 
the range of 330 nm-380 nm. The intensity of black 
light on the test surface shall be a minimum of 800 
microwatts/cm? in a circle of diameter 75 mm when 
held at a distance of 30 cm. the intensity of black light 
shall be measured by a calibrated ultra-violet meter. 


12 SYSTEM SENSITIVITY PERFORMANCE 


12.1 Nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr) test panels 
manufactured by reputed manufacturers and provided 
with the calibration test certificates, indicating the size 
of the defects with appropriate photographs shall be 
used for sensitivity evaluation. Based on the visibility 
of the cracks and the type of panels, sensitivity of the 
penetrant system can be classified as follow: 


System Type of Crack Depth x 
Sensitivity Test Panels Width 

Low Coarse Grade 50.0 x 2.0 um 
(approx) 

Low Medium Medium 30.0 x 1.0 um 
Grade 1 (approx) 

High Medium Medium 20.0 x 1.0 um 
Grade 2 (approx) 

Ultra High Fine Grade 10.0 x 1.0 um 
(approx) 


The supplier shall specify sensitivity level of the 
penetrant system. However, if not specified, visible 
penetrant system shall be tested using coarse grade 
panel (50.0 x 2.0 um) whereas, fluorescent penetrant 
system shall be tested using medium grade ‘2’ panel 
(20.0 x 1.0 um). 


12.2 Use of Test Panels for Comparison 


Nickel-chromium (Ni-Cr) test panels can also be used 
for comparing the two penetrants in the following way. 
Each penetrant is placed on the separate section of the 
nickel-chrome panels. If both the sections are on the same 
piece of the test panels, care should be taken to avoid 
any mixing of the two penetrants. This can be simply 
achieved by covering the unused section by a piece of 
paper while penetrant or developer is being applied over 
the other section. Based on the established procedures, 
the sequence of application and general processing shall 
be identical, such as, penetrant dwell, removal and 
developing. The two sections shall be compared for: 


a) Completeness of crack patterns; 


b) Sharpness of crack delineation, that is, 
definition; 


IS 12889 : 2018 


c) Brilliance; and 
d) Contrast. 


12.3 Re-use of Test Panels 


12.3.1 Visible and fluorescent dye penetrants shall be 
tested on separate test panels. In case, the same panels 
are to be used for both the penetrants, the panels shall 
be thoroughly cleaned before reuse. 


12.3.2 Since contaminating effect is likely to occur 
whenever tests are made, panel shall never be reused 
without post cleaning after each test by soaking the 
panel in acetone for 15 to 30 min followed by drying 
in oven at 80°C maximum or natural drying. 


12.4 Test for Penetrants only 
12.4.1 Meniscus Spot Test for Sensitivity 


The method employs a plano-convex lens of 1.06 m 
radius, placed upon an optically flat glass plate or a 
white tile. A few drops of penetrant are put on the plate 
or tile and lens is kept on it so that the penetrant fills 
the space for some distance out from the point of 
contact. At the point of contact, the thickness of 
penetrant films approaches zero and due to this, a 
colourless spot appears around this point. Spot 
diameter, when measured by scale having graduation 
of 0.5 mm, shall not exceed 4.0 mm and 2.5 mm for 
colour contrast penetrants and fluorescent penetrants 
respectively. The black light intensity for viewing 
fluorescent penetrants shall not be less than 


800 W/cm? and it should be kept constant during the 
measurement as the spot diameter varies with the 
incident light intensity. 


12.4.2 Colour Stability Test 


The fluorescent dyes have tendency to lose their ability 
to fluorescence after exposure to ultraviolet or black 
light. In addition to the sensitivity test, the same set up 
can also be used for testing the colour stability of 
fluorescent penetrants. The spot diameter shall not 
increase when the fluorescent penetrant under the lens 
is exposed to black light of constant intensity 
3 000 up W/cm? for 1 h. 


13 PACKING AND LABELLING 


13.1 Net Material Content of Aerosol Container 


Net material content of aerosol container shall be 
measured as per Annex C. 


13.2 The label on containers of penetrant material shall 
bear: 


a) Net content in grams, 

b) Classification of penetrant material, 

c) Manufacturer’s instructions for use, 

d) Batch or lot number, 

e) Month and year of manufacture and expiry, 
f) Storage instructions, 

g) Statutory warning, if applicable, 


ANNEX A 
(Cluase 5.6) 


REMOVABILITY/WASHABILITY TEST FOR PENETRANTS 
(BY METHOD A AND METHOD C) 


A-1 REMOVABILITY TEST FOR SOLVENT 
REMOAVLE PENETRANTS 


A-1.1 Penetrant of these groups shall be removable 
by wiping with a cloth dampened with penetrant 
remover. 


A-1.2 The penetrant removability shall be tested on a 
fairly rough surface, such as austenitic stainless steel 
panels (see IS 5522) of 100 mm x 50 mm x 1.6 mm in 
size and shot-blasted with 150 micrometer average size 
grit, using 2.5 kg/cm? of air pressure with a gun held at 
approximately 500 mm from the panels for about 


10 min. Prior to use, the panels shall be vapour 
degreased, heated to 100°C and cooled to room 
temperature in a desiccator. Alternatively the TAM 
Panel may be used. 


A-1.3 The removability of penetrants of these groups 
shall be tested by pouring approximately 5 ml of the 
sample on centered spot 40 mm from the top of the 
panel. The panel shall be kept inclined at 45° and 
allowed to drain for 15 min. At the end of the drain 
period, the panel shall be wiped with a dry cloth to 
remove the surplus penetrant, after which it shall be 


wiped with a cloth dampened with penetrant remover 
and dried. The developer from the manufacturer shall 
be applied and the panel examined under white or black 
light as appropriate. The penetrants shall not leave any 
background, which may interfere with the interpretation 
of indication. 


A-2 REMOVABILITY TEST FOR POST 
EMULSIFIABLE PENETRANTS 


A-2.1 The penetrants shall be tested as specified 
in A-1.3 except after the penetrant drain period, the 


IS 12889 : 2018 


panel shall be dipped in the applicable emulsifier until 
the penetrant is covered. 


A-2.2 The emulsifier shall have an appropriate dwell 
time as specified by the manufacturer or as determined 
by the experience and the panels shall be washed using 
a special washing fixture, in accordance with the 
standard washing procedure as per Annex D. The panels 
are dried, coated with applicable developer and 
examined under white or black light as appropriate. 
The penetrants shall not leave any background, which 
may interfere with the interpretation of indication. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 9 and Table 1) 
REMOVABILITY TEST FOR DEVELOPER 


B-1 TEST PANELS 


Test panels for this test shall be prepared in accordance 
with A-1.2. 


B-2 DRY DEVELOPERS 


Coat the panel with the developer by dusting and allow 
to stand for 5 min. Place the panel in the wash fixture 
and wash for 1 min in a cold tap water spray at the 
pressure of 30 pounds per square inch gauge (1 pisg = 
6 894.7 pa). Panel shall be air-dried and examined under 
oblique illumination and shall show no trace of 
developer. 


B-3 AQUEOUS 
DEVELOPERS 


AND NON-AQUEOUS 


The suspensions or solutions, as appropriate, mixed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, shall 
be applied to completely cover the test panel. The panel 
shall be dried suitably. After drying, the panel shall be 
placed in the wash fixture and washed for | min witha 
cold water spray at 30 psig. The panel shall be air- 
dried and examined under oblique illumination and 
shall show no trace of developer. 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 13.1 and Table 1) 
DETERMINATION OF NET CONTENT OF AEROSOL CONTAINERS 


C-1 Remove valve protective caps and check the gross 
weight to the nearest 2.0 g of each of the 10 containers 
selected at random from each product in the family to 
determine the lightest and heaviest package in the 
sample lot. Record the gross weight of the lightest and 
heaviest container. 


C-2 Choose the lightest container and shake well. 


C-3 Empty the lightest container by pressing the valve 
actuator until no additional product or gas is expelled. 
If any product remains, it should be expelled as 


completely as possible. Adequate safety precautions 
for fire hazard shall be used during expulsion of the 
propellant gas. 


C-4 Weigh the empty container to determine the wet 
tare weight (weight of the container plus any product 
not expelled). 


C-5 The net content of Aerosol container is determined 
by difference in weight of filled and empty container. 


NOTE — To be carried out by the manufacturer. 


IS 12889 : 2018 


ANNEX D 
(Clause A-2.2) 
STANDARD WASHING PROCEDURE AND ITS EQUIPMENT 


D-1 Panels used for various washability tests shall be 
washed as per the following standard washing 
procedure. 


During washing, panel shall be kept at 45° on a stand. 
An even curtain of water shall be allowed to flow over 
the surface from the top of the panel for a definite length 
of time at a controlled low pressure (approximately 30 


psig). 


D-2 A special fixture may be devised for standard 
washing procedure. One such washing fixture is 
described here. It contains one rectangular tank 
mounted at the top of the fixture. Tank is hinged at the 
bottom so that it can be tilted for drainage. Number of 
valves is fixed to the tank at its bottom that allows 
uniform flow of water over entire width of the panel. 
Below the valves, panel can be kept at 45° on a stand, 
for draining as well as washing. 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 6.1) 
PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINATION OF CHLORIDE AND SULPHUR CONTENT 


E-1 DETERMINATION 
CHLORIDE 


OF LEACHABLE 


E-1.1 Principle 


This method is applicable for the determination of 
leachable chloride. Sample is a treated with isoamyl 
alcohol, leachable chloride is extracted with water and 
estimated by spectrophotometer. 


NOTE — Follow manufacturer’s instruction for operation of 
the spectrophotometer. 


E-1.2 Stock Solution 


a) Deionized water, 

b) Isoamyl alcohol, 

c) 10 percent silver nitrate (Dissolve 10 g of 
silver nitrate in 100 ml of deionized water. 
Store in amber coloured bottle), 

d) Conc. Nitric acid. 

e) 1:1 Nitric acid (Dilute 50 ml of AR grade 
concentrated Nitric acid to 100 ml with 
deionized water), 

f) Chloride Standard of 10 ug/ml (use sodium 
chloride) prepared as below: 

Take 2.648 g of sodium chloride and make up 
to 1 000 ml with deionized water; it gives 
1000 ug/ml stock solution (Solution A). 


Dilute 10 ml of this solution (Solution A) to 
1 000 ml with deionized water to give working 
standard solution of 10 ug/ml (Solution B). 


E-1.3 Procedure 


a) Ina weighing bottle take nearly one-third or 
approximately 10 ml of isoamyl alcohol. 
Weigh the bottle (W,). 

b) To this add 2.0 to 2.5 ml sample, note the 
weight of the sample, mix well and transfer 
into 120 ml separating funnel. The weight of 
the sample is given by W,—W,. In which W, 
represents the weight of the bottle with 
isoamyl alcohol and sample. 

c) Rinse sample bottle with about 10 ml isoamyl 
alcohol and transfer into separating funnel. 

d) Add 20 ml of deionozed water and extract for 
5 min. 

e) Add drop by drop 1:1 nitric acid if separation 
of layer does not take place 
properly. 

f) Collect bottom aqueous layer in a volumetric 
flask of 50 or 100 ml capacity. 

g) To separating funnel again add 20 ml of 
deionized water and extract for 5 min. 

h) Collect bottom aqueous layer. Make up 
solution in volumetric flask of 50 ml capacity 


j) 


k) 


a) 


if the solution is clear. If the aqueous phase 
solution is coloured, extract the aqueous phase 
with 10 ml of isoamyl alcohol. Repeat this step 
if the colour persists. If the aqueous solution 
is turbid as in the case of developer solution 
filter the solution till the filtrate is clear and 
free from turbidity. Make up the solution to 
50 ml, take a suitable aliquot and add to that 
2 ml nitric acid and 2 ml silver nitrate (silver 
nitrate is added just before taking readings). 
Make up the solution to 25 ml. 
Sample readings are compared with standard 
values by taking absorbance using a 
spectrophotometer. Follow manufacturer’s 
instructions for the use. 
Carry out an experiment using all the solutions 
as in the case of sample but omitting the 
sample. Determine the process blank and 
subtract it from the sample reading. 
Calculation: 
(A, = A)xV, 

Chloride, ppm = V,xM 

where 


A, = wg total of chloride in the process 
blank solution, 


A, = ug total of chloride in the sample 


solution used for measurement, 


= volume of the solution, 


V, = volume of the sample aliquot used for 
the measurement, and 


M = mass of sample, in g. 

NOTE — Construct a calibration graph of absorbance 
versus total chloride in 25 ml of the solution used for 
absorbances versus measurement. Use this graph to 
calculate the total amount of chloride in pg of sample 
used for analysis (4,). Calculate similarly the total 
amount in ug of the process blank (4,). 


E-2 DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SULPHUR 
E-2.1 Principle 


This method is applicable for the determination of total 
sulphur. Sulphur in the sample is converted to oxides 
of sulphur by burning the sample in an oxygen 
atmosphere. The resulting oxides are converted to 
sulphate in presence of sodium carbonate containing 
Hydrogen peroxide. The sulphate is measured by a 
spectrophotometric method using Barium chloride. 


E-2.2 Stock Solution 


Conditioning Reagent = 10 ml barium 
chloride + 80 ml water (distilled)+ 10 ml conc. 
hydrochloric acid + 10 ml glycerol, 


b) 


c) 


d) 
e) 


IS 12889 : 2018 


Sodium carbonate 5 percent (dissolve 5 g of 
sodium carbonate in 100 ml of distilled water), 
1:1 Hydrochloric acid (dilute 50 ml of AR 
grade concentrated hydrochloric acid to 100 
ml with distilled water), 

Hydrogen peroxide 30 percent AR grade , 
Sulphur 20 ug/ml 

Take 4.428 5 g of sodium sulphate and make 
up to 1 000 ml. It gives 1 000 ug/ml stock 
solution (Solution A). Dilute 10 ml of this 
solution (Solution A) to 500 ml with deionized 
water to get solution of 20 ug/ml (Solution B). 


E-2.3 Procedure 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


p) 


Take a clean bomb calorimeter and to that 
add 5 ml of 5 percent sodium carbonate and 
5 drops of H,O, and mix thoroughly. 

Tie wire to arms of calorimeter, so as to pass 
the current. 

Tie with cotton thread, a filter paper strip that 
will dip in the crucible where the sample is 
taken. 

In a clean silica glass crucible insert the strip 
of cut filter paper (similar to Whatman Filter 
paper (No. 40) and to that add 1.0 g of sample 
and immediately transfer into bomb 
calorimeter. 

Fix the cover of the bomb and pressurize it 
with oxygen gas (25 psi). 

Pass current so as to ignite the sample and 
allow the sample to burn. 

When sample has completely burnt, switch off 
the current and keep the bomb in a water bath 
for about half an hour. 


After half an hour, remove bomb and release 
the gas pressure. 

Open the bomb and transfer the liquid inside 
the vessel into beaker. 

Wash the crucible lid, side and bottom of the 
bomb and collect the washing in the same 
beaker. 

Sulphur in sample gets oxidized to oxides of 
sulphur, which then dissolves in sodium 
carbonate to form sulphate in presence of 
hydrogen peroxide. 

Make the solution acidic with 1:1 hydrochloric 
acid and make up to 50 ml after filtration. 
Take 25 ml aliquot and add 10 ml conditioning 
reagent containing BaCl,. Digest on water bath 
and after cooling make up to 50 ml. Measure 
the absorbance at 500 nm using distilled water 
as reference. 


Take 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 ml standard sulphate 


IS 12889 : 2018 


solution (of 20 ug/ml) in 100 ml beaker. Add 
10 ml of conditioning reagent containing 
BaCl, and digest in a similar manner and after 
cooling make up to 50 ml. Measure the 
absorbance at 500 nm using distilled water as 
reference. 

q) Prepare a sample blank using 5 ml sodium 
carbonate. In all the cases, process the 
solution as in the case of sample and make up 
the solution to 50 ml after the addition of 10 ml 
of Conditioning Reagent containing barium 


chloride. 
r) Calculate the sulphur content in ppm as 
follows: 
(A, ~A)xV, 
Sulphur (in ppm) =  VixM 
where 


A, = pg total of sulphur in the sample 
process blank solution used for 
measurement. 


A, = ug total of sulphur in the sample 
solution used for measurement, 


= volume of the solution, 


V, 
V, = volume ofthe sample aliquot used for 
measurement, and 


M = mass of sample, in g. 


NOTE — Construct a calibration graph of absorbance 
versus total sulphur in 50 ml of solution used for 
absorbance versus measurement. Use this graph to 
calculate the total amount of sulphur in ug of sample 
used for analysis (A,). Calculate similarly the total 
amount in ug of the process blank (A,). 


E-3 METHODS FOR MEASURING TOTAL 
CHLORINE CONTENT IN COMBUSTIBLE 
LIQUID PENETRANT MATERIALS 
(ALTERNATE METHOD) 


E-3.1 Scope and Application 


E-3.1.1 These methods cover the determination of 
chlorine in combustible liquid penetrant materials, 
liquid or solid. Its range of applicability is 0.001 to 5 
percent using either of the alternative titrimetric 
procedures. These procedures assume that bromine or 
iodine will not be present. If these elements are present, 
they will be detected and reported as chlorine. The full 
amount of these elements will not be reported. 
Chromate interferes with procedures, causing low or 
non-existent end points. The method is applicable only 
to materials that are totally combustible. 


E-3.2 Summary of Methods 


E-3.2.1 The sample is oxidized by combustion in a 
bomb containing oxygen under pressure. The chlorine 
compounds thus liberated are absorbed in a sodium 


carbonate solution and the amount of chloride present 
is determined titrimetrically either against silver nitrate 
with the end point detected potentiometrically (Method 
A) or coulorometrically with the end point detected by 
current flow increase (Method B). 
CAUTION — Strict adherence to all of the provisions prescribed 
hereinafter ensures against explosive rupture of the bomb, or a 
blow-out, provided the bomb is of proper design and 
construction and in good mechanical condition. It is desirable, 
however, that the bomb be enclosed in a shield of steel plate at 


least 12.7 mm thick or equivalent protection be provided against 
unforeseeable contingencies. 


E-3.3 Apparatus 


E-3.3.1 Bomb having a capacity of not less than 300 
ml so constructed that it will not leak during the test 
and the quantitative recovery of the liquids from the 
bomb may be readily achieved. The inner surface of 
the bomb may be made of stainless steel or any other 
material that will not be affected by the combustion 
process or products. Materials used in the bomb 
assembly such as the head gasket and lead wire 
insulation, shall be resistant to heat and chemical action, 
and shall not undergo any reaction that will affect the 
chlorine content of the liquid in the bomb. 


E-3.3.2 Sample Cup — Platinum, 24 mm in outside 
diameter at the bottom, 27 mm in outside diameter at 
the top, 12 mm in height outside and weighing 10 to 11 
g, opaque fused silica, wide-form with and outside 
diameter of 29 mm at the top, a height of 19 mm, anda 
5 ml capacity, or nickel (Kawin capsule form), top 
diameter of 28 mm, 15 mm in height, as 5 ml capacity. 

NOTE — Fused silica crucibles are much more economical 

and longer-lasting than platinum. After each use, they should 

be scrubbed out with fine, wet emery cloth, heated to dull red 


heat over a burner, soaked in hot water for 1 h, then dried and 
stored in a desiccators before reuse. 


E-3.3.3 Firing Wire — Platinum, approximately 
No. 26 B and S gauge. 


E-3.3.4 Ignition Circuit — It shall be capable of 
supplying sufficient current to ignite the nylon thread 
or cotton wicking without melting the wire. 


CAUTION — The switch in the ignition circuit shall 
be of a type that remains open, except when held in 
closed position by the operator. 


E-3.3.5 Nylon Sewing Thread, or Cotton Wicking, 
White 


E-3.4 Purity of Reagents 


E-3.4.1 Reagent grade chemicals shall be used in all 
tests. Unless otherwise indicated, it is intended that all 
reagents shall conform to the specifications of the 
committee on analytical reagents of the American 
Chemical Society, where such specifications are 


available. Other grades may be used, provided it is first 
ascertained that the reagent is of sufficiently high purity 
to permit its use without reducing the accuracy of the 
determination. 


E-3.4.2 Unless otherwise indicated, references to water 
shall be understood to mean 


referee grade reagent water conforming to IS 1070. 


E-3.5 Decomposition 
E-3.5.1 Reagents and Materials 
E-3.5.1.1 Oxygen 


It shall be free of combustible material and halogen 
compounds, available at a pressure of 40 atm (4.05 
MPa). 


E-3.5.1.2 Sodium Carbonate Solution (50 g sodium 
carbonate per liter) — Dissolve 50 g of anhydrous 
Na,CO, or 58.5 g of Na,CO;.H,O) or 135 g of 
Na,CO,.10H,O in water and dilute to one litre. 


E-3.5.1.3 White Oil — refined 
E-3.5.2 Procedure 


E-3.5.2.1 Preparation of Bomb and Sample — Cut a 
piece of firing wire approximately 100 mm in length. 
Coil the middle section (about 20 mm) and attach the 
free ends to the terminals. Arrange the coil so that it 
will be above and to one side of the sample cup. Place 
5 ml of sodium carbonate solution in the bomb, place 
the cover on the bomb and vigorously shake for 15 s to 
distribute the solution over the inside of the bomb. Open 
the bomb, place the sample-filled sample cup in the 
terminal holder, and insert a short length of thread 
between the firing wire and sample. Use of a sample 
weight containing over 20 mg of chlorine may cause 
corrosion of the bomb. The sample weight should not 
exceed 0.4 g if the expected chlorine content is 2.5 
percent or above. If the sample is solid, not more than 
0.2 g should be used. Use 0.8 g of white oil with solid 
samples. If white oil will be used, add it to sample cup 
by means of a dropper at this time (see Notes and 
caution under E-3.5.2.2). 


NOTES 


1 After repeated use of the bomb for chlorine determination, a 
film may be noticed on the inner surface. This dullness should 
be removed by periodic polishing of the bomb. A satisfactory 
method for doing this, is to rotate the bomb in a lathe at about 
300 rpm and polish the inside surface with Grit No. 2/0 or 
equivalent paper coated with a light machine oil to prevent 
cutting and then with a paste of grit-free chromic oxide and 
water. This procedure will remove all, but very deep pits and 
puts a high polish on the surface. Before using the bomb, it 
should be washed with soap and water to remove oil or paste 
left out from the polishing operation. Bombs with porous or 
pitted surfaces should never be used because of the tendency 
to retain chlorine from one sample to the other. Do not use 
more than 1 g total of sample and white oil or other chlorine- 
free combustible material. 


IS 12889 : 2018 


2 If the sample is not readily miscible with white oil, some 
other non-volatile, chlorine-free combustible diluents may be 
employed in place of white oil. However, the combined weight 
of sample and nonvolatile diluents shall not exceed 1 g, some 
solid additives are relatively insoluble, but may be satisfactorily 
burned when covered with a layer of white oil. 

3 The practice of running alternately samples high and low in 
chlorine content should be avoided whenever possible. It is 
difficult to rinse the last traces of chlorine from the walls of the 
bomb and the tendency for residual chlorine to carry over from 
sample to sample has been observed in a number of laboratories. 
When a sample high in chlorine has preceded one low in 
chlorine content, the test on the low-chlorine sample should be 
repeated and one or both of the low values thus obtained should 
be considered suspect if they do not agree within the limits of 
repeatability of this method. 


E-3.5.2.2 Addition of oxygen — Place the sample cup 
in position and arrange the nylon thread, or wisp of 
cotton so that the end dips into the sample. Assemble 
the bomb and tighten the cover securely. Admit oxygen 
slowly (to avoid blowing the sample from the cup) until 
a pressure is reached as indicated in Table 2. 


CAUTION — Do not add oxygen or ignite the sample if the 
bomb has been jarred, dropped, or tilted. 


Table 2 Gauge Pressures 
(Clause E-3.5.2.2) 


Capacity of Bomb, ml Gauge Pressure, atm (M Pa) 


300 to 350 38 (3.85) 40 (4.05) 

350 to 400 35 (3.55) 37 (3.37) 

400 to 450 30 (3.04) 32 (3.24) 

450 to 500 27 (2.74) 29 (2.94) 
NOTE — The minimum pressures are specified to provide 


sufficient oxygen for complete combustion and the maximum 
pressures present a safety requirement. 


E-3.5.2.3 Combustion — Immerse the bomb in a cold- 
water bath. Connect the terminals to the open electrical 
circuit. Close the circuit to ignite the sample. Remove 
the bomb from the bath after immersion for at least ten 
minutes. Release the pressure at a slow, uniform rate 
such that the operation requires not less than 1 min. 
Open the bomb and examine the contents. If traces of 
unburned oil or sooty deposits are found, discard the 
determination, and thoroughly clean the bomb before 
again putting it in use (see Note 1 under E-3.5.2.1). 


E-3.6 Analysis, Method A, Potentiometric Titration 
Procedure 


E-3.6.1 Apparatus 
E-3.6.1.1 Silver billet electrode 
E-3.6.1.2 Glass Electrode, pH measurement type. 


E-3.6.1.3 Burette, 25-ml capacity, 0.05-ml graduations. 
E-3.6.1.4 Millivolt Meter, or expanded scale pH meter 
capable of measuring 0 to 220 mV. 


IS 12889 : 2018 


NOTE — An automatic titrator is highly recommended in place 
of items E-3.6.1.3 through E-3.6.1.4. Repeatability and 
sensitivity of the method are much enhanced by the automatic 
equipment while much tedious effort is avoided. 


E-3.6.2 Reagents and Materials 
E-3.6.2.1 Acetone, chlorine-free 
E-3.6.2.2 Methanol, chlorine-free 


E-3.6.2.3 Silver nitrate solution (0.0282 N) — Dissolve 
4.791 0+ 0.000 5 g of silver nitrate (AgNO,) in water 
and dilute to one litre. 


E-3.6.2.4 Sodium chloride sodium (0.0282 N) — Dry a 
few grams of sodium chloride (NaCl) for 2 h at 130 to 
150°C, weigh out 1.648 0 + 0.000 5 g of the dried NaCl, 
dissolve in water, and dilute to one litre. 


E-3.6.2.5 Sulphuric acid (1+2) — Mix 1 volume of 
concentrated sulphuric acid (H,SO,, sp. gr 1.84) with 
2 volume of water. 


E-3.6.3 Collection of Chlorine Solution 


Remove the sample cup with clean forceps and place 
in a 400-ml beaker. Wash down the walls of the bomb 
shell with a fine stream of methanol from a wash bottle, 
and pour the washings into the beaker. Rinse any residue 
into the beaker. Next, rinse the bomb cover and 
terminals into the beaker. Finally, rinse both inside and 
outside of the sample crucible into the beaker. Washings 
should we equal but not to exceed 100 ml. Add 
methanol to make 100 ml. 


E-3.6.4 Determination of Chlorine 


Add 5 ml of sulphuric acid (1:2) to acidify the 
solution (solution should be acid to litmus and clear 
of white sodium carbonate precipitate). Add 100 ml 
of acetone. Place the electrodes in the solution, start 
the stirrer (if mechanical stirrer is to be used), and 
begin titration. If titration is manual, set the pH meter 
on the expanded milivolt scale and note the reading. 
Add exactly 0.1 ml of silver nitrate solution from 
the burette. Allow a few seconds stirring; then record 
the new milivolt reading. Subtract the second reading 
from the first. Continue the titration, noting each 
amount of silver nitrate solution and the amount of 
difference between the present reading and last 
reading. Continue adding 0.1-ml increments, making 
readings and determining differences between 
readings until a maximum difference between 
readings is obtained. The total amount of silver 
nitrate solution required to produce this maximum 
differential is the end point. Automatic titrators 
continuously stir the sample, add titrant, measure the 
potential difference, calculate the differential, and 
plot the differential on a chart. The maximum 
differential is taken at the end point. 


NOTE — For maximum sensitivity, 0.002 82 N silver nitrate 
solution may be used with the automatic titrator. This dilute 
reagent should not be used with large samples or where chlorine 
content may be over 0.1 percent since these tests will cause 
end points of 10 ml or higher. The large amount of water used 
in such titrations reduces the differential between readings, 
making the end point very difficult to detect. For chlorine 
contents over | percent in samples of 0.8 g or larger, 0.282N 
silver nitrate solution will be required to avoid exceeding the 
10 ml water dilution limit. 


E-3.6.5 Blank 


Make blank determinations with the amount of white 
oil used but omitting the sample. (Liquid samples 
normally require only 0.15 to 0.25 g of white oil while 
solids require 0.7 to 0.8 g.) Follow normal procedure, 
making two or three test runs to be sure the results are 
within the limits of repeatability for the test. Repeat 
this blank procedure whenever new batches of reagents 
or white oil are used. The purpose of the blank run is to 
measure the chlorine in the white oil, the reagents, and 
that introduced by contamination. 


E-3.6.6 Standardization 


Silver nitrate solutions are not permanently stable, so 
the true activity should be checked when the solution 
is first made up and then periodically during the life of 
the solution. This is done by titration of a known sodium 
chloride solution as follows: Prepare a mixture of the 
amounts of the chemicals (sodium carbonate solution, 
sulphuric acid solution, acetone, and methanol) 
specified for the test. Pipet in 5.0 ml of 0.028 2 N 
sodium chloride solution and titrate to the end point. 
Prepare and titrate a similar mixture of all the chemicals 
except the sodium chloride solution, thus obtaining a 
reagent blank reading. Calculate the normality of the 
AgNO, solution as follows : 


5.0x NaCI (1 N) 
AgNO,(1 N)=——, qa 


Vic as A, 
where 

AgNO,(1 N) = normality of the silver nitrate 
solution, 

NaCl(1N) = normality of the sodium chloride 
solution, 

Va = millilitres of silver nitrate solution 
used for the titration including the 
sodium chloride solution, and 

V = millilitres of silver nitrate solution 


used for the titration of the 
reagents only. 


E-3.6.7 Calculation 


Calculation the chlorine content of the sample as 
follows: 


f ; (V; —V,)XNX3.545 
Chlorine (weight percent) = ———______ 


WwW 
where 

V, = millilitres of silver nitrate solution used by 
the sample, 

Vz, = millilitres of silver nitrate solution used by 
the blank, 

N = normality ofthe silver nitrate solution, and 

W = grams of sample used. 


E-3.6.8 Precision and Accuracy 


The following criteria should be used for judging the 
acceptability of results: 


a) Repeatability — Results by the same analyst 
should not be considered doubtful unless they 
differ by more than 0.006 percent or 10.5 
percent of the value determined, whichever is 
higher. 

b) Reproducibility — Results by different 

laboratories should not be considered doubtful 

unless they differ by more than 0.013 percent 
or 21.3 percent of the value detected, 
whichever is higher. 

c) Accuracy — The average recovery of the 

method is 86 percent to 89 percent of the 

actual amount present. 


E-4 DETERMINATION OF ANIONS BY ION 
CHROMATOGRAPHY WITH CONDUCTIVITY 
MEASUREMENT (ALTERNATE METHOD) 


E-4.1 Scope and Application 


E-4.1.1 This method is optimized for the analysis of 
detrimental substances in organic based materials. It 
provides a single instrumental technique for rapid, 
sequential measurement of common anions such as 
bromide, chloride, fluoride, nitrate, nitrite, phosphate, 
and sulphate. 


E-4.2 Summary of Method 


E-4.2.1 The material must be put in the form of an 
aqueous solution before analysis can be attempted. The 
sample is oxidized by combustion in a bomb containing 
oxygen under pressure. The products liberated are 
absorbed in the eluent present in the bomb at the time 
of ignition. This solution is washed from the bomb, 
filtered, and diluted to a known volume. 


E-4.2.1.1 A filtered aliquot of sample is injected into a 
stream of carbonate-bicarbonate eluant and passed 
through a series of ion exchangers. The anions of 
interest are separated on the basis of their relative 
affinities for a low capacity, strongly basic anion 


11 


IS 12889 : 2018 


exchanger (guard and separator column). The separated 
anions are directed onto a strongly acidic cation 
exchanger (suppressor column) where they are 
converted to their highly conductive acid form and the 
carbonate-bicarbonate eluant is converted to weakly 
conductive carbonic acid. The separated anions in their 
acid form are measured by conductivity. They are 
indentified on the basis of retention time as compared 
to standards. Quantitation is by measurement of peak 
area or peak height. Blanks are prepared and analyzed 
in a similar fashion. 


E-4.2.2 Interferences 


Any substance that has a retention time coinciding with 
that of any anion to be determined will interfere. For 
example, relatively high concentrations of low- 
molecular-weight organic acids interfere with the 
determination of chloride and fluoride. A high 
concentration of any one ion also interferes with the 
resolution of others. Sample dilution overcomes many 
interferences. To resolve uncertainties of identification 
or quantitation use the method of known additions. 
Spurious peaks may result from contaminants in reagent 
water, glassware, or sample processing apparatus. 
Because small sample volumes are used, scrupulously 
avoid contamination. 


E-4.2.3 Minimum Detectable Concentration 


The minimum detectable concentration of an anion is 
a function of sample size and conductivity scale used. 
Generally, minimum detectable concentrations are in 
the range of 0.05 mg/l for Fand 0.1 mg/l for Br, CI, 
NO, NO,,PO,*, and SO,” with a 100-ul sample loop 
and a 10-umho full-scale setting on the conductivity 
detector. Similar values may be achieved by using a 
higher scale setting and a electronic integrator. 


E-4.3 Apparatus 
E-4.3.1 Bomb 


Bomb having a capacity of not less than 300 ml, so 
constructed that it will not leak during the test and that 
quantitative recovery of the liquids from the bomb may 
be achieved. The inner surface of the bomb may be 
made of stainless steel or any other material that will 
not be affected by the combustion process or products. 
Material used in the bomb assembly, such as the head 
gasket and lead wire insulation, shall be resistant to 
heat and chemical action, and shall not undergo any 
reaction that will affect the chlorine content of the liquid 
in the bomb. 


E-4.3.2 Sample Cup 


Platinum, 24 mm in outside diameter at the bottom, 27 
mm in outside diameter at the top, 12 mm in height 
outside, and weighing 10 to 11 g; opaque fused silica, 


IS 12889 : 2018 


wide-form with an outside diameter of 29 mm at the 
top, a height of 19 mm, and a 5-ml capacity, or nickel 
(Kawin capsule form), top diameter of 28 mm, 15 mm 
in height, and 5-ml capacity. 
NOTE — Fused silica crucibles are much more economical 
and longer lasting than platinum. After each use, they should 
be scrubbed out with fine, wet emery cloth, heated to dull red 


heat over a burner, soaked in hot water for 1 h then dried and 
stored in a desiccators before reuse. 


E-4.3.3 Firing Wire 
Platinum, approximately No. 26 B and S gage. 
E-4.3.4 Ignition Circuit 


This circuit shall be capable of supplying sufficient 
current to ignite the nylon thread or cotton wicking 
without melting the wire. 


CAUTION — The switch in the ignition circuit shall 
be of a type that remains open, except when held in 
closed position by the operator. 


E-4.3.5 Nylon Sewing Thread, or Cotton Wicking, 
white. 


E-4.3.6 Ion Chromatograph, including an injection 
valve, a sample loop, guard, separator, and suppressor 
columns, a temperature-compensated small-volume 
conductivity cell (6 ul or less), and a strip chart recorder 
capable of full-scale response of 2 s or less. An 
electronic peak integrator is optional. The ion 
chromatograph shall be capable of delivering 2 to 5 ml 
eluant/min at a pressure of 1 400 to 6 900 KPa. 


E-4.3.7 Anion Separator Column 


Anion separator column, with styrene divinyl-benzene- 
based low-capacity pellicular anion-exchange resin 
capable or resolving bromine ion, chlorine ion, fluorine 
ion, nitrate ion, nitrite ion, phosphate ion, and sulphate 
ion; 4mm x 250 mm. 


E-4.3.8 Guard Column 


Guard column, identical to separator column except 4 
mm x 50 mm, to protect separator column from fouling 
by particulates or organics. 


E-4.3.9 Suppressor Column 


Suppressor column, high-capacity cation-exchange 
resin capable of converting eluant and separated anions 
to their acid forms. 


E-4.3.10 Syringe 


Syringe of minimum capacity or 2 ml and equipped 
with a male pressure fitting. 


E-4.4 Reagents 


E-4.4.1 Purity of Reagents — Reagent grade chemicals 
shall be used in all tests. Unless otherwise indicated, it 


12 


is intended that all reagents shall conform to the 
specifications of the committee on Analytical Reagents 
of the American Chemical Society, where such 
specifications are available. Other grades may be used, 
provided it is first ascertained that the reagent has 
sufficiently high purity to permit its use without 
lessening the accuracy of the determination. 


E-4.4.2 Deionized or Distilled Water, free from 
interferences at the minimum detection limit of each 
constituent and filtered through a 0.2 um membrane 
filter to avoid plugging columns. 


E-4.4.3 Eluant Solution, Sodium Bicarbonate — 
Sodium Carbonate (0.003M NaHCO, — 0.0024 M 
Na,CO;) 


Dissolve 1.008 g sodium bicarbonate and 1.017 6 g 
sodium carbonate in water and dilute to 4 litre. 


E-4.4.4 Regenerant Solution 1, Sulphuric Acid, 1 N— 
Use this regenerant when suppressor is not a 
continuously regenerated one. 


E-4.4.5 Regenerant Solution 2, Sulphuric Acid, 
0.025 N — Dilute 2.8 ml conc sulphuric acid (H,SO,) 
to 4 litre or 100 ml regenerant solution 1 to 4 litre. Use 
this regenerant with continuous regeneration fiber 
suppressor system. 


E-4.4.6 Standard Anion Solutions, 100 mg/ml — 
Prepare a series of standard anion solutions by weighing 
the indicated amount of salt, dried to a constant weight 
at 105°C to 1 000 ml. Store in plastic bottles in a 
refrigerator; these solutions are stable for at least one 
month as indicated in Table 3. 


Table 3 Standard Anion Solutions 
(Clause E-4.4.6) 


Anion Salt Amount 
g/l 
CL NaCI 1.648 5 
F- NaF 2.2100 
Br- NaBr 1.287 6 
NO3. NaNO; 1.3707 
NO>. NaNO, 1.499 8 
Po4* KH>PO, 1.433 0 
so4* KSO, 1.814 1 


E-4.4.7 Combined Working Standard Solution, High 
Range — Combine 10 ml of the Cl, F, NO,, NO,” 
and PO,* standard anion solutions. 1 ml of the Br, 
and 100 ml of the SO,” standard solutions, dilute to 
1000 mL, and store in a plastic bottle protected from 
light; contains 10 mg/l each Cl, F, NO,, NO, and 
PO,>, 1 mg Br/l, and 100 mg SO,7/1. Prepare fresh 
daily. 


E-4.4.8 Combined Working Standard Solution, Low 
Range — Dilute 100 ml combined working standard 


solution, high range, to 1000 ml and store in a plastic 
bottle protected from light; contains 1.0 mg/l each 
Cl, F, NO,, NO, and PO,>, 0.1 mg Br/I, and 10 mg 
SO,7/l. Prepare fresh daily. 


E-4.4.9 Alternative Combined Working Standard 
Solutions — Prepare appropriate combinations 
according to anion concentration to be determined. If 
NO, and PO,> and not included, the combined working 
standard is stable for one month. 


E-4.5 Decomposition Procedure 
E-4.5.1 Preparation of Bomb and Sample 


Cut a piece of firing wire approximately 100 mm in 
length. Coil the middle section (about 20 mm) and 
attach the free ends to the terminals. Arrange the coil 
so that it will be above and to one side of the sample 
cup. Place 5 ml of sodium carbonate/sodium 
bicarbonate solution in the bomb, place the cover on 
the bomb, and vigorously shake for 15 s to distribute 
the solution over the inside of the bomb. Open the 
bomb, place the sample-filled sample cup in the 
terminal holder, and insert a short length of thread 
between the firing wire and the sample. The sample 
weight used should not exceed 1 g. If the sample is a 
solid, add a few drops of white oil at this time to ensure 
ignition of the sample. 


E-4.5.1.1 Use of sample weights containing over 20 
mg of chlorine may cause corrosion of the bomb. To 
avoid this it is recommended that the samples 
containing over 2 percent chlorine, the sample weight 
be based on as indicated in Table 4. 


Table 4 Sample Weight with Respect to the 
Chlorine Content in the Sample 
(Clause E-4.5.1.1) 


Chlorine Content, Sample Wight, g White Oil 
percent Weight, g 
2to5 0.4 0.4 
5 to 10 0.2 0.6 
10 to 20 0.1 0.7 
20 to 50 0.05 0.7 


CAUTION — Do not use more than 1 g total of sample 
and white oil or other fluorine-free combustible 
material. 


E-4.5.2 Addition of Oxygen 


Place the sample cup in position and arrange the nylon 
thread, or wisp of cotton so that the end dips into the 
sample. Assemble oxygen slowly (to avoid blowing the 
sample from the cup) until a pressure is reached as 
indicated in Table 5. 


CAUTION — Do not add oxygen or ignite the sample 
if he bomb has been jarred, dropped, or tilted. 


13 


IS 12889 : 2018 


Table 5 Gauge Pressures 
(Clause E-4.5.2) 


Capacity of Guage Pressure, atm 
Bomb, ml 
300 to 350 38 40 
350 to 400 35 37 
400 to 450 30 32 
450 to 500 27 29 


D The minimum pressures are specified to provide sufficient 
oxygen for complete combustion and the maximum pressures 
present a safety requirement. 


E-4.5.3 Combustion 


Immerse the bomb in a cold-water bath. Connect the 
terminals to the open electrical circuit. Close the circuit 
to ignite the sample. Remove the bomb from the bathe 
after immersion for at least 10 min. Release the pressure 
at a slow, uniform rate such that the operation requires 
not less than 1 min. Open the bomb and examine the 
contents. If traces of unburned oil or sooty deposits 
are found, discard the determination, and thoroughly 
clean the bomb before again putting it in use. 


E-4.5.4 Collection of Solution 


Remove the sample cup with clean forceps and rinse 
with deionized water and filter the washings into a 100- 
ml volumetric flask. Rinse the walls of the bomb shell 
with a fine stream of deionized water from a wash 
bottle, and add the washings through the filter paper to 
the flask. Next, rinse the bomb cover and terminals and 
add the washings through the filter into the volumetric 
flask. Finally, add deionized water to bring the contents 
of the flask to the line. Use aliquots of this solution for 
the ion chromatography (IC) analysis. 


E-4.6 Procedure 
E-4.6.1 System Equilibration 


Turn on ion chromatograph and adjust eluant flow rate 
to approximate the separation achieved in Fig.1 
(2 to 3 ml/min). Adjust detector to desired setting 
(usually 10 umho) and let system come to equilibrium 
(15 to 20 min). A stable base line indicates equilibrium 
conditions. Adjust detector off-set to zero-out eluant 
conductivity; with the fiber suppressor adjust the 
regeneration flow rate to maintain stability, usually 2.5 
to 3 ml/min. 


E-4.6.1.1 Set up the ion chromatograph in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s instructions. 


E-4.6.2 Calibration 


Inject standards containing a single anion or a mixture 
and determine approximate retention times. Observed 
times vary with conditions but if standard eluant and 
anion separator column are used, retention always in 
the order Fluorine ion, Chlorine ion, nitrite ion, 


IS 12889 : 2018 


ja 
POS 


cl” 


NO3 


INJECT 


NO7 
2 Br- 


MINUTES 


sO, 


15 20 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL ANION PROFILE 


phosphate ion, Bromide ion, nitrate ion, and sulphate 
ion. Inject at least three different concentrations for 
each anion to be measured and construct a calibration 
curve by plotting peak height or area against 
concentration on linear graph paper. Recalibrate 
whenever the detector setting is changed. With a system 
requiring suppressor regeneration, nitrite ion interaction 
with the suppressor may lead to erroneous nitrite ion 
results; make this determination only when the 
suppressor is at the same stage of exhaustion as during 
standardization or recalibrate frequently. In this type 
of system the water dip (see caution under E-4.5.2) 
may shift slightly during suppressor exhaustion and with 
a fast run column this may lead to slight interference 
for fluorine ion or chlorine ion. To eliminate this 
interference, analyze standards that bracket the 
expected result or eliminate the water dip by diluting 
the sample with eluant of by adding concentrated eluant 
to the sample to give the same bicarbonate ion/ 
carbonate ion concentration as in the eluant. If sample 
adjustments are made, adjust standards and blanks 
identically. 

NOTE — Water dip occurs because water conductivity in 


sample is less than eluant conductivity (eluant is diluted by 
water). 


E-4.6.2.1 If linearity is established for a given detector 
setting, it is acceptable to calibrate with a single 
standard. Record the peak height or area and retention 


14 


time to permit calculation of the calibration factor, F. 
E-4.6.3 Sample Analysis 


Remove sample particulates, if necessary, by filtering 
through a pre-washed 0.2-um-porediam membrane 
filter. Using a pre-washed syringe of | to 10 ml capacity 
equipped with a male luer fitting inject sample or 
standard. Inject enough sample to flush sample loop 
several times: for 0.1 ml sample loop inject at least 1 
ml. Switch ion chromatograph from load to inject mode 
and record peak heights and retention. 


Times on strip chart recorder. After the last peak (SO,7-) 
has appeared and the conductivity signal has returned 
to base line, another sample can be rejected. 


E-4.6.4 Regeneration 


For systems without fiber suppressor regenerate 
with 1 N sulphuric acid in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions when the conductivity base 
line exceeds 300 umho when the suppressor column is 
on line. 


E-4.7 Calculation 


E-4.7.1 Calculate concentration of each anion, in mg/ 
l, by referring to the appropriate calibration curve. 
Alternatively, when the response is shown to be linear, 
use the following equation: 


C = HxFxD 


where 


C = mganion/l, 


H = peak height or area, 


F = response factor — concentration of standard/ 


height (or area) of standard, and 


IS 12889 : 2018 
D = dilution factor for those samples requiring 
dilution. 
E-4.8 Precision and Bias 


E-4.8.1 Samples or reagent water to which were added 
the common anions were analyzed in 15 laboratories 
with the results shown in Table 6. 


Table 6 Precision and Accuracy Observed for Anions 
at Various Concentration Levels in Reagent Water 
(Clause E-4.8.1) 


Anion Amount Added Amount Found Overall Precision Single operator Significant Bias 
Precision 95 percent 

mg/l mg/l mg/l mg/l Level 

F- 0.48 0.49 0.05 0.03 No 

F- 4.84 4.64 0.52 0.46 No 

Cl 0.76 0.86 0.38 0.11 No 

Cl- 17 17.2 0.82 0.43 No 

Cl 455 471 46 13 No 

NO, 0.45 0.09 0.09 0.04 Yes, neg 

NO; 21.8 19.4 1.9 1.3 Yes, neg 

Br-? 0.25 0.25 0.04 0.02 No 

Br- 13.7 12.9 1.0 0.6 No 

PO,*- 0.18 0.10 0.06 0.03 Yes, neg 

PO,- 0.49 0.34 0.15 0.17 Yeas, neg 

NO3- 0.50 0.33 0.16 0.03 No 

NO3- 15.1 14.8 1.15 0.9 No 

SO,- 0.51 0.52 0.07 0.03 No 

S04- 43.7 43.5 25 2:2 No 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (5213). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


