NAT HIAF IS 17190 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ат SIN Ue eh iret AY ҸҸ 
% feu mez — fare 


Grouts for Filling of Joints of Tiles 
and Stones — Specification 


ICS 91.100.10; 91.100.23 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 7 


Flooring, Wall finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Flooring, 
Wall finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


This standard specifies the requirements of different types of tile grouts suitable for filling of joints between tiles 
and stones of different porosity on various substrates. 


Tile grouts are classified in five types based on their performances and chemical nature of their binders: 
a) Cementitious grout (Type CG1), 
b) Cementitious grout (Type CG2), 
c) Reaction resin grout (Type RG1), 
d) Reaction resin grout (Type RG2), and 
e) Modified resin grout (Type MRG). 
The types have specific characteristics in terms of application properties and final performance. 


Grout supplied in accordance with this standard, when mixed and spread in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions, shall be suitable for the practical process of those types of tile/stone for which they are recommended 
by the engineer. 


The manufacturer of the grout products shall give all the information necessary for filling of grout, such as 
surface preparation, mixing of grout, application of grout and cleaning the grouted surfaces. The manufacturer’s 
instructions for all the above shall be carefully followed while using the grout products. All the tools and accessories 
used for the mixing and application of grouts shall be stored properly, and cleaned thoroughly with clean water or 
any other cleaner as specified by the manufacturer. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following standards: 


ISO 13007-3 : 2010 Ceramic tiles — Grouts and adhesives — Part 3: Terms, definitions and specifications 
for grouts 
ISO 13007-4 : 2013 Ceramic tiles — Grouts and adhesives — Part 4: Test methods for grouts 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex H. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 


observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).’ 


IS 17190 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GROUTS FOR FILLING OF JOINTS OF TILES AND 
STONES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements and test 
methods for grouts used for filling of joints between 
tiles, stones and mosaics for internal and external 
installations on floors and walls. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encourages to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

1727 : 1967 Methods of tests for pozzolanic 
materials (first revision) 

9459 : 1980 Specification for apparatus for 
use in measurement of length 
change of hardened cement paste, 
mortar and concrete 

10078 : 1982 Specification for jolting apparatus 
used for testing cement 

15477 :2019 Adhesives for use with ceramic, 
mosaic and stone tiles — 
Specifications (first revision) 

3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, following definitions 
shall apply. 


3.1 Abrasion Resistance — Resistance of grout to 
wear. 


3.2 Additional Characteristics — Characteristics for 
specific service conditions where enhanced levels of 
performance are required. 


3.3 Application Methods — Method for filling the 
joints between tiles and cleaning the tiles. 


3.4 Cementitious Grout — Mixture of hydraulic 
binding agents, aggregates, inorganic and organic 
additives, which can be mixed with water or liquid 
admix just before use. Grouts meeting this specification 
may or may not contain polymers. 


3.5 Chemical Resistance — Resistance of grout to 
chemical agents. Characteristics of chemical resistance 
or limit values of chemical agents shall be specified by 
the buyer for their special requirements, if any. 


3.6 Compressive Strength — Resistance of the grout 
to failure under compression exerted on two opposite 
points. 


3.7 Deformability — Resistance of hardened grout 
to be deformed by stresses between the tiles without 
damage to the installed surface/tile. 


3.8 Final Cleaning Time — Time interval between 
filling the joints with grout and starting to clean the 
tiles/stones for the second time. 


3.9 Flexural Strength — Resistance of the grout to 
failure under flexure applied at three points. 


3.10 Grouting Time — Minimum time interval after 
installation of tiles/stones, after which the grout can be 
applied to the joints. 


3.11 Initial Cleaning Time — Time interval between 
filling the joints with grout and starting to clean the 
tiles/stones. 


3.12 Linear Shrinkage — Reduction in length of a 
grout during hardening. 


3.13 Liquid Admix (Latex Additive) — A special 
aqueous polymer dispersion to be mixed with a 
cementitious grout on site. 


3.14 Modified Resin Grout — A single or multi- 
component mixture of binder, aggregates, inorganic 
and/or organic additives in which hardening occurs by 
chemical reaction or air curing. 


3.15 Pot Life — Maximum time interval during which 
the grout can be used after mixing. 


3.16 Reaction Resin Grout — A single or multi- 
component mixture of synthetic resin, aggregates, 
inorganic and/or organic additives in which hardening 
occurs by chemical reaction. 


3.17 Service Time — Minimum time after which 
the grouted tile/stone installation can be put to use. 
Manufacturer shall define the service times for various 
types of traffic conditions. 


IS 17190 : 2020 


3.18 Shelf Life — Time of storage under stated 
conditions during which a grout/liquid admix may be 
expected to maintain its working properties. 


3.19 Slaking Time (Maturing Time) — Interval 
between the time when the grout is mixed and the time 
when it is ready for application. 


3.20 Tile Grout — Any suitable product used to fill the 
joints between various types of tiles and stones with 
the exception of movement joints and expansion joints. 


3.21 Transverse Deformation — Deflection recorded 
at the center when a beam of hardened grout is subjected 
to three-point loading. 


3.22 Wall and Floor Tiles — Tiles made of 
materials such as ceramic, vitrified, glass, porcelain, 
metal, concrete, cement, natural and engineered 
(agglomerated) stones. 


3.23 Water Absorption — Amount of water absorbed 
by capillary action when the grout surface is in contact 
with water without any additional pressure. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


4.1 Cementitious Grout (Type CG1) 


Grout made up of a mixture of cement, with or without 
graded sand and additives that provide water retentivity, 
uniformly colored material and meet the requirements 
given in Table 1. These are used for filling joints having 
widths up to 5 mm from grouts made without graded 
sand, and for joints having widths up to 12 mm from 
grouts made with graded sand. 


4.2 Cementitious Grout (Type CG2) 


Grout made up of a mixture of cement, with or 
without graded sand, and other ingredients including 
re-dispersable, latex/polymer powder (to which only 
water is added at the job site) or a liquid latex mixture 
that provide water retentivity, uniformly colored 
material and meet the requirements given in Table 1. 
In latex form, it is added as a replacement for part or 
all of the mixing water. These are used for filling joints 
having widths up to 5 mm from grouts made without 
graded sand, and for joints having widths up to 12 mm 
for grouts made with graded sand. 


4.3 Reaction Resin Grout (Type RG1) 


Grout made up of resin composition, essentially a 100 
percent solid system, that is supplied in two or more 
parts to be mixed immediately before used for filling 
joints, and after application, suitable cleaner is used in 
order to expedite cleaning from the surfaces before the 
product hardens; and shall meet the requirements given 
in Table 1. 


4.4 Reaction Resin Grout (Type RG2) 


Grout made up of resin composition, not essentially 
a 100 percent solid system, that is supplied in two or 
more parts to be mixed immediately before used for 
filling joints and that is partially emulsified by water, 
after application, in order to expedite cleaning from the 
surfaces during application before the product hardens 
and shall meet the requirements given in Table 1. 


4.5 Modified Resin Grout (Type MRG) 


Grout made up of materials other than cement, and not 
covered by Type ВСІ or Type RG2 and shall meet the 
requirements given in Table 1. These are used for filling 
of joints of width up to 12 mm. These special grouts 
may belong to resin and modified resin family with 
additional requirement of deformability which qualifies 
this grout for highly demanding and flexible substrates 
like exterior applications. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


Grouts shall comply with the requirements given in 
Table 1. 


6 PACKING 


Grout shall be suitably packed in leak proofand moisture 
proof bags or containers, and liquid admixture/liquid 
components of grouts shall be bottled in suitable leak 
proof and moisture proof containers. 


7 MARKING 


7.1 The bags or liquid container shall be marked 
indelibly with the following: 

a) Name of the product; 

b) Manufacturer's mark and place of origin; 


c) Date or code of production, shelf life and 
conditions of storage; 


d) Type of grout; and 

е) Instructions for use: 
1) Mix proportions, if applicable; 
2) Maturing time, if applicable; 
3) Pot life; 
4) Mode of application; 


5) Delay for cleaning and service time, if 
applicable; or 


6 


NOTE — In the designation of a grout, information about 
special properties can be included when the product is intended 
for use in specific applications. This information shall be 
marked on the packaging or provided in the technical data 
sheet/test certificate along with the product. 


— 


Field of application. 


IS 17190 : 2020 


Table 1 Requirements for Grouts 
( Clauses 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5 and 5) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirements Method of 
Test, Ref to 


Type CG1  TypeCG2 ТуреКС1 TypeRG2 Туре MRG 


(0 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 

1) Linear shrinkage, percent, Max 0.30 0.20 0.15 0.15 N.A. Annex B 
ii) Water absorption after 30 min, percent, Max 15 10 0.5 0.5 5 Annex C 
iii) Water absorption after 240 min, percent, see Notel seeNotel  seeNotel seeNotel see Note 1 Annex C 

Max (optional) 

iv) Compressive strength, MPa, Min 15 17 45 20 15 Annex D 
v) Flexural strength, MPa, Min 2.5 3 30 12 5 Annex D 
vi) Abrasion resistance, percent, Max 3.0 2.5 0.5 0.5 2.5 Annex E 
vii) Chemical resistance (optional) N.A. N.A. see Note2 see Note2 see Note 2 Annex F 


viii Transverse deformation, mm, Min 
) N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 2:3 Annex G 
NOTES 

1 Limits of water absorption after 240 min may be decided by mutual agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


2 Limits of chemical resistance against specific chemical agents may be decided by mutual agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


7.2 BIS Certification Marking assessment schemes under the provisions of 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 


IS 17190 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, E-3, F-1 and G-1 ) 
SAMPLING AND MIXING PROCEDURE 


A-1 SAMPLING 


A representative sample of at least 2 kg shall be used. 


A-2 CONDITIONING 


Condition all the test materials, including water, for 
at least 24 h under standard conditions, that is, at a 
temperature of 27 + 2 °C and a relative humidity of 
65 + 5 percent. Unless otherwise stated, all tests shall 
be carried out under standard conditions only. 


A-3 MIXING PROCEDURE 


A-3.1 Cementitious Grout 


Add the potable water/liquid admix in the ratio 
designated by the grout manufacturer to the mixing 
bowl, start mixing and add the entire grout powder to 
the mixer (conforming to the requirements for mixer 
given in IS 1727) within 15 s. Mix for an additional 
15 s, stop and scrape down the bowl and the paddle, 
and mix for an additional 60 s to obtain a workable mix 


with complete and visually uniform wetting of the grout 
powder. Slake for the amount of time recommended 
by the manufacturer and after slaking, mix for an 
additional 15 s. Mixed grout shall not be used after 1 hr 
unless otherwise stated by the manufacturer. 


The resulting grout shall be workable and free of lumps, 
but possess enough consistency so that, where taken 
from the container, it will hang on a margin trowel. 


A-3.2 Reaction Resin Grout 


Blend the parts supplied using a suitable hand tool or 
machine mixer as per the manufacturer’s directions 
for mixing, making sure all the dry ingredients are 
thoroughly and uniformly wetted. 


A-3.3 Modified Resin Grout 


The manufacturer’s instructions of mixing and 
application shall be followed and shall meet the 
requirement of clean ability, as defined by the 
manufacturer. 


ANNEX B 
( Table 1, Annex C and Annex D ) 


DETERMINATION OF LINEAR SHRINKAGE 


B-1 Linear shrinkage shall be tested following the 
general test conditions and procedures given in Annex 
A and the instructions given below. 


B-2 APPARATUS 


B-2.1 Three Gang Moulds, used to prepare prismatic 
specimens (40 + 0.1) mm x (40 + 0.1) mm x 
(160 + 0.4) mm, with ground surfaces, made of steel 
(see Fig. 1). Holes for fitting suitable pins shall be 
pierced into the sides of the moulds corresponding to 
the ends of test specimens. 


Six smooth inserts: rigid, non-absorbent frames, such 
as polyethylene or polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), 
with dimensions of (40 + 0.1) mm x (160 + 0.4) mm 
and thickness of (15 + 0.1) mm. 


B-2.2 Jolting Apparatus, or Jolting Table, as per 
IS 10078. 


B-2.3 Measuring Apparatus, as per IS 9459. 


B-2.4 Calibration, Rod or Reference Rod, used as 
a standard length against which gauge readings can 
be tested. The rod shall be made of material having a 
negligible coefficient of expansion. 


B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


Assemble suitable mould to prepare samples. Mould 
the specimens immediately after the mixing ofthe grout 
as per Annex A, with the mould firmly clamped to the 
jolting table. Introduce, using a suitable scoop, the first 
of two layers of grout into each of the compartments, 
directly from the mixing bowl. Spread the layer 
uniformly, then compact using 60 jolts. Introduce the 
second layer of grout, level and compact with a further 
60 jolts. Lift the mould gently from the jolting table, 
strike off excess material and smooth the surface with 
a flat trowel. Wipe off the grout left on the perimeter of 
the mould. Place a 210 mm x 185 mm plate glass sheet 


of 6 mm thickness on the mould. A plate of steel or 
other impermeable material of similar size may be used. 
Place the mould, suitably identified, on a horizontal 
base under standard conditions. After 24 h, carefully 
remove the specimens from the mould. Prepare three 
specimens for each grout. 


B-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


Immediately after de-moulding, determine the length, 
L, of the test samples using the measuring apparatus. 
Keep the de-moulded prisms on a 10 mm dimension 
under standard conditions leaving a clearance of at 


I-—15 


APPROX 


IS 17190 : 2020 


least 25 mm between specimens. Take a reading of 
each specimen, L, after 27 days + 12 h from the initial 
reading. 


B-5 EVALUATION OF RESULTS 

Calculate the linear shrinkage (in percent), as given 
below: 

Linear shrinkage (percent) = (L,— L/L, x 100 


Report the individual and mean linear shrinkage 
(in percent) of the three specimens, correct to nearest 
0.01 percent. 


160+ 0.4 


r-------- 


z 


T 


| 

| 

] 

| 

] 

| 

] 

| 

| 

| 
V. 
Ie 
| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

l 

| 

| 


х 
чес Е 


ER 
] 


1 к= 


All dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 1 TvPiCAL MOULD FOR PRISMATIC SPECIMENS (40 x 40 x 160) 


IS 17190 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Table 1) 


DETERMINATION OF WATER ABSORPTION 


C-1 Water absorption shall be tested following the 
general test conditions and procedures given in 
Annex A and the instructions given below. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Gang Moulds, as described in B-2.1. 


C-2.2 Three Inserts, 1 mm thick, of rigid plastic 
(for example, PTFE) or high density polyethylene 
(HDPE) with no release agent. 


C-2.3 Jolting Apparatus, or Jolting Table, as per 
IS 10078. 


C-2.4 Tray, with a flat base large enough to contain 
three test specimens. 


C-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


Place the inserts approximately in the middle of the 
mould, parallel to the smaller faces. Following the 
procedure described in B-3, prepare six specimens of 
each grout. After demoulding, condition the samples 
for 20 days under standard conditions. Seal the four 
sides with dimension 40 mm x 80 mm by means of 
a neutral curing silicone sealant such that they are 
water impermeable. Then condition the samples for 


7 additional days. 


C-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


Twenty eight days after mixing, weigh each test sample 
to the nearest 0.1 g, m, and then place them vertically 
in the tray, with the unsealed surface down on round 
or triangular spacers with dimension 40 mm x 40 mm, 
immersed in water, 5 mm to 10 mm deep, taking care 
to prevent the prism faces from coming in contact with 
each other. Maintain the water level constant by adding 
water when necessary. After 30 min, remove the test 
samples from water, quickly dry them by blotting with 
a dampened cloth and immediately weigh to the nearest 
0.1 g, m,. Replace in the tray and repeat the procedure 
after an additional 210 min, if required. 


C-5 EVALUATION AND EXPRESSION OF 
RESULTS 


Calculate the water absorption (in percent), as given 
below: 
Water absorption (percent) = ( m, — m,)/m,x 100 


Report the individual and mean water absorption 
(in percent) of the six specimens, correct to nearest 0.01 
percent. 


ANNEX D 
( Table 1) 


DETERMINATION OF FLEXURAL AND COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH 


D-1 Flexural and compressive strength shall be tested 
following the general test conditions and procedures 
given in Annex A and the instructions given below. 


D-2 APPARATUS 
D-2.1 Gang Moulds, as described in B-2.1. 


D-2.2 Jolting Apparatus or Jolting Table, as per 
IS 10078. 


D-2.3 Testing Machine, of flexural strength type, 
capable of applying the load with suitable capacity and 
sensitivity for the test. The machine shall be provided 
with a flexure device as shown in Fig. 2. 


D-2.4 Testing Jig, as shown in Fig. 3, incorporated 
in the lower platen; the upper platen receives the load 
from the compressive strength testing machine through 
an intermediate spherical seating. 


D-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMENS 


Following the procedure described in B-3, prepare 
three specimens of each grout. 


D-3.1 Flexural 
Conditions 


Strength Under Standard 


Keep the de-moulded prism in standard conditions for 
27 days leaving a clearance of at least 25 mm between 
prisms. After conditioning has been completed, place 
the prism in the testing machine (see D-2.3) with 
one side face on the supporting rollers and with 
the longitudinal axis normal to the support. Apply 
the load vertically by means of the loading roller 
to the opposite side face of the prism and increase 
it smoothly at the rate of 50 + 10 N/s until fracture. 
Keep the prism halves in standard conditions until 
tested in compression. 


D-3.2 Compressive 
Conditions 


Strength under Standard 


Test the prism halves broken in flexure, by means 
of the equipment given in D-2.4. Centre the prism 
halves laterally to the platens of the machine within 
+0.5 mm, and longitudinally, such that the end face of 
the prism overhangs the platens or auxiliary plates by 
about 10 mm. Increase the load smoothly at the rate of 
(2 400 + 200) N/s over the entire load application until 
fracture. 


D-4 EVALUATION OF RESULTS 


D-4.1 Flexural Strength 


The flexural strength, L,, is calculated using equation 
given below: 


L,= (1.5 Р,х Ly MPa 


A 


IS 17190 : 2020 


where 


b = length of the side of the square section of the 
prism, in mm; 

P.= load applied to the middle of the prism at 
fracture, in N; and 


L — distance between the supports, in mm. 
Report the individual and mean flexural strength of the 
three specimens, correct to nearest 0.1 MPa. 
D-4.2 Compressive Strength 


The compressive strength, L, is calculated using 
equation given below: 


L = P/AMPa 
where 
Р, 


А = cross sectional area of the specimen, in тт? 


maximum load at fracture, in N; and 


Report the individual and mean compressive strength 
of the six specimens, correct to nearest 0.1 MPa. 


t E 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic 2. TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT OF LOADING FOR FLEXURAL STRENGTH TESTING 


IS 17190 : 2020 


== 
10 


7 
[7 
SS NS 8 
| 
KEY 
] - SPHERICAL SEATING OF MACHINE 7 - LOWER PLATEN OF THE JIG 
2 — UPPER PLATEN OF THE MACHINE 8 — LOWER PLATEN OF THE MACHINE 
3 — SPHERICAL SEATING OF JIG 9 — RETURN SPRING 
4 — UPPER PLATEN OF THE JIG 10 - SLIDING ASSEMBLY 
5 — SPECIMEN 11 - BALL BEARINGS 


6 - LOWER PLATE 


Fic 3. TYPICAL JIG FOR COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH TESTING 


IS 17190 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Table 1) 


DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO ABRASION 


E-1 Resistance to abrasion shall be tested following 
the general test conditions and procedures given in 
Annex A and the instructions given below. 


E-2 APPARATUS REQUIRED 


Abraser (single head or double head) as shown in 
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 or equivalent model with roller 
wheels, supplementary weights, precision balance, 
vacuum suction portion, cleaner brush, screw driver for 
specimen platform. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


Prepare the specimen having 125 mm diameter and 
thickness of 6 + 1 mm with the grout mix conditioned 
and prepared as per Annex A. Cure them under 
standard laboratory conditions for a period (28 days in 
case of cementitious grouts) specified in technical data 
sheet of the grout for full curing. The samples should 
be conditioned to the testing atmosphere for at least 
24 h (48 h, in case of organic materials). 


Take at least 3 samples, duly cleaned by brush. Weigh 
the samples before starting the test as pre-weight, A. 
Switch on the machine and auxiliary vacuum unit and 
adjust precision vacuum nozzle. Keep the abrading 
wheel on the abrading arm. For grout and its products, 
H-18 calibrade or equivalant wheels should be used. 
Put the machine on refacing mode. For new rollers, 


PRECISION VACUUM 

NOZZLE ADJUSTMENT 
COUNTER-WEIGHT 
MOUNTING STUD 


AUXILIARY 
WEIGHT 


ABRADING 
WHEEL 


| г> 
ке 


INTERFACE 


JAL DISPLAY 
LID cy 
LID 


run 50 refacing cycles 2 times, and for old rollers, 
run 25 cycles, if the last completed cycles were 
less than 1 000, else run for 50 refacing cycles. S11 
refacing sheet or equivalant sheet should be used 
for the refacing activities. Put the machine in testing 
mode before starting the test.Keep the samples tightly 
in the specimen holder using bolts. Set the speed at 
60 rpm for effective abrasion and the number of 
abrasion cycles at 300. Press start button for the testing. 
If the abraser is double header, both the abrasion heads 
may be used at the same time. Ensure the vacuum unit 
is working with the test. This will help to take away 
the abraded mass from the surface. After completing 
the test, demount the samples from the surface. Weigh 
the samples again with precision balance, B. Before 
weighing make sure all the powder particles were 
cleaned from the specimen surface. 


E-4 CALCULATION 


Calculate the percentage weight loss using the weight 
difference between initial and final weight of the 
sample, as given below: 


Percent weight loss (after 300 cycles) = (А-В)/А x 100 
where 

A — initial weight of the sample; and 

B= final weight of the sample. 


VACUUM PICK-UP 
OZZLE 


AUXILIARY WEIGHT 
MOUNT 


SPECIMEN 
HOLDER 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL ABRASER 


IS 17190 : 2020 


PAD 


M 


ESS 


DRIVE PIN 


Eel < 


ИЕ 22S 


E = 


SCREW 


NUT 


CLAMP PLATE 


ТУ 


\ 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL Cross — SECTION OF SPECIMEN HOLDER 


ANNEX F 
( Table 1) 


DETERMINATION OF CHEMICAL RESISTANCE 


F-1 Chemical resistance shall be tested following F-3 TEST SPECIMENS 


the general test conditions and procedures given in 
Annex A and the instructions given below. 


F-2 APPARATUS 


F-2.1 Cylindrical Mould, 25 + 1 mm in diameter by 
25 + 1 mm high. The moulds may be constructed in 
any manner that allows the formation of the desired 
test specimen. The material from which the mould is 
constructed shall be chemically inert and shall have 
anti-stick properties. 


F-2.2 Containers 


F-2.2.1 Wide Mouth Jars, of sufficient capacity, fitted 
with plastic or plastic-lined metal screw caps for low 
temperature tests involving media of low volatility. 


F-2.2.2 Erlenmeyer Flasks, of sufficient capacity, 
fitted with standard taper joints and a reflux condenser 
attachment for use with volatile media. 


F-2.2.3 Compression Testing Machine 


F-2.2.4 Chemical Agents, consisting of the media to 
which the materials are to be exposed in service. 


10 


F-3.1 Number 


The number of specimens shall consist of sets of a 
minimum of three cylinders for one medium, at a single 
temperature and for each test interval. In addition, one 
set of at least three specimens shall be available for test 
immediately following the conditioning period, and 
other sets of at least three, equivalent to the number of 
test temperatures, for the total test period. 


F-3.2 Preparation 


Mix the components in the ratio specified by the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Blend the parts using a 
suitable hand tool or machine mixer, making sure any 
ingredients are thoroughly and uniformly mixed. 


F-3.3 Conditioning 


Condition the test units for 7 days in standard conditions, 
the 7 days include the curing time in the mould. After 
the 7 days, proceed as described in F-3.5 on one set of 
specimens. 


F-3.4 Procedure 


Immediately following the conditioning period, 
measure the diameter of all test specimens to the nearest 


0.03 mm using a micrometer, D,. Make two 
measurements at right angles to each other and record 
the diameter as the average of the two. Following the 
diameter measurement, weigh all the specimens to 
the nearest | mg on an analytical balance and record 
the values, m,. Prior to immersion, record a brief 
description of the colour and surface appearance of the 
specimen and of colour and transparency of the test 
medium. Place the weighed specimens, to be immersed, 
on their curved sides in the individual containers. 


Add sufficient chemical agent to continuously cover 
each specimen by a minimum 10 mm. Place the closed 
container in a constant temperature oven adjusted 
to the required temperature or in a suitable adjusted 
liquid bath simulating the real service and exposure as 
closely as possible. Replace agents that are known to be 
unstable, as often as necessary, in order to maintain the 
original chemical composition and concentration, for 
the planned intervals. 


Remove the specimen after 28 days of immersion to 
determine the chemical attack. Other exposure periods 
may be employed. Clean each specimen by three quick 
rinses in running cold tap water and quick dry by 
blotting with a paper towel between each rinse. After 
the final blotting allow the specimen to dry for 30 min, 
resting on its curved surface, and weigh to the nearest 
1 mg, m, and measure the diameter, D, of the test 
specimen as described in F-3.5. Note any indication of 
surface attack on the specimen, any discoloration of the 
test specimen and the formation of any sediment in the 
chemical agent. 


F-3.5 Determination of the Compressive Strength 
for One Set of Specimens 


Determine the compressive strength for one set of 
specimens: 


a) Immediately after the conditioning period, C; 


b) After the exposure period for each chemical agent 
and each temperature, C,; and 


c) After ageing in air for the total test period at each 
test temperature. 


The elapsed time between the removal of each 
specimen from the test medium and the compressive 
test should be uniform for all specimens. Place 
each specimen in the testing machine such that the 
plane faces of the cylinder are in contact with the 
surface of the compression tool or cage. Apply the 
load to the specimen at a cross-head movement of 
5.5 + 0.5 mm/min when the machine is running without 
load. Break the specimen and record the maximum 
load. 


11 


IS 17190: 2020 


F-3.6 Evaluation and Expression of Results 


F-3.6.1 Mass Change 


Calculate the loss or gain in mass of the specimen 
during exposure for each examination period, as given 
below: 


Am = (m,—m,)/m, x 100 


where 
Am = mass fraction change, to the nearest 
0.01 percent; 
m,- mass ofthe specimen after initial conditioning, 
in g; and 
m,= mass of the specimen after immersion, in g. 


Determine the mean of the three values or more. 


F-3.6.2 Diameter Change 


Calculate the change of the diameter of the specimen 
during exposure for each examination period, as given 
below: 


AD = (D,— D)/D, x 100 
where 
AD — diameter change, to the nearest 0.01 percent; 


D,= diameter of the specimen after the initial 
conditioning, in mm; and 

D,= diameter of the specimen after the exposure 
period, in mm. 


Determine the mean of the three values or more. 


F-3.6.3 Change of Compressive Strength 


Calculate the cross-sectional area of the specimen on 
the diameter value as determined in F-3.4. Calculate 
the percentage change in compressive strength of the 
specimen during exposure for each examination period, 
as given below: 


AC = ( C,- СС, х 100 


where, 
AC = compressive strength change, to the nearest 
0.01 percent; 
C, = load per cross-sectional area of specimen after 
conditioning period, in MPa; and 
C,= load per cross-sectional area of specimen after 


exposure period, in MPa. 


NOTE — A result showing a plus (+) sign in the values of 
Am, AD and AC shall indicate a gain in mass, diameter and 
compressive strength respectively and vice-versa. 


IS 17190 : 2020 


F-3.6.4 For each exposure period, the following 
information shall be reported: 


a) Mean percentage of mass change of specimen; 
b) Mean percentage of diameter change; 


c) Appearance of specimen after immersion (surface 
cracks, loss of gloss, etching, pitting, softening, 
etc.); 


e) Mean percent change in the compressive strength 
of specimen; 


f) Test conditions of exposure to each chemical 
agent, frequency of change of chemical agent, 
concentration, temperature, etc; 

g) Colour and surface appearance of test units before 
and after testing; and 


h) Total duration of the test and the exposure periods, 


d) Appearance of the test chemical agent : 
(discolouration, sediment, etc); in days. 
ANNEX G 
( Table 1) 


DETERMINATION OF TRANSVERSE DEFORMATION 


G-1 Transverse deformation shall be tested following 
the general test conditions and procedures given in 
Annex A and the instructions given below. 


G-2 APPARATUS 

As per F-1 of IS 15477. 

G-3 TEST SPECIMENS 

As per F-2 of IS 15477, substituting grout for adhesive. 
G-4 PROCEDURE 


G-4.1 Conditioning 


Immediately after the removal of template B place five 
specimens, on the support, horizontally into the plastic 


12 


container and seal it to make it air tight. Condition the 
test units at 27 + 2 °C. After fourteen days remove 
them from the plastic container and condition them for 
another fourteen days in air in standard conditions. 


G-4.2 Transverse Deformation, as per F-3.2 of 
IS 15477. 


G-5 TEST RESULTS 


The transverse deformation is determined correct 
to 0.1 mm, by calculating the average value of the 
deformations. Deformation, in mm, shall be reported 
for individual and mean values for deformability of 
grout. The grout deformability is classified as ‘S/’ if 
the mean value is more than or equal to 2.5 mm. 


IS 17190 : 2020 


ANNEX H 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Flooring, Wall finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi) 


ArdexEndura India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


ACC Limited, Mumbai 
Ahluwalia Contracts India Limited, Mumbai 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Carborundum Universal Ltd, Chennai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Chemicals Manufacturers 
Association, Navi Mumbai 


Construction Industry Development Council, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Glass and Ceramic Research 
Institute, Kolkata 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, 
New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & 
Sanitaryware, Mumbai 


Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mumbai 


Lloyd Insulation (India) Pvt Limited, 
New Delhi 


MAPEI Construction Products India Pvt Ltd, 
Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA (Chairman) 


Suri K. P. PAULSON 
SHRI GOPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI S. K. Gupta 
SHRI PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJI VARGHESE 
Suri У. С. RAJENDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR KAUSHAL 
SHRI ARUN Kumar Tyaai (Alternate) 


Suri R. D. MATHUR 
SHRI VYANGESH Снокѕ (Alternate) 


SHRI UPEN PATEL 
SHRI SAMIR SURLAKER (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jan (Alternate) 


Suri S. К. SINGH 
Dn AcHAL Kumar Mrrrar (Alternate) 


Dr SATYENDRA МАТН MISRA 
Dr RAKESH KUMAR 


CurEF ENGINEER (DWK) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. AGARWAL 


SHRI SAMIR Das 
SHRI AKHILESH Maurya (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN RAO 
SHRI SUBHASHISH MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN RAO 
Suri Р. К. SHARMA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri Монїт KHANNA 
Suri K. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


Dr G. S. Ravı SHANKAR 
Авылт Dutta (Alternate) 


13 


IS 17190 : 2020 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in- 
Chief’s Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD 
(Army), New Delhi 


Modern Tiles & Marble, New Delhi 
Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 
МҮК Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 
NTC Tiles LLP, Panchkula 


New Delhi Municipal Council, New Delhi 


North Delhi Municipal Corporation, 
New Delhi 


Paver and Block Manufacturers Association 
(PBMA), Mumbai 


Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai 
Premier Polyfilm Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Research, Designs and Standards 
Organization, Lucknow 


Responsive Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


RMG Polyvinyl India Limited, Ghaziabad 


Shriram Institute of Industrial Research, 
New Delhi 


Somany Ceramics Ltd, Bahadurgarh 


Super Tiles & Marble Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Ultratech Cement Limited, Mumbai 
Wacker Chemie India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRIMATI Rrvoo MAHENDRU 
SHRIMATI REMIKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KAPOOR 
E. R. PADMA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH JETPARIA 
Бнк JERAM МАРНАУ Kavar (Alternate) 


DR P. ARJUNAN 
Suri N. RApHAKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT TRIVEDI 
SHRI Nitin CHowpHaRY (Alternate) 


SHRI SOMIT NEOGI 
SHRI ANIMESH Das (Alternate) 


SHRI PREM CHAND GUPTA 
SHRI SUSHANT GUPTA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr S. RAMESH 


SHRI MEHUL JAIN 
SHRI ISHAN SEHGAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR 
SHRI HARENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (WoRKS) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI RISHABH AGARWAL 
SHRI ABHISHEK AGARWAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr MUKESH GARG 
SHRI RAMAN Duvant (Alternate) 


Suri G. G. TRIVEDI 
Dn Аѕнутоѕн GoeEL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK RAJPUROHIT 
SHRI SUDHAKAR Mopy (Alternate) 


Suri B. KUMAR 


REPRESENTATIVE 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (Civit. ENGINEERING 
„ 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretaries 


SHRI PRADEEP SINGH SHEKHAWAT 
SCIENTIST “С? ( Civit. ENGINEERING ), BIS 


AND 


SHRI MILIND GUPTA 
SCIENTIST “С” ( Civi. ENGINEERING ), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 05 (12592). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


