( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 8218 ( Part J.I) - 1982

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR PLANT RAILWAYS PART II
LOCOMOTIVES, WAGONS THEIR MOVEMENT AND

Industrial
Chairman
SHRI

Safety

Advisory

Committee,
Representing

ISAC

A. K. CHAKRABARTY

Directorate General Factory Advice Labour Institutes, Bombay

Service

&

Members
SRRI P. R. SUXENDRANATHAN (Alternate to Shri A. K. Chakrabarty ) Indian Cotton Mills Federation, Bombay SHRI S. P. BHATIA SHRI CHARANJIT LAL Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI B. R. DAVE ( Alternate ) DR S. K. CRATTERJEE Directorate General of Health Services PRO+ B. B. CHATTERJEE (Alternate ) India Society of Engineers, Calcutta SHXI P. K. CNAUDHURI SHRI D. K. NAG ( Alternate ) Sandoz ( India ) Ltd, Thanc SRRI N. CHAWLA Loss Prevention Association of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. K. DAS SHRI S. PURUSHOTHAMA ( Alternate ) Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SHRI S. C. DEY SHRI S. M. PRASAD (Alternate) Standing Committee on Safety for the Steel SERI D. M. DH~R Industry, Durgapur SHRI A. K. DAS GUPTA (Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( COMMERCIAL ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( COMMEI~CIAL) ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR GENERAL OF M I N ES Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SAFETY DIRECTOX, MINES S A F E T Y EQUIPMENT ( Alternate )

Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI K. H. GANDHI SHRI SATPAL SINGH ( Altcrnqte ) Institution of Fire Engineers ( India ), New Delhi SHRI P. N. G~OSH National Safety Council, Bombay SRRI K. C. GUPT~ SHRI N. RAQHAVAN (Alternate) ( Continued on page 2 Q Copyright 1982 INDIAN STANDARDS 4.

SHRIDURGESHCHANDHA SRRI JAYANT ADHIA (Alternate)

Century Rayon,

Bombay

)

INSTI&ON

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1927 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permissioehe publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the.s&d Act.

IS : 8218 ( Part II ) - 1982
( Continuedfrom page 1)

Members
SHRI R. P. JHA SHRI J. D. JIJIHA SHRI M. N. ARORA ( Alternate) SHRI M. KANT SHRI KIRIT MARU ( Alternate ) SHRI P. KRISRNAN NAIR SHRI LAXMI NARAIN

Representing
Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi Safety Appliances Bombay The Manufacturers' Association, Ltd,

SHRI A. B. TRAKUR ( Alternate ) Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi SERI G. B. MENON SEEI B. K. NARAYANA BHA~WAN Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SERI S. SRINATH (Alternate) Ministry of Communications SHRI G. RAXAMURTHY . SHRI Y. V. K. KEDDY ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, SHBI S. G. RANADE Calcutta Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. R. C. RAO SHRI R. N. DAS ( Alternatr ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) REPRESENTATIVE The Safety First Association of India, Bombay SHRI Y. K. SAPRU SHRI A. A. JABDENVALA ( Alternate ) Emplozhy State Insurance Corporation, New SERI I. C. SARIN DR K. M. SAXENA ( Alterqzatc ) SHRI P. SESHADRI SHRI JAQJIT SINQR (Alternate) DR B. SINQH SHRI P. R. ROY ( Aftcrnatc ) SHRI D. K. SIRKAR
SHRI S. J. SHARMA ( Alfcrnutc) SHRI S. VENKASWAMY SHRI S. P. VIDYARTHI DR HARI BHAQWAN, Director ( Chem ) ( Sccrefa~ )

SHRI KARAN SINQH ( Altsrnatc ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport SHRI H. R. LAXMINARAYAN

Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Udyogmandal Indian National Trade Union Congress, Delhi

New

Ministry of Petroleum Cent;ianbyning Indian Chemical Calcutta

& Chemicals Station (CSIR ),

Research

Manufacturers'

Association,

Directorate General of Civil Aviatio?, New Delhi All India Manufacturers' Organization, Bombay Director General, ISI ( Ex-ofiio Member)

Safety Practices and Procedures Subcommittee,
Convener SHRI P. R. SURENDRAUATHAN

ISAC/S-J
Service &

Directorate General Factory Advice Labour Institutes, Bombay

Members SHRI H. GANAPATHY ( Alfernate to
Shri P. R. Surendranathan ) . d`f ( Continuedon p0c1 12 )

IS : 8218 `( Part II ) - 1982

Indian Standard
SAFETY CODE FOR PLANT RAILWAYS
PART II LOCOMOTIVES, WAGONS THEIR MOVEMENT AND

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 March 1982, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Safety Advisory Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 A large number of manufacturing units operate plant railways for heavy movement of their goods. The committee, responsible for felt that safe practices for plant preparing this standard, therefore, railways should be codified. This standard has, therefore, been compiled in the light of model rules drafted by Central Labour Institute, Bombay; report of a Subcommittee on rail and road safety in the iron and steel industry; and the corresponding rules framed by the Ministry of Railways, Government of India.

,0.3 This standard

First part, namely, IS : 8218 ( Part I )has two parts. This standard 1976* covered clearances, track, loading and unloading. ( Part II ) covers safe practices in the design of locomotives, wagons and their movement, assistance has also been derived

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, from the following publications: Model code of safety regulations guidance of governments Labour Organization. Accident prevention 1969. National

for industrial establishments for the and industry, 1969. International operations. 6th edition,

manual for industrial Safety Council, USA.

Report of the subcommittee on rail and road safety in iron and steel industry. 1969. Ministry of Labour.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) lays down safe practices of locomotives, wagons and their movement. * " J'!
*Safety code for plant railways: Part I Layout.

in respect

of design

3

IS : 8218 ( Part

II ) - 1982

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, ( Part I )-1976* shall apply. 3. DESIGN FEATURES the definitions given in IS : 8218

FOR SAFETY

3.0 In-built design features of locomotives and wagons for promoting safety should receive maximum consideration. Good field of vision for the driver, and safe means of access are essential. - Their 3.1 Locomotives following requirements. safe design features should include the

3.1.1. Cab windows should be of adequate give maximum field of vision.

size and so disposed as to

3.1.2 Outline, shape and positioning of engine cowling ( in case of diesel locomotives ), should allow maximum space for windows and interfere as little as possible with the vision from the windows. 3.1.3 Shunter's steps should be at four corners of the locomotives. They should be applied proportionately with non-slip treads; and should position relative to the frame and footplate so as to allow the shunter to stand on them and be in the clear. They should also permit the shunter to cross over the locomotive in safety at the end remote from the cab. 3.1.4 Hand rails should be sufficient and properly positioned especially those for use by a shunter when mounting and dismounting from the locomotives 3.1.5 There should be audible warning system with a distinctive note, with control for directional operation, easily accessible to driver in the normal lookout position. 3.1.6 Operating controls should be in duplicate and arranged so as to be easily handled by the driver from the normal lookout position. 3.1.7 Efficient provided. windscreen wipers of robust construction should be

3.1.8 Buffer beam extensions should be provided to protect shunter's legs, when riding on lower step. 3.1.9 Lifting and jacking pads should be provided at the four corners of the locomotive to assist and make safe,.* re-$&ling operations. *Safety code for plant railways: Part I Layout. 4
. -47 -

IS : 8218 ( Part Ii ) - 1982
shunting

3.1.10 Suitable
shocks.

buffers

should

be

provided

to

reduce

intensity

of

3.1.11 Locomotive should be SO finished as to include distinctive markingin bright colours of prominent parts in accordance with practice in force and provision of suitable lights for identification at night. 3.2 Wagons -For provided. wagons the following ladders and requirement hand-holds. should be

\

3.2.1

Suitably

designed

access

3.2.2 A suitable grilled platform around man-hole opening of oil tank wagons should be provided for safe access of personnels who are required to take dip or inspect the wagons from time to time during decantation. 3.2.3 Couplers should be coupled or uncoupled without the necessity of If, however, screw couplers are to be employees going between wagons. used these should be so designed that the shackle of the screw coupling can be attached to the draw bar hook with sufficient ease. Existing couplings of the simple flat link type incorporating loose vertical pins ( top entry ) in use of ingot casting are unsafe. These couplings may be converted to lever operated ( bottom entry ) vertical pin type couplings. 4. PRECAUTIONS

FOR SAFETY

4.0 In no circumstances

shall any locomotive or train be moved between sunset and sunrise or at any time when there is fog, unless it carries a white headlight and a red rear light.

4.1 Locomotives 4.1.1 Every locomotive shall be provided with efficient brakes, all of Brake shoes shall be which shall be maintained in good working order. examined at suitably fixed intervals and those that are worn out replaced at once.
4.1.2 Water-gauge glasses of every locomotive, whatever be the boiler pressure, shall be protected with substantial glass or metal screens. 4.1.3 It shall be clearly indicated on every locomotive crane in EngIish and language understood by the majority of the workers in the factory, for what mass of load and at what radius the crane is safe. 4.2 Wagons-Every wagon (and passenger coach, if any ) shall be with self-acting brakes cap&le of being applied provided either continuously or with efficient hand brakes which shall be maintained i %*7 5 .'

IS : 8218 ( Part II ) - 1982

in good working order. The hand brakes shall be capable of being applied by a person on the ground and fitted with a deviae for retaining them in the applied position.
4.3 Overhead Crane Runways

4.3.1 A very serious hazard exists at points where an overhead crane runway crosses above a railway track, either inside or outside. The hazard lies in the possibility of crane loads or hook blocks striking locomotives or wagons while shunting is going on.

4.3.2 A system ofinterlocked signal lights, with one set visible to the crane operator and the other to the shunting crew, should be installed to guard against movement of the crane near the track while it is occupied. All personnel involved, especially crane operators, should be trained to respect the signals, without exception. 4.3.3 The signals can be actuated manually by a key switch, the key The signals should also be interlocked being kept by the area foreman. with a derail. Another method is to provide a zone power cut-off for the crane runways in the vicinity of the track, the cut-off being actuated by a key turnout point under the control of the area supervisor. Other methods that assure positive control of the crane movements may also be used. 4.3.4 Shunting crew should be required to get clearance from the area foreman before moving into the area, and the foreman should be responsible for keeping cranes clear until the shunting engine and wagons move out.
4.4 Precautions -

Besides, the following precautions

should be taken. in sound and

4.4.1 All equipment and appliances should be maintained safe operating condition.

4.4.2 The type of motive power for a plant railway is important to prevent accident and fire. Explosive gases are easily ignited by flames or sparks from fuel-fired locomotives. Where such gases may be present, electric, compressed air, or storage battery locomotive should be used.
4.4.3 Where ventilation is insufficient to keep the concentration of noxious and even toxic exhaust gases at a safe level, as in mines, the use of fuel-fired locomotives should be prohibited. However, since diesel engines can be equipped with devices to eliminate toxic gases from the exhaust, these types of locomotives may + fused in some adequately ventilated mines ( other than coal ).

6

. -47

I

IS : 8218 ( Part II ) - 1982 4.4.4 A major hazard with electric locomotive, in addition to that of sparking in explosives atmospheres, is the possibility of employees contact with the trolley. The trolley should be guarded at all points where employees may pass under it and should be high enough to prevent contact at all places.
4.4.5 Boilers of steam with boiler regulations statutory requirements. locomotives should be constructed and inspected in accordance more quietly the outside. for oil fires. on in accordance with relevant than steam

4.4.6 Diesel locomotives, which operate locomotives, should be equipped with bells. 4.4.7 4.4.8 Deck Each

walks should have hand rails around locomotive should carry

an extinguisher

4.4.9 An effective arrangement of spark arrestor shall be provided steam locomotives to prevent hot cinders being thrown out. 5. RAILROAD

VEHICLES
including special machines, attention should be

5.0 For railroad
directed

vehicles, to the following.

5.1 Adequate wind screens and/or cab windows should be so positioned as to permit the maximum unobstructed all round field of vision for the On occasions this may require the provision of supplementary driver. windows, low down in the dash; for example, in vehicles standing high off For this purpose, clear plastic or similar material may have the ground. advantage. 5.2 Clear view of buckets, mobile units. hooks and other attachments for the driver of for easy parts.

5.3 Safe seating for the driver with controls suitably handling without the driver moving from his driving 5.4

positioned position.

Safe means of access to and from cab, to be clear of moving

5.5 When steps or ladders are necessary, adequate proportions, of non-slip character positioned with complementary hand-holds. 5.6 Adequate facilities for driving

treads _or rungs should be of and these should be properly

in reverse. cons#ruction and properly of&he driver in the event

5.7 Cab sides and ends should be of robust braced together to resist collapse and trapping of collision and capsizing.

IS : 8218 ( Part II ) - 1982 5.8 Automatic couplers may be used to eliminate the serious involved when men go between either standard or narrow gauge to insert or withdraw pins manually. hazard wagons

5.9 Hopper bottom wagons should be opened only with standard wagon wrenches. A special tool for closing the latches on bulk wagons eliminates the need for a man to go on top of the wagon from which he might fall. Rerailers should be provided for narrow gauge wagons; other means of rerailing wagons are generally dangerous. 5.10 For shunting should be followed. 6. MOVEMENT, 6.1 Movement locomotives the colour scheme yellow/black Yellow colour should be prominent. LOADING of Wagons AND UNLOADING stripes

OF WAGONS

6.1.1 Moving of wagons by manual methods often result in accidents. The safest procedure is to use a shunting engine. Loose and fly-shunting inside the factory should be avoided. 6.1.2 If the ordinary hand wagon mover is used, there should be a shield around the bar so that the employee will not strike his hands or otherwise injure himself if the tool should slip. Pinchbars and other make shift tools should not be used to move wagons. 6.1.3 When a wagon is approaching a gradient, a workman should test the hand brake to make sure that it takes hold and that excess slack in the brake, chain is taken up. 6.1.4 When a crane or hoist is used to move wagons with a cable running through a snatch block and if the cable breaks or if the hook pulls loose from a bar, workman may be struck by the flying rope. Wagons can be moved more safely by having a tractor pull than by means of a cable equipped with a hook especially made for the purpose. 6.1.5 When self-propelled, rider-operated wagon mover is used. This vehicle should have rubber-tyred wheels or steel rail wheels, both retractable so that it can run either on plant grounds or on rails. It should be fitted with standard couplers. 6.2 Loading and Unloading

6.2.1 Wagons stopped for loading or unloading should be protected against being accidentally moved by meaw'+f suitable wheel chokes or other suitable means. Standard railway red flags for day time and red 8 . -4% I

IS : 8218 (Part

II) - 1982

lights for night use furnish warnings to train crews. Signals should be placed between the rails at each end of the wagon accessible from either direction. Train crews should be strictly prohibited from coupling engines or wagons to any wagons so protected. The red signals should be removed only by the employees engaged in loading or unloading operations, when they are ready to release the wagons. 6.2.2 Bells and blinking warning lights should be installed along the tracks in working areas to warn personnel that shunting operations are going on. The warning lights and bells should be turned on by plant supervision before shunting operations are begun. For the purpose of warnings, only red and yellow lights shall be used. 6.2.3 It is the responsibility of the local plant management to clear employees from wagons before releasing the track to railway employees for shunting. Therefore, before wheel chokes and red flags are removed, plant supervision shall make sure that: a) gates, barriers or other obstructions area; b) all plant personnel are cleared area; are cleared from the track

from railway wagons and track have

c) all overhead building cranes in the area being transferred stopped operations and are clear of track vicinity; d) all bridge plates are removed from wagons; e) all counterweighted and secured; retractable service platforms ( cables,

are retracted

f) all wagons moving equipment from wagons; g) all loading and unloading the wagons; and

hooks, etc ) is removed from

conveyors should be retracted and refrigerated

h) electrical connections given to thermal are decoupled.

wagons

6.2.4 Tracks for loading or unloading flammable liquids or other dangerous materials should be demarcated and pointed suitably. For additional protection, turnout points should be provided with locks. 6.2.5 The consignee of a wagon load shipment of material or merchandise after unloading of the wagon should clean it before releasing it to the railway that serves the establishment. Pieces of uj_ating and dunnage, nails, and strapping left loose in the wagon are seri&s hazards to railway employees and others who may have to enter it later. i -4% 9

-

IS : 8218 ( Part 7. OTHER

II ) - 1982

SAFE PRACTICES

7.1 It is vital that transportation personnel as well as ail other employees, They should be guided such as inspection staff, observe safe practices. When by same safety rules as are observed by all large railroad system. plant railway safety problems arise, help and suggestions should be sought from the safety men and operating officers of a plant's connecting railway line.
7.2 Safety meetings and other educational activities inform plant personnel about railway hazards. should be used to

7.3 It is not possible to include all the safe practices required to be However, a observed by workers for the safe operation of plant railways. few of the more important ones are given below for instructions to the workers and shunting crew employed for the plant railways. 7.3.1 Stop and look both ways before to move crossing any track. on any track, in

7.3.2 Expect trains or wagons either direction.

at any time, Never

7.3.3 Stop over rails when crossing any rail. 7.3.4 Never go between for the purpose of adjusting

tracks.

step, walk,

or sit on move )

moving wagons (or wagons that may couplers or for any other purposes.

7.3.5 Give a hand or lamp stop signal and receive an acknowledgement of the signal before going between standing engines or wagons. 7.3.6 To close a box wagon door, place one hand and the other on the back end of the door. 7.3.7 7.3.8 7.3.9 drivers Step down from wagons Never While should attempt do not jump. foot-board of an engine. loco on the door handle

to ride the leading

crossing the road inside the factory premises, the whistle and look both ways before crossing the road.

7.3.10 While changing the points through the point lever, the point should be inspected physically to avoid any gap in between the point which can result in an accident. _* 7.4 The railway on the track. track should be kept cle&`!and no oil should be allowed

.
10

`c-7

I

IS : 8218 ( Part II ) - 1982 7.5 Overhead Power Lines maintained as per IS : 5613*. These shall be designed, installed and

*IS

: 5613 Code

of practice for design, installation and maintenance of overhead powerlines. ( Part I/Set 1 )-1970 Lines up to and including 11 kV, Section 1 Design. ( Part I/Set 2 )-I971 Lines up to and including 11kV, Section 2 Installation and maintenance. ( Part II/Set 1 )-I976 Lines above 11 kV and up to and including 220 kV, Section 1 Design. 4. (Part II/Set 2 )-I976 Lines above 11 kV andq$ to and including 220 kV, Section 2 Installation and maintenance.

KS : 8218 ( Part II) - 1982 ( Continuedfrom page 2 )
Members S~rttr C~IAIZANJITLULL SHIZI B. R. DAvn ( AhfZat8 ) CBIEN E~J~INEXR ( ELECTRICAL ) Representing Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur

Labour Industries Energy & Department, Government of Maharashtra. Bombav Central Boilers Board, New Delhi Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad

s LiPimINTEJDINC
CHIEF

ENOINm!Z

INSPECTOR OF BOILERS, KARNAT~KA DIRECTOR OF Mrsns SABEYY DEPUTY DIRECTOR CIB' hllr~s SAFETY (SC) (Alternate j SHRI V. N. K+IOLXUTE SHRI G. R. GUJAR ( Alternate ) SHRI S. KWSHNAN NAIX

( INSPECTION )

( &tW?KZte )

Chief Inspector of Factories, Maharashtra Director of Factories & Boilers, Government Kerala Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi National Safety Council, Bombay & Steel Company of

SIWI G. B. MENON SHRI N. C. MUKHERJEE .. SRRI N. RAQHAVAN ( Alternate ) The SHRI V. K. MURFHY

Tata Iron Jamshedpur Snnr K. N. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate )

Limited,

12

