NAT Ta IS 7746 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Wet ЧЧ FAET 
зтаччот чөгөт — Тї аат 


KS P 


In-Situ Shear Test on 
Rock Mass — Code of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2022 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, 4% freh - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 5 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Rock mass is heterogeneous, anisotropic and discontinuous. When civil engineering structures like dams, are 
founded on rock mass, they transmit normal and shear stresses on the discontinuities in the rock mass. Failure 
is often initiated by sliding along a joint plane near or along the foundation, or along abutments of dam. For a 
realistic assessment of the stability of the structure, estimation of the shear resistance of such discontinuities 
becomes essential. Most of the time it is difficult to collect undisturbed samples of rock with intact discontinuities. 
Besides laboratory shear tests on small specimen generally do not reflect the influence of asperities present in the 
field. Therefore large size in-situ shear tests are preferred. 


The Standard was formulate in 1975 and subsequently revised in 1991 to bring it in line with the method suggested 
by International Society of Rock Mechanics. In this revision the following major modifications have been 
incorporated: 


a) Title of the standard has been modified as ‘/n-situ shear test on rock — Code of practice’ to ‘In-situ 
shear test on rock mass — Code of practice’ for better understanding; 


b) Rock over rock interface is included; 

c) Size of test block has been improved as per the international practices; 

d) Use of linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) has been incorporated; and 
e) RMR, Q, and GSI value for the testing area have been included. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practice in the field in this country. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rule for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7746 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


IN-SITU SHEAR TEST ON 
ROCK MASS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the procedure for determining 
the in-situ peak and residual direct shear strength of a 
discontinuity (may be a joint, bedding plane, schistosity 
or cleavage) in rock mass or of the interface between 
concrete block and rock foundations or between rock 
over rock interface. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard listed below contains provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


11315 (Part 4) : 
1987 


Method for quantitative description 
of discontinuities in rock mass: 
Part 4 Roughness 


3 PRINCIPLE 


3.1 A block of rock intact with the rock mass or a 
concrete block cast on rock surface is subjected to a 
normal load and sheared under increasing shear force 
on a predetermined plane of shear. The displacements 
of the block in the direction of these forces are recorded 
with the shear resistance, for estimating the peak shear 
resistance of the discontinuity/interface as the case may 
be. This test can be performed in open excavation or in 
drifts or tunnels. 


3.2 A shear strength determination should preferably 
comprise at least five tests on the same test horizon 
with each specimen tested at a different but constant 
normal stress. 


3.3 In applying the results of the test, the pore water 
pressure conditions and the possibility of progressive 
failure shall be assessed for the design case as they may 
differ from the test conditions. 


4 LOCATION OF TEST SITE 


4.1 A general idea of the intensity and direction of 
forces due to the construction of the structure, should 
be obtained, for proper location of the test. 


4.2 The area for the test should be selected such that 
the geology at the test location is representative of the 
geology of the area to be loaded by the structure. The 
test should preferably be conducted in the region where 
maximum shear stresses are expected. The location 
should allow the test to be conducted in such a way that 
the direction of shearing in the test corresponds to the 
direction of anticipated shearing on construction of the 
structure. 


4.3 Testing in drifts or tunnels is preferred for 
convenience. In the absence, these tests may be located 
at design level or in open excavations for foundation or 
abutment within the fresh rock. Care should be taken 
to avoid zones of induced fractures created by blasting. 


5 PREPARATION OF TEST SITE 


5.1 The test block shall be cut to the required 
dimensions (usually not less than 700 mm x 700 mm 
x 350 mm) using methods that avoid disturbance 
or loosening of the weak discontinuity to be tested. 
The base of the test block should coincide with the 
plane to be sheared. Smaller blocks not less than 
450 mm х 450 mm x 200 mm may be permissible if the 
surface to be tested is relatively smooth; larger blocks 
may be needed when testing very irregular surfaces. 
The clear spacing between blocks should be at least 
one metre. 


5.2 The size and shape of the test block may for 
convenience be adjusted so that the faces of the block 
coincide with natural joints or fissures; this minimizes 
block disturbances during preparation. When this is not 
feasible, the test block 15 cut by line drilling around 
the block and removing the outside rock up to the base 
of the block. Small irregularities that would limit the 
thickness or the placement of encapsulating material 
should be removed by hand trimming. 


5.3 A channel approximately 20 mm deep and 80 mm 
wide should be cut around the base of the block to 
allow freedom of shear and lateral displacements. 


5.4 A layer at least 20 mm thick of weak material 
(for example, clay) is applied around the base of the 
test block, and the remainder of the test block is then 
encapsulated in cement concrete (1:2:4) or cement 
mortar (1:2), or similar material of sufficient strength 


IS 7746 : 2022 


and rigidity to prevent collapse or significant distortion 
of the block during testing. A steel casing of appropriate 
size (usually 700 mm х 700 mm x 350 mm internal 
dimensions) made of minimum 10 mm thick mild steel 
plates may be used where required for encapsulation 
the block. The encapsulating formwork (steel casing) 
should be designed to ensure that the load bearing faces 
of the encapsulated block are flat and at the correct 
inclination to the shear plane. Special care is required 
while placing cement concrete or cement mortar to 
ensure that cement slurry does not penetrate through 
existing joints/cracks in the rock mass of the test block 
to the weak discontinuity at the base of the block to be 
tested. The top of the block should also be made flat 
with concrete or mortar. 


5.5 Reaction pads, anchors, etc if required to carry the 
reaction from normal and shear load systems to the 
adjacent sound rocks, shall be carefully positioned and 
aligned. 


5.5.1 For passing the reaction of the normal load system 
to the roof of the drift or tunnel, the surface of the rock 
should be chiselled and made flat with a minimum 
of 5 mm cement mortar (1:2) layer over an area of 
600 mm x 600 mm. Ifthe surface is very much sheltered 
concreting may be adopted to make the surface as far as 
possible parallel to the top of the test block. 


5.5.2 For applying normal load on the block in open 
excavation any suitable arrangement may be made. If 
anchor-beam system is adopted, the anchors should be 
embedded to a depth suitable to provide the required 
reaction, below the bottom of the block at a distance 
not less than 600 mm from the sides of the block. This 
anchor-beam system should be designed to withstand 
the reaction due to maximum normal load to be applied 
on the block. Kentledge type of arrangement is also 
possible for normal loading. 


5.5.3 For transmitting the reaction to the side of the 
tunnel or open excavation for applying shear force at 
the base of the block, the location of the seating on 
the side wall should be similarly prepared at suitable 
elevation. 


5.6 If saturation of the material in the discontinuity is 
expected after construction of the structure, a small 
trough of 50 mm depth should be prepared around the 
block to store water for saturating the plane of shear. 


5.7 For determining the shearing resistance of 
concrete rock interface, a concrete block (1:1.5:3) of 
700 mm x 700 mm x 350 mm should be cast after 
the surface of the rock is cleared in a steel casing as 
described in 5.4. The surface of the rock should be 
chiselled so that the maximum trough depth of the 
undulations does not exceed 10 mm. 


6 TEST SET-UP 


6.1 Types of Set-up 


Two different types of set-ups may be adopted 
depending upon whether the tests are conducted in 
open excavation or in a drift or tunnel. The normal load 
and the tangential force should be applied such that 
their line of action passes through the centroid of the 
shear area at the base of the block. 


6.1.1 Set-up in Open Excavation 


6111 A 25 mm thick mild steel plate of 
500 mm х 500 mm size (or of an appropriate size as 
compared to size of the test plot) shall be placed on 
the block centrally for uniform distribution of normal 
load. If necessary, a series of reducer plates may be 
placed on the top of this plate to be appropriate with 
the size of the jack. A remote controlled hydraulic jack 
of sufficient capacity shall be placed centrally on the 
top of the plates. A roller arrangement shall be centrally 
located between reducer plates below jack. Packing 
plates or spacer columns placed concentric with the 
plunger of the jack between the beam and the jack 
may be used. The contact between the block and the 
beam is made by operating the jack. The hydraulic jack 
of suitable capacity for applying shear force shall be 
placed inclined at 15° to the base of the block as shown 
in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. The jack applying shear force shall 
be positioned such that the line of action of the force 
passes through the centre of the shear area. For this 
purpose, a 15° wedge is placed between the block and 
the jack. Another 15° wedge is placed between the jack 
and the reaction pad as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 to 
pass the reaction to the side wall of rock mass. Loading 
and unloading shall be controlled using hydraulic pump 
and pressure/load gauge. 


6.1.1.2 To record the displacements of the block dial 
gauges or linear variable differential transformer 
(LVDT) having least count of 0.01 mm and a travel of 
50 mm should be used. Four dial gauges or LVDTs shall 
be placed to record normal (vertical) displacement, 
two for recording shear (horizontal) displacement and 
two for recording lateral (horizontal) displacement 
(see Fig. 1), provided sufficient space would be available 
especially in case of tunnel or drift. The dial gauges or 
LVDTs shall be fixed from a datum bar supported on 
stands located sufficiently away from the test block and 
the anchors. The surface of encapsulating is generally 
not sufficiently smooth and flat to provide adequate 
reference for displacement gauges. Glass plates may 
be cemented to the test block for this purpose. These 
plates should be of adequate size to accommodate 
movement of the specimen. In case LVDT is used for 
displacement measurement, data acquisition system 
should be used for recording data. All the measuring 
devices, like LVDT and pressure/load gauge shall be 
calibrated periodically. 


IS 7746 : 2022 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR DISPLACEMENT GAUGES OR LVDT OVER THE TEST BLOCK 


ANCHOR BEAM OR 
KENTLEDGE ARREANGEMENT 


пк rrr] 
666467664 VS UNA 
уу) 756 UNA. 
SEY) ARRAY 
HYDRAULIC JACK FOR 
TRENCH SHEAR LOAD ( 200 t OR ABOVE ) HYDRAULIC [— PACKING PLATES 
(18тх10т) WOODEN HOSE AND SPACER COLUMN, 
WEDOER IF REQUIRED 
SIDE REACTION PLATES & ROLLERS 
PAD c ARRANGEMENT 
Қалар STEEL FRAME 
: TEST BLOCK mm 10 mm THICK 
2: (700 x 700 x 350 mm) ` CONCRETE-ROCK 
ЫРУ А PN. INTERFACE 
22222272/2222222222 777” 
C e HYDRAULIC PUMP FITTED 
HYDRAULIC JACK FOR ww t ‚ — | WITH PRESSURE - CUM - LOAD GAUGE 


SHEAR LOAD ( 200 t OR ABOVE ) [mg 
HYDRAULIC PUMP FITTED Hag 
WITH PRESSURE- CUM - LOAD GAUGE 


Fic. 2 TvPICAL TEST SETUP IN OPEN EXCAVATION 


IS 7746 : 2022 


TOP REACTION 
PAD 


С 
ШШ m 
DRIFT (COLUMN TO COLUMN) 
(1.8mx 2.1 m) 
STEEL ALUMINIUM ALLOY | 
HOLLOW COLUMNS 
(1000/500/200/100 mm ) 
DRIFT 
(1.8 m x 2.1 m) 
300 mm DIAMETER 
| STEEL PLATES 
HYDRAULIC JACK FOR ҮҮ I» 
SHEAR LOAD ( 200 t OR ABOVE ) | 
HYDRAULIC 
HOSE 
SIDE REACTION A 0 6 |] PLATES & ROLLERS 
E; | n ARRANGEMENT 
=, =N eo STEEL FRAME 
КЕТТИ ИҢЕ: er eat : 10 mm THICK 
STEEL PLATES ==; =—— = 2: ; 
Й--“И ===== a= TEST BLOCK = 


| sss 


| = a 7 


"we 


HYDRAULIC JACK FOR 
SHEAR LOAD ( 200 t OR ABOVE ) 


HYDRAULIC PUMP FITTED 
WITH PRESSURE- CUM - LOAD GAUGE 


22: (700 x 700 x 350 mm), 


с 


E-ROCK 
INFERPACE 


«os 


| 
| 
7| 


HYDRAULIC PUMP FITTED 
WITH PRESSURE- CUM - LOAD GAUGE 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL TEST SETUP IN For TESTING IN DRIFT OR OPEN EXCAVATION 


6.1.1.3 Water filled in the trough should be allowed to 
stand for 24 h to permeate into the discontinuity before 
the test is commenced. 


6.1.1.4 If two or more hydraulic jacks are used either 
for normal or for shear loading, care is required to 
ensure that they are identically matched and are in 
exact parallel alignment. Each jack should be provided 
with a spherical seat. 


6.1.1.5 If the test horizon is inclined at more than 10° 
to 20° to the horizontal, it is advisable to apply a small 
normal load to the upper face of the test specimen 
while the sides are cut, to prevent premature sliding 
and also to inhibit relaxation and swelling. The load, 
approximately 5 to 10 percent of that to be applied in 
the test, may be provided by screw props or by a system 
of anchored cross beam. The load should be maintained 
until the test equipment is in position. 


NOTE — The distance of the anchors/reaction wall from the 
edge of the block under test shall be at least 1 m. 


6.2 Set-up for Test in Drift or Tunnel 


This set-up is similar to that described in 6.1.1 except 
that the jack applying normal load reacts with the roof 
of the tunnel (see Fig. 3) at the location prepared in 
5.5.1. 


7 TEST PROCEDURE 


7.1 The test should not be started until the concrete or 
mortar at the faces providing reactions and around the 
block within the casing is set. Before actual starting 
of the test, all dial gauges or LVDTs shall be checked 
for rigidity, adequate travel and freedom of movement, 
anda preliminary set of load and displacement readings 
taken. 


7.2 The normal load should then be raised in 
increments to full value specified for the test, recording 
the corresponding normal displacements at each 
increment, when the displacements are stabilized. 
After the full value of normal load is reached, the 
normal displacement of the test block shall be recorded 


as a function of time until the normal displacement 
stabilizes or until the recorded displacement is less than 
0.05 mm in 10 min in all the four dial gauges or LVDTs. 
This set of readings are particularly important in case 
of clay filled discontinuities for working out the time 
for completion of primary consolidation (t) (see 8.1). 


7.3 The shear force is then increased either in 
increments or continuously in such a way as to control 
the rate of shear displacement. A rate of 2.5 t/10 min 
may be appropriate. The normal, shear and lateral 
displacements of the block shall be recorded at each 
increment of shear load. The rate of shear displacement 
should be less than 0.1 mm/ min in the 10 min period 
before taking a set of readings. Approximately 10 sets 
of readings should be taken before reaching peak shear 
strength. When testing clay filled discontinuities, the 
total time to reach peak strength should be more than 
6 to (see 8.1). If necessary the rate of shear should 
be reduced or the application of further shear force 
increments delayed to meet this requirement. The shear 
force shall be increased until either it falls rapidly 
after reaching a peak or it remains constant inspite 
of continuous pumping while showing continuous 
increase in shear displacement. 


7.4 After reaching the peak strength, the shearing should 
be further continued under constant normal stress and 
readings of load displacements be taken at increments 
of 0.5 mm to 5 mm shear displacement to adequately 
define the residual stage. At least four consecutive 
sets of readings shall be obtained which shows not 


NORMAL DISPLACEMENT, А п 


IS 7746 : 2022 


more than 5 percent variation in shear force over a 
shear displacement of 10 mm. Having established a 
residual strength, the normal stress may be increased or 
decreased and shearing continued to obtain additional 
residual strength values. 


7.5 After the test, the block should be inverted, 
photographed and fully described. Measurements 
of the area of contact and joint roughness 
[see IS 11315 (Part 4)] shall be taken. Samples of infill 
material if any shall be taken for index testing. 


7.6 At least five such blocks should be tested for each 
discontinuity or interface under a different but constant 
normal stress covering the range of designed normal 
stresses. 


7.7 The observations from the test should be recorded 
in the form of a typical test data sheet shown in Annex 
A. 


8 CALCULATIONS AND INTERPRETATION 


8.1 While testing clay filled discontinuity, a 
consolidation curve as shown in Fig. 5 should be 
plotted. The time ¢,,, for completion of primary 
consolidation should be determined by constructing 
tangents to the curve as shown. The time to reach peak 
shear strength from the start of shear loading should be 
greater than 6 1, to allow pore pressure dissipation. 
In case of unfilled joint the data of normal load and 
normal displacement can be used to roughly estimate 
the modulus of deformation of rock mass. 


IDEAL CONSOLIDATION 
CURVE 


ELAPSED TIME (LOG SCALE ) 


FIG. 4 CONSOLIDATION CURVE 


IS 7746 : 2022 


8.2 Displacement readings are averaged to obtain 
values of mean shear and normal displacement As and 
An respectively. Lateral displacements are recorded 
only to evaluate specimen behaviour during the test, 
although if possible, they should be taken into account 
when computing corrected contact area. 


8.3 The normal and inclined load applied shall be 
corrected using the calibration charts of the pressure 
gauges used. The total normal load acting on the shear 
plane (Р,) will be the sum of the normal load applied 
by the jack resting on the block (Р, ) and the normal 
component of the applied inclined force on the base 
(Р. sin 15°). The total shear force acting on the shear 
plane (Р) will be the tangential component of the 
applied inclined force on the base (P cos 15°). When 
the shear plane is not horizontal the applied forces shall 
be resolved in directions perpendicular and parallel 
to the shear plane, in order to derive total normal and 
shear plane, respectively acting on the shear plane. 
The applied normal force should be reduced after each 
increase in shear force by an amount (P „sin 15?) in order 
to maintain the normal stress approximately constant. 
The applied normal forces, may be further reduced 
Аз (mm)x P, 
Width of block (mm) 


during the test by an amount to 


compensate for area change. 


8.4 Shear and normal stresses are computed as under: 


Shear Stress, 7 — B 
A 


Normal Stress, с, = 5 
where 
P, — Final normal force, 
P. = Total shear force, and 


A — Area of shear surface corrected to account for 
shear displacement. 


8.5 For each test specimen, graphs of shear stress 
versus shear displacement and normal displacement 
versus shear displacement should by plotted as shown 
in Fig. 5. If the joint under test is tight like that of an 
interface between concrete and rock or an unfilled joint 
having interlocking asperities, the shear stress versus 
shear displacement curve is likely to be similar to curve 
‘A’ in Fig. 5 showing a distinct peak shear strength and 
a sudden fall in shear strength at failure. However, if 
the joint is a filled joint especially a clay filled joint, 


the curve is likely to follow curve ‘B’ in Fig. 5 which 
does not have a distinct peak. Similarly, curve between 
normal displacement versus shear displacement is 
likely to follow trend ‘C’ in Fig. 5 in case of tight joint 
and to trend ‘D’ in case of filled joints. The slope of 
the curve between normal displacement, An and shear 
displacement, As can be used to roughly estimate the 
asperity angle (1) such that 


. An 
tani = — 
As 


8.6 Graphs of peak and residual shear strength versus 
normal stress shall be plotted from the combined 
results of all, the tests as shown in Fig. 6. Shear strength 
parameters ¢,, ф„ and с shall be obtained from this 
graph as shown in the Fig. 6. Plotting of actual field test 
results generally shows scatter and not always as ideal 
shown in Fig. 5. The parameters, namely cohesion and 
friction angle for peak and residual shear strength are 
the mathematical outputs used in the design. 


9 REPORT 


9.1 The report of the test should include the following: 
a) Description of the methods used for specimen 
preparation. 


b) For each specimen a full geological description 
of the intact rock, sheared surface and filling and 
JRC at the test location. RMR, Q and GSI values 
as applicable shall be included. 


с 


wm 


Detailed description of test equipment and a 
sketch (or photograph) of equipment set-up and 
its orientation. 


d 


wm 


A layout plan showing detailed locations of test 
blocks prepared with their identification number 
and the direction of shearing. 

e) Photographs of each sheared surface showing 

direction of shearing, location and dimension. 

f) For each test block а data sheet 
(see Annex A) a consolidation curve (Fig. 4) and 
graphs of shear stress versus shear displacement 
normal displacement (Fig. 5). 


Каи 


An abstract showing blockwise values of peak 
and residual shear strength and corresponding 
normal stress normal displacement and shear 
displacement. 


в 


һ 


— 


Graph of peak and residual shear strength versus 
normal stress (Fig. 6) with derived values of shear 
strength parameters. 


IS 7746 : 2022 


12- 
C 
E 
1.0[- > 
Oo 
n. c 
> а 
= " ы 
= 08 2 
Р > 
ЖҮН РЕАК * @; 
т оС © STRENGTH D < 
m RESIDUAL 0 
Y A STRENGTH a 
5 04- z 
Ф (ға 
о 
0.2— 2 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
SHEAR DISPLACEMENT, As IN mm 
Fic. 5 SHEAR STRESS-DISPLACEMENT GRAPHS 

Oo 

а. 

> 

2 

ke 

пеў 

к 

[©] 

z 

LLI 

С 

к 

0 

X 

< 

ш 

I 

[77] 

т 


NORMAL STRESS, о, IN MPa 


residual friction angle. 


apparent friction angle below stress с. Point A indicates shearing off major asperities on the shear surface. 
Note that ф = ¢, + i, where ф is the basic frication angle and i is the asperity angle. 


frication angle above stress с. This will usually be equal to or slightly greater then ф. 
cohesion intercept of peak shear strength curve. 


= apperent cohesion at a stress level corresponding to ¢,(that is, for c, > б). 


Fic. 6 SHEAR STRENGTH-NORMAL STRESS GRAPH 


АММЕХА 
[ Clauses 7.7 and 9.1(f) ] 
TYPICAL DATA SHEET FOR IN-SITU SHEAR TEST 


Project Location Block No. 
General block description Pha 
Description of the surface to be NA | 
sheared: EN | 
% Psa | 
Roughness: Filling material 9% | 
ant | 
2 % 
ПІР: DIP direction: а- 15° 
Persistance: P =рР +P. Sing 
Spacing of set: P =P „Cosa 
Surface dimension: Initial Area A : o, = P/A 
т-Р/А 
Time Applied Normal Normal Displacement, Applied Shear Shear Displacement | Lateral Displacement | Р, Р |с, т 
Elapsed in Force, P a A, Dial Gauge or LVDTs’ Force Dial Gauge or LVDTs' Dial Gauge or kN | kN | мра | MPa 
Minutes Reading Reading LVDT's Reading 
Reading | Force | 1 2 | 3 | 4 | Average | Reading | Force 1 2 |Ауегаре| 1 2 | Average 
kN mm kN | mm | mm mm mm | mm mm 
(1) (2) 8) 04) | (5) 06) 0701 (8) (9) (10) | (11) | (12 (13) 1014) 1 (15) (16 | (17) | (18) | (19 | Q0) 


TOT : OPLL SI 


IS 7746 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Engineering AG, India, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR — Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 
CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 
Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad 
Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunneling 
Technology, New Delhi 
Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


National Diasater Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Highways and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dn М. K. SAMADHTYA (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI AKHIL Каз (Alternate) 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


Lr Cor PARIKSHIT MEHRA 


ӛнкі G. P. PATEL 

SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 
DIRECTOR 

SHRI HARI ОБУ (Alternate) 
Мр RIZWAN ALI 

Dr S. А. BURELE (Alternate) 
MEMBER (D &R) 

CHIEF ENGINEER, DESIGN (Alternate) 
DR SHANTANU SARKAR 

SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 
Dr J. K. MOHNOT 

DR К. D. Dwivepi (Alternate) 
DR PANKAJ GUPTA 

SHRI К. K. PANIGARHI (Alternate) 
DR ALTAF USMANI 

SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 
SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 

Suri D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 

DR MAHESH CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 
PROF SUMIT SEN 

DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 
ProF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 

PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 
ProF A. K. MISHRA 

Dn К. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


Dr C. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


IS 7746 : 2022 


Organization 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Machanics, Bengaluru 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 

RITES Ltd, Gurugram 

THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 

In personal capacity (Flat no. 4123, Tower 4, Ace 


Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida) 


In personal capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


In personal capacity (4-/25, Prodhyogiki Apartment, 


Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


ӛнкі М. К. MATHUR 
SHRI IMRAN SAYEED (Alternate) 


Suri A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI С. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. К. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI Vay DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 
Dn R. K. GOEL 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTATING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Dr MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (16116). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


