( Reaffirmed 2006 )

WELDED LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS EXCEEDING 5 LITRE WATE CAPACITY FOR LOW PRESSURE LIQUEFIABLE GASES CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSPECTION AND RECONDITIONING OF USED LPG CYLINDERS

UDC

621-642'02-404

: 662'767-620'11

P

Q

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

.&cember

1991

Price Group 3

Gas Cylinders

Sectional Committee,

HMD

16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This code of practice covers LPG cylinder unserviceable. examination, reconditioning and the creteria for declaring an used

Manufacture, possession and use of any gas, when contained in cylinders of more than 500 ml water capacity in a compressed or liquefied state, are regulated under the Gas Cylinder Rules, 1981, This code of practice has been prepared in consultation and of the Government of India. agreement with the statutory authorities under those rules. This code has been formulated based on the practice followed in the~country for the re-conditioning of LPG cylinders. For the convenience, it is divided into following two sections: Section 1 Inspection Section 2 Detailed examination and reconditioning of this code is complied with, the or analysis, shall be rounded off values ( revised)`. The number the same as that ~of the specified

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be value in this code. The relevant SI units and the corresponding conversion Pressure 1 Pa ( Pascal ) = 1 N/m2 1 kgf/mm2 = 9'806 65 MPa

factors are given below for guidance.

AMENDMENT NO. 2 JULY 2010 TO IS 13258 : 1991 WELDED LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS EXCEEDING 5 LITRE WATER CAPACITY FOR LOW PRESSURE LIQUEFIABLE GAS -- CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSPECTION AND RECONDITIONING OF USED LPG CYLINDERS
(Page 3, clause 10.5.1.1) -- Substitute the following for the existing: `10.5.1.1 Cylinder wall thickness so achieved shall not be less than the minimum calculated wall thickness as per IS 3196 (Part 1).'

(ME 16)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 2009 TO IS 13258 : 1991 WELDED LOW CARBON STEEL CYLINDERS EXCEEDING 5 LITRE WATER CAPACITY FOR LOW PRESSURE LIQUEFIABLE GASES -- CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSPECTION AND RECONDITIONING OF USED LPG CYLINDERS
(Page 1, clause 2)  Insert the following at the appropriate places: IS 4683 : 1968 IS 6586 : 1989 Chilled iron shot and grit for use in foundries Metal spraying for protection of iron and steel  Recommended practice (first revision)

(Page 4, clause 16.1 , third line)  Substitute `12 kgf/cm2' for `980 kPa (10 kgf/cm2)'. (Page 5, clause 18.2, first para)  Substitute the following for the existing: `The outside surface shall be grit blasted with minimum SA 2.5 grade of blast (see IS 4683) and shall have the following protective coatings:' [Page 5, clause 18.2(a)]  Substitute the following for the existing: `a) Spraying zinc as per IS 6586 to give a coating of minimum thickness of 37 microns unless otherwise agreed between the purchaser and the manufacturer.'

(ME 16)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

IS 13258:1991

Indian Standard

WELDEDLOWCARBONSTEELCYLINDERS EXCEEDING5LITREWATERCAPACITY FOR LOWPRESSURELIQUEFIABLE GASESCODEOFPRACTICEFORINSPECTIONAND RECONDITIONINGOFUSEDLPGCYLINDERS
1 SCOPE
This code lays down the requirements for the testing and inspection, materials, procedure, reconditioning of used LPG for marking cylinders of capacity exceeding 5 litres and up to and including 250 litres. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No. Title 3.3 Burn Isolated heat-affected sections of the cylinder wall caused by electric arc or high temperature flame impingement ( for example, oxy-acetylene flame >. 3.4 Cut ( Gouge ) A sharp impression where removed or redistributed. 3.5 Dent A blunt depression where has not been penetrated. 3.6 Dig A sharp depression has been penetrated. 3.7 Fire Damage to the cylinder as a result of fire. 3.8 Gas Leakage Gas escaping through 3.9 General Corrosion Corrosion corrosion. more extensive than pit or line the cylinder. where the surface material the surface material the metal has been

Colours for ready mixed 5 : 1978 paints and enamels ( third revision ) Enamel, synthetic, exterior 2932 : 1974 ( a ) undercoating ( b ) tinishing (first revision ) Welded low carbon steel 3196 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 cylinders exceeding 5 litre capacity for low water pressure liquefiable gases : Cylinders for Part 1 liquefied petroleum gases - Specification (LPG) ( fourth revision ) Welded low carbon steel .3196 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 cylinders exceeding 5 litre capacity for low water pressure liquefiable gases : Part 3 Methods of test Glossary of terms used in `7241 : 1981 cylinder technology fyr,t revision ) `8867 : 1978 Saturated vapour pressure and test pressure for low liquefiable gases pressure contained in gas cylinders
_

3.10 Line Corrosion Corrosion in a line, often at a junction with an attachment ( for example, footring > not greater than 6 mm wide at the surface. 3.11 Pit Local corrosion not in excess of 6 mm diameter and occurring not more frequently than one in any 500 mm2 of the surface.
SECTION 1 INSPECTION

.3 TERMINOLOGY

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the' I 4 INSPECTION EQUIPMENT definitions given in IS 7241 : 1981 shalI apply. OF MEASUREMENT In addition the following definitions .$hall also

AND METHOD

apply.
3.2 Bulge

:Swelling of the cylinder

wall. 1

Exterior corrosion, denting, bulging, gouges or measured by simple direct digs are normally measurement with scales or depth gauges. The defect can also be measured using a rigid

IS 13258 : 3991 straight edge of sufficient length placed over the defect and a scale is used to measure the distance from the bottom of the straight edge to the bottom of the defect. Suitable depth gauges ~may also be used -for measuring the depth of small cuts or pits. It is important when measuring such defects to use a scale which spans the entire affected area. When measuring cuts, the upset metal should be removed or compensated for so that only actual depth of metal removed from the cylinder wall is measured. 5 EXTERNAL 5.1 General Cylinders shall be examined externally for rust, scale, damage and other physical defects. Protective paint, plating or other coatings and foreign matter shall be removed where necessary from the external surface of the cylinder so that the surface can be properly examined. In determining the condition of the cylinder the examiner shall take into consideration its length of service and the minimum wall thickness required by the specification to which the cylinder was made. The limits shown in 6 shall be used in assessing defects and the conditions which necessitate declaring the cylinders unserviceable. 6 MEAS~UREMENT OF DEFECT AND CRITERIA FOR DECLARING A CYLINDER UNSERVICEABLE 6.1 Bulge 6.4 Dig Cylinders shall be declared unserviceable when a dig on a cylinder body is 75 mm or more in length and the depth of the dig is more than 4 mm. 6.5 Cut Cylinders shall be declared unserviceable when a cut on a cylinder body is 75 mm or more in length. In other cases the cylinder shall be taken for further examination in accordance with Section 2. 6.6 Pit Cylinders having pit shall be taken for examination in accordance with Section 2. However it will be left to the discretion of the inspecting officer to decide whether the cylinder is unserviceable or requires further examination. EXAMINATION 6.2 Burn Cylinders having unserviceable. 6.3 Dent Cylinders shall be declared unserviceable when the depth of a dent is greater than one-tenth of the mean diameter of the dent or the mean diameter or the dent is greater than one-quarter of the diameter of the cylinder. Dent on a weld shall not be permitted, but flattening ( wear ) of weld shall not be treated as a dent on the weld. Dent adjacent to the flattened weld shall be treated as a dent on the weld. burns shall be declared

Cylinders shall be declared unserviceable when a 6.7 Line Corrosion variation of one percent or more exists in the Cylinders having line corrosion shall be taken in prepheral circumferences or measured for examination in accordance with Section 2. distances measured from the valve pad to the However, it will be left to the discretion of the fixed point ) inspecting officer to decide whether the cylinder centre seam ( or equivalent according to 6.1.1. is unserviceable or requires further examination. 6.1.1 Mensurement of Bulges 6.8 General Corrosion Cylinders having general corrosion shall be taken for examination in accordance with Section 2. However, it will be left to the discretion of the inspecting officer to decide whether the cylinder is unserviceable or requires further examination. 6.9 Gas Leak When a leak is suspected, the cylinder shall be pressurized and submerged in a water-bath 0~' soapy water shall be applied to the area of the suspected leak. Areas around the base shall be particularly checked. Cylinders leaking at a weld shall be submitted for repairs. If satisfactory repairs cannot be done, cylinders shall be declared unserviceable. Cylinders leaking in any other part of the body shall be declared unserviceable. 2 Bulges in cylinders shall be measured by any of the following ways : Bulges a> on the cylinder side wall can be a series of measured by comparing circumferential measurements. the side wall can be measured by comparing a series of measurements pr the peripheral distance between the valve pad and the centre seam ( if any ) or an equivalent fixed location on the cylinder sidewall. Variations from normal cylinder contour can be measured directly by either measuring the height of bulge with a scale or comparing templates of bulged areas with similar areas not bulged.

b) Bulges in the head and in some cases on

c>

IS 13258:1991

6.10Fire 6.10.1 Cylinders shall be reheat-treated, hydrostatically tested and finished before being returned to service where :
a) paint is burned of, b) bulging not exceeding the limit given in 6.1has occurred, and c) no other sign of excessive heat damage is evident. 6.10.2 where a) b) Cylinders shall be declared
:

10.3Internal Cleaning
Each cylinder shall be internally of the following methods. cleaned by any

10.3.1 Where the interior of the cylinder is contaminated by oil or other similar fluid it shall be cleaned by one of the following methods: a) Steam cleaning, and b) Washing out with an approved solvent. 10.3.2 Where the interior of a cylinder is affected by rust or other foreign matter it shall be cleaned by one of the following methods: a) Approved blasting, rotary wire brushing or rumbling procedure; or b) Burn out treatment in a furnace at 300�C for a period not exceeding one hour after which all free rust and scale shall be removed by methods given in 10.3.1. 10.4 Tare Weight Verification After degassing and through cleaning ( internally and externally ), cylinders shall be checked for correct determination of the tare weight ( weight of the empty cylinder with valve and its safety cap, footring and V.P. ring ). Any cylinder having lost its tare weight by over 5 percent of its original tare weight shall be declared unserviceable. 10.5 External Inspection 10.5.1 Affected portions of the body of the cylinders segregated during inspection under Section 1 shall be ground to achieve a defect free surface. 10.5.1.1 Cylinder wall thickness so achieved shall not be less than 90 percent of the designed wall thickness. 10.6 Internal Inspection The entire internal surface of the cylinder shall be examined by means of an extra low voltage inspection lamp and the cylinder shall be declared unserviceable if the bottom of an internal defect cannot be seen and its extent cannot be measured. 11 SEGREGATION OF CYLINDERS Cylinders on the basis of inspection shall be segregated in accordance with 11.1 and 11.2. 11.1 Unserviceable Cylinders with any one or more of the following con&tions shall be declared unserviceable: a) Cylinders declared unserviceable when inspected according to Section 1; b) Cylinders having lost their identity ( Manufacturer's name, serial number of the cylinder, test date and original tare weight ); 3

unserviceable

warping or distortion has resulted. bulging exceeding the limit given in 6.1 has occurred, or c) other signs of excessive heat damage are evident.
DETAILED EXAMINATION RECONDITIONING

SECTION 2 AND 7

MATERIAL

The material used for manufacturing the replacements of detachables like shroud, valve protection ring and footring shall be as specified in IS 3196 ( Part 1 ) : 1991. The tube used for making valve protection ring shall conform to the owner's requirement as detailed in their drawing. 8 REPLACEMENT DETACHABLES

8.1 The design of all detachables shall meet the requirements laid down in IS 3196 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 for individual parts respectively. 8.1.1 The design shall also conform to the owner's requirement as detailed in their drawing. 9 DEGASSING OF CYLINDERS

9.1 Valves of cylinders taken for processing shall be removed by employing a proper fixture and a suitable wrench using a close fitting hexagonal adopter. It shall be ensured that only depressurised cylinders are taken for the removal of the valve. 9.2 Cylinder shall be degassed by suitable ~method and each cylinder shall be checked with explosive meter to ensure complete degassing. The degassing station and procedures shall have the approval of the statutory authority. 10 DETAILED EXAMINATION shall
.,

10.1Cylinders received for reconditioning
be examined in accordance 10.2 External Cleaning with Section 1.

Each cylinder shall be cleaned externally by wire brushing, water jet abrassive cleaning, approved chemical cleaning or any other suitable method.

IS 13258: 1991 c) Cylinders

coming second time; and

for

repairs

for

the

12.2 Dedenting Dedenting of cylinders if required shall be done by a process approved by statutory authority. 12.3 Fixing New Footring and Valve Protecting Ring/Sbrond New footring and valve protecting ring/shroud shall be welded in accordance with IS 3196 ( Part I ) : 1991 and all welds shall be inspected for weld defects. 13 STRESS RELIKVING All the hot worked or cold worked cylinders shall be normalized or stress relieved suitably. 14 HYDROSTATIC TEST

d) The cylinders having wall thickness less than the minimum thickness as permitted in 10.5.1.1. Cause(s) of rejection of all the unserviceable cylinders shall be recorded in the proforma as shown in Annex A and cause may b; coded in the foilowing manner: Bulge Burn Dent Dig cut Pit Line corrosion General corrosion Bung thread damage Loss in tare weight Identity lost Cylinder identified as once repaired The bottom of internal defect cannot be seen and it's extent cannot be measured thickness The wall been reduced by than the specified 11.2 Repairable Cylinders which are found serviceable according to 10.1 and 11.1 shall be considered ~repairable. These cylinders shall be taken for further processing and reconditioning. Cylinders with following types of defects shall b: permitted for repairs: E-l E-2 E-3 E-4 E-5 E-6 E-7 E-S E-9 E10 E11 E12 I-l

14.1 Each heat treated cylinder shall be subjected to hydrostatic test. During the hydrostatic test, the pressure shall be increased gradually till the required test pressure is reached. After the test pressure is reached and the external surfaces of the cylinder are dried it shall be retained for a period of not less than 30 seconds. Any reduction in pressure noticed during this retention period or any leakage, or visible bzllge of deformation shall be treated as a case of failure in the test and the cylinder shall be declared unserviceable. 14.1.1 The value of hydrostatic test pressure for LPG shall be taken as 25 kgf/cm2 as specified in IS 8867 : 1978. 14.1.2 Hydrostatic Test shall be carried according to 7 of IS 3196 ( Part 3 ) : 1991. 15 FIXING OF VALVE Prior to fixing of valves on to the cylinder, bung threads shall be cleaned using appropriate tap and checked for any imperfections, distortion etc. Valves shall be fitted using a suitable torque of 200 & 20 Nm. A suitable jointing material should be used between the valve and bung to arrest leakage of LPG through this joint. 16 PNEUMATIC TEST out

has more value

I-2

a) Damaged footrings

can be replaced with new ones. No partial replacement of the footring shall be permitted. ring/shroud b) Damaged valve protecting may be replaced or repaired.
NOTE-The need for replacement of footring and valve protecting ring shall be decided by the Inspecting Authority.

12 RECONDITIONING ;2.$Removal

." of Footring and `Valve Protectfsg
"

16.1 Each cylinder after it has been dried and fitted with valve shall be tested for leakage by subjecting to air pressure of not less than 980 kPa ( 10 kgf/cm2 ) for a period of one minute while immersed in water and shall show no leakage from the body of the cylinder and the joint between valve and bung. This test shall be carried out after fixing the safety cap on the valve. 16.2 Pneumatic Leakage Test shall be carried out according to 8 of IS 3196 ( Part 3 ) : 1991. 17 DESHAPING Cylinders declar'ed unserviceable during inspection/tests shall be returned to the owner for-proper deshaping or shall be deshaped under 4

12.1.1 Damaged/Defective foot ring and valve without protecting ring shall be removed damaging the body of the cylinder. The welded spots shall be ground and cleaned thoroughly for checking the surface for line corrosion, pits, etc, and wall thickness before fitting new footring and valve protecting ring.

IS 13258 :1991 the supervision owner's option. of inspecting authority as per duly approved and signed by the inspecting authority shall be forwarded to the statutory authority and the owner ( see Annex B ). 20 MARKINGS The cylinders fitted with new footring and V.P. ring shall be immediately marked with the following original markings on the footring and vertical stays of V.P. ring as applicable: a) Serial number of the cylinder. name b) Original manufacturer's and repairer's identification. c) New tare weight and gross weight of cylinder in kg. d) Month and year of manufacture, and reconditioning. e) The maximum working pressure, and pressure in kgf/cm2. f) Water capacity in litres. retest test

18 PREPARATION FOR DESPATCH 18.1Before being fitted with valves, all cylinders
shall be thoroughly cleaned, dried internally. 18.2 The outside surface of the cylinders shall be shot blasted and given following protective coatings: a) Spraying Zinc or Aluminium to give a coating of minimum thickness of 37 microns urless otherwise agreed between the purchaser and repairer.

b)

One coat of "Zinc agreed between repairer.

Chromate Primer" as the purchaser and

One coat of super synthetic enamel paint c> conforming to IS 2932 : 1974 of signal red colour ( Shade No. 537 of IS 5 : 1961 ). Both the layers of the primer and paint shall have a total thickness of minimum 30 microns. 19 RECORDS
A

g) Loss in tare weight, if observed under 10.4 shall be punched at the footring ( Example - If the loss in tare weight is 200 g, it shall be punched as LTW 200. ) The letter `R' shall be conspicuously stamped on the vertical stay of the valve protecting ring as close to certification mark as practicable for identification that the cylir,der is reconditioned. The letter `R' shall be stamped on the footring also.

record shall be maintained for ~a11 tests, reconditioning and inspections at the cylinder repairer's works and copies shall be made available to the inspecting authority and owner of the cylinder, if desired. A test certificate

5

IS 13258: 1991

ANNEX A (Clause 11.1 )
LIST OF CYLINDERS Repairer's Name Order No. Batch No. Certificate No. Date
Cylinder SI No. Original Manufacturer's Name Date of Manufacture Date of Rejectior Cause of Rejection

UNSERVICEABLE

Repairing Company's Representative

Inspecting

Officer

ANNEX B ( Clause 19 )
LIST OF CYLINDERS Repairer's Name Order No. Batch No. Certificate No. Date
Cylinder SI No. Original Manufacturer's Name Date of Manufacture Date of Repair/ Test Details of Repairs Carried Ouf -

ACCEPTED

Repairing Company's Representative 6

Inspecting

Officer

Standard Mark by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed
Stundards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations

Bnreao of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution -established under the Bureau of Indiun Standards .4c4 1986 to promoto harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does nob preclude the free use, in any form without the prior permission in writing of BLS. the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and siaes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standarb Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the Dot : No. HMD are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendment& if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition. following reference : 16 ( 0013 1 Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAUjOF,INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDA-RDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones
: 331 01 31,

331 13 75

Telegrams a Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 t 331 13 75 37 86 62 160036 600113 53 38 43 2350216

Regional Offices :

NEW DELHI Central : Manak Bhavan, 110002 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA Northern 700054

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BH&PAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVAN.~NTr-S,A.PURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Swatanbra Bharat Press, Delhi. India

