INATA Aah IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Hadt ATV TUE HT TOA — OT 


CAGE LI 
qrt 2 Ya ete 


Measurement of Surface 
Frictional Properties — Methods 
of Test 
Part 2 Ramp Test 


ICS 13.340.60 


© BIS 2023 


UR AH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
er ee HAH MA, 9 SRT Me HHL AMT, Ag Reet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 7 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


The selection of any type of floor surface finish for use for use at home or at commercial space (especially in 
industry) is very much important. One of the selection criteria involves frictional properties of the tile surface. 
Frictional resistance can be measure by various methods. The method described in this standard is the ramp test 
method. The other standard in this series is: 


Part 1 Pendulum test 


This test method works on the concept that a tester wearing testing footwear/barefoot walks forwards and 
backwards in an upright position across the floor covering to be tested, which is initially in a horizontal position 
and then gradually tilted until the acceptance angle has been reached. The acceptance angle is determined using 
a floor covering coated/circulated with lubricant. The mean acceptance angle reached is used to classify the 
degree of slip resistance. 


While formulating this Standard, considerable assistance has been derived from DIN 51130 : 2014 “Testing of 
floor coverings — Determination of the anti-slip property — Workrooms and fields of activities with slip 
danger — Walking method — Ramp test’. 


Informatory Annex on testing and evaluation (see Annex B) and special requirements of footwear 
(see Annex C) used are included for general guidance. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


This standard contributes to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9. ‘Industry, innovation and 
infrastructure, build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster 
innovation’. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 'Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision). 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MEASUREMENT OF SURFACE FRICTIONAL PROPERTIES 


— METHODS OF TEST 
PART 2 RAMP TEST 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This test method covers the procedure for 
measuring surface frictional properties of a floor 
using the ramp test. 


1.2 This standard (Part 1) also specifies a method of 
measuring the volume of the displacement spaces in 
floor coverings with profiled surfaces. 


1.3 This test method is applicable to all types of 
surfaces (plain as well as self-designed/profiled). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in the text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of the standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Acceptance Angle — Angle of slope of the 
tilted surface at which the tester reaches the limit of 
safe walking. 


3.2 Displacement Space — The open cavities 
formed by the ridges and valleys of a profiled floor 
which lie beneath the walking surface of the floor 
covering. 


NOTE — The displacement space enables the distribution 
and collection of excess lubricants underneath the walking 
surface, contributing to the anti-slip capacity of the floor 
covering. 


3.3 Profiled Surface — Surface of flooring 
materials where the clear distance between profile 


ridges does not exceed 40 mm. 


3.4 Slip Resistance — Capacity of a floor covering 


to prevent slipping. 


3.5 Tester — Person who walks along the tilted 
surface. 


3.6 Workplaces and Working Areas — 
Workplaces and working areas where lubricants 
routinely contaminate the floor, for example grease, 
oil, water, food products, food scraps, dust, flour and 
plant waste. 


4 SYMBOLS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 
symbols shall have the meaning indicated against 
each: 


Ost — Standard acceptance 
angle; 

CrDos — Critical difference at 
significant level of 
95 percent; 

Axst — Standard test acceptance 
angle; 

Dj — Correction as a function 


of the size of the mean 
test acceptance angle; 


Ages — Corrected mean overall 
acceptance angle; 
R9/R10/R11/R12 — Slip resistance class; and 
A/B/C — Slip rating class. 
5 PRINCIPLE 


5.1 Slip Resistance 


A tester wearing testing footwear/barefoot walks 
forwards and backwards in an upright position 
across the floor covering to be tested, which is 
initially in a horizontal position and then gradually 
tilted until the acceptance angle has been reached. 
The acceptance angle is determined using a floor 
covering coated/circulated with lubricant. The mean 
acceptance angle reached is used to classify the 
degree of slip resistance. Subjective influences on 
the acceptance angle are limited by means of a 
calibration procedure. 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


5.2 Displacement Space 


The test specimen is levelled out by filling the 
profile cavities with paste until this is flush with the 
surface. The mass of the test specimen is measured 
before and after this process. The volume of the 
displacement space is calculated from the difference 
in mass and the density of the paste. 


6 TESTING OF SLIP RESISTANCE 
6.1 Apparatus and Test Equipment 
6.1.1 Testing Footwear 


The tester wears testing footwear with an outsole of 
nitrile rubber with a shore hardness of 
A/73 + 5 [according to IS 13360 (Part 5/Sec 11)] 
with a profile as in Fig. 1. 


After the completion of the tests, the soles of the 
testing footwear shall not remain in an oil bath for 
storage. The soles are to be thoroughly cleaned and 
the oil removed, but without the use of any 
detergents or hydro treated light naphtha, and stored 
in a dry place. 


For barefoot tests, the test person shall soak their feet 
in the barefoot lubricant (see 6.1.4) for ten minutes 
before starting the test. 


6.1.2 Test Apparatus with Safety Equipment 


For the test apparatus a flat warp resistant platform 
shall be used with a width of approximately 600 mm 
and a length of approximately 2 000 mm. In the 
longitudinal direction, the ramp shall be adjustableto 
an incline of O° up to approximately 40° 
(see Fig. 2). The lifting speed of the drive shall be 
such that the angular velocity of the ramp is not more 


than 1° per second. The tester shall be able to 
control the movement of the ramp, with the ability 
to move it up or down either continually or in 
incremental steps of 0.5°. There shall be an angle 
measuring device attached to the test apparatus that 
is capable of indicating the angle of inclination to the 
horizontal to an accuracy of + 0.2°. The test 
apparatus shall be constructed such that the angle of 
inclination does not fluctuate by more than 
+ 1° when walked along. The angle measuring 
device display is to be positioned such that the tester 
is not able to see it while the test is being performed. 


To ensure the safety of the tester, handrails are to be 
installed on each longitudinal side of the test 
apparatus. The tester is also to be protected from 
falls by the use of appropriate safety equipment 
(safety harness and fall protection system). 


6.1.3 Lubricant for Testing with Footwear 


Motor lubricating oil of viscosity grade 40 according 
to IS 13656 is to be used for the test. The oil is to be 
stored in a tightly closed container to prevent 
changes in viscosity. Before beginning the test, 
200 ml + 20 ml of the lubricant per square metre 
shall be applied evenly with a brush to the surface of 
the flooring test piece. The outsole of the footwear 
shall be coated with the lubricant using a brush. 


6.1.4 Lubricant for Barefoot Tests 


A non-ionic surfactant such as LS45 (structure 
shown in Fig. 3) mixed with water in a concentration 
of 1 gram/litre (0.1 percent solution in water) shall 
be used as lubricant for barefoot tests. A continuous 
flow of the lubricant is to be applied prior to and 
during the tests at the rate of 6 litre/min + 1 litre/min 
in a manner to form a largely uniform distribution of 
the lubricant over the test surface. The lubricant 
may be used only once and shall not be re-circulated. 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL OUTSOLE OF THE TESTING FOOTWEAR 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


| | 

Ps 1/) 

LiLLL Lh Ah hhh hd UKALI T x 
Ba \ 


2120 


Key 


1 Safety harness and fall protection system 

2 Drive unit 

3 Inclinable platform upon which the flooring test piece is attached 
4 Angle transmitter 


FIG. 2 EXAMPLE OF A TEST APPARATUS (INCLINED PLANE) WITH SAFETY EQUIPMENT 


H3 
C wlios—O-CCHs—CH;—07-CH—CH;-—07-H 


FIG. 3 STRUCTURE OF LS45 NON-IONIC SURFACTANT (M = 4, N = 5) 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


6.1.5 Flooring Test Piece 


The flooring test piece measuring approximately 
1 000 mm x 500 mm is to be obtained from the floor 
covering to be tested. The floor covering to be tested 
shall either be self-supporting or comprise a 
warp-free sheet with a flat underside, or else shall be 
affixed to flat, resilient, warp-free material. The 
surface to be tested shall be easily identifiable as 
such or be clearly marked. 


Floor coverings with directionally-oriented profile 
or roughness are to be tested in such a manner that 
the orientation producing the lowest slip resistance 
is in line with the walking direction. This is to be 
determined in preliminary tests. 


Floor coverings made up of individual rectangular 
pieces without directionally-oriented profile or 
roughness are to be positioned with the longitudinal 
side in the walking direction. 


The surface of the floor covering shall be clean for 
the test and free from manufacturing residues, 
separating agents, or flashes. 


The preparation of the flooring test piece from the 
floor covering shall be done in a manner consistent 
with the way this type of covering is used in practice. 
The overall flooring test piece shall be rigidly fixed 
on the platform with appropriate locking 
mechanism. 


6.2 Calibration (Selection and Training of the 
Testers) 


There are three standard floor coverings available 
for the calibration method, (St-I, St-II and St-IIIA), 
whose acceptance angles a have undergone 
extensive testing and have been specified as 
standard acceptance angles @s,st-1, Gs,st-1 and Gs, St-ILA 
(see Table 1). 


The tester walks across each of the standard floor 
coverings three times before the test is carried out 
according to 6.3. The mean values axsi-1j, aksen and 
axstma, are calculated from the resulting calibration 
acceptance angles determined by this pre-test. The 
individual corrections Aast1j, Aa s-nj and Adasen, 
are obtained from the respective difference between 
these mean values and the standard acceptance 
angles. 


The critical difference (CrD) characterizes the range 
of variation of measured values within which 
differences randomly occur for either measurements 
on the same object in different laboratories or during 
different measurements in the same laboratory. 


The critical differences, CrDos, have been 
determined for the three standard floor coverings for 
a significance level) of 95 percent on the basis of the 


reproducibility limits and repeatability limits as in IS 
15393 (Part 2) or IS 15393 (Part 5). 


Two testers are required for testing the floor 
coverings to be evaluated. The calibrated 
acceptance angles determined for the standard floor 
coverings apply here axsi-1,1, @xst-n,1 and @xst-ma,1 and 
respectively, axst12, @kst-0,2 and a@xstma2 as well as 
the individual corrections Aast11, Aast-n,1 and 
AGQst-IIIA.1 and respectively, Aast12, Aast-112 and 
Aast-11A.2- 


Table 1 Standard Acceptance Angle and Critical 


Differences 
(Clauses 6.2, B-1 and B-3) 
SI No. Standard asi CrDos 
Floor 
Covering 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) St-I 8.7° 3.0° 
ii) StI 17.3° 3.0° 
iii) St-HIA 27.3° 3.0° 


If the individual corrections Aast1j, Aasi-nj and 
Aas-ma,j fall within the critical differences, they will 
be included in the analysis, but if they fall outside 
the range, the responsible tester will be excluded 
from the test. Tester shall be replaced by another 
tester the same day. 


6.3 Procedure 


The temperature of the test room, as well as the 
footwear, lubricant and flooring test piece shall be 
27 °C +5 °C. The lubricant is to be applied in a 
manner specified in clause 6.1.3 (for tests with 
footwear) or clause 6.1.4 (for barefoot tests), as 
applicable. 


The tester then walks in an upright position with the 
line of vision downhill, taking steps of half a 
foot/shoe length forwards and backwards along the 
flooring test piece. The flooring test piece starts in 
a horizontal position and the incline is gradually 
increased at a speed of approximately 1° per second. 
When the tester reaches the limit of being able to 
walk safely, the tester walks up and down multiple 
times to determine the critical range of the 
acceptance angle (the angle of slippage). The 
acceptance angle of the flooring test piece is 
determined three times, each time starting in the 
horizontal position or starting with an angle 10° 
below the acceptance angle of the previous 
measurement. Before each second and third 
measurement, lubricant is to be re-applied to the 
surface area with a brush. The test shall be carried 
out by two testers. 


NOTE — In order to maintain an even gait, it is 
recommended that the pace frequency be set by an acoustic 
clock-pulse generator, for example, a metronome. The 
tester’s pace frequency should be approximately 140 steps 
per minute at an angle of inclination up to ~ 20°. 


6.4 Evaluation 


For each tester, the three acceptance angle results are 
averaged to give the mean test acceptance angle @ 1 
and @ 2. 


For each tester, a correction of D; is calculated. 
Depending on the size of the mean test acceptance 
angle reached y and a, the calculation is carried 


out according to one of the four scenarios listed in 
Table 2. 


The addition of the correction D, and the mean test 
acceptance angle a, gives the corrected mean 
acceptance angle ay. 


The scenarios in Table 2 are outlined for tester 1. 
For tester 2, the calculation of the correction D, is 
carried out accordingly. 


6.5 Classification and Typical Applications 


The corrected mean acceptance angles a, and a are 
added together and divided by 2. The result is the 
corrected mean overall acceptance angle ges used to 
determine the slip-resistance/rating classification 
according to Table 3 and Table 4 (for barefoot tests). 


7 MEASUREMENT OF THE DISPLACEMENT 
SPACE 
7.1 General 


The measurement of the displacement space shall 
only be carried out subject to agreement. Floor 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


coverings with a displacement space of more than 
10 cm*/dm? (for example, grating) owing to their 
open structure will be classified as V 10 according 
to Table 5 without the displacement space being 
measured. 


7.2 Test Apparatus 


The test apparatus consists of a base plate with a 
smooth surface, an adjustable metal frame to enclose 
the test specimen, a scale with a maximum 
permissible error of 0.05 g as well as a measurement 
device to determine the density of the paste used for 
testing, for example, dispersion adhesive. 


7.3 Test Specimen 


A piece of the floor covering measuring 
100 mm x 100 mm serves as the test specimen. 
The test specimen shall be representative of the 
surface structure of the floor covering. 


When using tiles or sheets with sides measuring 
between 90 mm and 100 mm, the displacement 
space determination is to be carried out on individual 
sections and the results projected to 10 000 mm?. 


When using tiles or sheets with sides measuring less 
than 90 mm, the test specimen is to be made up of 
individual tiles and sheets affixed together. The tiles 
or sections shall be glued onto a base plate, closely 
fitted next to one another with no gaps in between, 
and then cut into a 10 000 mm? test surface. 


Table 2 Correction as a Function of the Size of the Mean Test Acceptance Angle 


(Clause 6.4) 
SI No. Scenario Correction 
Dı 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) doi < @xst-11 
; ES D, = AQgt-11 X Z 
ii) @k,st-1,1 £ @o,1 < sti 
Dy = |Aast-11 + (AQst-111 — Adst-11) 
š Ao1 — QK,St-1,1 E 1 
Asta — @Kst-1,1] V2 
iii) Qk,st-1,1 £ 91 < @K,St-111,1 
D, = |AQst-111 + (Adsi-ma1 = Ads-11,1) 
M1 T AR st-111 7 1 
ak St-IA,1 — &k,st-1,1] V2 
b 1 
iv) ax stu S 4,1 D, = AQsi=mas X 5 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 3 Slip-Resistance Classification based Upon the Corrected Mean Overall Acceptance Angle — 
Tests with Footwear 


(Clauses 6.5 and B-4) 


SI No. Corrected mean Overall Slip Resistance Typical Floor Applications 
Acceptance Angle Class 
Ages 

0) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Up to 10° R9 Low risk internal applications, customer 
reception areas 

ii) over 10° up to 19° R 10 Toilet and bathroom areas, self-service 
cafeterias 

iii) over 19° up to 27° R11 Cold stores, dish washing areas 

iv) over 27° up to 35° R 12 Liquid spillage areas, large commercial 
kitchens 

v) over 35° R 13 High risk of slip, oil spillage or similar 
present 

Table 4 Slip Resistance Classification Based on Angle of Slippage — Barefoot Tests 
(Clause 6.5) 
SINo. Corrected Mean Overall Slip Rating Typical Floor Applications 
Acceptance Angle Class 
Ages 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 12° to 18° A Dry areas including dry changing areas, dry barefoot 
corridors 
ii) over 18° up to 24° B As A + pools surrounds, community showers, pool 
beach areas, wet change areas 
iii) over 24° C As A and B + pool surround inclines, walk through 


pools, jacuzzi floors and seats, inclined pool edges and 
steps 


7.4 Determination of Paste Density 


Before the series of tests is begun, the density of the 
paste to be used for the test is to be determined using 
two samples. For this purpose, a specimen glass is 
filled with the paste, free from air bubbles. The 
paste is then levelled off flush with the upper edge 
of the glass. The fill density is calculated from the 
difference in mass between the filled and empty 
glass and the volume of the specimen glass, and then 
rounded to two decimal points. 


7.5 Procedure 


The test specimen is placed on the base plate with 
the profiled side down and taped around each side 
flush with the surface from corner to corner. Then 
the test specimen is weighed to the nearest 0.1 g. 
The test specimen is again placed upon the base plate 
with the profiled or structured side facing down and 
enclosed by the metal frame, flush with the surface. 


The test specimen is then turned over and the 
displacement spaces filled with the paste. The paste 


is smoothed out evenly so as to be flush with the tops 
of the profile ridges, leaving no grooves. After the 
metal frame is removed, the test specimen is 
weighed for the second time. The filling and 
smoothing of the paste, removal of the frame and the 
second weighing shall take place within one minute. 
The volume of the displacement spaces is calculated 
from the difference in mass and the determined 
density of the paste. This test is to be carried out on 
five test specimens for each type of profile or 
structure. 


7.6 Evaluation and Classification 


The size of the displacement space is determined by 
calculating the arithmetic mean of the five volume 
determinations and rounding to 0.5 cm*/dm?. The 
result is used to determine the class of displacement 
space according to Table 5. 


8 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall refer to this standard and include 


the following details: 


a) Designation, name of the product 
manufacturer, product; if applicable the 
grade, colour and dimensions of the 
products which were used for the floor 
covering; 

b) Structure of the surface (for example, flat, 
profiled, structured); 


c) Mean overall acceptance angle, rounded to 
0.1°; 


d 


wm 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


Displacement space, rounded to 
0.5 cm? per dm? or, if applicable, ‘not 
tested’; 


Slip resistance class; 

If applicable the class of the displacement 
space; 

Test house; and 


Abnormalities (for example, Irregularities in 
the surface). 


Table 5 Relationship of the Class of Displacement Space to the Volume per Unit Area 
(Clauses 7.1 and 7.6) 


SINo. Volume Per Unit Area of 
Displacement Space, 


Class of 


Displacement Space 


cm?/dm? 
Min 
(1) (2) (3) 
D 4 V4 
11) 6 V6 
111) 8 V8 
iv) 10 V 10 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


IS No. 


IS 13360 (Part 5/ 
Sec11) : 2013 


IS 13656 : 2019 


IS 15393 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Plastics — Methods of testing 
— Determination of indentation 
hardness by means of a 
durometer (shore hardness) 
(first revision) 


Internal combustion engine 
crankcase oils for automotive 
application (diesel and 
gasoline) — Specification 
(third revision) 


Accuracy  (trueness and 
precision) of measurement 
methods and results: 


IS No. 


(Part 2) : 2021 


(Part 5) : 2003 


Title 


Basic method for the 
determination of repeatability 
and reproducibility of a 
standard measurement method 


Alternative methods for the 
determination of the precision 
of a standard measurement 
method 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


TESTING PROCESS 


B-1 CALIBRATION 


The testing calibration shall include the following: 


a) Each test person j walks along each standard 
floor covering three times and the mean 
values are determined: 


Ag st-1j AKSt-I,5 CK St-1ILj 


b) The individual corrections: 
Aajj = &si-&gij (i 
= St — 1, St — II, St 
— IIIA) 
are calculated and given as: 
Adst-1; A@st-nj A@st-ma,j 
c) The test person is excluded if 


|Aa;;| > CrDos 


See Table 1. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


Each accepted test person j walks along the floor 
covering to be tested three times and the mean value 
Qo,j is determined. 


B-3 EVALUATION 


The correction D; for the flooring test piece, 
depending upon the mean value œo, j, is calculated 


according to the equations in Table 1. The individual 
result of test person j is calculated as follows: 


Qj = Qj + D; 
B-4 CLASSIFICATION 
The end result of the test by 2 testers is given as: 
A. ait 
= 422 


ges 


and results in the assignment to a class according to 
Table 3. 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
OUTSOLES OF THE TESTING FOOTWEAR 


C-1 Exposure to motor oil over longer periods as 
well as walking upon floor coverings with sharp 
surfaces can lead to changes in the sole of the test 
shoe. These changes can be determined optically or 
by calibration. Sanding the surface of the soles with 


unused sandpaper of grain 320 carbon silicide can 
remove these changes. After the surface of the soles 
is sanded, the sandpaper dust is to be removed and a 
test person shall carry out a calibration. 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Flooring, Wall Finishing and Roofing Sectional Committee, CED 05 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (1/109, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi - 110076) 


Acropolis Institute of Technology and Research, 
Indore 
Aludecor Lamination Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Ardex Endura India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Choksi Laboratories Limited, Indore 


Construction Industry Development Council, 
New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Glass and Ceramic Research 
Institute, Kolkata 


CSIR - Central 
New Delhi 


Road Research Institute, 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


H. R. Johnson (India) Limited, Dewas 


Indian Council of Ceramic Tiles & Sanitaryware, 
Mumbai 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ASHOK KHURANA (Chairperson) 
DR SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI JAYANT AWASTHY (Alternate I) 
SHRI DEEPSHIKHA SHUKLA (Alternate II) 


SHRI DEVESH KUMAR 


SHRI K. P. PAULSON 
SHRI GOPINATH KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
Ms NANDINI MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI VYANGESH CHOKSI 


SHRI P. R. SWARUP 
SHRI RAVI JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SINGH 
DR ACHAL KUMAR MITTAL (Alternate) 


DR PARAG MANGALBHAI SOLANKI 
DR PARVESH AGARWAL (Alternate I) 
DR ASHA T. ANIL (Alternate I) 


DR RAKESH KUMAR 


CHIEF ENGINEER (DWK) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR DAS 
SHRI AKHILESH MAURYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANISH MAHALA (Alternate II) 


SHRI SUDIPTA SAHA 
SHRI SUBHASHISH 
(Alternate) 


MUKHOPADHYAY 


SHRI SUDIPTA SAHA 
SHRI P. K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 


MAPEI Construction Products India Pvt Ltd, 
Bengaluru 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Morbi Dhuva Glaze Tiles Association, Morbi 


MYK Laticrete India, Hyderabad 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


National Test House, Kolkata 


NTC Tiles LLP, Panchkula 


Paver and Block Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Plastindia Foundation, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilm Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Lucknow 


RMG Polyvinyl India Limited, Ghaziabad 


Shriram Institute of Industrial 


New Delhi 


Research, 


Steuler Industrial Solution (India) Private Limited 


In Personal Capacity (N96, Ground Floor, 
Mayfield Garden, Sector-51, Gurugram - 
122018) 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR GAURAV SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI HANUMANTHA RAJU S.N. 

SHRI RAVI JAGTAP (Alternate I) 

SHRI ASHUTOSH KANDWAL (Alternate II) 
SHRIMATI RIVOO MAHENDRU 

SHRIMATI REMIKA SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI NILESH JETPARIA 
SHRI JERAM MADHAV KAVAR (Alternate) 


DR P. ARJUNAN 
SHRI N. RADHAKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIT TRIVEDI 
SHRI SANJAY MUNDRA (Alternate I) 


SHRI AMIT SAGAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI D. V. S. PRASAD 
DR SOMIT NEOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI PREM CHAND GUPTA 
SHRI SUSHANT GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMBHANI 
SHRI MEHUL JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND GOENKA 
DR E. SUNDARESAN (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR 
SHRI HARENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (WORKS) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHISH MOHAN 
SHRI A. N. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH GARG 
SHRI RAMAN DHYANI (Alternate) 


SHRI CHIRAG K BAXI 
SHRI BHARATBHAI D. PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. D. MATHUR 


IS 18433 (Part 2) : 2023 


Organization Representative(s) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/ 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 


SHRI PRADEEP SINGH SHEKHAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 05 (21164). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


