UDC 622'242 : 028'111'24

( First Reprint

FEBRUARY

`1986)

IS:7156-

1974

lndian

Stancfard

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

GENERAL REVERSE
1. Scope -- Covers the goneral requirements

REQUIREMENTS

FOR RIGS

CIRCULATION
for reverse circulation

DRILLING
drilling rigs.

D

8 ..

2. Functions

and Constructional

Details

U

2
..

2.1 The reverse circulation drill is used to construct larger diameter wells, the hole being of any size up to 1 500 mm ( m60 in ) in certain cases, under soft ro medium and hard soil conditions for bore wells.
This type of drill is not The sand formations and sticky clay form, the soft and hard strata conditions. The characteristics of this type of drill is to clear the cuttings by suitable for hard rocky conditions. pumping them along with the water through the drill rod string, the water being circulated via the annuius from the water storage pit to the hole through a flume and back to the pit again (see Fig. 1). 2.2 The functions and the constructional details of various units are given in Fig. 2. They are intended to be typical only and do not constitute a specific recommendation but are only a guideline for the manufacturer and the user of the drilling rig.

2.2.1 Draw works--The draw works shall consist of not less than two drums to hold the drilling string and to handle auxiliary equipment and shall have individual controls either through clutches or any other acceptable method with brake bands of the required capacity. The drive shafts shall be Proper lubrication shall mounted on antifriction bearings on either side and shall rotate freely on them. The brake bands should prevent any foreign material or the lubribe ensured for longer bearing life. The drive shall be through the transmission to give varying cants to come in contact with the linings. The draw works shall be complete with sufficient lengths and capacity of tested speeds for the pull. steel wire rope rolled on both the drums.
2.2.2 /Vast - Mast shall be constructed either of structural steel conforming to IS : `I 161-1968 Specification for structural steel (standard quality) (fourth revision)' or steel tubing conforming to The material IS : 266-1969 ' Specification for steel tubes for structural purposes (second revision)`. shall be capable of handling the maximum desired load without distortion, the factor of safety being The mast shall be made up of horizontal sections with cross-bars tied not less than 2.2 in any case. together to the sections at an interval of not more than 3 to 3.5 metres. They shall be properly welded The final shape of the mast shall be correct to the requirement with the with no cracks in welding. clear working height to handle the drilling string and with sufficient width to accommodate handling The mast shall be actuated by one or more double acting hydraulic of drilling bits and casing pipes. cylinders with safety checks, to either raise or lower it. A mechanical lock shall be provided to hold There shall be adjustable leg supports for the mast to take up the loads the mast in vertical position. without any disturbance to its position. The hydraulic cylinders shall be operated by means of a suitable hydraulic pump driven by the main power unit or by a separate power unit and controlled by valves. The mast shall have the necessary attachments for all the hydraulic and water connection joints, the crown pulleys and the wire string. Necessary lubricating arrangements shall be made for all Suitable electrical wiring arrangements shall also be made for lighting. the moving parts. 2.2.3 Rotary table - The rotary table shall give a positive rotation to the drill string in different speeds through the tranrr+ssion for the different strata conditions. Whereas the hard sticky clay formation requires faster rotational speeds to pass through, the sand formation requires lesser speed. The The selection of the correct speed shall be the driller's job according to the prevailing conditions. rig shal\ have at least 4 or 5 speeds to select from. The rotary drive to the drill string shall be provided by means of a straight or spiral steel gear and pinion properly machined to close tolerances. The pinion shaft shall be mounted on heavy duty taper roller bearings. An independent clutch for the rotary table The entire unit shall be mounted on a cast or fabricated oil-bath casing, dustshall also be provided. The drive to the drill string from the table shall be through a two-piece master proof and leakproof. bushing. In case of smaller rotary tables provision either to remove it or to keep it in the vertical position while lowering of casing and while shifting, shall be provided. 2.2.4 Transmission - Provision shall be made for effecting different rotational speeds for the rotary table according to the soil conditions and different hoisting speeds according to the load on the hook. As mentioned earlier, hard sticky clay formations require faster speeds and the hoisting speed is inversely proportional to the hoisting load. For this a gear box with not less than 4 forward speeds and This unit shall be coupled to one reverse speed with the required gear reduction shall be provided. the power unit through the main clutch. Individual clutches shall be provided for all the subunits. Transmission unit shall be filled with suitable grade of lubricating oil and shall be leakproof, Adopted 25 February 1974

Q July 1974, ISI I I
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTlTUTlON MANAK BHAVAN, a BAHADUB SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHt 11OQOZ

Gr 3

iS:7156-

1974

2.2.5 Pump -The pump shall remove the cuttings as the drilling progresses quickly and efficiently to obtain maximum rate of drilling. A suitably designed pump delivering the maximum quantity of water and with the maximum requisite pressure, driven by either the main power unit through suitable drives and with an independent control, or by an auxiliary Dower unit with controls, shall be provided in the rig. A suitable priming system shall also be provided. It shall either 2.2.6 Power unif - All the above units shall be driven by one or more power units. In be a high speed industrial type diesel engine or an electric motor or motors of adequate capacity. the case of the diesel engine, it shall be continuously rated and be free from troubles, shall be provided In the case of with suitable lubricating and cooling systems and shall be easily accessible for repairs. an electric motor it shall be a continuous rated motor with starter, switchgear and cable arrangements The motor shall be suitable for operation in 400 V ac and enclosed in a suitable weatherproof cabin. In either case, namely, the diesel engine or the electric motor, they shall develop adequate mains. In the case of the diesel engine a fuel tank of power at the rated speed to meet all requirements. suitable capacity shall be provided.

\
i t

SUCTION WING

PRIME MOVElR

-----.--_ - --.---ILSETTLING W4::r.J'
7, *"

4

,3

TX/ -if

K:
DRlLLiNG BIT

FIG. 1 REVERSE

CIRCULATION

DRILLING

SYSTEM

2

IS : 7156 - 1974
2.2.7 Confrols -- The following

controls

should be provided:

a) To start the power unit, b) Erection of the main supporting c) Raising and lowering d) Hoisting e) Hoisting and lowering and lowering of mast, the main line, the auxiliary line, string, jacks,

f) To give rotary drive to the drilling g) To drive the pump, and h) Control switches for the lighting

unit.

All the above controls shall be grouped together and placed at the driiler's place within reach for quick and easy operation and the entire oparation shall be done by a single operator and the In addition to this, the drill shall have the following gauges, operations shall be fully visible to him. namely, vacuum gauge, ammeter, voltmeter, etc. 2.2.8 Lighting sysfem - Generally drilling operations are carried out during day and night. To enable round-the-clock operation, the entire rig shall be adequately illuminated. In the case of the rig mounted with a diesel engine, the power for lighting shall either be from the main engine or from any auxiliary equipment. In the other case where the electric power is available and the rig equipped with electrical motors, the power for the lights shall be tapped from the electrical main and in the case of rigs supplied to mines the voltage shall be either 110 or 24 V. Panel lights for the gauges may also be provided. Suitable control switches shall be provided. 2.2.9 Mounting --All the above units put together form the drilling rig. The whole system shall be grouped and mounted as a single unit on an al! steel welded structure with structural members running The mounting shall ba of either a lengthwise forming a solid foundation for the entire machinery. units shall be assembled on the chassis truck-mounted or a trailer-mounted one. Ail the individual in a compact manner and shall have sufficient space for carrying out repairs easily to the different parts. In the case of the truck-mounted chassis it shall be self propelled, driven by the main power unit with In a trailer-mounted chassis it shall be handled by an external unit, that suitable drive arrangements. is, a tractor. 2.2.10 Tools and accessories -The drilling rig shall be provided with the complete set of all operating equipments such as drilling bits, drill rods, handling tools, etc. and also small hand tools for carrying The following tools and accessories that are out repairs to both power units and other equipments. ordinarily to be supplied along with the drill shall be included but this is variable according to the need of the user of the drilling rig: a) Drill bits of various sizes and types; with appropriate the different soil formations; b) Sufficient substitute connections to drill through

numbers of drill rods to cover the rated capacity of the drill; flange;

c) Drill rod hoisting d) Drill rod slip; e) Spirit level; f) Chain wrenches; g) Adjustable

wrench; round, half-round, etc (rough and smooth);

h) Set of files-flat, j) Cold chisel; k) Centre punch; m) Hammer; n) Pliers; p) Screw driver; q) Adjustable

spanner;

r) Set of double ended spanners; s) Set of ring spanners; 4

IS : 7156 - I974

0 Set of box spanners; u) Grease gun; VI Oil can;
w) Steel tape;
Y) Hacksaw frame with blades; and

2) Set of allen keys.
3. Information to be Supplied or ordering history, by the Purchaser drilling rigs, the user shall furnish the following information: has to be carried ou0 . . . . . . . ..M.S L.;

3.1 When enquiring

a) Geographical

in general, of the location of sites where drilling

b) Height with reference to msan sea level that is, + . . . . . . . . . M.S.L. or -

C! Static

water level at the place of location; formation of strata where the hole is to be drilled;

4 Anticipated

e) Maximum diameter and depth to be drilled; f 1 Mobility for the entire unit (truck, trailer);
g) The available power to drive the rig that is whether electric power is available or not; and h) Special features required, if any. 4. Information 4.1 The following to be Furnished information by the Supplier by the supplier:

shall be furnished

a) Performance of the drilling rig in respect of the following: 1) Maximum diameter and depth that can be drilled;

2)

The approximate

rate of drilling

under normal specified conditions;

3) The pump capacity, namely, the maximum discharge and pre&ure; and 4) Any special features in construction to drill through hard soil conditions.

b) cl d)
e)

The maximum load handling capacity, constructional details of the drill mast. The type and capacity of the wire ropes.

the maximum

and working

height and width

and the

The capacity of the main line and auxiliary The number of variable rotational

line brakes. speeds.

and hoisting

f) 9) h) j)
5. Testing

The number and capacity of the mast raising cylihders. The prime-mover and its transmission ratios. that can be made while which shall

Mobility of the drilling rig with effecting delivery of the rig.

reference to alternate arrangements

Any other special features that are incorporated in the design and construction give increased performance characteristics to the drilling rig.

5.1 Object -The object of testing the drilling rig is to determine the efficiency of the drill in terms of the maximum diameter and depth of drilling and rate of penetration under specified soil conditions. This shall be subject to agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. 5.2 Duration results. of Test The duration of the test shall be sufficient to obtain accurate and consistant shall be made

5.3 Observation During the Test in regard to the following: a) Mobility of the drilling

During the whole period of the test, careful observation

rig from one site to another; of drill and commencing the drilling operations without 10s~

b) $:iEickness . *

in erection

IS : 71569 1974
c) The diameter of the hole drilled and its depth; The depths at an interval of at least 1'5 minutes d) The rate of drilling at different formations. shall be noted and the relative time taken shall be observed for every unit of depth; i e) The capacity of the mast and the draw works; f) The capacity of the pump to the extent of its quick clearance and discharge; g) Undue shock, hammering, h) Lubrication j) Operational suitability vibrations of the cuttings, the pressure

or other mechanical defects;

of all the units; and and the controls,

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

Water well drilling means the construction of bore wells, for the supply of water for drinking and for industrial and agricultural purposes. The capacity of the wells shall be according to the needs and the availability of acquefier. This standard has been prepared to provide guidance to both the manufacturers and users of reverse circulation drilling rigs for bore well construction. This standard is not intended to be restrictive in character and is subject to agreement between the manufacturer and user. Some of the requirements of this specification may either be modified or made more elaborate. In this standard certain minimum technical requirements are specified for satisfactory performance of the rigs. Among the various requirements covered in this standard are those pertaining to the constructional details of the drill in general. 6 Seema Offset Press, Delhi, India

