**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 917 (1976) : Activated Calcium Carbonate for Rubber 
Industry [PCD 13: Rubber and Rubber Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 917 - 1976 

(Reaffirmed -2012) 

Edition 2.1 
(198012) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

ACTIVATED CALCIUM CARBONATE 

FOR RUBBER INDUSTRY 

( First Revision ) 

(Incorporating Amendment No. 1) 
UDC 661.842.622 : 678.4.046.34 



© BIS 2002 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Price Group 4 



IS : 917 - 1976 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

ACTIVATED CALCIUM CARBONATE 

FOR RUBBER INDUSTRY 

( First Revision ) 

Rubber Products Sectional Committee. CDC 6 

Chairman Representing 

Dr D. Banerjee Escon Consultants Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri M. L. Bahranf Ministry of Defence (R & D) 

Shri Anil Agarwal ( Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Bandyopadhaya Ministry of Defence (DGI) 

Shri M. Kumaran ( Alternate) 
Shri M. Banerjee National Rubber Manufacturers Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri J. Chatterjee ( Alternate) 
Shri A. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals. 

New Delhi 
Shri S. K. Bose National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri A. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Chakravarty Bayer (India) Ltd. Bombay 

Shri R. R. Pandit ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Chatterjee Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd. 

Dr S. K. ROY ( Alternate ) Calcutta 

Shri S. S. Chopra Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta 

Shri K. M. Bijli ( Alternate) 
Shri W. G. Desai All India Rubber Industries Association, Bombay 

Shri K. R. Sengupta ( Alternate) 
Shri K. N. Ganesh Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri S. B. Ganguli Dunlop India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. N. S. Myer ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. George John Madras Rubber Factory Ltd. Madras 

Shri K. J. Abraham ( Alternate) 
Shri G. C. Jain Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri R. C. Jhingan Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. Bombay 

Shri Lalit Mohan Jamnadas Cosmos India Rubber Works Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Pulin L. Kinariwala ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Lathia Lathia Rubber Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd. Bombay 

Shri D. P. Lathia ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© BIS 2002 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or In part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an Infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 917 - 1976 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

DR S. p. MANIK Railway Board (Ministry of Railways) 

SliRl D. N. V. Chellam ( Alternate) 
Dr C. K. N. Nair Rubber Board. Kottayam 

Shri S. C. Nandy Bata India Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri Sunil Sarkar ( Alternate) 
Shri M. M. Paiel Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd. Bombay 

Dr N. V. C. Rao Directorate General of Technical Development. 

New Delhi 
Shri G. R. Inamdar ( Alternate) 
Shri V. R. Rao Sundaram Industries Pvt Ltd. Madurai 

Shri K. C. Madhusudhanan 
{Alternate) 
Shri R. C. Syed Indian Rubber Manufacturers' Research 

Association. Bombay 
Shri D. D. Talwalkar All India Automobile & Ancillary Industries 

Association. Bombay 
Shri K. M. Khaladkar ( Alternate) 
Dr G. M. Saxena. Director General. ISI ( Exofficio Member) 

Director (Chem) 

Secretary 

Shrj Sa tish Chander 

Deputy Director (Chem), ISI 

Rubber Chemicals and Compounding Ingredients 
Subcommittee, CDC 6 : 5 

Convener 
Dr R. K. Mathan Polymer Consultancy Services, Madras 

Members 

Dr M. C. Badarinarayna Bayer (India) Ltd, Bombay 

Dr S. N. Chakravarty ( Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Bandyopadhaya Ministry of Defence (DGI) 

Shri P. L. Nag ( Alternate) 
Shri B. BHArrACHARYYA Inchek Tyres Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Sarkar ( Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Bose National Test House. Calcutta 

Dr D. K. Das ( Alternate) 
Shri R. M. Bose Ramani Mohan Industries Pvt Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri H. K. Mukherjee ( Alternate) 
Shri D. K. Chaiterjee Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Dr S. K. Ray ( Alternate ) Calcutta 

Shri J. Chaiterjee National Rubber Manufacturers Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Amit K. Biswas ( Alternate) 
Shri R. W. Dharwadkar United Carbon India Ltd. Bombay 

Shri S. B. Ganguli Dunlop India Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri A. Sen ( Alternate) 
Dr a. S. Ghag All India Rubber Industries Association, Bombay 

Shri S. V. Lathia ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 14 ) 



IS : 917 - 1976 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

ACTIVATED CALCIUM CARBONATE 

FOR RUBBER INDUSTRY 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 1 September 1976, after the draft finalized 
by the Rubber Products Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Chemical Division Council. 

0,2 This standard was first published in 1958. In this revision, 
requirement for insoluble siliceous matter has been removed while the 
maximum limit for moisture content has been lowered. New requirements 
for pH and hydrochloric acid insolubles have been added. Further, 
wetting and compounding tests have also been included in the standard. 
Instead of leaving the requirement for total fatty matter to be decided 
between the purchaser and the supplier, a range has been specified. 

0.3 This standard contains clauses 2.4 and 3.1 which call for 
agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. 

0.4 This edition 2.1 incorporates Amendment No, 1 (December 1980). 
Side bar indicates modification of the text as the result of 
incorporation of the amendment. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of 
this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS: 2-1960*. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and methods of 
sampling and test for activated calcium carbonate intended for use in 
rubber industry. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS: 917- 1976 

2. REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 Description — The material shall consist of precipitated calcium 
carbonate coated with thin layer of fatty acids or their salts. It shall be 
in the form of a free-flowing, white powder, free from visible 
impurities. 

2.2 The material shall also comply with the requirements given in 
Table 1. 



TABLE 1 



REQUIREMENTS FOR ACTIVATED 
CALCIUM CARBONATE 



Si 
No 



CHARA( FLRisric 



(1) 
i) 

ii) 
ili) 



IS 



Rlquirfment 


MhTHOD OF Tlst. 
REFTO 




Appendix CI No in 
IS 7086 
(Part D- 
1973* 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


001 


~ 


3 


105 ±0 5 


__ 


5 


02 


~ 


9 


43 to 46 


— 


lot 


02 





11 



A 

B 
C 



E or G 



12 



(2) 

Sieve residue on 150 micron 
Sieve, percent by mass. Max 

pH 

Hydrochloric acid insolubles, 
percent by mass, Max 

iv) Loss on ignition, percent by mass 

v) Manganese (as Mn). percent by 
mass, Max 

vi) Copper (as Cu), percent by mass, 

vii) Total fatty matter, percent by mass 

viii) Mixed oxides, percent by mass, Max 

ix) Chlorides (as CI), percent by mass. 
Max 

x) Calcium carbonate and magnesium 
carbonate together (as CaCO^), 
percent by mass. Min 

xi) Moisture and volatile matter, 
percent by mass, Max 

♦Methods of sampling and test for rubber compounding ingredients. Part I 
[The Ignition temperation shall be 950 ± 25"C 

2.3 Wetting Test — When about 1 g of the material is shaken 
with 10 ml of water in a test tube, the material shall float on the 
surface. 



005 

2 to 3 5 

1 
04 

92 
75 



I 



IS : 917 . 1976 

2.4 Compounding Test — If desired by the purchaser, the material 
may be compounded in natural rubber test recipe and the properties 
compared with the approved sample. The values obtained with the 
test sample shall not vary by more than ± 10 percent for tensile 
strength, elongation at break and hardness and not more than ±15 
percent for modulus at 300 percent elongation and tear strength from 
those obtained with the approved sample. The test recipe is given in 
Appendix F. 

3. PACKING AND MARKING 

3.1 The material shall be packed as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 

3.2 The packages shall be securely closed and marked with the name 
of the manufacturer; mass of the material; recognized trade-mark, if 
any; and the year of manufacture. 

3.3 The packages may also be marked with the IS! Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marl<s) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements or that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing 
and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

4. SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

4.1 Sampling — Sampling shall be done as prescribed in 15 of 
IS: 7086 (Part I)-1973*. 

4.2 Number of Tests 

4.2.1 Tests for manganese and copper shall be conducted on 
individual samples. 

4.2.2 Tests for all other characteristics shall be conducted on 
composite sample. 

4.3 Criteria for Conformity 

4.3.1 For Individual Samples — The mean and range of the test 
results for manganese and copper shall be calculated as follows: 

Mean ( X) = The sum of test results 

Number of test results 

Range ( i? ) = The difference between the maximum and the 
minimum value of the test results. 



♦Methods of sampling and test for rubber compounding ingredients. Part I. 

5 



IS : 917 - 1976 

The lot shall_be deemed to have satisfied the requirements of the 
specification if X + 0.6 R < 0.02 for manganese and < 0.005 for copper, 

4.3.2 For Composite Sample — In respect of ail other characteristics, 
the lot shall be considered as conforming to the specification if the 
composite sample satisfies each of these requirements. 



APPENDIX A 

[ Table l./tem(vii) | 
DETERMINATION OF TOTAL FATTY MATTER 

A 1. REAGENTS 

A 1.1 Ether 

A- 1.2 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — approximately 5 N. 

A- 1.3 Acetone 

A 2. PROCEDURE 

A-2.1 Weigh accurately about 5 g of the material in a 400-ml beaker 
and wet the material by adding a little ether. Cover with a cover-glass 
and carefully add (a few millilitres at a time) 50 ml of dilute 
hydrochloric acid. Boil, dilute to about 100 ml with water and cool to 
room temperature. Transfer to a 300-ml separating funnel, rinse out 
the beaker with 25 ml of ether and transfer to the separating funnel. 
Shake gently, release the pressure by inverting the funnel and 
gradually opening the tap. Allow the two layers to separate 
completely, then run off the aqueous layer into the original beaker. 
Filter the ether layer through a dry filter paper into a tared conical 
flask. Transfer the aqueous layer back into the separating funnel and 
extract twice as before but using 15 ml portions of ether. Reserve the 
aqueous layer for the tests prescribed in Appendix B, Filter the 
combined ether extracts also through the same filter paper and collect 
the filtrate in the tared conical flask. Finally wash the filter paper 
with ether, distil the ether until only about 5 ml remain in the flask, 
then add about 5 ml of acetone and evaporate the mixture on a 
water-bath. Dry the residue at 60°C. In order to reduce the drying 
time to about 15 minutes and minimize volatilization and oxidation of 
fatty acid, blow through the flask a gentle current of air two or three 
times during drying. Cool the flask in a desiccator and reweigh. 



IS : 917 - 1976 

A-3. CALCULATION 

Total fatty matter, percent by mass = ^^^ ^u^^^ 

where 

A = mass in g of the conical flask containing the dried 

residue, 
B - mass in g of the conical flask, and 
M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 



APPENDIX B 

[ TaWel, J^em(viii) j 
DETERMINATION OF MIXED OXIDES 

Bl. REAGENTS 

B-1.1 Concentrated Nitric Acid — relative density 1.42. 

B-1.2 Ammonium Chloride — solid. 

B-1.3 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution — relative density 0.90. 

B-1.4 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — relative density 1.16. 

B-1.5 Dilute Ammonium Nitrate Solution — approximately 
2 percent [mlv). 

BZ. PROCEDURE 

B-2.1 Transfer the aqueous solution reserved in A-2.1 to a 250-ml 
graduated flask and make up the volume with water. Pipette out 
100 ml of the solution in a beaker and filter, if necessary. Boil the 
solution or the filtrate with a few drops of concentrated nitric acid and 
then add 5 g of ammonium chloride. Add ammonium hydroxide 
solution till the smell of ammonia persists and hydroxides are 
precipitated. Filter. Dissolve the precipitate in concentrated 
hydrochloric acid and then add ammonium hydroxide solution. Allow 
to settle for 20 minutes and then filter. Wash the precipitate with 
dilute ammonium nitrate solution until free from chlorides. Transfer 
the filter paper along with the precipitate to a tared crucible 
(previously heated to constant mass and cooled). Dry in an air-oven, 
ignite the crucible at about 850**C carefully, cool in a desiccator and 
weigh. Repeat heating, cooling and weighing till constant mass is 
obtained. 

Note -- Constant mass may be deemed to have been attained when the change In 
mass when re-heated and cooled does not exceed 0.000 5 g. 



IS : 917 - 1976 

B-3. CALCULATION 

B-3.1 Mixed oxides, percent by mass = —tj- 

where 

A = mass in g of the ignited precipitate, and 

M = mass in g of the material taken for the test in A-2.1. 

APPENDIX C 

I Table I, Item(ix) ) 
DETERMINATION OF CHLORIDES 

CI. APPARATUS 

C-1.1 Nessler Cylinders — 50 mi capacity, two (see 
15:4161-1967*). 

C 2. REAGENTS 

C-2.1 Concentrated Nitric Acid — relative density 1.42. 

C-2.2 Silver Nitrate Solution — approximately 4 percent ( m/v), 

C-2.3 Standard Sodium Chloride Solution — Dissolve 0.164 9 g of 
sodium chloride in water and make up the volume with water to 
1000 ml. Transfer exactly 10 ml of this solution to a 100 ml 
volumetric flask and dilute to 100 ml, One millilitre of this solution 
contains 0.01 mg of chloride (as CI). 

C-3. PROCEDURE 

C-3.1 Weigh 1.000 g of the material and dissolve in minimum 
quantity (say about 5 ml) of concentrated nitric acid. Transfer the 
solution to a 100-ml graduated flask and make up the volume with 
water to the mark. Transfer 10 ml of this solution to one of the 
Nessler cylinders, add 1 ml of silver nitrate solution and make up the 
volume with water to 50 ml. Carry out a control test in the other 
Nessler cylinder using 4 ml of standard sodium chloride solution in 
place of the material and the same quantity of other reagents in the 
same total volume of the reaction mixture. Compare the opalescence 
produced in the two tubes after 5 minutes. 

C-3.2 The limit prescribed in Table 1 shall be taken as not having 
been exceeded if the opalescence produced in the test with the 
material is not greater than that produced in the control test. 



^Specification for Nessler cylinders. 



IS: 917 1976 

APPENDIX D 

[Table!. Item (x)] 

DETERMINATION OF CALCIUM CARBONATE AND 
MAGNESIUM CARBONATE 

D-1. REAGENTS 

D-1.1 Standard Hydrochloric Acid — approximately 1 N. 

D-1. 2 Standard Sodium Hydroxide Solution — approximately 
0.1 N. 

D-1.3 Methyl Orange Indicator — Dissolve 0.1 g of methyl orange 
in 100 ml of water. 

D-2. PROCEDURE 

D-2.1 Weigh accurately about 2 g of the material and dissolve in 50 ml 
of standard hydrochloric acid and 10 ml of water. Titrate the excess 
acid with standard sodium hydroxide solution using methyl orange as 
an indicator. 

D-S. CALCULATION 

Calcium carbonate and magnesium 5.005 (V N -VN) 
carbonate (as CaCOs). percent by mass = ~-~ — ^ 

where 

Vj = volume in ml of standard hydrochloric acid added. 

Ni = normality of standard hydrochloric acid, 

V2 = volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution 
required for excess acid. 

N2 = normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution, 
and 

M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 



APPENDIX E 

[ Table I, Item (xi)] 
DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 

E-0. GENERAL 

E-0.1 For the determination of moisture content. Dean and Stark 
Method has been specified. 



18:917-1976 

El. APPARATUS 

E-1.1 The Deen and Stark apparatus consists of a glass flask heated 
by suitable means and provided with a reflux condenser discharging 
into a trap. The connections between the trap and the condenser, and 
the flask should be interchangeable ground-glass joints. The trap 
serves to collect and measure the condensed water, and to return the 
solvent to the flask. The assembly of apparatus is shown in Fig. 1, and 
the various components are described below. 

E-1.1.1 Flask — of 500 ml capacity and shape shown in Fig. 1, made 
of hard resistant glass, well-annealed and as free as possible from 
striae and similar other defects. 

E-1.1. 2 Condenser — a water-cooled, glass reflux condenser, having a 
jacket approximately 400 mm long and an inner tube of 9.5 to 
12.7 mm outside diameter. The tip of the condenser to be inserted in 
the trap may be ground off at an angle of 30"* from the vertical axis of 
the condenser. When inserted into the trap, the tip of the condenser 
shall be 6 to 7 mm above the surface of the liquid in the trap after 
distillation conditions have been established. 

E-1. 1.3 Trap {or Receiver) — of 50ml capacity, made of hard 
resistant glass, well-annealed and as free as possible from striae and 
similar other defects, provided with ground-glass joints, with the 
shape, dimensions and tolerances given in Fig. 1, consisting 
essentially of the upper chamber, together with the tube and ground 
joint leading to the flask, and the graduated tube. The graduated 
portion shall have a capacity of 5 ml when filled to the highest 
graduation mark. The scale shall cover the range of to 5 ml and shall 
be graduated at intervals of 0.1 ml. The graduation marks 
corresponding to each millilitre shall be numbered and carried 
completely round the tube. The graduation marks midway between 
the numbered marks shall be carried three-quarters way round the 
tube and the remaining marks shall be carried half-way round the 
tube. The error at any indicated capacity shall not exceed 0.05 ml. 

E-1. 1.4 Heat Source — either an oil-bath or an electric heater 
provided with a sliding rheostat or other means of heat control. The 
temperature of the oil in the bath should not be very much higher 
than the boiling point of toluene ( see E-2.2 ). 

E-1. 1.5 Copper Wire — Long enough to extend through the condenser 
with one end twisted into a spiral. The diameter of the spiral should 
be such that it fits snugly within the graduated portion of the receiver 
and yet can be moved up and down. 

10 



IS : 917 - 1976 




FLASK 
SOOmI 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Dean and Stark Apparatus 



11 



IS : 917 1976 

E 2. REAGENTS 

E-2.1 Potassium Dichromate Sulphuric Acid Cleaning Solution 

E-2.2 Toluene — Saturate the toluene by shaking with a small 
quantity of water and distil. Use the distillate for moisture content 
determination. 

E 3. PROCEDURE 

E-3.1 Preparing the Apparatus — Clean the entire apparatus with 
potassium dichromate-sulphuric acid cleaning solution to minimize 
the adherence of water droplets to the sides of the condenser and the 
receiver. Rinse thoroughly with water and dry completely before use. 

E-3.2 Place approximately 100 g of the material, accurately weighed, 
in the distillation flask, add 200 ml of toluene and swirl to mix. 
Assemble the apparatus and fill the receiver with toluene by pouring 
it through the condenser until it begins to overflow into the 
distillation flask. Insert a loose cotton plug in the top of the condenser 
to prevent condensation of atmospheric moisture within the tube. In 
order that refluxing may be under control, wrap the flask and tube 
leading to the receiver with asbestos cloth. Heat the flask so that the 
distillation rate is about 100 drops per minute. When a greater part of 
the water has distilled over, increase the distillation rate to about 200 
drops per minute and continue until no more water is collected. Purge 
the reflux condenser occasionally during distillation with 5-ml 
portions of toluene to wash down any moisture adhering to the walls 
of the condenser. The water in the receiver may be made to separate 
from the toluene by moving the spiral copper wire up and down in the 
condenser and the receiver occasionally, thus causing the water to 
settle at the bottom of the receiver. Reflux until the water level in the 
receiver remains unchanged for 30 minutes and then shut off the 
source of heat. Flush the condenser with toluene, making use of the 
spiral copper wire to discharge any moisture droplets. Immerse the 
receiver in water at about 27°C for at least 15 minutes or until the 
toluene layer is clear, and then read the volume of water. 

E-4. CALCULATION 

E-4.1 Water content, percent by mass = — ~~ — 
where 

V = volume in ml of water, 

D = specific gravity of water at the temperature at which the 

volume of water is read, and 
M = mass in g of the material taken for the test. 

12 



IS : 917 - 1976 

E-4.2 Precision — The result of a duplicate determination of 
moisture content, percent by mass, should not vary by more than 
± 0.05 from that of the first determination. 



APPENDIX F 

( Clause 2.4 ) 
RECIPE FOR COMPOUNDING TEST 

Fl. TEST RECIPE 

F-1.1 The following test recipe is recommended for checking the 
performance requirements: 

Parts by Mass 

Natural rubber, Grade A 100 

Zinc oxide 5 

Stearic acid 2 

Sulphur 3 

Mercaptobenzothiazole 1 

Activated calcium carbonate 78 

F-2. CURING 

F-2.1 Curing shall be done in a press for 45 minutes at 125°C with 
steam at a pressure of 0.14 MN/m^ (approx 1.4 i<gf/cm^). 

APPENDIX G 

[ Table I, Item (xi) ] 
DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE AND VOLATILE MATTER 

G-1. PROCEDURE 

G-1.1 Weigh accurately about 5 g of the material in a weighed clean 
and dry squat form weighing bottle, and dry to constant mass 
at 105 ± 2''C. Cool in a desiccator and weigh. Note the lowest mass. 
Express the loss in mass as percentage of the mass of the material 
taken for the test. 



13 



IS : 917 - 1976 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr A S Ghag Mlndla Chemicals Ltd. Bombay 

Shri H B KiNGSLEY (Aiternate) 
Shri J N Ghosal Sturdia Chemicals Ltd. Bombay 

Shri H S Vi jay anath ( Aiternate ) 
vShri C S Inamdar Cosmos India Rubber Works Pvt Ltd. Bombay 

Shri Sfn Gupta ( Alternate) 
Shri K B Kulkarni Indo Nippon Chemicals Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N I B hu a (A/ternate) 
Shri S M Mlhta Camphor & Allied Products Ltd, Bareilly 

Shri S N Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri M Mitra Escon Consultants Pvt Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri B Ch akra vari y (A/tcrnate) 
Shri S C Nandi Bata India Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri S Sarkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr V S ViJAYAN Nayar Travancore Titanium Products Ltd. Tnvandrum 

Shri M M Pa ill Synthetics & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R P D\jqfy (Alternate) 
Shri V D Pandsf vSwastik Rubbei Products Ltd. Pune 

Shri S. V Tafhawadkcr ( Alternate) 
Shri R Roy Chowdhury Philips Carbon Black Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri B B. Sangtani Basant Rubber Factory Pvt Ltd. Bombay 

Dr N P SURYANARAYANA Indian Rubber Manufacturers Research 

DrR C Syed ( A/ternafe) Association. Thana 

Shri D V. WmcNBAKER Waldie Ltd. Calcutta 

Shri A Dlb ( Alternate ) 



14 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory Institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in wrltmg of BIS This does not preclude the free use in the 
course of implementing the standard of necessary details such as symbols and sizes type or grade 
designations Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications) BIS 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are Issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments Standards are 
also reviewed periodically a standard along with amendments Is reaffirmed when such review 
Indicates that no changes are needed If the review indicates that changes are needed it is taken up 
for revision Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest 
amendments or edition by referring to the latest Issue of BIS Catalogue and Standards Monthly 
Additions 

This Indian Standard has been developed by Technical Committee CDC 6 and amended by 
PCDC 13 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Amd No 1 



December 1980 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones 323 0131 323 33 75 323 94 02 

Regional Offices 

Central Manak Bhavan 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern 1/14 C I T Scheme VII M V I P Road Kankurgachi 
KOLKA FA 700054 

Northern SCO 335 336 Sector 34 A CHANDIGARH 160022 



Western 



Branches 



Telegrams Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

I 323 76 17 
1323 38 41 

1337 84 99 337 85 61 
1337 86 26 337 91 20 

60 38 43 
60 20 25 

235 02 16 235 04 42 
235 15 19 235 23 15 

( 832 92 95. 832 78 58 
1832 78 91.832 78 92 

AHMEDABAD BANGALORE BHOPAL BHUBANESHWAR COIMBATORE 
PARIDABAD GHAZIABAD GUWAHATI HYDERABAD JAIPUR KANPUR LUCKNOW 
NAGPUR NALAGARH PATNA PUNE RAJKOT THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 
VISHAKHAPATNAM 



Southern C I T Campus IV Cross Road CHENNAI 600113 



Manakalaya E9MIDC Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 



