( Reaffirmed 2004 )

1s r 10163( Part I ) - 1982

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED METHODS OF TESTS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF DIELECTRIC PROPERTIES OF INSULATING MATERIALS AT FREQUENCIES ABOVE 300 MHz
PART I GENERAL

Solid Electrical
Chairman SHB~A.S.

Insulating

Materials

Sectional

Committee,

ETDC 63

ReprsJmting Senapathy Whitelay Ltd, Bangalore

LAKEUIXANAN

Members
-Shrik. S. Lakshmanan`) Dr Beck & Co (India ) Ltd, Pune S. B. BAPAT Srrn~ R. S. LAA~ ( Altmnatc ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. Hyderabad DB _ M. V. DALAL SHRI B. SIJDAIXSH~N ( Alternate I ) SHBI B. K. MURTEY ( Alfematc II ) Fibre-Glass Pilkington Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. M. DASTUR SHRI R. K. AQARWAL ( A&mate ) Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SHRI V. B. DESAI SHRI B. G. SEARMA ( Al&mate ) Central EIecfricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOB ( HED-IV ) Drarrcron ( TED ) (Al/aM/) Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore DIREOTOR SHRI K. S. A~JNAOHALA SA~TRY
SHRI

SFLRI B. A. GOVINDABAJ I AI&mate to

Caprihans India Ltd, Bombay SHRI YOUEUF ALI SABIR ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi LT-COL GURDEV SINQH MAJ K. U. SALUN~E ( Alternate ) Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, _ Bangalore SHRI P. N. HIRIYANNAIAH SERI &. UMESH ( Alternate ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization, JOINT DIRECTOR S T A N D A R D s Lucknow ELECTRICAL/TM-L DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ELECTRICAL-C2 ( A&mate )

( Alternate ) DB ASHOK GHOSH

( Continued on @age 2) I
INDIAN

@ Coppignt 1982
STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the indtio Copl"`pbt Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any meana except with written permiasion'of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

I

Members
SHRI

Representing

B. MUKHOPADHYAYA National Test House, Calcutta SERI P. C. PBADHAN ( Altmate ) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore DB M. S. NAIDV PROP V. PRABHABHANKER ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SERI R. V. NARAYAXAN New Delhi DB M. S. PADBIDRI Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. R. POTNIS ( A&mute ) Formica India Ltd, Pune SHRI S. W. PATWABDHAN SHRI V. K. HINCZNE( Ahmute ) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, DE G. M. PHADKE Bombay SHRI K. K. GOBAIN ( Ahmute ) Sahney Kirkwood Pvt Ltd, Thane S-1 D. S. SALHBEY SEEI K. S. KAPOOX ( Al&a& ) Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal SHBI C. C. SAKUDA SHRI K. A. ANTANI. ( &mat6 ) Jhaveri Thanawala Corporation, Bombay SHRI S. S. SHAR~A \ SHRI K. T. THANAWALA ( dtumare J NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI N. T. SIDDARAXANNANAVAR SHRI ASWATHANARAYANA ( dtcrnatc ) DE J. VAID Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay DR S. P. BHIDE ( Akmute) SHRI S. P. SAOIXDEV, Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Memh ) Director ( Elec tech )

secretary
R. G. KALE Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI
SHRI

2

I%r1016S(Partf)-1982

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED METHODS OF TESTS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF DIELECTRIC PROPERTIES OF INSULATING MATERIALS AT FREQUENCIES ABOVE 300 MHz
PART I GENERAL

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 April 1982, after the draft finalized by the Solid Electrical Insulating Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The standard deals with the general requirements of the methods of measuring the dielectric properties of insulating materials of frequencies above 300 MHz. It applies to the procedures for the determination of relative permittivity and dielectric dissipation factor and of quantities related to them, such as loss index, of dielectric materials in the microwave frequency region. 0.3 This standard is one amongst a series of standards dealing with the dielectric properties of electrical insulating materials. Unlike the test methods empIoyed at lower frequencies, the test methods for frequencies above 300 MHz involve the use of test specimen and/or test set up, the dimensions of which are larger than or comparable to the wave length of the electromagnetic fieId of the test frequency. This standard has since been brought out with a view to highlight these special considerations in addition to highlighting the factors influencing dielectric properties of insulating materials at higher frequencies. A survey on methods of measurements, and the choice of test methods are also given. 0.4 Lumped parameter methods can be used when the wave length of the applied electromagnetic field is large compared with the dimensions of the specimen. Distributed parameter methods shall be used when the spatial variation of the electromagnetic field over the specimen cannot be ignored. 0.5 This standard is being brought out in many pati;' It is intended to'. cover the general requirements and resonance method `of test5 `in. the first

3

IS t 10163 ( Part I )

l

1982 methpd of

two parts. Subsequent parts dealing with input impedance measurement, and optical methods are under consideration.

0.6 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from IEC Pub 377-l ( 1973 ) ` Recommended methods for the determination of dielectric properties of insulating materials at frequencies above 300 MHz Part I General issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular standard is complied with, the final value, observed or ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off IS : 2-19607. The number of significant places retained value should be the same as that of the specified value 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers the general requirements of the method of measurement of the dielectric properties of insulating materials at frequencies above 300 MHz. 1.2 This standard applies to the procedure for the determination of relative permittivity, and the dielectric dissipation factor and of quantities related to them, such as loss index, of dielectric materials in the microwave frequency region. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. All these definitions apply only to dielectric materials having the permeability of absolute vacuum. 2.1 Relative Complex Permittivity mittivity cry of a dielectric material is: Ed*The relative complex perrequirement of this calculated, expressin accordance with in the rounded off in this standard.

c* % * -_ G*' - j er') = /5_ (1) co where +' is relative permittivity which is a real component of complex permittivity, j Q" is the imaginary component of complex permittivity and C,* denotes the complex capacitance of a small capacitor in which the space between and around the electrodes is entirely and exclusively filled with the dielectric material in question, and C, is the capacitance of the same electrode configuration in absolute vacuum.
NOTE-The
complex capacitance of a capacitor is defined by: part of the j-c&x* = Z-x* = Gx

+ j&x
) and jwCx is the imaginary

where Gx is the real part ( ac conductance complex admittance 2+x+ of the said capacitor. tRules for rounding off numerical

values ( revised ).

4

18 : 10163 (Part I) - 1982 As the wavelength of the applied electromagnetic field with increasing frequency approaches the dimensions of the specimen employed, the variation of the electric ( and magnetic ) field parameters throughout the specimen can no longer be ignored. Therefore, for a proper interpretation of the measured data, it is necessary to turn from lumped circuit analysis to wave analysis and transmission line theory. This means also growing sensitivity of results to inhomogeneity and anisotropy of specimens. 2.1.1 The relative complex permittivity or* of a dielectric material is proportional to the square of the ratio of the complex propagation coeflicient y = a + j/3 of an electromagnetic wave in the dielectric material to that y,, = j &, in absolute vacuum:

(2)
where r\a is the wavelength in free space and & is the critical ( or cut-off) wavelength of the mode used.
NOTE 1 -With
Ac=oO. plane waves of travelling electromagnetic wave (TEM)

NOTE 2 - The relative permittivity cr of ambient dry air free from carbon dioxide at 293 K and normal atmospheric pressure equals 1400 53, so that in practice measurements of capacitance in air ( Ca), specific capacitance in ?ir ( Ce) and complex propagation coefficient in air ( ya ) taken in air instead capacitance m vacuum ( Cc ), specific capacitance in vacuum ( Ce) and complex propagation coefficient in vacuum (ye ) taken in absolute vacuum can be used to determine the relative permittivity ar of solid and liquids with sufficient accuracy. NOTE 3 - The complex ( absolute ) permittivity product of its relative complex permittivity sr* permittivity of absolure vacuum) so.
s* = cost* of a dielectric material is the and the electric constant (or

In the SI system, the absolute permittivity has the unit farad per metre ( F/m ); furthermore, the electric constant E,, has the following value: e0 z 8.51.10-1s ==: -!10-g F/m 36x ' (3)

2.2 Relative Persnittivity cr' -The relative permittivity sr' of a dielectric material is the real part of the relative complex permittivity, According to equations 1 and 2: defined in 2.1.

tan 8 instead

NOTE-

If the dielectric quantities are noted of sr' and sr", the prime is omitted: cr' = cr

as real

numbers,

that

is, sr' and

5

Es: 10163 (Patt

I) - 1982

2.3 Loss Index .Q"- The loss index or" of a dielectric material is the imaginary part of the relative complex permittivity defined in 2.1. According to equations 1 and 2:

(5)
2.4 Dielectric Dissipation Factor tan 8 - The dielectric dissipation factor tan 6 of a dielectric material is the tangent of the phase angle (loss angle 6 ) between the applied field strength ` F ' and the resulting electric displacement D within the insulating material, both varying sinusoidally with time at one and the same angular frequency w = 2n f. 2.4.1 As the fie!d components E and D within the dielectric in general are not accessible to measurement, the dielectric dissipation factor of a given volume ( for example, of the dielectric material ) is measured as the ratio of the electric energy dissipated to 2~7 times that reversibly stored in that volume per one half-period of oscillation. This ratio is also equivalent
to:

tan 6 = -e$ 2.4.2 The reciprocal _factor ( Q - factor ): of the dissipation 1 tan== factor tan 8 is called

(6) quality

Q
PROPERTIES OF

3. FACTORS INFLUENCING DIELECTRIC DIELECTRIC MATERIALS

3.1 The measured permittivity and dielectric dissipation factor of a given dielectric material are determined by the resulting dielectric polarization of the test specimen. Various external and internal physical parameters such as frequency, temperature, electrical field strength, ionizing radiation, moisture and other impurities, chemical structure, homogeneity and isotropy ( physical and chemical structure ), etc, affect the measured data. Therefore, to interpret consistently the results obtained from a test, it is necessary to know the state of the test specimen and to keep all the aforementioned parameters under control. In the following, the influences of frequency, temperature, moisture and other impurities, of physical and chemical structure and of electrical field strength on the measured dielectric properties are discussed separately.
NOTE - The permittivity and dielectric dissipation factor measured within the frequency range covered by this recommendation mostly originate from dipole polarization due to polar molecules a& from atomic polarization.

6

I . 3.1.1 Frequency

IS 810163 ( Part I ) - 1382

3.1.1.1 As, for technical materials, Q' and tan 6 are not constant over the wide frequency range over which they are used, it is necessary to measure the dissipation factor and the permittivity at those frequencies at which the dielectric material will be used. For accurate interpolation between data measured at a few frequencies, it may sometimes be possible to obtain a Debye curve to fit over an absorption region; also, effective use may be made of a Cole-cole plot. 3.1.2
Temperature

3.X.2.1 The polarizability of a dielectric material depends also on its temperature. Therefore the frequencies of the loss lindex maxima ( and correspondingly of the dielectric dissipation factor ) vary with tempera* ture. Accordingly, the temperature coefficient of loss index can be positive or negative depending on the position of the loss index maximum with Special respect to the measuring frequency and the test temperature. attention is drawn to the fact that irreversible changes of the dielectric properties of the material investigated may occur in a short time, for In this rcspe+$ example, during a measurement at elevated temperatures, see 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 also. 3.1.3
Moisture and Other Impurities

3.1.3.1 The polarizability is increased by absorption of water or by the formation of a water film on the surface of the dielectric, thus affecting the permittivity, the dissipation factor and the dc conductivity. Conditioning of test specimens is therefore of decisive importance and control of the moisture content, both before and during testing, is imperative if test results are to be interpreted correctly. The polarizability is also subject to impurities introduced by physical contamination or chemical additives, for example, solvents or plasticizers. Therefore care shall be taken to ensure that the material to be tested is not affected or affected only in a controlled way by the sampling procedures or by subsequent treatments for example, at elevated temperatures. 3.1.4
Physical and Chemical Structure

3.1.4.1 The direction of polarization of the electromagnetic field relative to the structure of the specimen under test strongly influences the result of the measurement. Different results may be obtained due to inhomogeneity ( as in laminates ) or to anisotropy, for example, in crystals, unless all measurements on the specimens are made in the same relation to some identifiable feature of the material. Specimens which have the same chemical composition but different chemical structures, for example, curable resins subjected to different curing conditions or

7

IS I 10163 ( Part I ) - 1982 polymers of a different results. degree of polymerization, will also give different

NOTE- Materials showing some periodicity in their structure such as laminates may have a frequency response different from that of their constituents if the wavelength is comparable with the period of this structure.

3.1.5 AC - Field Strength 3.1.5.1 In general, permittivity and dielectric dissipation factor are independent of field strength SO long as no partial discharge occurs in the dielectric. With ferro-electric bodies, however, a field-dependent effect may still be observable at the lower microwave frequencies, but it rapidly vanishes as the frequency increases. 4. SURVEY ON MEASURING METHODS

4.1 Principles of Measuring Methods feature of methods for the deter4.1.1 General - The characteristic mination of dielectric properties in the frequency range covered by this recommendation is that the electric and magnetic components of the field vary both in amplitude and phase from point to point of the specimen and ' of the measuring apparatus, because the wavelength of the radiation is comparable with the dimensions of the specimen and the apparatus. In non-magnetic materials, this effect first becomes obvious in the tens-ofMHz region and can no longer be ignored from 600 MHz upwards. 4.1.2 Physical Effects Available for Measurement The permittivity and loss govern the following effects: 4.1.2.1

a) The propagation velocity of electromagnetic waves, and hence their wavelength within a given medium, is related inversely to the permittivity of the medium in question ( see 2.1), b) At any discontinuity of the permittivity of a medium transmitting a wave, a fraction of the energy of the wave is reflected; the magnitude of the fraction depends on the ratio of the permittivities at the two sides of the discontinuity, and c) Because the wave polarizes the medium, energy is lost continuously the wave amplitude is therefore along its path of travel; attenuated in proportion to the loss index of the medium. 4.1.2.2 E$ects not related to permittivity a) A beam of given frequency f and of given cross-section may propagate not only in one mode but in a variety of modes of different velocities and hence different wavelengths. The modes which exist in a particular case depend on the beam cross-section and on the beam-launching system, and

IS:10163(PartI)-1982

b) Reflection of energy and/or mode conversion (which also results in loss of energy in a given mode ) takes place at any point at which the beam cross-section changes. Attenuation may still occur even in absolute vacuum due to diffraction losses from the beam or to the finite conductivity of the beam-guiding structure. In order to separate the effects of the material properties from those of unwanted disturbances of the test-wave field, and thus obtain consistent and reproducible results, it is important to use for the measuring apparatus a uniform transmission system, that is one in which there are no significant discontinuities to cause reflections or losses. The properties of the system itself must be well known at the measuring frequency, and must either not change at all or change only in a predictable manner, after Only simple test arrangements should be insertion of the test specimen. used, both to reduce the number of uncertainties concerning the test conditions and to simplify the calculations. 4.2 Test Arrangement inserted may consist of:
-

The apparatus

in which the test specimen is

4.2.1 Resonance Apparatus - A uniform transmission section is shortcircuited at both ends and loosely coupled to a generator and receiver. Maximum energy transfer between generator and receiver is established when the separation of the short-circuits is a multiple of one-half the Details of this ( the Resonance Method ) will be working wavelength. Results are obtained in terms of Q given in Part 2 of this standard. ( see 2.4.2 ) and of frequency shift or dimensional shift to restore resonance after insertion of the test specimen, at constant resonator dimensions or constant test frequency respectively.
NOTE - As this method employs multi le beam reflection, it is especially suited to the detection of the lowest dissipation Pactors, even with small quantities of test To achieve the highest sensitivity possibile, fixed resonators may be used; material. such apparatus can be used only at a single frequency, which depends to some extent on the shape, size and dielectric properties of the test specimen.

Choice of the Test Method - The choice of the test method is affected by various considerations which may conflict with each other. In the following, these considerations are treated separately ( see Fig. 1 ). 4.3

4.3.1 Frequency or Wauelength
4.3.1.1 At high frequencies it may be difficult to work to the required mechanical precision. At lower frequencies, guided waves are preferred due to reduction of size of test apparatus and of test specimens. Due to the skin effect of metallic conductors, in general the attenuation of waveguides rises with increasing frequency, thus making determination of loss index of low loss materials increasingly difficult.

9

18:10163(Pastf)-1982
NOTE- Hollow guides at the same working frequency show lower attenuation than coaxial guides. With circular hollow guides, the HeI mode has the outstanding property that attenuation decreases as frequency increases.

4.3.2 Test Material Sha#e and Quantity 4.3.2.1 Test specimens shall conform to the requirements of the test set-up. Therefore, in general, machining procedures are necessary ( see respective measuring methods ). As the material to be tested may be available not in bulk but only in plate, sheet ( film ), rod ( wire ) or tube form, the test method may be chosen also with respect to the shape and An essential condition for dielequantity of test material being at hand. ctric measurements is that the specimen be of a single piece. For resonance methods, the specimens may fill the cross-section of Due to the high inherent sensitivity with these methods, the the beam. techniques are applicable also to ball, rod or disk shaped specimens so long Sensitivity to small variations in the as suitable modes are employed. properties and the accuracy of results, however, greatly depend on the mode used, the ratio of volumes of resonator and specimen including the accuracy in obtaining this ratio.
4.3.2.2 Having equal specimen length ( in order to have equal sensitivity in measurement ) means that test apparatus using guided waves in their fundamental mode requires less test material than that using unguided waves; likewise, coaxial waveguides require still less than hollow With waveguide equipment, it is guides at the same working frequency. essential to fit the test specimen to the waveguide dimensions as closely as p:ossible. 4.3.3
Dielectric Projerties of Test Material 4.3i3.1 Permittivity - Insulating materials having relative permittivities up to about 100 may be tested by any one of the methods enumerated. It must be borne in mind, however, that, due to the presence of the dielectric, higher order mode set up by any imperfections may propagate within the specimen, thus causing erroneous readings. With relative permittivities from about 100 upwards, transmission methods may be preferable by virtue of the high accuracy obtainable. With anisotropic materials, the results obtained depend on the positioning of the axes of the specimens with respect to the polarization axis of the beam. Therefore, the specimens must be cut to match the test conditions with respect to the mode employed.

4.3.3.2 Dielectric dissipation factor and loss index - Resonance methods are most suited for detecting very small losses. With impedance methods, the lower limit is imposed by the attenuation of the empty transmission system. The upper limits of losses measurable are set with resonance methods, by the off-set of the resonance effect. 10

lS:IO163 (PartI )-1982

Bridge methods

Resonance

methods

Resonance

methods

nput Impedance measuring methc (Transmission line and bridge methods)

Optical

methods

lgf-co f 0
? `0 aJ

0

1 10 50

1

I 100Hz
2 FIG.

3

4 10 km 30

5 16OkHt 3

6 I 300 m

7 10

8 IOOMHz

g 1 30!, mm

10 10 39

11 10OGHz 3 300

12 1 pm

13 10 THz 30

1
300 !

30

3

qC

MEASISR~NCJ &IET~~~D!

11

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS:10163

(PartI)-

requirements concern the 4.3.4 Mechanical Requirements - Mechanical dimensional precision and the surface finish of the wave guiding structure as well as of the specimen, and also the accuracy to which length or angle readings can be taken.

4

Dimensional precision is especially important when non-standard waveguide equipment is being used ( for example, cavities ) or if waveguides are used close to their cut-off frequency, and in matching of specimens to the waveguide dimensions ( the respective methods will be dealt with in Part 2 of this standard ). With methods using unguided waves, these requirements apply to the beam launching system and to the surface flatness of the specimen as well. All moving parts must move smoothly and without any back-lash.
equalling l-25

NOTE 1 - Waveguides should not be used below a frequency times the cut-off frequency of the respective mode. NOTE 2 -Tolerances f SO, where Xg of characteristic dimensions

shall conform

to at least

is the propagating

wavelength.

b) High surface finish is required especially with all metallic beam guiding structures, as due to the pronounced skin effect any disturbance of a smooth surface will cause further increase of attenuation. c) With all methods employing standing waves, determination of the standing wave pattern must be correct at least to a quantity hg of the order of -J-lmO, where ,Ig is the propagating wavelength. Consequently, in the millimetre range advisable to turn to optical methods. 4.3.5 Temperature of wavelengths, it is

4.3.5.1 Temperature influences the consistency of measurements with methods using guided waves in that it changes not only the characteristic length of the measuring assembly, but also the match of the specimen to the waveguide and, with hollow guides, the cut-off wavelength as well. 5. TESTING PROCEDURE 5.1 Preparation of Specimens 5.1.1 The specimen shall be cut from the solid material or prepared by an appropriately standardized technique in order to obtain the desired shape. The subsequent measurements of the dimensions of the specimen shall be made accurately with a tolerance of f & + 0*005 mm .

13

IS : 10163( Part I ) - 1962 5.2 Conditioning 5.2.1 Conditioning specifications. 6. TEST REPORT shall be made in accordance with the relevant

6.1 In the test report, the following information shall be given where relevant : a) Type and designation of the insulating material as well as the form in which it is delivered. Method of sampling, shape, dimensions of the test specimen and date of sampling. Exact information on the treatment of the specimen at the contact areas is important; b) Method and duration of conditioning the specimens; c) Temperature and relative humidity during the test and temperature of the specimen; d) Measuring apparatus and test method applied; e) Applied microwave power; f) Applied frequency or free space wavelength; g) Applied wave mode ( Information on the position of a preferred axis of the specimen with respect to the direction of the electric field applied is very important ); h) Relative permittivity sr ( average value); j ) Dielectric dissipation factor ( average values ); and k) Date of test. tan 8 or dielectric loss index sr"

.14

INDIAN ON

STANDARDS

SOLID ELECTRICAL

INSULATING

MATERIALS

IS

:
Organic, backing, (Jirst Ye&ion ) Air-drying impregnating, insulating varnishes for electrical purposes purposes

350-1968 352-1973 1271-1958 1576-1967 1951-1961 2188-1962 2259-1963 2260-1973

insulating

varnishes for electrical

(Jirst revision ) and apparatus

Classification of insulating materials for electrical in relation to their thermal stability in service Solid pressboard for electrical Polyvinyl purposes purposes purposes chloride sleeving for electrical

machinery

Methods of test for paper for electrical Methods of test for determination materials Preconditioning, conditioning materials (Jirst r&&n )

of insulation resistance testing of solid

of solid insulating insulating

and tapes

electrical

2448 ( Part I )-1963 Adhesive insulating with cotton textile substrates 2448 ( Part II )-I968 Adhesive insulating with PVC substrates 2464-1963 2584-1963 2824-1975 3202-1965 3352-1965 3396-1979 3765-1966 4248-1967 4249-1967 4486-1967 Built-up mica for electrical Method of test for electric frequencies

for electrical

purposes purposes

: Part I Tapes : Part II Tapes

tapes for electrical

purposes strength of solid insulating materials at power

Method for determining the comparative tracking index of solid insulating materials under moist conditions (first revision ) Code of practice for climate proofing of electrical and equipment of electrical purposes mineral base ) for insulating Varnished cotton cloth and tapes for electrical Methods of test for volume materials (Jirst revision ) Varnish impregnated Non-ignitable and electrical purposes purposes

surface resistivity

cotton sleevings for electrical self-extinguishing boards

( with

Classification and methods of tests for non-ignitable properties of solid electrical insulating materials

and self-extinguishing

Recommended methods for the determination of the permittivity and dielectric dissipation factor of electrical insulating materials at power, audio and radio frequencies including metre wavelengths Thin vulcanized Vulcanixed fibre sheet ( including leatheroid ) for electrical purposes fibre sheets for electrical purposes substances in fibrous insulating purposes

4819-1968 4820-1968 5596-1970 5711-1970 6230-1970 6659-1976 7084-1973 7571-1974

Methods of test for determining materials Vulcanized Electronic Woven asbestos tape for electrical grade ceramic

deleterious

fibres rods and tubes for electrical materials

insulating purposes (jirst r8oisioa ) for electrical purposes and allied purposes

Bitumen based filling compounds Methods of tests for ceramics

for telecommunication

IS:
7755-1975 7809 High tension compounds insulating cotton tape impregnated purposes: with bitumen baaed

Pressure sensitive adhesive tapes for electrical General requirements Methods of test

( Part I )-1975 ( Part II )-I977

( Part III/Set 1 )-I977 Requirements for individual PVC tapes with non-thermosetting adhesive

materials,

Section 1 Plasticized

( Part III/Set 2 )-1981 Specification for individual materials, Section 2 Requirements for polyester film tapes ( PETP ) with thermosetting adhesive ( Part III/Set 3 )-1981 Specification for individual materials, Section 3 Requirements for polyester film tapes ( PETP ) with non-tbermosetting adhesive ( Part III/Set 4 )-I977 Requirements for individual paper, creped with thermosetting adhesive ( Part III/Set 5 )-1977 Requirements for individual paper with tbermosetting adhesive 6264-1976 Air drying and anti-tracking insulating materials, materials, Section 4 Cellulosio Section 5 Cellulosic purposes

varnishes for electrical

8504 ( Part I )-I977 Guide for determination of thermal endurance properties of electrical insulating material8 : Part I Temperature indices and thermal endurance profiles 8516-1977 8570-1977 9229 Methods of test for materials materials determining purposes mica or treated mica paper: electrolytic corrosion with insulating

Press paper for electrical Definitions Methods

Insulating

based on built-up of test

( Part I )-1979 ( Part II )-1979

and general requirements materials, Section 1 Rigid mica

( Part III/Set 1 )-1979 Specification for individual material for commutator separator8 9335 ( Part I )-1979 Cellulosic papers for electrical general requirements

purposes

: Part I Definition8 and

