NAT HIAF IS 17394 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Sa SAIN tia À aA aie 
ait hierrr wat aaa — A-AA 


Selection of Chemical Coagulant and 
Disinfectant in a Water Treatment 
Plant — Guidelines 


ICS 71.100.80 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 6 


Water Quality for Industrial Purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Water Quality 
for Industrial Purpose Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council.This standard 
covers guidelines for selection of suitable chemical coagulant and disinfectant in a water treatment plant along 
with brief details of commonly used coagulants and disinfectants in raw water treatment. 


Fresh water resources are formidably shrinking with increasing population and expansion of land used area, 
stressed the available resources of water to meet the need of society. The main natural sources of fresh water are 
Himalayan Glaciers and Seasonal rains to recharge the natural water bodies, which are contaminated during its 
course of flow with discharged effluents from local civic bodies and industrial sectors. 


All naturally available water contains both dissolved and suspended impurities. The suspended impurities vary 
considerably with source, composition, charge, particle size, shape, and density. Coagulation and flocculation 
processes are used to separate the suspended solids from the water. 


The choice of coagulant chemical depends upon the nature and magnitude of the suspended solid to be removed, 
the raw water conditions, the facility design, and cost of the amount of coagulant chemical necessary to produce 
the desired result. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17394 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SELECTION OF CHEMICAL COAGULANT AND 
DISINFECTANT IN A WATER TREATMENT 
PLANT — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers guidelines for selection of suitable 
chemical coagulant and disinfectant in a water treatment 
plant along with brief details of commonly used 
coagulants and disinfectants in raw water treatment. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
whichthrough reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this Indian Standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revisions, and parties to agreements based on this 
Indian Standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
Indian Standards: 


IS No Title 
260 : 2001 Aluminium sulphate, non-ferric 
(second revision) 
262 : 1982 Ferrous sulphate, heptahydrate 
(second revision) 
299 : 2012 Alumino-ferric (fifth revision) 
711 : 1970 Specification for ferric choride, 


technical (first revision) 


1065 (Part2): Stable bleaching powder — 


2019 Specification: Part 2 treatment of 
water intended for drinking 
4200: 1984 Specification for sodium aluminate 


(first revision) 


11673 (Part 2): Sodium hypochlorite Solution: 


2019 Part 2 Water treatment use (second 
revision) 
15573 : 2018 Poly aluminium chloride (first 
revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Coagulation — A process/phenomenon to 
destabilize suspended colloidal particles/small particles 
by the addition of chemical reagent called coagulant, 
resultant to agglomeration and micro floc formation by 
destabilization of colloidal particles. Floc formation 
takes place where colloidal particles (0.1-1-micron 
size) collide with each other and create destabilized 


larger flocs in flocculation process. 
basically involves three sequential steps: 


Coagulation 


a) Addition and mixing of coagulant in water; 


b) Colloid /particle 
neutralisation); and 


destabilization (charge 


c) Floc formation/agglomeration or flocculation (a 
physical process). 


3.1.1 Coagulants on dissociation in water produce 
electrically +ve charged species (with high density 
charge), which neutralise the negative charges of 
suspended particles. Once the charge is neutralized, the 
colloidal and other suspended particles agglomerate. 
A high speed, rapid-mixing facilitates to disperse the 
coagulant and promotes particle collisions to achieve 
good coagulation. Proper contact time in the rapid-mix 
chamber is typically 1 to 3 min. 


3.1.2 Objective of coagulation is not only to remove 
suspended particles in water but also to affect the 
removal of certain soluble materials by adsorption or 
precipitation for example, removal of natural organic 
matter (NOM) to reduce the formation of disinfection 
bye products, facilitating removal of pathogens and 
inorganic contaminants like arsenic compounds, 
phosphates, fluorides. 


3.2 Coagulants — This is an inorganic or organic 
substance that initiates or facilitate a clarification 
process during water treatment. A coagulant together 
with other chemicals (as required), are added in water to 
aggregate dissolved contaminants, suspended particles 
(for example, colloidal and dispersed tiny particles) 
into large particles for their removal by sedimentation, 
clarification or any other solid removal process. 


3.3 Flocculation — Following the first step of 
coagulation, a second process called flocculation 
occurs. Flocculation, a gentle mixing stage, increases 
the particle size from sub-microscopicmicro-floc to 
visible suspended particles. The micro-flocs are brought 
into contact with each other through the process of 
slow mixing. Collisions of the micro-floc particles 
cause them to bond to produce larger and visible bulky 
floccules which get settled. Sometimes another reagent 
called flocculants (along with coagulants) aids in the 
form of inorganic or organic polymers are added which 
promotes the formation of floc and strengthen the floc 


IS 17394 : 2020 


size and weight, to increase settling rate. Once the floc 
has reached its optimum size and strength, the water is 
ready for the sedimentation process. Required contact 
time for flocculation range from 20 min to an hour. 


3.4 Sedimentation — A physical water treatment 
process under which suspended/insoluble/immiscible 
solids are settled due to gravity action. Removal of 
suspended particles by sedimentation depends upon the 
size and specific gravity of these particles (more than 
specific gravity of water). 


4 COAGULANTS COMMONLY USED FOR 
TREATMENT OF RAW WATER 


For raw water treatment, generally following chemicals 
are recommended in view of effectiveness of the 
coagulant. Chemical formulae and relevant Indian 
Standards are also mentioned along with forms 
available. Pre-polymerised salts are also available in 
high basicity/medium basicity grades offering more 
flexibility for selection of most suitable coagulant. 


4.1 Aluminium Sulphate 


It is also known as alumand available in two types 
namely, non-ferric and ferric having small quantity 
of ferric sulphate. It has been mostly used in water 
treatment since more than century as better alternatives 
were not available. Still it is one of widely used 
coagulant in water treatment. 


Forms: Liquid and solid (slabs, lumps or coarse 
powder): 


a) Non-ferric (IS 260 : 2001) 
1) Chemical Formula: Al, (SO,),.14-18 H,O 


b) Alumino-ferric (IS 299 : 2012) — It contains 
mainly aluminium sulphate along with small 
quantity of ferric sulphate which also plays role of 
coagulant. 

1) Chemical Formula: nAl,(SO,),.(1-n) 
Fe,(SO,),.14-18 H,O, where ‘n’ is variable. 


4.2 Sodium Aluminate 


Sodium aluminate is used in conjunction with alum 
for treatment of water (having low pH) where high pH 
is desired for effective coagulation. It is very useful 
adjunct to the lime soda softening process, particularly 
when magnesium is also present in water as it coagulates 
colloidal magnesium hydroxide. 


a) Chemical formula: Na,ALO,. XH,O 
b) Forms: Solid and liquid (see IS 4200) 


4.3 Polyaluminium Chloride (PAC) 


Polyaluminium chloride (PAC) is general name 
given to polyaluminium chloride compounds, namely 
polyaluminium chloride hydroxide and polyaluminium 
chloride hydroxide sulphate. When it is to be used for 
treatment of water for supply of potable water, it is 


recommended that PAC is produced from virgin raw 
materials to avoid any contamination of toxic and 
hazardous substances. 


a) Chemical formula: [Al (OH)a Clb]n where a and b 
are variables; a + b = 3; n = 15 and a > 1.05 


[Al (OH), Cl, (SO,),Jn where a, b, c are variables 
and (a + b + 2c) = 3 and a > 1.05, and n~15 


b) Forms: Solid and liquid 
c) Grades: High basicity and Medium basicity 


High basicity grades are preferred for waters having low 
alkalinity (< 50 ppm) and where low pH fall is desired 
or when higher doses are needed (see IS 15573). 


4.4 Aluminium Chlorohydrate 


Aluminium chlorohydrate (ACH) is a specific 
aluminium salt which is used in cosmetics as an 
antiperspirant and as a coagulant in water purification. 
It is commercially available in solid and liquid forms. 


In water purification, this compound is preferred in 
some cases because of formation of high density 
electrically charged species (Ionic species), which 
makes it more effective for destabilizing and removing 
suspended materials than other aluminium salts, such 
as aluminium sulphate, aluminium chloride and various 
forms of polyaluminium chloride and polyaluminium 
chlorosulphate, in which the aluminium structure results 
in a lower net charge than aluminium chlorohydrate. 
Further, the high degree of neutralization of the HCl 
results in minimal impact on treated water pH when 
compared to other aluminium and iron salts. It is 
effective at cold temperature and particularly suited for 
low alkalinity raw water. 


a) Chemical formula: AL (OH),C1 
b) Forms: Solid and liquid 


4.5 Ferric Chloride 


It is commercially available in the form of anhydrous 
powder, hydrated material and liquid at various 
concentrations. Solid anhydrous forms fume on 
exposure to air giving vapours of HCI. Both forms are 
highly corrosive and require special attention during 
its storage and handling. Due to colour and residual 
iron ions, it is rarely used in treatment of raw water for 
potable use. When treated water has to undergo further 
process like reverse osmosis (RO), it is extensively 
used. It also has predominant use as coagulant for 
sewage and industrial waste water treatment. 


a) Chemical formula:Anhydrous: FeCl, 
b) Hydrates: FeCl,.6H,O 
c) Forms: Solid (anhydrous powder or deliquescent 
crystals of hydrated form) and liquid (see IS 711). 
4.6 Ferrous Sulphate 


It is produced as hydrated form having green or bluish 
green crystals. It is rarely used for treatment of raw 


water because soluble ferrous ions need to be oxidised 
to ferric ion for its removal as floc or precipitate/sludge 
from treated water. Generally, its major use is for 
treatment of waste water. 


a) Chemical formula: FeSO,.7H,O 
b) Form: Solid (see IS 262) 


4.7 Ferric Sulphate 


Ferric sulphate is used as a primary coagulant in water 
treatment particularly when a broad coagulation pH 
range is desired, as it is effective between 4-11 pH. 


a) Chemical formula: Fe,(SO,), 


b) Form: Crystalline and liquid having 39-45 percent 
ferric sulphate 


4.8 Poly-electrolytes 


Poly-electrolytes are long-chain polymers having 
high molecular weight and are widely used in 
industry as coagulant aids together with the regular 
inorganic coagulants. Anionic (negatively charged) 
poly-electrolytes are often used along with metal 
coagulants. Low-to-medium weight positively charged 
(cationic) poly-electrolytes can also be used alone 
or in combination with the aluminum and iron type 
coagulants to attract the suspended solids and neutralize 
their surface charge. Poly-electrolytes are effective 
over a wider pH range than inorganic coagulants. 
They can be applied at lower doses, and they do not 
consume alkalinity. They produce smaller volumes 
of more concentrated, rapidly settling floc. The floc 
formed from use of a properly selected polymer will be 
more resistant to shear, resulting in less carryover and 
a cleaner effluent. 


As per WHO, presence of unreacted monomers in 
polyelectrolytes is a matter of concern to public health. 
As a result some countries have banned its use in 
drinking-water treatment. Though some claims have 
been made that the poly-electrolyte of starch base can 
be used for drinking water treatment however potability 
of such treated water needs to be established first. Thus, 
due to potential carcinogenic nature of polyelectrolytes, 
treatment of raw water using polyelectrolyte is 
restrictively recommended for use of such treated water 
for industrial sector/application and strictly not to be 
used for treatment of water intended for drinking. 


5 GUIDELINES OR GUIDING FACTORS FOR 
SELECTION OF COAGULANT 


Final selection of the coagulant (or coagulants) and 
dosing rate should be based on thorough Jar testing and 
plant scale evaluation. Factors for choice and selection 
of coagulant should be based upon raw water quality, 
effect upon downstream treatment process performance, 
desired quality of treated water in terms of turbidity, 
NOM, pH, TDS etc. and cost of inventory (coagulants/ 
chemical), method and cost of operations and sludge 


IS 17394 : 2020 


handling and disposal and finally net overall cost at the 
dose required for effective treatment to achieve desired 
goals of treatment. 


5.1 Source of Raw Water 


River, canal, pond, lake, dam, etc. 


5.2 Raw Water Quality 


Turbidity, alkalinity, pH, hardness, temperature, colour, 
odour and taste (see Note below) 
NOTE — For taste evaluation, adequate precaution should be 
taken after assessing raw water quality for clarity and odour. It 
is recommended that taste evaluation should be avoided if raw 
water is suspected of effluent contamination. 


5.3 Type of Process Equipment 


5.3.1 Existing Plants — Type of clarifier and related 
systems of storage, chemical dissolution, piping and 
dosing etc. 


5.3.2 Upcoming Plants — For design of upcoming 
plants, factors for consideration include: 


a) Land available/required, 
b) Capital cost, and 
c) Operating and maintenance cost. 


5.3.3 Simplicity or Ease in Plant Operation — Safety, 
environment, sludge handling and disposal etc. 


5.3.4 Desired Quality of Treated Water — In terms of 
TDS, pH, sulphate content etc. 


5.3.4.1 In terms of uses — Potable or industrial 
application and or demineralisation. 


5.3.4.2 In terms of physio-chemical parameters of 
treated water — Colour, taste, odour, TDS, pH, 
hardness, conductivity, disinfection by products (DBP), 
level of sulphates, chlorides and residual aluminium 
or iron content. For household usage treated water 
quality need to comply IS 10500, while for other usage 
it need to satisfy other national or individual industry 
standards. 


5.3.4.3 Source of raw water — It is important to know 
the source of raw water (water lifted from underground 
source or natural water bodies) to ascertain its 
continuous availability as well as its variation in quality 
due to season, pollution or other external factors which 
will affect critical parameters of plant operation. 


6 RAW WATER QUALITY 


6.1 Turbidity 


Turbidity in water is due to suspension/dispersion of 
fine particles (like clay, silt etc.), colloids of minerals 
and organic impurities which normally have negative 
charge on it. Generally in low turbidity water (< 10 
NTU), inorganic coagulant which quickly generates 


IS 17394 : 2020 


floc and forms stable sludge bed is preferred. Under 
moderate turbidity (10-100 NTU), use of any PAC or 
alum or iron salt will be successful, and selection in 
this category is done based on other desired factors 
like economy, safety, treated water quality etc. In case 
of high turbidity (> 100 NTU) or where there is rapid 
change in turbidity, PAC or PAC with little alum is 
most suitable over required large additions of alum or 
ferric sulphate to get better operational efficiency and 
superior water quality (low TDS, low pH depression 
etc.). 


6.2 Alkalinity 


While selecting a metal salt coagulant, such as alum, 
ferric salt or PAC, alkalinity is of critical importance 
as these coagulants require some alkalinity for their 
effective performance. At low alkalinity (< 50 ppm), 
high basicity coagulants, such as PAC or aluminium 
chlorohydrate (ACH) are reported effective. For alumor 
ferric salts, alkalinity need to be increased by addition 
of alkali, such as NaOH, Na,CO, or Ca(OH), or by use 
of sodium aluminate. At higher alkalinity > 50 ppm, 
normally all coagulants will function well. 


6.3 pH 


pH of raw water has important role to determine/ 
exclude certain coagulant because each coagulant has 
its own optimum pH zone to perform effectively. Ferric 
salts perform well in acidic conditions, while in case of 
ferrous sulphate, the pH > 9.5 is maintained to ensure 
complete precipitation of iron. Reported optimum pH 
range for alum is 5.5 - 6.5 and for PAC it is 5.0 — 8.0. 
Effect of pH fall in treated water is also important 
to note as in case of alum and ferric salts, pH fall is 
substantial. 


6.4 Temperature 


All commonly used coagulants perform well when water 
temperature is 10°C to ambient. At temperatures lower 
than 10°C, efficiency of alum and iron salts declines 
largely. Thus in winter, whenever water temperature is 
likely to fall below 10 °C, PAC is the most suitable as it 
functions well at a broad temperature range. 


6.5 Hardness 


There will be always some hardness in raw water due to 
calcium and magnesium salts. Whenever it is required 
to reduce temporary hardness of water, generally lime 
is added for softening water. Although lime sludge 
is dense, to capture lime fines, coagulant is required. 
Lime sludge also need to be dewatered for its separate 
disposal. Major criterion for efficient lime softening 
is pH control, pH should be (9.8 -10.2), a coagulant 
leading to high depression of pH will effect softening 
efficiency, thus not suitable. Thus high basicity salts 
like PAC/ACH are found to be more suitable for water 
requiring lime softening process. 


6.6 Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC)/Colour 


Maximum removal of dissolved organic carbon or 
total organic carbon (TOC) or natural organic matter 
(NOM) or colour is critical in selection of a proper 
coagulant, while providing water which is neither 
corrosive nor scaling. The coagulants which can 
remove DOC by complexation with it (usually at 
pH 5.5 — 7.0), while preserving alkalinity for turbidity 
precipitation are most suitable. Suitable selection is 
normally achieved by testing each chemical in the 
laboratory followed by plant trial. In waters with 
both NOM and suspended particles, required dose 
of coagulant is typically determined by the NOM 
concentration. 


6.7 Taste and Odour 


Coagulants have a little role in removal of odour and 
improvement in taste of treated water, which is generally 
achieved by treating water by passing through activated 
carbon beds. 


6.7.1 Process Equipment (Plant Design) — Unlike raw 
water quality, type of plant has little impact on choice 
of coagulant, in almost all of the existing plants, change 
of coagulant is possible with or without some minor 
changes. However, if a new plant is to be designed, 
then operating and capital cost of the plant as well as 
required space can be reduced by selection of suitable 
form (liquid or solid) and type of coagulant. 


In case of liquid coagulants, equipment handling for 
example, agitators, solution tanks for dissolution of 
solid coagulants are not required, further covered space 
for storage of solid coagulants is not needed. In case 
of liquid form of coagulants, size of required piping 
and dosing pumps depends on volume of dose and is 
significantly low for polymeric coagulants, which are 
normally dosed without dilution. 


Lime or alkali addition is required in many cases to 
increase pH of treated water due to fall in pH caused 
by a coagulant (ferric chloride, ferrous sulphate, 
alum) while for other coagulants (ACH, PAC, sodium 
aluminate), pH drop is minimal and thus additional 
treatment to boost pH may not be required. This 
reduces cost of lime storage area, lime dissolution 
tanks, related piping and dosing arrangements. In same 
fashion at high turbidity, in case of some coagulants, 
flocculants like Pes (for industrial treatment) are not 
required thus selection of appropriate coagulant can 
save capital and operating cost on lime and PE storage, 
dissolution and dosing. Some coagulants generate very 
low sludge which will attribute in reduction of size 
of required sludge handling and disposal unit. Use 
of such chemicals will lead to significant reduction 
in capital cost and required space and this is also 
normally associated with low operating costs and good 
housekeeping. 


6.8 Safety, Environment and Ease in operation 


6.8.1 Safety 


It is essential to find hazardous nature of the coagulant 
as well as special precautions for its handling and 
usage. Further it is also important to know volume or 
quantity of coagulant required for a period (say yearly). 


If a coagulant is available in the liquid form, then 
merits of using it in liquid form must be assessed. 
Liquid coagulants are relatively safe and easy to 
store and handle as compared to its solid forms which 
require many extra operations including manpower 
or equipments (hoist/cranes/forklifts) to unload, 
stock, transfer, dissolve, removal of insoluble from 
dissolution tanks etc. Use of coagulants in liquid form 
enhances safety as operations are in closed system. 
Further some coagulants work efficiently at low dose 
and without any dilution; thus low quantity to handle 
such coagulants provide more safety. 


6.8.2 Environment 


As per recent research studies, presence of sulphate 
in sewage and its conversion to hydrogen sulphide 
(H,S) and further to sulphuric acid by bacteria can 
be reduced to a great extent for reducing pollution 
and saving substantial cost of sewer corrosion or its 
control. It is reported that sulphate free coagulants can 
thus drastically reduce generation of H,S in sewer and 
switch over to sulphate free coagulants can decrease 
pollution due to H,S and sewer corrosion significantly. 
Thus latest trend is to use sulphate free coagulants. 


Pre-polymerised salts of iron and aluminium are very 
efficient, require small quantity of iron or aluminium 
ions for coagulation thus requiring less exploitation of 
natural resources of minerals of these metals. Further 
sludge generation is reduced to a great extent. 


6.8.3 Ease in Operation 


One should preferably select a coagulant which has 
wider applicability that is, which is effective during 
wide variation in quality of raw water, pH, temperature, 
turbidity etc. rather than frequent changeover of 
one coagulant to other due to poor performance of a 
coagulant in use. 


A few coagulants are used as such or low dosing volume 
is required for same performance as compared to other 
coagulants making plant operation compact and easier 
and thus requiring less manpower and supervision. 
These merits are assessed in terms of economics, 
safety, capital cost to conclude the choice of coagulant. 


6.9 Desired Water Quality 
6.9.1 Effect of Coagulation on Quality of Treated Water 


Since coagulants are directly added to raw water during 
treatment, its nature, purity, quantity used and reactivity 
etc. have direct impact on the quality of treated water. 


IS 17394 : 2020 


In the municipal water segment, plant is often run to 
supply the best quality of water as per government 
regulations while cost being secondary priority. In an 
industrial plant, water is treated as per requirement 
of its process keeping economics as one of the 
major consideration. By considering desired crucial 
parameters of quality a few options will be eliminated 
thus making process of selection relatively easier. 


High dose of conventional salts of aluminium or iron 
consume natural alkalinity of water significantly, 
leading to fall in pH of treated water (may require 
pH boosters) while increasing TDS/ionic load and 
conductivity significantly. High dose required for some 
coagulants may lead to high TDS which can affect taste 
of water or food items prepared from such water. Iron 
based coagulants, many times leave residual colour, or 
cause yellowing of water on storage due to oxidation of 
residual ferrous salts. Thus these are not recommended 
for use in water treatment for house hold usage if other 
alternates are available. 


In case of pre-hydrolysed salts of aluminium and iron 
depression in pH is very low and increase in ionic 
load/TDS due to coagulant is about 70-80 percent 
lower leading to better quality of water having low 
conductivity. Residual aluminium in pre-hydrolysed 
aluminium coagulants PAC/ACH is also low as 
compared to alum usage (see Table 2) . 


Effect of selected coagulant on disinfection bye products 
(DBP) also need to be looked into to ascertain that 
treated water is within permissible limits with respect 
to DBP. Newly developed pre-hydrolysed coagulants 
like polyferric chloride/sulphate (PFC or PFS) or ACH 
or PAC contribute lower (12-25 percent) ionic load 
(TDS) as compared to conventional salts of aluminium 
or iron. Thus use of these relatively new coagulants is 
extremely beneficial in demineralisation (DM) process 
as it leads to reduction in regeneration of resin beds, 
thus saving cost of regeneration chemicals (caustic and 
acid), resins, power, labour and maintenance. 


7 FUNDAMENTALS 
WATER 


As raw water is invariably contaminated with various 
pathogens (bacteria, viruses and amoebic cysts) 
causing killer diseases like typhoid, dysentery, cholera, 
diarrhoea, giardiasis, gastroenteritis etc, process of 
effective destruction or inactivation of the pathogens 
called as “disinfection” is a necessary step in water 
treatment for providing safe potable water. Other physio- 
chemical steps of water treatment like coagulation, 
flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, aeration etc. assist 
in destruction or removal of pathogens to some degree 
but to obtain safe water, disinfection is still required. 
Disinfection is generally carried by following process. 


OF DISINFECTION OF 


a) Boiling; 
b) Membrane filtration; 


IS 17394 : 2020 


c) Radiation UV, X- rays, gamma rays; and 


d) Treatment by chemicals, such as chlorine, chlorine a) 
producing compounds like bleaching powder, 


four mechanisms: 


b) 


sodium hypochlorite, chlorine dioxide, bromine, 
iodine and ozone etc. 


7.1 Mechanism 


7.1.1 


of pathogens 


Disinfection/destruction 
can be 


or 


Damaging cell wall; 
Changing cell permeability; 


c) Changing colloidal nature of the cell protoplasm; 


and 
d) 


inactivation 


explained by following 


Inactivation of enzyme systems responsible for 
metabolic activities. 


Table 1 Comparative Table for Illustrating Commonly Used Coagulants like Alum and 


PAC for Treatment of Potable Water 


( Clause 6.9.1 ) 


SI No. Parameter Alum PAC 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Raw water quality 
a) Turbidity 
Low and medium turbidity Good Good 
high turbidity Poor Good 
b) Alkalinity 
<50 ppm Poor Good 
> 50 ppm Good Good 
c) pH of raw water 5.5-6.5 5.0 — 8.0 
d) Temperature of raw water 
< 10°C Poor Good 
10°C -ambient Good Good 
ii) Type of plant 
a) Existing plants based on alum usage Suitable PAC can be used in alum-based plants 
with or without minor modifications.# 
Alum solution/ liquid alum tanks can also 
be used for storage of PAC 
b) Flock/sludge settling time High Low 
c) Output of treated water As per designed capacity Normally higher than designed capacity 
due to low sludge and easy filtration 
d) Existing plants designed on PAC usage Alum can be used in PAC based plants Suitable 
with minor modifications 
iii) New plants under design 
a) Form of coagulant Preferred liquid form if available, as Liquid form preferred, if available. Solid 
agitator and solution tanks not needed. form can also be used, as storage and 
Solid form can also be used as storage transportation will be easier. 
and transportation likely to be easier. 
b) Required land and covered space High Low particularly in case of liquid form. 
c) Hygiene and cleanliness of plant Low in case of solid alum # High 
iv) Safety 
Solid form of coagulant Average Average 
Liquid form of coagulant Good Good 
v) Environment-friendly Medium Good 
vi) Ease in operation Medium Good 
vil) Quality of treated water Fair* Good 


# In view of large quantity and nature of supply (loose) as per prevailing practices in India. 


* Alum appears to be superior compared to PAC only for removal of DOC particularly coagulation at low pH (enhanced coagulation). However, 
this depends on particular raw water and in most cases it will not be an issue. 


7.1.2 Chemical disinfection involves minimum two 
steps namely: 


a) Penetration of the disinfectant through the cell 
wall; and 


b) Reaction with enzymes within the cell. 


7.1.3 Residual disinfection is also necessary to provide 
a partial safeguard against low-level contamination 
and growth within the distribution and storage system. 
Different disinfection practices may be required to treat 
the different type of pathogens effectively. 


7.2 Disinfection Practices Commonly used in Water 
Treatment 


Generally two type of chemical disinfectants are used, 
namely: 


a) Oxidizing chemicals, which includes halogens and 
halogen releasing compounds, chlorine dioxide 
and other oxidants, such as ozone, potassium 
permanganate etc; and 


b) Metal ions, such as silver. Rarely other type of 
chemical disinfectants, such as acids and bases 
are used for disinfection. Other techniques 
include use of radiations for example, ultraviolet, 
gamma, X- rays and microwaves for destruction 
of microorganisms, out of which UV radiation 
is in use commercially. Occasionally membrane 
filtration is also used. 


IS 17394 : 2020 


A comparative chart for different disinfectants are also 
provide din the Table 2. 


7.3 Commonly used Disinfectants 


Commonly used disinfectants are mentioned in 7.3.1 
to 7.3.6. 


7.3.1 Chlorine 


Chlorine is commercially available in small cylinders 
as well as in large cylinders (tonners) having 900 kg 
of chlorine, where it is in the form of amber coloured 
oily liquid due to high pressure in the cylinder. Liquid 
chlorine is vapourised to get chlorine in gaseous form 
for treatment of water. 


Chlorine reacts with water to form hypochlorous acid 
(HOC!) (see equation!) which further dissolves into 
hypochlorite ions (OCI) and H* (see equation 2). 


Cl, + H,O = HOCI + H* + Cr equ. (1) 
HOCI = H*+ OCI equ. (2) 


Both above said reactions (1) and (2) are reversible. 
The undissociated HOCI is about 100 times powerful 
disinfectant than the hypochlorite (OCI ) ion. Free 
available chlorine in water is defined as the chlorine 
existing in water as HOCI and OCT ions. 


Both reactions (1) and (2) are dependent on pH of 
water. Above pH value of 3, which is normally case 


Table 2 Comparative Chart for Different Disinfectants 
( Clause 7.2 ) 


SI Disinfectant Effectiveness Disinfection Residual Ease of Ease to Cost Safety Effective 
No. to Destroy by Products Effects Application Detect Aspect pH Range 
Common (DBPs) efficiency of 
Pathogens Disinfection 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
i) Chlorine Yes THM and Fair Poor Easy Lowest Low 5.5-8 
HAA 
li) Bromine YES Br-THM and Fair Poor Easy High Low 5.5-8.5 
Bromoamines 
iii) Iodine YES I-THM and Fair Medium Easy Expensive Good 5.5-8 
Hypo- Iodous than 
acid Chlorine 
iv) Bleaching Yes THM and Fair Easy Easy High Fair 5.5-8 
Powder HAA 
v) Sodium Yes THM and Fair Easy Easy High Fair 5.5-8 
Hypochlorite HAA 
vi) Chlorine Yes None Good Medium Easy Very High Good Wide pH 
dioxide range 
vil) Ozone Yes, Not NIL Difficult Rapid Field 10-15 Good Wide pH 
(A superior Established test not times than range 
bactericide) available Chlorine 
viii) UV YES NONE NIL Easy --do--- High Good Wide pH 
Radiation range 


IS 17394 : 2020 


for raw water, chlorine completely exists in form of 
hypochlorus acid (HOCI). Further as pH increases 
from 5.5, dissociation of HOCI to hypochlorite ion 
(OCI) increases. Approximate percent of HOCI at 
different pH value of water is given below in the tabular 
form. 


5.5 | 6.0 | 7.5 | 8.0 | 9.5 
100 | 96 | 50 10 0 


DH of water 
Percent of HOCI 


The addition of chlorine does not produce any marked 
change in pH of the natural waters. Although chlorine 
is employed primarily for microbial disinfection, it also 
acts as an strong oxidant and is consumed by many 
organic and inorganic materials present in the water thus 
can remove or assist in removal of many undesirable 
impurities in the water. Sufficient time and dose of 
chlorine is must for chemical reactions and disinfection 
and to leave some unreacted chlorine as residual for 
disinfection of water during storage and transportation. 
Chlorine is dosed either in the gaseous form or in the 
form of a solution made by dissolving gaseous chlorine 
in a small auxiliary flow of water by getting chlorine 
gas from chlorine cylinders. It is extensively used in 
medium to large water treatment plants, however it 
requires elaborate safety practices and use of chlorine 
evaporators and auxiliary equipments. 


Chlorine reacts with organic matter in water to produce 
trihalomethane (THM), halogen acetic acid (HAA) 
mainly dichloro and trichloro acetic acids and other 
halogen disinfection byproducts (DBPs), which if 
present in large quantity may sometimes be a matter 
of health concern. Formation of these DBPs can be 
controlled by optimisation of treatment systems (see 
IS 646). 


7.3.2 Bleaching Powder/Calcium Hypochlorite 


Bleaching powder is another source of chlorine. Its 
grade having 30-35 percent available chlorine is 
extensively used, and is commonly called as “stable 
bleaching powder”. Its use is simple, relatively safe and 
does not require power during its application, but has 
demerit of poor stability, difficulty in storage due to its 
hygroscopic nature and expensive to use. It is generally 
used in small installations (see IS 1065). 


High strength bleaching powder having 65-70 percent 
available chlorine is also used due to its high stability 
and non-hygroscopic nature but it is more costlier and 
require safety in handling. 


7.3.3 Sodium Hypochlorite Solution 


Chlorination of water is also done by sodium 
hypochlorite having 10-15 percent of available chlorine 
at ambient temperatures. Its stability is greatly affected 
by heat, light, pH and presence of heavy metal ions. 
Storage temperatures should not exceed 32°C, above 


which decomposition rate is too high. Due to stability 
issue, commercial sodium hypochlorite is rarely used 
that too only in small plants (see IS 11673). 


As compared to chlorine use of sodium hypochlorite is 
quite expensive. 


7.3.4 Chlorine Dioxide ( ClO,) 


Due to concerns about production of trihalogen methane 
(THM) during disinfection by chlorine and also safety 
hazards in storage, transportation and handling of bulk 
chlorine, use of chlorine dioxide is becoming more 
popular in recent years. Chlorine dioxide has very short 
shelf life and hence, is generated immediately prior to 
application. Chlorine dioxide decomposes in water to 
form chlorite and chlorate. Chlorine dioxide is unstable 
and subject to explosion in gaseous form but aqueous 
solutions of the gas are stable and safe. Its efficiency 
as germicide is least affected between pH 6 - 10 and 
it does not combine with ammonia and many other 
organic impurities before oxidising them, thus DBPs 
are low and not a matter of concern. Dosage of chlorine 
dioxide remains less than chlorine due to its higher 
oxidising capacity. 


7.3.5 Ozone ( O,) 


It is produced by passing dry air or oxygen through 
a high voltage electric field. Ozone being unstable it 
breaks down to normal oxygen (O,) and nascent oxygen 
(O), latter being a powerful oxidant and disinfectant. Its 
dose is typically in the range of 2-5 mg/l. It is a superior 
pathogen killer than chlorine and its compounds and 
is highly effective in removal of tastes, odours, colour, 
iron and manganese, but it must be dosed sufficiently 
to complete oxidation before initiation of disinfection. 
Its efficiency of disinfection is unaffected by pH or 
temperature over a wide range. Ozone forms DBPs, 
whose adverse effects are not yet established. 


Demerits of ozone treatment include: 


a) High cost of production (10-15 times than 
chlorine); 


b) Its generation on site due to unstability; and 
c) Inability to provide residual protection. 


Despite these demerits, ozone is extensively used in 
many developed countries particularly in municipal 
water segment of Europe and Canada. 


7.3.6 Other Halogens 
7.3.6.1 Bromine 


It is commercially available as heavy dark reddish- 
brown liquid, which upon addition to water forms 
hypobromous acid (HOBr) and its dissociation leads 
to formation of hypobromite ion (OBr). Bromine 
reacts with ammonia and organic matter in water. It has 
been used on a limited scale for disinfection on small 


installations like swimming pools. Due to its high cost 
and low effectiveness, it is not used for water treatment 
in municipal/ Industrial segment. 


7.3.6.2 Iodine 


Addition of solid iodine in water results in formation 
of hypoiodous acid (HOI) and hypoiodite ion (IO). 
Iodine has same disinfecting power as chlorine and 
is less dependent on pH, temperature, time of contact 
and can also kill aerobic cysts, and provides long 
lasting protection. Iodine oxidises ammonia and 
phenols present in water, thus produces lower DBPs 
than chlorine. Being more costly than chlorine, iodine 
has been used in swimming pools and in very small 
installations. 


7.3.6.3 UV radiation 


Ultraviolet radiation may killa cell, retard its growth and 
change its heredity. Depending on the dose of radiation, 
one or all above said processes may happen. Effective 
region of wavelength is 250 — 265 nm for disinfection. 
For this purpose UV light produced by mercury lamp is 
used for good disinfection. Sufficient intensity and time 
of exposure is applied to clear water flowing in thin 
films. Presence of iron even at low concentration of 1 
ppm can drastically absorb >80 percent of UV radiation 
and water depths of about 12 cm are desired for good 
disinfection. 


Merits of UV radiation are that, no foreign matter is 
actually introduced and no taste or odour is produced. 
Demerits of UV treatment include: 


a) Lack of residual effect; 
b) expensive equipment; and 


c) lack for a rapid field test to check treatment 
efficiency. 


Use for UV radiation in industrial/potable water 
treatment has typically been restricted to small facilities. 


7.4 Guidelines or Guiding Factors for Selection of 
an Efficient Disinfectant 


Efficiency of disinfection will obviously depend on 
the nature of the disinfectant. The end products of 
reactions which occur when disinfectant is added into 
water determine efficiency of disinfection. The course 
of these reactions are influenced by the character of 
water and its constituents. Adequate concentration of 
a chemical disinfectant must be added to maximize 
destruction of organisms. 


Undermentioned five main factors must be considered 
during selection of suitable disinfectant. 


7.4.1 Physio-Chemical Parameters of the Water to be 
Treated 


Higher the temperature, faster is the disinfection as 
rates of chemical reaction increase with increase in 
temperature thus temperature of water must be suitable 


IS 17394 : 2020 


for reactions between selected disinfectant and water. 
The range of pH of water to be treated is crucial to 
evaluate a disinfectant since bactericidal efficiency 
varies with pH. Type of organic matter and pollutants 
in water also play important role for selection of 
disinfectant as these will also consume the disinfectant. 


Type and quantity of suspended particles will also 
affect disinfection as some microorganism may be 
sheltered from disinfectant when deeply embedded in 
the suspended particles, thus better clarity of treated 
water is required. 


7.4.2 Type, Condition and Density of Pathogens 


Each type of organism has different cell structures 
and enzyme systems from other organisms, therefore 
action of disinfectant varies on different pathogens. 
Viruses in general are more resistant than bacteria and 
thus need high concentration and longer contact time 
of disinfectant. Cysts are very resistant. Conditions 
in which the organism occur are also likely to affect 
the efficiency for example, cell inside the clump may 
get protection from disinfectant when cells are clumps 
together. High density of the pathogens also affects the 
efficiency of the disinfectant. 


7.4.3 Contact Time Available for Disinfection 


The destruction of organisms increase with contact 
time available for disinfection, it is limited by the 
design of the plant and is usually >30 minutes. If the 
minimum contact time is not available then dose of the 
disinfectant needs to be enhanced. 


7.4.3.1 Criterion for a good disinfectant 


For a disinfectant to be effective in water treatment 
plant, it must possess the following properties: 


a) For a particular water for treatment it should be 
capable to destroy present pathogens sufficiently 
within available contact time; 

b) It should be possible to detect efficiency of 
disinfection easily by a practical, rapid and simple 
method; and 

c) It should leave residual effect to avoid undesirable 
bacterial growth during storage and distribution 
up to end-user. 


7.4.4 Quantity of Water to be Treated 


For large facilities, gas chlorination or chlorine dioxide 
are recommended. 


7.4.5 Safety/Hazard Aspects 


7.4.5.1 Disinfection by products (DBP) formed by use 
of the disinfectant should not render water toxic or 
unacceptable due to odour, colour and taste. 


7.4.5.2 Safety in storage, transportation and handling 
of bulk materials should also be considered while 
selecting a proper disinfectant. 


IS 17394 : 2020 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Edzwald, (2011) 

Water Quality and Treatment: A Hand book on Drinking water, Denver: Mc Graw —Hill 
2. Critten den, J et al. (2005) 

MWH’s Water Treatment: Principals and Design, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


3. Manual on Water Supply and Treatment, 3 Edition, May 1999, CPHEEO, Ministry of Urban 
Development, Govt. of India, New Delhi 


4. Gableich. Christopher J et al. 


Control of Residual Aluminium from conventional Treatment to Impure Reverse Osmosis Performance, 
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, La Verna, California, cgabeich@mwdh20.com 


5. Peter Gebbie et al., Using Polyaluminium Coagulants in water Treatments Paper presented at 64° 
Annual water Industry Engineers and operators Conference, Bendigo, Australia 5-6 September, 2001. 


6. O’Melia, C.R et al. 


Polymeric Inorganic Coagulants, AWWARF final Report. Denver, CO. American Water Works 
Association (AWWA) Research Foundation, 1989 


7. IljePikaar et al, Reducing sewer corrosion through integrated urban water management, 
(15" August, 2014) Science 345 (6198), pp 812-814. 


8. Wolfgang Rauch et al., Replace contamination, not the pipes, (15 August, 2014) Science 345 (6198), 
pp 734-735. 


10 


IS 17394 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


EXPERTS WHO MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION TO THE DEVELOPMENT 
OF THIS STANDARD 


Organization 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai 

Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Thiruchirapali 

Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 

Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 

Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 

Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute, Sharanpur 

Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 
Bhavnagar 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Consumer education and Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, New Delhi 


Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda 


Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited, Allahabad 


Ion Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Aditya Birla Chemicals (India) Limited 
Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation, 
New Delhi 


National Environment Engineering Research Institute, 
Nagpur 


NLC Nalco India Limited, Kolkata 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri K. P. BHATTACHARYYA, (Chairman) CHD 13 
SHRI SHIVAYYANAMATH. S. (Alternate) 


DR S. BHATNAGAR 
K. ANaAnpaA. Basu (Alternate) 


DR NEELAM NIGAM 
Smt PoosA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


Dr C. MURALIDHARAN 
SHRI R. SUTHANTHARARAJAN (Alternate) 


Dr S. D. MAKHIJANI 
Dr R. C. Triven (Alternate) 


DR REETA TANDON 
Dr S. THariyaL (Alternate) 


Dr Soumya HALDAR 
Dr D. N. Srivastava (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Ms ANINDITA MEHTA 
Ms Do tty JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri T.S.G. NARAYANAN 
Suri NAND LaL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SASTRY 
Suri R. S. BAGHEL (Alternate) 


SHRI GORAKH SINGH 
Suri K. S. S. Moortny (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 
Dr Renu Sarar (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 


Suri V. P. GHODMARE 
Suri Rasesu (Alternate I) 
DATTATRAYA CHIVANE (Alternate II) 


Suri R. M. DESPHANDE 


SHRI SUKANTA KAR 


Dr PAWAN LABHASETWAR 
Er S. P. Anney (Alternate) 


DR ASHISH KUMAR SAMADDAR 
SHRI NADAN CHATTERJI (Alternate) 


Suri B. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI SHARAT Kumar (Alternate) 


IS 17394 : 2020 


Organization 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Water and steam Chemistry Division, BARC facilities, 
Kalpakkam 


ClIl-Triveni Water Institute 
In Personal Capacity 
Delhi Jal Board 

In Personal Capacity 

In Personal Capacity 

In Personal Capacity 

In Personal Capacity 


Directorate General, BIS 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MUNEESH CHADDA 
Suri S. Y. Panpit (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. VERMA 
Ms MANJEET AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 
Dr SuNEEL PANbey (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
Suri N. R. Kamar (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
Dr R. K. SINGH 

SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 
DR A. LAWRENCE 

Suri D. K. JAIN 

SHRI B. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI SHARAT KUMAR 


Suri U. K. Das, Scientist ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SAGAR SINGH 
Scientist ‘C’ (CHD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 13 (14542). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


