IS 9299 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard INSULATING MATERIALS BASED ON BUILT-UP MICA OR TREATED MICA PAPER SPECIFICATION
PART ( 2 METHODS OF TEST

First Revision )

UDC 621'315'613'1

: 629'1

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI April 1992

Price Group 7

Solid Electrical

Insulating

Materials

Sectional

Committee,

ETD 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau after the draft finalized by the Solid Electrical lnsulating Materials Sectional approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This series deals with consists of the following Part 1 Definitions Methods built-up mica three parts: and general of test, and for individual materials. of test. or treated mica paper for of Indian Committee Standards, had been

use in electrical

equipment.

It

requirements,

Part 2 Part 3 This standard

Specifications

( Part 2 ) covers methods

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC PUB 37 I-2 ( 1987 ) `Specification for insulating materials based on built-up mica or treated~mica paper, Part 2 Methods of test', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC). This revision of the standard stiffness, resin flow, gel time, and IS0 publications. has been taken up to incorporate additional test methods namely penetration flexural strength and air resistance taking from IEC

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values signifcant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same in this standard.

this standard is complied with, a test, shall be rounded off in ( revised )`. The number of as that of the specified value

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992

Indian Standard

INSULATING MATERIALS BASED ON BUILT-UP MICA~ORTREATED MICA PAPER SPECIFICATION
PART 2 METHODS OF TEST ( 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 2) covers the methods of test applicable to built-up mica or treated mica paper for use in electrica~l equipment. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard: ISNo. 1175 : 1981 Title Methods for grading and classification of muscovite mica blocks, thins and films (first revision ) Thermal evaluation and classification of electrical insulation (first revidon ) Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 53 Mica (supersedingIS 1174) Methods of test for electric strength of solid insulating materials at power frequencies Recommended methods for the determination of the permittivity and dielectric dissipation factor of electrical insulating materials at power, -audio and radio frequencies including metre wavelengths

First Revision )
taken across the full width of the roll to give an area of 3.2 m2, or a maximum length of 2 m. Where the material is delivered in sheets, a sheet constitutes a specimen. 3.3 Method of Test Measure the thickness of the material at ten points uniformly distributed over the specimen. 3.4 Results
The values of the ten measurements are to be recorded.

The mean of these values is the thickness of the material. 4 COMPOSlTION 4.1 With the tests given in this clause, the content in mass, percent is determined for the following items: a) volatiles, b) binder, and c) mica. 4.1.1 From the values obtained, the mass per unit area can be calculated for: a) the dried product (product as received without volatiles), bj the binder, c) the mica, and d) the reinforcement or support. 4.1.2 Requirements of 4.2 to 4.6 are not applicable to mica products containing a binder which is not completely removed at high temperatures. Silicone binders are dealt with in 4.7. 4.2 Test Specimen done or more specimens with a surface area.of 0.01 m2 are taken from the material in the original packaging. The test specimen shall be weighed with an accuracy of one milligram, m, being the mass found in grams. 43.1 Where the mass per unit area of the components has to be determined, the area (A) in square metres of the test specimen shall be determined with an accuracy of 2 1 percent. The specimens may be cut into pieces. 1

1271 : 1985

1885 (Part 53) : 1980 2584 : 1963

4486 : 1967

3 THICKNESS 3.1 Test Apparatus A measurement device shall be used having measuring of 6 to 8 mm diameter which shall be flat within 0.001 mm and parallel to within 0.003 mm. The gradations shall be in divisions of 0.01 mm and shall permit estimation of the reading to 0.002 mm. The pressure exerted on the specimen shall be 10 N/cm2 to 20 N/cm2. For higher values of pressure, it shall be as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser. The accuracy of measurement when checked by a setting gauge shall be within 0.005 mm. 3.2 Test Specimen Where the meaterial is delivered in rolls, a specimen is

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992 4.3 Content of Volatiles and Mass per Unit Area of the Dried Material The test specimen (mass m ), shall be heated under the conditions prescribed in the individual specification sheet (Part 3) of the material under investigation. After cooling in a desiccator, the specimen is weighed (mass mJ. The mass per unit area of binder (m'b) is:

m'b =

m2-m4

A

m'b is usually expressed in g/m'
4.4.3 Where partof the binder does not dissolve in the agreed solvent, the reinforcement is carefully separated from the mica and the amount of binder still present in the mica is determined by weighing before and after heating at 500 2 25OC for 6 hours.
NOTE - If the mass per unit area of the reinforcement is stated

The volatile content (TV) is: TV = m,-m
9 The mass per unit area of the dried product m'r=
m2 2 x

100 percent ( m't ) is:

by the supplier, it is permitted to determine the binder content according to the method described in 4.5.Jn this case, the binder content is determined by equations

A m't is usually expressed in g/m'.
4.4 Binder Content 4.4.1 Material Without Inorganic Reinforcement

Cb=

3 -

(mp + m,1 x
m2

100 percent

m'b = Reinforcement or with
where 9

m2--(m3+Q

A

The test

specimen, dried in accordance with 4.3 (mass m, ), is heated in a muffleoven at a temperature of 500 f 25OC. Unless otherwise specified, the period of heating shall be 6 hours. After coolingin a desiccator, the mass m, is determined. The binder content (Cb ) is:

= mass of organic reinforcement,

and

m `b is usually expressed in g/m'..
4.5 Mass per Unit Area of Reinforcement Material

(m'r)
The supplier shall state the mass per unit area of the reinforcement material used and the method for determining this property shall be agreed upon between the supplier and the purchaser. In the absence of this information, a method shall be used, based on that defined ~14.4.1 if the support is inorganic, and on that defined in 4.4.2 if thL supportis organic. 4.6 Mica Content From the results of the previous tests, the mica content (Cm) and the mass per unit area of mica (m'a ) can be calculated. For material without reinforcement or with organic reinforcement: Cm=-!!!_
m2

Cb = m2-m3
m2

x1OOpercent

NOTE - In case of dispute, the heating shall be continued to constant mass, the mass being considered constant when consecutive weighings differ by not more than 0.1 percent.

The mass per unit area of binder (m'b ) is:

m'b =

m2

--m3

A

m'b is usually expressed in g/m2.
4.4.2 Material with Organic Reinforcement

The test specimen,

dried according to 4.3 (mass mJis placed in the paper tube of a Soxhlet extraction apparatus with a content of 0.51. The type of solvent is subject to agreement between the supplier and thepurchaser and shall be capable of dissolving the binder completely, but shall not dissolve the reinforcement. The boiling under reflux is continued for 2 h or longer if necessary for the corn plete dissolution of the binder. The treated specimen is taken out of the paper tube`and shall be dried for half an hour at 135OC. After cooling in a desiccator the mass m4 is determined. The binder content ( Cb ) is:

x 100 percent :

For material with organic reinforcement

Cm=

m,lA - m'r

m't

x 100 percent
reinforcement:

For material with inorganic
m3 --

A

m'r x 100 percent

Cm=

m't

Cb=

m2

-m4 m2

x 100 percent
2

m'm=m'-m'b-m'r m'm is usually expressed in g/m".

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992

4.7 Silicone Binder Content
The determination of silicone content shall be subject

to agreement between the supplier and thepurchaser. An example of possible method is given below. 4.7.1 Test Specimen The test specimen shall have a mass of approximately 5 g (for thin materials, two pieces of approximately 5 x 20 cm are suitable). 4.7.2 Method of Test Weigh the specimen in a previously dried and weighed extraction thimble to the nearest milligram. The difference in mass is the mass of specimen. Put sufficient diethylamine (reagent grade) into a Soxhlet extraction flask to fill the siphon one and a half times and extract the specimen until extraction is complete at a siphon rate of 6-10 times per hour. (The minimum time of extraction is 4 h for thin materials, but may be much longer for thick materials). Allow the apparatus to cool, then replace the diethylamine with acetone and extract as before for one and a half hours. Remove the thimble, allow it to dry in air on a watchglass for 10 minutes and then heat for 30 minutes in an oven at 105 It 2OC. Cool the thimble in a desiccator, and then weigh it to the nearest milligram. Subtract the weight of the thimble. 4.7.3 Results Report the silicone binder content for each specimen tested as a percentage to the first decimal place. Silicone binder content-= loss in mass x 100 percent specimen mass

allowed to dry. The size of the splittings is determined with the template given in IS-1885 (Part 53) : 1980 and IS 1175 : 1981. 6 ELASTIC COMPRESSION
6.1 The elastic compression of rigid mica material -is determined from the variations in thickness of a multilayer specimen submitted to cyclic pressure variations between 700 N/cm2 and 6 000 N/cm2 measured after stabilization and is expressed as a percentage of the thickness of the specimen at 700 N/cm2. The temperature of the test is indicated in the specification for individual materials (part 3).

6.2 Apparatus
The apparatus is as follows:

a) A

b)

c>

measuring device which enables the total thickness of the pieces of rigid mica material in the stack (as described in 6.4) to be determined within 2 percent and the difference in height of the stack at 700 N/cm2 and 6 000 N/cm2 to within 0.1 mm ; Flat steel plates, 1.5 - 2 mm thick; and One flat steel plate, not more than 10 mm thick, drilled to enable a thermocouple to be inserted.

6.3 Test Specimen
The test specimen consists of a number of pieces of

rigid mica material of the same area, the latter being of 15 to 40 cm2. A stack is formed consisting alternately of a steel plate 1.5 to 2 mm thick and larger in size than the mica and a piece of rigid mica material. The vertical alignment of the mica is important. The number of layers shall be such that the total-height of the mica sheet is 10 to 15 mm. The steel plate drilled to~enable a thermocouple to be inserted is used in the middle of the stack. 6.4 Method of Test A stack made up according to 6.3 is subjected to a pressure 3f 700 N/cm2 and then taken to the temperature indicated in the individual specification sheet and maintained there until no further compression occurs. The heating of the stack shall be such that the maximum temperaturespecified is not exceeded in any part of the stack. The height of the stack (d,) is determined. The pressure on the stack is then increased progressively to 6 000 N/cm2 over a period 6f about 10 minutes. The pressure is maintained for a period of 15 minutes and the heighht of the stack (d2) is determined. The pressure is descreased progressively down to 700 N/cm2 over a period of about 5 minutes. As soon as the pressure reaches 700 N/cm2, the stack height is determined. A new cycle is commenced under conditions similar to the first one (compression to 6 000 N/cm2 ), remaining at maximum pressure for only 5 minutes followed by decompression to 700 N/cm2. The cycles are repeated until successive determinations of d, and d2 are constant within 0.02 mm (0, and D, ). 3

5 SIZE OF SPLITTINGS 5.1. Test Specimen
The size of the specimen of sheet to be tested shall be 300 x300 mm. The specimens and special test conditions for tape materials are stated in the individual specification sheets (Part 3).

5.2 Method of Test To remove the bonding material, the specimen is placed in a tray or shallow bath and boiled with 15 percent aqueous solution of caustic potash (KOH) until disintegration takes place. If the bond cannot be looseJled by the above means, any other suitable solvent may be used or the test specimen may be heated in a muffle ovenuntil the binder is sufficiently degraded to permit examination of the splittings. Alternatively, the splittings may be removed mechanically provided no splitting is torn in the process. After disintegration, the splittings rewashed several times with hot water, or with fresh solvent, and then

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992 Measurements~are then made at the specified temperature on the stack of steel plates used for interleavingthe specimen. The stack heights are measured at 700 N/cm, and at 6 000 N/cm2 and recorded as d, and d,, respectively. 6.5 Results The result is expressed as a percentage related to the thickness under a pressure of 700 N/&and claculated from the equation, Electric compression
NOTES

b) Flat c) One

steel plates, 1.5 to 2 mm thick; and

flat steel plate, not more than 10 mm thick, drilled to enable a thermocouple to be inserted.

7.3 Test Specimen The test specimen consists of a number of pieces of rigid mica material of the same area, the later being of 15 to 40 cm2. A stack is formed consisting alternatively of a steel plate 1.5 to 2 mm thick and larger insize than the mica, and a piece of rigid mica material. The vertical alignment of the mica is important. The number of layers shall be such that the total height of the mica sheet is 10 to 15 mm. The steel plate, drilled to anable a thermocouple to be inserted, is placed in the middle of the stack. 7.4 Method of Test A stack prepared accourding to 7.3 is placed between the plates of the press. The stack is subjected to a pressure of 6 Ooo N/cm2 for a period of 30 minutes at the temperature prescribed in the relevant specification section. The heating of the stack shall be any part of the stack. After this period of time, the edges of the micaceous material inthe stackare carefully inspected. The presence of small droplets of the binder or a displacement of mica should be noted.
NOTE! - It is suggested that temperature be initially raised and then the pressure shall be applied for conducting the test.

(0, - dJ - (02 - dJ @`I - d3 1

x 100 percent

1 For clarification (see Fig 1 ).

of the method of test mentioned in 6.4,

2 The plastic deformation of thematerial can be established by measuring the thickness at pressure of 700 N/cm* at the beginning (d> and the end (da of the test at room temperature. 3 Taking values at intermediate pressure gives an idea of the non-linearity of the compression.

7 STABILITY

UNDER HEAT AND PRESSURE

7.1 The test for stability under heat and pressure determines mica or binder displacement, or both, under specified conditions of temperature and pressure. The test is to be considered very subjective and great care should be used in describing the test results. 7.2 Test Apparatus The test apparatus is as follows: a> A press capable of giving a pressure of 6 000 N/cmZ;

IS 9299 (Pat-t 2) : 1992 7.5 The test for stability under heat and pressure may also be carried out accordingto the method specified in Annex A. 8 TENSILE ELONGATON BREAKIN G AT BREAK STRENGTH ANB 9 ELECTRIC STRENGTH be carried out according to

9.1 This test shall IS 2584 : 1963.

The breakdown test with rapidly applied voltage shall be used, as described in 8.1 of IS 2584 : 1963. Unless individual performed otherwise specified in the specification of Part 3, the test shall be in air at the ambient temperature.

8.1 Test Apparatus The tensile breaking strength and the elongation at break are measure by means of a suitable testing apparatus. 8.2 Test Specimen The length of the test specimen shall be such that after clamping in the testing machine there remains a free length of 200 mm between the jaws. For tapes the width of the specimen is the width of the tape with a maximum of 25 mm shall be cut in such a way that damage to the material along the edges is avoided. 8.3 Method of Test the the to the

The size of electrodes shall be stated in the individual specification. Five tests shall be made. 10 STIFFNESS 10.1 Conditioning and Test Atmosphere

The test specimens are to be in equilibrium with the normal laboratory temperature (27 2 2OC ). 10.2 Test Specimens Full-width material : Five test specimens in the machine direction and five test specimens in transverse direction, measuring 15 mm x 50 mm; and : Five test specimens of 50 mm in length and the widthof the tape greater than 10 mm. When testing in transverse direction, the width of the tape shall become the len#h of test specimens.

Insert the test specimen into the machine so that load is applied evenly across the width and that initial test length is 200 mm. It may be necessary modify the jaws in such~a way that slip or break in jaws is avoided.

The test specimen is elongated until it breaks and the maximum load during the test and the increase in the distance between the jaws at the moment of break, are recorded when specified in the relevant individua! specification. Tests either made. cation breaks in which the specimen breaks within 25 mm of jaw are discarded. Five valid measurement are The time from the commencement of the appliof the load to the moment at which the specimen shall be 20 i: 5 seconds.

Tape material

10.3 Procedure The dimensions of test specimens are to be determined with an accuracy of + 0.5 mm. The test specimen is placed as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 with the glass fabric side on the outside of the fold, symmetrically on the support platform, parallel to the slot and with its two edges overlapping the slot by equal amounts on each side. The penetrator bar is driven into the slot against the resistance of the test specimen until the maximum force of resistance is reached. The rate of
PENETRATOR TEST BAR SPECIMEN

8.4 Results The five individual results and their mean are reported in newton percentimetre width. If delamination occurs before rupture, the load at determination and the load at rupture are to be reported.

d

//

SUPPORT

PLATFORM

I

FORCE-MEASURING

DEVICE I

FIG. 2 APPARATUSFOR MEASUREMENTOF 5

S-s

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992

PENETRATOR TEST --SPECIMEN

BAR

SUPPORT

PLATFORM

All dimensionsin millimetres. FIG. 3 APPARATUS FOR MEASURJMENT OF STIFFNESS

movement of the support platform against the penetratorbar shall be such that the maximum force is reached in 15 + 3 s. A force-measuring device such as a table balance should be used to record the maximumforceof resistance. The stiffness shall be given in newtons per metre and is calculated as follows: Stiffness = -ZZ I where
F mu = maximum flexural load (N); and 1 = length of test specimen (m). F

11.1 Test Specimen

(N/m)

Use a template, cut sufficient squares of material 50 mm x 50 mm so that when stacked the aggregate of nominal thicknesses is about 2 mm. Clean off all loose particles and projecting fibres from the pieces to be tested and align the squares accurately. For tape material, build up the stack to give a 2 mm nominal unpressed thickness by using sufficient layers of butted tape with successive layers at right angles. With certain widths of tape, it may be necessary to cut the sides to obtain 50 mm x 50 mm. 11.2 Procedure Weigh the test piece to the nearst milligram (m, ). Record the percentage resin content ( C,), determined in accordance with 3.4. Measure the thickness of the stack (f ) by the metnod given in 2 (0.7 MPa). Place the test piece centrally between caul plates not exceeding 1.5 mm thick at 15OCto 35OC. Stops are not used. Insert the assembly of plates and test piece in a press preheated to the temperature given in individual material specifications. Close the press immediately and apply a force of 2.5 kN. Cure the test piece for 5 t 1 min. Remove the test specimen from between the caul plates. 6

10.4 Report The central values and the maximum and minimum values of the stiffness in machine direction (with deflection of weft yams) and in transverse direction (with deflection of warp yarns) shall be reported separately. Note the test temperature.
11 RESIN FLOW AND CONSOLIDATION -. The temperature for this test should be noted as given

in Part 3.

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992 Remove the resin flash being careful not to remove any glas. Reweigh the test piece to the nearest milligram (m& Measure the thickness (0.7 MPa). 11.3 Results The resin flow weight, is : resin flow at the specified temperature, by (t,) by the method given in 2 resin. A timer shall be started at the moment the resin comes into contact with the hot plate. After the resin has melted and when 75 percent of the specified gel time has elapsed, the resin shall be stirred using a wooden stick 3 mm in diameter, holding the stick as near vertical as possible and mixing the centre as well as the edges of the molten resin. While stirring, the diameter of the pool of melted resin shall not exceed 25 mm. Approaching the gel point, the resin becomes tacky and forms strings; the gel point is reached when it no longer forms strings and is no longer tacky, but is still elastic. At this point, the timer is stopped land the elapsed time, measured in seconds, is taken as the gel time. 13 PENETRATION 13.1 Test Apparatus The appartus is a standard Williams type penetrometer, with a test area of 6 + 0.05 cm diameter (see Fig. 4).
NOTE - The container for the test liquid may be heated and cooled and should be thermostatically controlled.

ml

-m2

x104 (percent)

ml C, consolidation 12 GELTIME = fl t2

x 100 (percent)

t1

.

Cut and stack ten pieces of material 100 mm x 25 mm. In the case of tape less than 25 mm wide, the test piece shall be the width of the tape under test. Press the stack on a hot plate maintained at a surface temperature of 170 f 2OC squeezing out the molten

I

I

THERMOMETER

Lso
FIG.

All dimensions in millimetres.

4

STANDARD

WILLJAMSTYPE 7

F%NFXROMEER

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992 A system of time measurement, for example a stopwatch permitting the time to be measured with an accuracy of 0.1 s. Test liquid a mixture of 60 percent volume of castor oil (double refined) and 40 percent volume of toluene; : 0.917 g/cm'; and 15 FLEXURAL STRENGTH MODULUS IN BEND 15.1 Test Specimen For the determination of the llexural strength take five test pieces in the direction parallel to one edge and another five in a direction at right angles to this. Bach test piece shall be of a length not less than 20 times the measured thickness, of a width 1Omm to 25 mmand of a thickness 4 + 0.2 mm. For the determination of the elastic modulus, of two similar test pieces are taken. two sets AND ELASTIC

Density Viscosity

at 27OC

at 27OC : 26 mPa.s.

NOTE -As toluene is volatile, the test liquid should be renewed every ten days. Furthermore the ageing of the castor oil reduces the accuracy of the measurement. It is recommended not to use mixtures older than four months.

In the case of curablematerials, cut the test pieces from a laminate prepared in accordance with 3.2. 153 Procedure Use the methods described in Annex C. This determination shall be made at temperatures of 27OC and 155%. 16 DISSIPATION FACTOR/TEMPERATURE CHARACTERISTICS AT FREQUENCIES BETWEEN 4% Hz AND 62 Hz 16.1 Test Specimen The test specimen shall measure approximately 150 mm x 150 mm x 2 mm. ln the case of curable materials, it shall be prepared in accordance with 3.2. 16.2 Test Conditions Carry out the tests in air at temperature intervals of about 10 OC, from 30 OC up to the temperature specified in Part 3. 16.3 Electrodes Use electrodes as described in IS 4486 : 1967. A suitable arrangement is for the high voltage electrode to be 100 mm in diameter, the low voltage electrode shall~be 75 mm in diameter and surrounded by a guard ring approximately 10 mm wide, with 1.5 to 2.0 mm clearance between electrode and guard ring. The electrodes shall be backed with brass electrodes from which the sharp edges are removed to a radius at the edge exceeding 0.8 mm. 16.4 Procedure Make the test at a frequency of between 48 Hz and 62 Hz by means of a suitable apparatus and using a maximum stress of 1.5 kV/mm on the measured thickness. Measure the dissipation factor on the test pieces at the temperatures given above and plot the dissipation factor against temperature. 17 THERMAL ENDURANCE

13.2 Test Specimens The test is carried out with test specimens 75 mm x 75 mm. Two sets of three test specimens are to be prepared. 13.3 Method of Test

Measure the thickness of the test specimens by the method specified in Part 3. All test specimens shall be numbered randomly from 1 to 6, on the same side of the mica paper, on an area not affected by the testing. Test specimens 2, 4 and 6 are to be tested with the figure outside (not in contact with the test liquid). Test specimens 1, 3 and 5 are to be tested with the designated surface in contact with the liquild. Fill the penetrometer so that the level on the test liquid is within 5 mm from the top. Fix the test specimen above the liquid by means of ,I clamping ring. Maintain the temperature of the test liquid at 27 2 0.5 OC (thermostatically controlled). Start fhe timing device when the penetrometer brought from horizontal into the inclined position. is

Stop the time lmeasurement when the circular test area is completely impregnated by the test liquid.
NOTE - Losses of test liquid caused by testing should be replaced before the subsequent test.

13.4 Evaluation Report the central value and the minimum and maximum values of the time measurements for each set of the test specimens. Note the thickness. 14 DETERMINATION (GURLEY) OF AIR RESISTANCE

14.1 This method specifiesmeasurement of resistance to air flow through a sheet of paper or board. The results obtained with the apparatus described cannot be accurately related to those of other instruments, because in this instrument air pressure varies slightly during the test. Details of test method are given in Annex B. 8

The thermal endurance shall be determined in accordance with the third edition of IS 1271 : 1985. The property chosen for a particular material end point criterion will be given in Part 3. and the

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992

ANNEXA
(Clause 7.5 )
TEST FOR STABILITY A-O-GENERAL A-O.1 The test for stability under heat and pressure determines mica or binder displacement, or both, under the specified conditions of test. A-l TEST METHOD A-l.1 Significance A-1.3.2 Pressure Gauge UNDER R&4T AND PRESSURE sufficient Force to obtain a pressure of at least 7 MPa on the test specimen. The apparatus shallbecapableof maintaining a specimen temperature of at least 200 f SOC. It is desirable that the apparatus have platens with water ducts or other provisions for cooling the specimen.

This test serves at a measure of the ability of bonded micaceous materials to maintain their physical intergrity under exposure to heat and pressure. It has special significance where the material to be tested is employed as commutator segment insulation. This test is suitable for acceptance tests and for manufacturing control. A-l.2 Nature oFTest

A pressure gauge capable of determining the pressure on the specimen with an accuracy of 5 5 percent. A-1.3.3 Thickness Gauge r ^I. the thickness

A thickness gauge capable of measuring of specimen to the nearest 0.025 mm. A-1.3.4 Thermocouple, temperature. A-l.35 Steel Wedges for measuring

the specimen

This test method utilizesthe application of a shearing force as well as a compressive force, which is accomplished by placing the specimens between specified wedges, thereby causing the applied force to resolve into compression and shear components. This test is particularly useful for material used incommutatorassemblies where shearing as well as compressive forces are encountered. Test results are expressed quantitiatively as units of linear deflection. A-P.3 Test Apparatus A-1.3.1 Hydraulic Press A hydraulic press having thermostatically controlled, electrically heated platens, or a hydraulicpress with other provisions for heating the specimen and controlling the temperature. The platens shall be at least 102 mm in size. The press shall be capable of exerting

~Two steel wedges of the same size as the specimen by approximately 19 mm thick, with one face tapered at an angle of 3O with the horizontal, as shown in Fig. 5. They shall be hardened and. surgace ground too and bottom. A-13.6 Dial Gauges

Two dial gauges having 0.02 mm graduations and a range of at least 13 mm, designed to be accurate at the specified test temperature, and suitably mounted on the steel wedges described in A-1.3.5.
NOTE - Where the dial gauges are mounted through nonmetallic bushings, or if some other suitable method is used to interrupt the metallic thermal path, it shall not be necessary to utilizegauges designed to be accurate at the test temperature.

DIAL \

CAKE

if D:A_ GLJ',E -.I_
FIG. 5. APPARATUS FOW STABILITY `&ST UNDER HEAT AND PRESSURE, ANGULAR METHOD

9

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992 A-l.4 Test Specimen The specimen shall consist of two rectangular pieces of bonded micaceous plate between 2 500 and 3 870 mm2 in area, the shorterside being not less than 38 mm.
A-l.5 Procedure specified temperature for 5 minutes. Do not allow the platen temperature to exceed the specimen temperature by more than 10 OC. A-1.5.3 Adjust both gauges to read zero. Obtain a pressure of 30 mPa within 5 s on the top and bottom assembly surfaces and maintain for 15 minutes at the specified temperature. Record the deflection as determined by the top and bottom dial gauges after 15 s, 30 s, 1, 2, 5, 10 and 15 minutes beginning with the instant that the 30 MPa pressure is obtained. A-I.6 Report

A-1.5.1 Insert the specimen between the wedges, as shown in Fig. 1. Centre~the assembly in the press and carefully align, using just enough pressure to hold the assembly together. Insert the thermocouple and fit it tightly in the hole provided in the centre wedge. It is recommended that the thermocouple be cemented in the~hole. Obtain a pressure of 690 kPa on the top and bottom assembly surfaces. A-1.5.2 Pack thermal insulation, equivalent to approximately 51 mm of loose rock wool, around the specimen without disturbing either the specimen or dial gauges. Heat the specimen to 160 2 5 OC or 200 f 5 C, as specified, and allow to remain at the

The report shall include the following:

a) Method employed, b) Specified temperature, 4 Size of the specimen, and _ 4 Average deflection at each of
vals as determined gauge readings.

the time interby the top and bottom dial

ANNEX B (Clause 13.1)
DETERMINATION B-l SCOPE This standard specifies the equipment required and the method for determining the air resistance of paper and board by'the principle known as `Gurley'. B-2 FIELD OF APPLICATION OF AIR RESISTANCE (GIJRLEY)

B-4 PRINCIPLE
Compression of air by the weight of a vertical cylinder floating in a liquid. A test piece is in contact with the compressed air and the cylinder falls steadily as air passes through the test piece. The time for a given volume of air to pass through the test piece is a measure of its air resistance.

This method is applicable to papers and boards that (under the conditions specified) permit the passage of 100 ml of air in 5 to 1800 s. The method is unsuitable for rough surfaced papers such as creped and corrugated papers, which cannot be securely clamped to avoid leakage. B-3 RELATION TO AIR PERMEANCE

B-5 EQUJI'MENT B-5.1 Air~resistance
Apparatus

Since the pressure applied varies during a test for air resistance, and because of turbulence, etc, in the measurement of air permeance, air resistance (Gurley) can be calculated only approximately from the air permeance of a sample. The approximate Air resistance numberical (Gurley) conversion 140 = p seconds in micrometres per is :

The apparatus, a diagrammatic sketch of which is shown in the Fig. 6, consists of an outer cylinder which is partly filled with sealing fluid, and an innercylinder, having an open or closed top, sliding freely in the outer cylinder. Air pressure provided by the weight of the inner cylinder is applied to the test piece held between clamping plates on circular orifice of diameter28.66mm(areaapproximately6.4cm2).Theclamping plates may be at the top of the inner cylinder or, preferably, may be mounted in the base of the apparatus (see B-5.1.1). An elastic gasket which is attached to the clamping plate on the side exposed to the air pressure prevents leakage of air between the surface of the-paper and the clamping plate. The gasket consists of a thin, elastic, oil-resistant, nonoxidizing material, having a smooth surface and a thickness of 0.70 to 1.00 mm. 10

where P is the air permeance Pascal second @m/Pa.s).

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992 The inside diameterofthe gasket is 28.6 + 0.1 mm, and the outside diameter 34.9 + 0.1 mm. The aperture of the gasket is accurately aligned with the aperture in the clamping plates. To align and protect the gasket in use, it is cemented to a groove machined in the clamping plate. The groove is concentric with the aperture in the opposing plate. Its internal diameter is 28.41 f 0.04 mm and its depth 0.45 5 0.005 mm. Its outside diameteris35.14~0.04mmforconvenienceininsertingand attaching the gasket. The outer cylinder has a height of 254 mm and an internal diameter of 82.6 mm. It has four vertical bars, each of length 245.5 mm, and diameter 2.4 mm, mounted equidistantly on the inner surface of the outer cylinder to serve as guides for the inner cylinder. The inner cylinder is made of aluminium alloy, is graduated in units of 50 ml and has a total range of 350 ml. The volume tolerance is 0.5 percent. It has a height of 254 mm, an external diameter of 76.2 mm and an internal diameter of 74.1 mm. Its mass is 567.0 2 0.5 g. The volumes referred to are nominal volumes and should, in principle, be increased by the volume of fluid displaced by the walls of the inner cylinder during the test; in practice, since this error is common to all instruments from the normal source, it is ignored. B-5.1.1 Variations in Apparatus Reference has been made in B-5.1 to the existence of two versions of the apparatus. In one version the clamping plates are mounted on top of the floating inner cylinder. In the other version the plates are mounted in the fixed base portionof the apparatus, and all the dimensions quoted relate to the current model of this version. Many examples of earlier models of this version also exist. The earliest models were not fitted with gaskets,although it is thought that all those made since the end of 1945 are so fitted. In these the dimensions are slightly different, but no significant difference in the results is to be expected. It appears that the inside diameter of the gasket and the groove have beenvaried slightly so that at times it has been necessary to stretch the gasket slightly to fix it into the groove. The effective test area, however, always seems to have been within 1 percent of the original 6.452 cm2. Some of the inner cylinders are also graduated in units of 25 ml for the first 100 ml and may~have a graduation at the 400 ml interval. On some cylinders the engraved graduations are replaced by a `stuck on' graduation label. Many outer cylinders have four vertical square bars instead of the round bars. Alternative inner cylinders with a mass of 142 g are available. The results obtained with these cylinders are approximately 4 times those obtained with the 567 g cylinders. Alternative clamps to expose 1;61 cm2 (diameter 14.30 mm) or 0.645 cm2 (diameter 9.05 mm) are available and these give results about 4 or 10 times normal. 11 The use of the alternative cylinders or clamps referred to above shall be reported because the results can be converted only approximately to those which would be obtained with the standard apparatus. B-5.2 Sealing Fluid

The outer cylinder is filled with an oil having a density of approximately 0.86 g/ml, a kinematic viscosity of 10 to 13 cm2/s (60 to 70 s Saybolt) at 38OC and a flashpoint of at least 135 OC. (see B-5.2.1). B-5.2.1 Oil isused in preference to water because it does not affect the moisture condition of the air or test piece, or corrode the inner cylinder. The lubricating action of an oil probably assists the smooth motion of the cylinder. The oil shall not contain any easily volatile material and for that reason a minimum flashpoint is specified. B-5.3 Ancillary Equipment and Materials of recording

A stopwatch or electric timer capable time to the nearest 0.2 s, is required.

B-6 SAMPLING CONDITIONING AND PREPARATIONOF TEST PIECES B-6.1 Sampling and conditioning shall be carried out in accordance with relevant Indian Standard. B-6.2 One test piece cut from each of ten selected sheets is normally sufficient (but see B-8.1). Where the clampingplates of the apparatus are atthe top of the size is inner cylinder, a convenient test piece 50 mm x 120 mm; for the apparatus having the clamp in the base, 50 mm square is adequate. B-7 PROCEDURE B-7.1 Checking Test the apparatus for air leakage as specified in B-7.2. B-7.2 Checking Air Leakage

A thin sheet of smooth, rigid, impermeable metal or plastics shall be-clamped between the orifice plates. Using the procedure specified in B-7.3 the leakage shall not exceed 50 ml in 5 h. B-7.3 Determination Place the instrument on a level surface so that the cylinders are vertical. Fill the outercylinder with oil to a depth of about 120 mm as indicated by a ring marked on the inner surface of the cylinder. For the instrument having the clamp in the top of the inner cylinder, raise the inner cylinder with one hand, clamp the test piece with the other, then lower the inner cylinder and allow it to float in the oil. Alternatively, the inner cylinder may be removed, the test piece clamped, and the inner cylinder lowered gently in the outer cylinder.
NOTE - The proper procedurt~is to tighten the knurled nuts alternately so dial the clamping pressure will be equal on both

I!3 9299 (Part 2) : 1992
sides. If only one nut at a time is tightened, the clamp will not bear evenly on the test piece and air leakage will probably occur.

7.4 Number of Tests Five test pieces shall be tested with the top side up and five with the wire side up. B-g CALCULATION AND TEST REPORT

Forthe insturment having the clamp in the base, raise the inner cylinder until its rim is supported by the catch, clamp the test piece between the clamping plates, and then lower the inner cylinder gently until it floats. As the inner cylinder moves steadily downward, measure the number of seconds, to the nearest 0.2 s, required for the first two consecutive 50 ml intervals to pass the rim of the outer cylinder, starting at zero point. For relatively impermeable papers and boards, the reading may be taken at the end of the first 50 ml interval and the result doubled. With very open or porous papers, a larger volume of air may be timed and the result reduced proportionately to 100 ml. If a steady movement of the inner cylinder is not attained before the zero markis reached, timing may be started at the 50 ml mark.
NOTE - Vibration of the apparatus should be avoided, as this increases the rate of air displacement.

B-8.1 If the mean air resistance in the two directions through the sheet is significantly different and if this difference is required to be shown in the report, ten tests are required in each direction. The result shall then be reported separately. B-8.2 as the values to two The meanof the ten test results shall be reported `Air resistance (Gurley)' in seconds. Report below 10 s to the first decimal place, otherwise significant figures.

B-9 PRECISION When two sets of test pieces from the same sample are tested in the same laboratory by the same well-trained operator, the two average test results can be expected 95 percent of the time, to agree within 10 percent.

INNER

CYLINDER,

FIG. 6

I~GRAMMATK

SKETCH OF AIR RESISTANCE (GURLEY) APPARATUS(NOT TO SCALE)

12

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992

ANNEXC (Clause 14.1)
DETERMINATION C-l SCOPE AND FIELD OF APPLICATION OF FLEXURAL PROPERTIES

C-25 Flexural SWs.5 at Ruphup The flexural stress developed at the moment of rupture C-3 APPARATUS Standard testing machine, properly constructed and calibrated, which can be operated at an approximately constant rate, V, of relative movement of the loading nose and the supports, and in which the error for indicated loads does not exceed 51 percent and for indicated deflections does not exceed ?. 2 percent.
NOTE - It is recommended that a machine be used which has lessthan mmmovementoftheweighingmechanismforthefull scale load.

This Annex specifies a method for the determination of flexural properties of rigid non-reinforced and fibrereinforced plastic materials. In the form of rectangular bars of standard of non-standard dimensions, moulded directly or cut from sheets or other shapes. It applies only to a simple, freely supported beam, loaded at midspan. The following properties may be determined using the method described. C-l.1 The flexural stress and the deflection at rupture of materials that break before, or at, the conventional deflection. C-l.2 The flexural stress at the conventional deflection of materials that break before, or at, the conventional deflection. C-l.3 The flexural stress at maximum load for materials that show maximum load before, or at, the conventional deflection. C-E.4 The flexural stress at rupture or at maximum load, when the conventional deflection is exceeded, if so required by the material specification. C-1.3 Optional (modulus

The radius rr of the loading nose and the radius r2 of the supports shall be as follows : rl : 5 +, 0.1 mm r2 : 0.5 ?z0.2 mm for thicknesses up to and including 3 mm, and h = 0.2 mm for thicknessess 3 mm (see Fig. 2). The span shall be adjustable. C-4 TEST PIECES Prepare bars of rectangular cross-section as described in the appropriate Indian Standard on preparing test pieces, or according to the specifications for the material to be tested. C-4.1 Standard Test Pieces The standard dimensions Length 1 Width b Thickness in millimetres shall be : of the test piece

of the test piece over

..

The apparent modulus ofelasticity inflexure of elasticity determined by flexuretest).

NOTE-The modulus of elasticity in flexure is to be considered only as an approximate value of Young's modulus of elasticity.

C-2 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this Annex the followingdefinitions apply* C-2.1 Deflection

The distance over which the top or bottom surface of the test piece at mid-spanhas deviated during flexure from its original position. C-2.2 Flexural Stress at a Given Time of the Test The maximum outer fibre stress of the material in the section of the test piece at mid-span. It is calculated according to the relationship given in 6.1. C-2.3 Flexural Deflection Stress at the Conventional equal to 1.5 times the

= $0 or more = 10 f 0.5 h = 4 + 0.2

C-4.2 Other Test Pieces When it is not possible or desirable to use the standard testpiece, the following rules shall be observed, except as noted below :

a) The

The flexural stress at a deflection thickness of the test piece. C-2.4 Flexural

length and thicness of the test piece shall be in the same ratio as in the standard test piece, that is :

/min. = 20 h Load

Stress at Maximum

b)

The flexural stress developed whenthe load reaches the first maximum. 13

The width of the test piece may be any value between 10 and 25 mm except for materials with very coarse fillers for which the width shall be 20 to 50 mm.

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992
NOTE - The preparation and dimensions of the test piece may bedefioedbythespecificatiooforthemateriaLAltematively,the values of width given in the tables below may be use& Rigid Non-Reinfoxed Nominalthickness h mm l< 3< 5 10 20 30 h h h h h h s L I s I s 3 5 10 20 35 50 Plastics Width b mm 15 30 50 80 Plastics Width b mm 25 10 15 20 35 50

the test results. This is particularly true of laminates (see Fig. 7) C-4.3.2 When the material shows a significant difference in flexural properties in two principal directions, it is to be tested in these two directions. If, because of the application, this material is subjected to stress at some specific orientation to the principal direction, it is desirable to test the material in that orientation.

< < c <

?:0.5

C-4.4 Number of Test Pieces
C-4.4.1 At least five test pieces shall be tested.

Fibre-reinforced Nominal thickness h mm 1 < lo< 20 < 35 < h h h h a 10 a20 L 35 s 50

When very coarse textile glass fibre roving is used as the reinforcement, it maybe necessary to increase the width of the test pieces. C-4.3 Anisotropic
C-4.3.1 Materisls

f 1
0.5

C-4.4.2 The results from test pieces that break outside the central one-third of the span length shall be discarded and new test pieces shall be tested in their,place. C-4.5 Conditioning of Test Pieces
The test pieces shall be conditioned as required by the specification for the material. If no specification exists, condition the material in one of the standard atmospheres.

C-5 PROCEDURE
C-5.1 Carry out the test in one of the standard atmospheres.

In the case of anisotropic materials, the test pieces shall be chosen so that the flexural stress in the test procedure will be applied in the same direction as that to which products (moulded articles, sheets, tubes, etc) similar to those from which the test pieces are taken, will be subjected in service. The relationship of the test piece chosen to the application will determine the possibility or impossibility of using standard test pieces and, in the latter case, will govern the choice of the dimensions of the test pieces in accordance with C-4.2 It should be noted that the position or orientation and dimensions of the test pieces sometimes have avery significant influence on

C-5.2 Measure the width, b, of the test piece to the nearest 0.1 -mm and the thickness, h, to the nearest 0.002 mm. Adjust the length of the span, L, to :
L =15h

to17h

Measure the length of the span to within 05 percent.
NOTE - For very thick and unidirectional fibre-reinforced test pieces it may be necessary to use a distance between supports calculated oo a higher ratio of L/h, to avoid delamination in shear.

W!PLH_RtRECT~O~~_
OF THE PRODUCT

FIG.7 POS~ON OFTEIST PIECE IN RELATION TO LENGTH ANDWIDTHOFSHEET 14

IS9299 (Part 2) : 1992 For very thin test pieces, it may be necessary to use a distance betwen supports calculated on a lower value of L/h to enable measurements to be made within the load capacity of the testing machine. C-53 Fort esting to a~specification, V(relative rate of movement of the loading nose and supports) shall be as required in the specification for the material.
NOTES 1 If desired, V may be calculated as follows: s V =I 6h where V is the relative rate of movement of the loading nose and supports in millimetres per minute; S, is the strainrate, per minute, 0.01 orasrequired by the material specification; L is the span length in millimetres; and h is the thickness of the test piece in millimetres. 2) When there is no specification for the fibre-reinforced materials) to be tested, one or the other of the two foilowing methods can be used : Method A whenL/h LZ

C-5.6 For test pieces that rupture before, or at, the moment of reaching the conventional deflection (see C-2.3), record the load and deflection at rupture. C-5.7 For test pieces that do not rupture before, or at, the conventional deflection (see C-2.3), record the load at the conventional deflection. Alternatively, if required by the material specification, continue the test without interruption beyond the conventional deflection, until rupture occurs or a maximum load is reached; record the load and deflectionat whichever of these points is specified. C-5.8 For test pieces that show maximum load befare the conventional deflecton is reached, record the maximum load and the corresponding deflection. C-6 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS C-6.1 The flexural stressfat a load F is calculated, in megapascals, from the formula; M @ =w
M is the flexural moment at load F, given by the

formula:
M=--.-

FL 4

: for qualification testing of the material
=16+1 4 (mm)

in which F
L

V (mmimin = Method B

: for routine and screening tests

is the applied load, in meganewtons, is the span length in metres;_and W is the section modulus, in cubic metres.

V = 10 mm/min

For a rectangular section :

C-S.4 Load the test piece as a simple beam at midspan without impact (see Fig. 8). C-55 If it is desired to measure the modulus of elasticity, read the load and the deflection values simultaneously sufficiently frequently so that a smooth loaddeflection curve may be plotted.
I
_--L APPLIED I LOAD

and

uf =-

3FL

2bh2

---.
.--....

-_-_-..

----

._ *

1

FIG. 8 POSITION OFTESTPIECE DURING TFJST
1

IS 9299 (Part 2) : 1992
NOTES 1 If M is expressed in newton millimetres and Win cubic millimetres, fis obtained in N/mm*, numerically equal to hfPa. IfMisexpressed millimetres,fis inkilogram-forcemillimetres, obtained in kgf/mm2. and Wisincubic

flexural stresses are statistically inhomogeneous. In such a case it is necessary to carry out a critical study of all the results and to examine with great care the arithmetic mean values and statistical deviations. C-7 TEST REPORT The test report may include some or all of the following particulars:

2 For a more accurate calculation of the flexurel stress which takes into account the horizontal component of the flexural moment at deflection d, the following eque.tion may be used :

uf=s

(I+$)

a) brand, identification mark, origin, date of receipt and other pertinent data concerning the tested material; of preparation of the test pieces;

where d is the deflection at mid-span in millimetres. The other terms are as previously defined.

b) method 4

C-6.2 To calculate the apparent modulus of elasticity,

cl measured dimensions of the test pieces and the
length of span used; when test pieces have ruptured.

E,, in -megapascals, a load deflection curve is plotted using the data collected. The modulus of elasticity is determined from the initial linear portion of the load deflection curve by using at least five values of the deflection and the load for the test piece, E, is given by the following formula : E,= where Eb L b h F is the modulus of elasticity; is the span length; is the width of the test piece; is the thickness of the test piece; is the load at a chosen point on the initial linear portion of the load-deflection curve; and Y is the deflection corresponding to load F. L3 -XI4 bh3 F Y

1) Flexural

stress at rupture, the arithmetic mean and the standard deviation (see C-7.1)

2) deflection at rupture, giving tyhe arithmetic mean and the standard deviation, 3) the side of the test piece on which the loading nose was applied and the type of break for each test piece;

4 when test pieces have not ruptured
1) flexural stress at the conventional deflection, (see C-2.3), and/or 2) flexural stress and deflection at the maximum load (see C-2.4), giving the arithmetic mean and the standard deviation in each case; 3) the side of the test piece on which the loading nose was applied;

IfL, b, hand Y are in millimetres, and F is in newtons, then Eb is in N/mm2 which is numerically equal to MPa. And if L, b, h and Y are in millimetres but F is in kilograms force, than E,is in kgflmm2.
C-6.3 Types of Rupture ,The calculated flexural stress is that which occurs at

f) optional - the load-deflection curve and the

arithmetic mean value of apparent modulus of elasticity, E,, together with the standard deviation of E,,; procedures and laboratory con-

the surfaces of the test piece, assuming that the neutral axis is the middle of the thickness. During a flexural test, three different types of breaks can occur; a) rupture due to tensile stresses, b) rupture due to compression stresses, and c) rupture due to shear stresses. The type(s) of break which occur(s) must be indicated for each test piece. If the types of rupture observed in testing a group of test pieces are different, then the values obtained for

conditioning gs ditions.

C-7.1 Estimated value of standard deviation, S, is estimated from the formula: S= \i

6

-2)" 1

n-

where
x

is the value of a single observation; is the arthmetical mean of all n values of x; is the number of observations

3 n

16

Standard

Mark

Standards

The use of the Standard Mark IS governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked producrs are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further, safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers ma-y be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the such as symbols and sizes, type or grade the standard, of necessary details, course of implemen:ing Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. designations. Revision of Indian Standards
Indian Standards Act,

marking

and quality

1986 to promote certification of goods

if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BlS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No. ETD 2 ( 3540) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg. New Delhi

110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (~Common to all Offices) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

( 331 331 01 13 75 31

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola

37 86 62

Northern So'uthern Western

160036 600113

53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus,

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHW-AR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

