Waa Wah IS 16439 : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


yw Gea oe far gege 
KIK 


Metadata Standard for Geospatial 
Information 


ICS 35.240.70 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM st 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM gei, 9 geigugig pi Art, we feeei-110002 
Vee” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2016 Price Group 4 


Geospatial Information Sectional Committee, LITD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geospatial 
Information Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology Division 
Council. 


India has a vast amount of map information generated through systematic topographic, geological, soil, cadastral 
surveys and various natural resources information generated with the use of the remote sensing data. Spatial 
information is expected to play a pivotal role in the sustainable development of natural resources. It is desirable 
to have a common set of data standards and metadata definitions for sharing the data and information transparently 
among government and non-government organizations, academia, industry and citizens. 


Metadata serves two major purposes — both for the spatial data generator and for the spatial data user. For the 
generator, the metadata provides a framework to document the spatial data and declare its content for users. For 
the user, metadata serves many important purposes, including finding the spatial data as per need; browsing 
spatial data; deciding on whether the spatial data will meet the application need; finding how the spatial data can 
be accessed and processing of geo-spatial information for various data generating agencies. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the international 
publications listed in Annex A and has decided that these may be used in conjunction with this standard till 
Indian Standards on these subjects are published. 


Assistance has been drawn from ISO 19115 : 2003 ‘Geographic information — Metadata, National Natural 
Resources Management System (NNRMS)/Natural Resources Database (NRDB) Standards and National Spatial 
Data Infrastructure (NSDI) Metadata standard Version 2.0’ while formulating this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


IS 16439 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


METADATA STANDARD FOR GEOSPATIAL 
INFORMATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies metadata to provide a 
framework for documenting the spatial data and declare 
its content for the users. It facilitates finding spatial 
data as per their needs and deciding whether the spatial 
data meets the specific application requirement. The 
metadata standards allow describing the dataset in order 
to understand the uses and limitations of the data while 
distributing amongst the organizations. It provides a 
key to the information on the schema which describes 
the information about the data and distribution of 
dataset where the fields are clearly mentioned as 
mandatory or optional. In addition to the standards that 
are given, the information exchange can be extended 
using parameters like hardcopy of map, translation, 
chart production, etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contains provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 


provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreement based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions given in Annex B shall apply. 


4 REQUIREMENTS OF 
STANDARD 


METADATA 


The requirements of metadata elements and schema 
shall be as specified in Table 1. Table 1 specifies the 
mandatory and optional metadata elements. However, 
optional metadata elements may be provided as agreed 
between user and supplier. 


Table 1 Metadata Standard for Mandatory Elements and Schema 
(Clause 4) 


SINo. Elements Schema 


Mandatory / Optional 


i) Data identification information Dataset_Title 


Name_Of_The_Data 


Keywords 
Access_Constraints 


Use_Constraints 


Mandatory 
Theme 


Purpose_Of_Creating_Data 


Data_Type 


Metadata_Standard_Version 


Audience 
Availability 


DQ_Topological_Consistency 


Contact_Person 
Organization 
Mailing Address 
City 

Country 
Contact_Telephone 
Contact_Fax 
Contact_Email 
X_Minimum 
X_Maximum 
Y_Minimum 
Y_Maximum 
T_Late 


ii) Contact information 


iii) Coverage 


Mandatory 


IS 16439 : 2016 


SI No. 


Elements 


Schema 


Mandatory / Optional 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 
vii) 


viii) 
ix) 
x) 


xi) 
xii) 
xiii) 
xiv) 
xv) 
xvi) 
xvii) 
xviii) 


xix) 
xx) 
xxi) 


xxii) 
xxiii) 


xxiv) 
XXV) 


Geographic location of 

the dataset (by four coordinates 
or by description) 

Citation 


Metadata date stamp 
Type 


Subject 
Description 
Publisher 


Dataset responsible party 
Distribution format 

On-line resource 

Dataset topic category 
Language 

Abstract describing the data 
Spatial representation type 
Spatial resolution of the dataset 


Reference system 

Temporal extent information 
for the dataset 

Vertical extent Information 
for the Dataset 

Quicklook 

For Image Data 


Rights 


Team (organization Name’ xxxxx’) 


T_Early 

Place_Name 

Period_Name 

Spatial_Resolution 
Spatial_Georeference 
Spatial_Aggregation 
Temporal_Precision 
Temporal_Interval 
Temporal_Aggregation 

Note 

Alternative_Metadata 
Geographic_Bounding_Box 

Or 

Geographic_Description 
Data_Prepared_By 

Original_Source 
Source_Scale_And_Date_Mapping 
Year_Digitizing_Year_ 

Survey_Year 

Lineage 
Associated_Project_Preparing_The_Data 
Associated_Publications_Person.Email 
Individual_Name 
Corporate_Name_And_Address 
Metadata_datestamp (as per ISO 8601) 
Data_Format 

Data_File_Size 
Data_Physical_Location_(Computer + Path) 
Subject_Specific 

Subject__Domain 

Description 

Description_History 

Publisher 

Publisher_Address 

Responsible_Party 

Format 

Onlineresource 
Dataidentifiction.Topiccategory 
Language (as per ISO 639-2) 
Data_Identification_Abstract 
Data_Identification_Spatial_Representation_Type 
Resolution.Distance 

Or 

Resolution.Equivalentscale 
Rs_Identifier 

Extent. Temporalelement 


Vertical extent 


Graphic_File_Format/Map_In_Encrypted_Mode 
Name_Of_The__ Satellite 

Sensor 

Path 

Row 

Image_Acquired_From 
Date_And_Time_Of_Image 

File_Format 

Bits_Per_Pixel 

Spatial_Resolution 

Spatial_Resolution_Unit 

Number_Of_Bands 

Number_Of_Rows 

Number_Of_Cols 
Purchased_Or_Obtained_On_Exchange_Basic 
Rights 

XXXxXx_team 

XXXXX_expert_commentary 
XXXXX_expert_internal_notes 


2 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Mandatory 
Mandatory 
Optional 


Optional 
Optional 


Optional 
Optional 
Optional 
Optional 
Mandatory 
Mandatory 
Mandatory 
Optional 


Optional 
Optional 
Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Optional 


SI No. Elements 


Schema 


IS 16439 : 2016 


Mandatory / Optional 


xxvi) Attributes/Entity and attribute 
information 


xxvii) Projection information 


xxviii) Data quality 


Xxix) Online resource information 


Entity_And_Attribute_Overview 

And/Or 
Entity_And_Attribute_Detailed_Description 
(If the data includes a database that is not documented, 
you are strongly encouraged to develop the detailed description) 
Name_Of_Projection 
UnitProjection_Parameters 
Logical_Consistency_Report 
Completeness_Report 

Process_Description 

Process_Date 

Source_Originator 
Source_Publication_Date 

Source_Title 

Source_Online_Linkage 
Source_Scale_Denominator 
Type_Of_Source_Media 
Source_Time_Peroid_Of_Content 
Source_Currentness_Reference 
Source_Citation-_Abbreviation 
Source_Contribution 

If Data Assessments Permored: 
Attribute_Accuracy_Report (If Applicable) 
Horizontal_Positional_Accuracy_Report (If 


Applicable) Vertical_Positional_Accurancy_Report (If Applicable) 


CL Online resource 
Linkage 

Protocol 
Application Profile 
Name 

Description 
Instructions 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


LIST OF REFERRED INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 


International Standard 


Title 


Optional 
Optional 


Optional 


Mandatory 


ISO 639-2 : 1998 Codes for the representation of names of languages — Part 2: Alpha- 3 code 
ISO 8601 : 2004 Data elements and interchange formats — Information interchange — Representation 
of dates and times 


IS 16439 : 2016 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 3) 
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


Abstraction — A way of viewing a real world object, 
usually a simplification. For example, a road may be 
represented as a centreline in one application and an 
area bounded by kerblines in another. 


Accuracy — The closeness of results of observations, 
computations or estimates to the true values or the 
values accepted as being true. 


Altitude — Elevation above or below a reference datum, 
as defined in Federal Information Processing Standard 
70-1. 


Area — A generic term for a bounded, continuous, two- 
dimensional object that may or may not include its 
boundary. Attribute — Defined characteristic of an 
entity type (for example, composition). 


Attribute value — A specific quality or quantity 
assigned to an attribute (for example, steel), for a 
specific entity instance. Content — In ArcWeb Services, 
data that may include data files, layers, or services. 


Coordinates — The pairs of numbers expressing 
horizontal distances along orthogonal axes; 
alternatively, triplets of numbers measuring horizontal 
and vertical distances. 


Coverage — A digital version of a map forming the 
basic unit of vector data storage in ARC/INFO. A 
coverage stores geographic features as primary features 
(such as arcs, nodes, polygons, and label points) and 
secondary features (such as ties, mapextent, links, and 
annotation) Associated feature attrubute tables describe 
abnd store attributes of the geographic features. 


Data — Any collection of related facts arranged in a 
particular format; often, the basic elements of 
information that are produced, stored, or processed by 
a computer. 


Database — A logical collection of inter related 
information, managed and stored as a unit, usually on 
some form of mass storage system such as magnetic 
tape or disk. A GIS database includes data about the 
spatial locations and shape of geographic features 
recorded as points, lines, pixels, grid cells or tins as 
well as their attributes. 


Data Element — A logically primitive item of data. 


Data Format — The structure used to store a computer 
file or record Data set — a collection of related data. 


Data Type — The characteristics of columns and 
variables that defined what types of data values they 


can store. Examples include character, floating point 
and integer. 


Digital Image — Two dimensional array of regularly 
spaced picture elements (pixels) constituting a picture. 


Domain — In the definition of the elements in the 
metadata standard, the domain identifies valid values 
for a data element. 


Elevation — Conforming to Federal Information 
Processing Standard 70-1, the term ‘altitude’ is used 
in this standard, rather than the common term elevation. 


Entity Instance — A spatial phenomenon of a defined 
type that is embedded in one or more phenomena of 
different type, or that has at least one key attribute value 
different from the corresponding attribute values of 
surrounding phenomena (for example, the 10 Street 
Bridge). 


Entity Point — A point used for identifying the location 
of point features (or areal features collapsed to a point), 
such as towers, buoys, buildings, places, etc. 


Entity Type — Definition and description of a set into 
which similar entity instances are classified (e.g., 
bridge). 


Geospatial Data — An information that identifies the 
geographic location and characteristics of natural or 
constructed features and boundaries on the earth. This 
information may be derived from, among other things, 
remote sensing, mapping, and surveying technologies. 


GIS — The GIS stands for Geographic Information 
System. A Geographic Information System is a 
computer system designed to allow users to collect, 
manage, and analyze large volumes of spatially 
referenced and associated attribute data. The major 
components of a GIS are: a user interface; system/ 
database management capabilities; database creation/ 
data entry capacity; spatial data manipulation and 
analysis packages; and display/product generation 
functions; from USGS Open File Report 88-105 (A 
process for evaluating Geographic Information 
Systems). In the broadest sense, a GIS is any integrated 
system of information that includes a geographic 
component. 


Horizontal — The tangent to the geoid or parallel to a 
plane that is tangent to the geoid. 


Interface — The type of signal protocol for connecting 
computer devices. You can only connect a peripheral 
device to a microcomputer through a matching 


interface. Common interface types include serial, 
parallel, SCSI and GPIB. 


Interoperability — The capability of components or 
systems to exchange data with other components or 
systems, or to perform in multiple environments. In 
GIS, interoperability is required for a GIS user using 
software from one vendor to study data compiled with 
GIS software from a different provider 


Label Point — A reference point used for displaying 
map and chart text (for example, feature names) to 
assist in feature identification. 


Latitude — An angular distance measured on a 
meridian north or south from the equator. 


Layer — An integrated, areally distributed, set of spatial 
data usually representing entity instances within one 
theme, or having one common attribute or attribute 
value in an association of spatial objects. In the context 
of raster data, a layer is specifically a two-dimensional 
array of scalar values associated with all of part of a 
grid or image. 


Longitude — Angular distance between the plane of a 
meridian east or west from the plane of the meridian 
of Greenwich. Map — Spatial representation, usually 
graphic on a flat surface, of spatial phenomena. 


Media — The physical devices used to record, store, 
and (or) transmit data. Meridian — A great circle on 
the Earth that passes through the geographic poles. 


Metadata — Data about the content, quality, condition, 
and other characteristics of data. 


National Geospatial Data Clearinghouse — 
Distributed network of geospatial data producers, 
managers, and users linked electronically. Building on 
initiatives such as the national information 
infrastructure, the clearinghouse uses a distributed, 
electronically connected network, such as the Internet. 
Each data provider will describe available data in an 
electronic form, and provide these descriptions (or 
metadata) using means that can be accessed over a 
communications network. Thus, the data for the 
clearinghouse are located at the sites of data producers 
(or, where more efficient, at the sites of intermediaries) 
throughout the country. Using the network, users will 
search these descriptions to locate data that are suitable 
for their applications. 


Node — Zero-dimensional object that is a topological 
junction of two or more links or chains, or an end point 
of a link or chain. 


IS 16439 : 2016 


Coordinate — The coordinate of a point in a plane 
cartesian coordinate system obtained by measuring 
parallel to the y-axis (the "vi value). 


Pixel — Two-dimensional picture element that is the 
smallest non divisible element of a digital image. Raster 
— One or more overlapping layers for the same grid or 
digital image. 


Resolution — The minimum difference between two 
independently measured or computed values which can 
be distinguished by the measurement or analytical 
method being considered or used. 


Scale — The ratio or relationship between a distance or 
area on a map and the corresponding distance or area 
on the ground, commonly expressed as a fraction or 
ratio. A map scale of 1/100 000 or 1:100 000 means 
that one unit of measure on the map equals 100 000 of 
the same unit on the earth. 


Schema — The structure or design of a database or 
database object, such as a table, view, index, stored 
procedure, or trigger. In a relational database, the 
schema defines the tables, the fields in each table, the 
relationships between fields and tables, and the 
grouping of objects within the database. Schemas are 
generally documented in a data dictionary. A database 
schema provides a logical classification of database 
objects. 


Source — The component of an extended element. The 
name of the individual or organization creating an 
extended element spatial — An adjective applied to 
objects that vary in space in two or three dimensions. 


Table — A database is organized into tables that contain 
records. Tables cover different topics related to the 
same common theme. The theme and its extent of 
development determine the number of tables that 
comprise the database. 


For example, the Crow Butte soil polygon database 
contains twelve tables, in such areas as yield, crop 
potential, and statistical information (see also database 
object, field, record). 


Temporal extent — All the temporal information, 
including the earliest and last observations, of a data 
layer in ArcGIS Tracking Analyst. 


Topological Consistency- It is the mathematical 
algorithm which defines the relationship between 
different spatial features. 


Vertical — At right angles to the horizontal; includes 
altitude and depth. 


IS 16439 : 2016 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geospatial Information Sectional Committee, LITD 22 


Organization Representative(s) 


Mas Gen (Dr) R. Sıva Kumar (Chairman) 
Suri P. S. ACHARYA (Alternate 1) 
SHRI NiRMALENDU Kumar (Alternate II) 
Dr DeEvENDRA SINGH (Alternate HD 


National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) Division, New Delhi 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Census of India, Delhi, 


Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi 


Central Statistical Organisaton, New Delhi, New Delhi 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi, New Delhi 


Earth Resources Data Analysis Systems, Gurgaon 


ESRI, New Delhi 


Forest Survey of India, Dehradun, Dehradun 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Bombay 


Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Indian Meterological Department, New Delhi 


Indian Naval Hydrographic Department, New Delhi, New Delhi 


Karnataka State Council, Bangalore, Bangalore 
Ministry of Defence 


National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organization, Kolkata, Kolkata 
National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land use, Nagpur, Nagpur 
National Council for Applied Economics Research, New Delhi, 

New Delhi 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 
National Informatics Centre (NIC), New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


Navyuga Spatial Technology, New Delhi 
Rolta, Hyderabad 

Space Applications Centre, ISRO, Hyderabad 
Survey of India, Hyderabad 


Suri S. K. SINHA 
Dr N. Varaparas (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. SINGH 
Suri R. Josepu (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND KUMAR 


Ms. Smreiti K. Upapuyay (Alternate) 


Shri P. C. Mohanan 
Dr YOGESH PAITHANKAR 


SHRI KAUSHIK CHAKRAVARTY 
Wo Cor A. K. Jaa (Alternate) 


Dr Baren MATHUR 


Suri M. L. SHRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RABIR SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. BOHRA 
SHRIMATI Pusup Lata (Alternate) 


Dr P. S. Roy 
Dr PLN Ragu (Alternate) 


Pror N. L. SARDA 
Dr Smita SENGUPTA (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. Goen 


SHRI RAHUL SAXENA 
Suri N. K. Pancasa (Alternate) 


Cpr K. M. Nair 
Suri B. K. Ramprasap (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 
Mai Gen S. V. CHINAWAR 


Pror (Dr) V. C. JHA 
Dr C. M. Rao (Alternate) 


Dr DIPAK SARKAR 
Dr G. P. On Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR SRIVASTAVA 


Co B. B. SINGH 


Dr VANDANA SHARMA 
Suri VisHU CHANDRA (Alternate) 


Dr. Venu GopaL Rao 

Dr ANIRUDHA Roy 

Dr C. R. BANUR 

Dr SHASHIKANT A. SHARMA 


Suri R. N. NANDA 
Suri Nitin Josui (Alternate) 


Organization 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16439 : 2016 


Representative(s) 


Sarı D. Goswami, Scientist "E and Head (LITD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AsHIsH TIWARI 
Scientist ‘B’ (LITD), BIS 


Composition of Working Group for Metadata Standard for Geospatial Information 
under, LITD 22 


Organization 


National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) Division, New Delhi 


Census of India, Delhi 
Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 
National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land use, Nagpur 


Space Applications Centre, ISRO, Hyderabad 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. S. ACHARYA (Convener) 
SHRI NiRMALENDU (Alternate) 


Suri A. P. SINGH 
Suri S. K. BOHRA 
Dr G. P. OBI REppy 


SHRI SHASHIKANT A. SHARMA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards ` Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 22 (3335). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


