WAT AA IS 16389 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


whan — yaaa a fast TAA 
facet ait APA actin & fa 
utar cat Tater 


Geosynthetics — Method of Test for 
Biological Clogging of Geotextile or 
Soil/Geotextile Filters 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
e WM MAA, 9 TEGEN WAL AMT, ve feeeit-110002 
a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


HI: Yi 


September 2015 Price Group 4 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16389 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — METHOD OF TEST FOR 
BIOLOGICAL CLOGGING OF GEOTEXTILE OR SOIL/ 
GEOTEXTILE FILTERS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This test method is used to determine the potential 
for and relative degree of, biological growth which 
can accumulate on geotextile or geotextile/soil filters. 


1.2 The amount of clogging occurred over geotextile 
is determined by measuring the flow rate over the 
extended period of time, and the rate of flow can be 
measured by both the constant head and variable head 
method. 


1.3 This test method can be adopted for unsaturated as 
well as saturated conditions. 


1.4 This test method can also be used to give an 
indication as to the possibility of backflushing and/or 
biocide treatment for remediation purposes if biological 
clogging does occur. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards. 


IS No. Title 
6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 
1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties. 
SP 45 : 1988 Handbook on glossary of textile 
terms 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions and those given in SP 45 and IS 13321 
(Part 1) shall apply. 


3.1 Geotextile — A permeable geosynthetic comprised 
solely of textiles. 


3.2 Permeability — The rate of flow of a liquid under 
a differential pressure through a material. 


3.3 Permittivity — The volumetric flow rate of water 
per unit, in a cross-sectional area head under laminar 
flow conditions. 


3.4 Aerobic — A condition in which a measurable 
volume of air is present in the incubation chamber or 
system. 


NOTE — In geotextiles, this condition can potentially 
contribute to the growth of micro-organisms. 


3.5 Anaerobic — A condition in which no measurable 
volume of air is present in the incubation chamber or 
system. 


NOTE — In geotextiles, this condition cannot contribute to the 
growth of micro-organisms. 


3.6 Back Flushing — A process by which liquid is 
forced in the reverse direction to the flow direction. 


NOTE — In other drainage application areas, this process is 
commonly used to free clogged drainage systems of materials 
that impede the intended direction of flow. 


3.7 Biocide — A chemical used to kill bacteria and 
other micro-organisms. 


4 PRINCIPLE 


It is the test in which geotextile filters or soil/geotextiles 
filters are subjected to the different liquid flow rates, 
possibility of biological clogging of geotextile is 
checked by considering the reduction in flow rate. 
Permittivity is measured using constant head as well 
as variable head method. The use of the method is 
primarily oriented toward landfill leachates but can be 
performed with any liquid coming from a particular 
site or synthesized from a predetermined mixture of 
biological micro-organisms. 


5 APPARATUS 


5.1 The Flow Column and Specimen Mount, consists 
of a 100 mm inside diameter containment ring for 
placement of the geotextile specimen along with upper 
and lower flow tubes to allow for uniform flow 
trajectories (see Fig. 1). The flow tubes are each sealed 
with end caps which have entry and exit tubing 
connections. The upper tube can be made sufficiently 
long so as to provide for a soil column to be placed 
above the geotextile. When this type of combined soil/ 
geotextile cross-section is used, however, it is difficult 
to distinguish which material is clogging, for example, 
the soil or the geotextile. It does however simulate 
many existing filtration systems. In such cases, a 
separate test setup with the geotextile by itself will be 


IS 16389 : 2015 


FLOW 


UPPER END CAP 


SOIL 


ERG A UPPER TUBE 


100 mm 
GEOTEXTILE TEST 
SPECIMEN 
vvv vovovvve CONTAINMENT 


RING a 


LOWER TUBE 499 mm 


LOWER END 
CAP 


100 mm 


Fic. 1 FLow COLUMN To CONTAIN GEOTEXTILE TEST 
SPECIMEN 


required as a control test and the difference in 
behaviour between the two tests will give an indication 
as to the contribution of soil clogging to the flow 
reduction. 


5.2 Hydraulic Head Control Devices, are required at 
both the inlet and outlet ends of the flow column. Figure 
2 shows the complete setup based on constant hydraulic 


OUTLET 
HEAD 


CONTROL 


OVERFLOW 


head monitoring where concentric plastic cylinders 
are used with the inner cylinders being at the elevation 
from which head is measured. The elevation difference 
between the inner cylinder at the inlet end and the 
inner cylinder at the outlet end is the total head across 
the geotextile test specimen (or soil/geotextile test 
specimen in the case of a combined test column). Note 
that the elevation of the outlet shall be above the 
elevation of the geotextile. 


5.3 A Hydraulic Head Standpipe, above the flow 
column is required for falling hydraulic head 
monitoring. Figure 3 shows this type of test 
configuration in which a clear plastic standpipe is 
placed above the flow column. Liquid movement is 
monitored for the time of flight between two marks 
on the standpipe. Note that the elevation of the outlet 
shall be above the elevation of the geotextile. 


5.4 The Overall Test System, dimensions are 
sufficiently small so that either of the above mentioned 
units can be used at a field site if desirable. They can 
either be kept stationary in the laboratory or in the 
field, or they can be transported from the laboratory 
to the field site when required. 


5.5 The Permeating Liquid, is generally site specific 
and often comprises landfill leachate. Other liquids 
for which biological clogging is of concern can also 
be evaluated. The liquid can be synthesized on an as- 
required basis. 


6 PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 


6.1 Take the sample from a swatch extending in width 
of the fabric and approximately 1 m along the selvage 


INLET LIQUID 


INLET HEAD CONTROL 


OVERFLOW 


GEOTEXTILE TEST 
SPECIMEN 


! 


FLOW COLUMN 


Fic. 2 FLow COLUMN WITH INLET AND OUTLET HYDRAULIC HEAD CONTROL DEVICES FOR CONSTANT HEAD TEST 


CLEAR 
PLASTIC 


STANDPIPE 
— 


GEOTEXTILE TEST 
SPECIMEN 


FLOW COLUMN D 


Fic. 3 FLow COLUMN WITH STANDPIPE FOR VARIABLE 
(FALLING) HEAD TEST 


from each roll in the lot sample. Take a swatch such a 
way that fabric from the outer wrap of the roll or the 
inner wrap around the core is avoided. 


6.2 Take no specimens nearer the selvage or edge of 
the laboratory sample than 10 percent of the width of 
the laboratory sample. The minimum specimen 
diameter shall be 100 mm so that full fixity can be 
achieved around the inside of the flow column. 


7 CONDITIONING 


7.1 There is no conditioning of the geotextile test 
specimen, per se, since this test method is a hydraulic 
one and the conditions of the permeating fluid shall be 
the controlling factor. 


7.2 The relative humidity shall be 100 percent except 
during times of air drying between non saturated test 
readings. For saturated conditions the relative humidity 
shall always be 100 percent. 


7.3 The temperature of the test over its entire duration 
is important. It is desirable to track temperature 
continuously. If not possible, frequent readings at 
regular intervals are required. 


8 PROCEDURE 


8.1 Procedure A — Constant Head Test 


8.1.1 Select and properly prepare the geotextile test 
specimen. Trim the specimen to the exact and full 
diameter of the inside of the flow column. 


IS 16389 : 2015 


8.1.2 Fix the geotextile test specimen to the inside of 
the containment ring. If water insoluble glue is used 
be sure that any excess does not extend into the flow 
area of the geotextile. 


8.1.3 Caulk the upper surface of the geotextile to the 
inside of the containment ring using a silicon based 
caulk and allow it to completely cure. The caulk shall 
be carefully placed so as not to restrict flow through 
the geotextile. 


8.1.4 Insert the upper and lower tubes into the 
containment ring and create a seal. If polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) tubing and fittings are being used, first a cleaner 
and then a solvent wipe is used to make the bond. 


8.1.5 If a screen or gravel of approximately 50 mm 
size is necessary to support the geotextile, it shall be 
placed with the device in an inverted position. 


8.1.6 Place the lower end cap on the device and make 
its seal. 


8.1.7 If soil is to be placed over the geotextile, place it 
at this time. Place the soil at its targeted moisture 
content and density taking care not to dislodge or 
damage the geotextile beneath. 


8.1.8 Place the upper end cap on the device and make 
a permanent seal. 


8.1.9 Connect flexible plastic tubing from the flow 
column’s top and bottom to the head control devices. 
At this point the system shall appear as shown in Fig. 2. 


8.1.10 Adjust the total head lost to 50 mm and initiate 
flow via the introduction of the permeating fluid to 
the system. When using leachate, proper safety and 
health precautions shall be maintained depending upon 
the nature of the leachate itself. 


8.1.11 Convert the liquid collected from the discharge 
tube to flow rate (litres/min) and repeat the 
measurement three times. Report the average of this 
value. 


8.1.12 Increase the total head lost if desired. Heads of 
100 mm, 200 mm, and 300 mm may be considered. 
These relatively high values of total head may be 
required if the geotextile begins to clog. 


8.1.13 After readings are completed, disconnect the 
head control devices. If non-saturated (aerobic) 
conditions are desired, the bottom end cap outlet is 
allowed to vent to the atmosphere. If saturated 
conditions are desired, the flexible plastic tubing from 
the bottom end cap shall remain in position and be 
brought higher than the elevation of the geotextile or 
soil within the test column. This will maintain saturated 
conditions between readings. 


IS 16389 : 2015 


8.1.14 Use fresh liquid for each set of measurements 
since changes, either biological or particulate in nature, 
may influence the test results. 


8.2 Procedure B — Falling Head Test 


8.2.1 Select and properly prepare the geotextile test 
specimen. Trim the specimen to the exact and full 
diameter of the inside of the flow column. 


8.2.2 Fix the geotextile test specimen to the inside of 
the containment ring. If water insoluble glue is used 
be sure that an excess amount does not extend into the 
flow area of the geotextile. 


8.2.3 Caulk the upper surface of the geotextile to the 
inside of the containment ring using a silicon based 
caulk and allow it to completely cure. The caulk shall 
be carefully placed so as not to restrict flow through 
the geotextile. 


8.2.4 Insert the upper and lower tubes into the 
containment ring and create a permanent seal. If 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) tubing and fittings are being 
used, first a cleaner and then a solvent wipe is used to 
make the bond. 


8.2.5 If a screen or a gravel of approximately 50 cm 
size is necessary to support the geotextile, it shall be 
placed with the device in an inverted position. 


8.2.6 Place the lower end cap on the device and make 
it seal. 


8.2.7 If soil is to be placed over the geotextile, place it 
at this time. The soil shall be placed at its targeted 
moisture content and density taking care not to dislodge 
or damage the geotextile beneath. 


8.2.8 Place the upper end cap on the device and make 
a seal. 


8.2.9 Attach a clear, rigid plastic standpipe to the upper 
end cap. The standpipe shall have clearly visible 
markings at regular intervals to monitor the movement 
of liquid. At this point the system shall appear as shown 
in Fig. 3. 


8.2.10 Fill the standpipe to a level above its upper mark. 
8.2.11 Allow for flow through the system until the 


liquid level reaches the upper mark and then start a 
stopwatch. 


8.2.12 Allow flow to continue unimpeded until the 
liquid level reaches the lower standpipe mark and 
immediately stop the stopwatch so as to record the 
elapsed time. 


8.2.13 Repeat this measurement procedure three times. 
The average of this value is to be reported. 


8.2.14 After readings are completed, disconnect the 


head control devices. If non-saturated conditions are 
desired, the bottom end cap outlet is allowed to vent to 
the atmosphere. If saturated conditions are desired, the 
flexible plastic tubing from the bottom end cap shall 
remain in position and be brought higher than the 
elevation of the geotextile or soil within the test 
column. This will maintain saturated conditions 
between readings. 


8.2.15 Use fresh liquid for each set of measurements 
since changes, either biological or particulate in nature, 
may influence the test results. 


9 CALULATION 
9.1 Procedure A — Constant Head Test 


9.1.1 Flow rate per unit area, is calculated on the basis 
of the average flow rate measured during conducting 
of the test. This value is then divided by the cross 
sectional area of the geotextile for the flow rate per 
unit area or ‘Flux’. The units are litres/min-cm?. 


9.1.2 Permittivity can be calculated by using Darcy’s 
formula for constant head flow test as follows: 


q = kiA 
1 -ki 

A 

a ^ 
A t 
a_k 
tAh t X 


q = flow rate (L3/T); 
A = cross-sectional area (L7); 
k = coefficient of permeability (L/T); 
t = geotextile thickness (L); 
i = hydraulic gradient (L/L); 
Ah = change in total head (L), and 
w = permittivity (T-'). 
9.1.3 Plotting of the results is very descriptive of the 


process as it is on-going. Figure 4 presents a number 
of possible trends in the resulting behaviour. 


9.2 Procedure B — Falling Head Test 


9.2.1 Permittivity is calculated when using the 
geotextile by itself with no soil. It is based on Darcy’ s 
formula which is integrated over the head lost during 
the arbitrary time interval Aż and results in the following 
equation: 


o 


h 


£ 


k a 
=y =2.3 
t a A 


AT log,, 


where 
k = coefficient of permeability (L/T), 
t = thickness (L), 
W = permittivity (TT), 
a = area of liquid supply standpipe (L?), 
A = area of test specimen (L°), 
AT = time change between h, and h; (T), 
h, = head at beginning of test (L), and 
h; = head at end of test (L). 


9.2.2 The permeability coefficient is calculated when 
using soil and geotextile together. It uses the exact 
formulation as above in the following form. 


t h 
k= 23108, — 
AAT h; 


9.2.3 Plotting of the results is very descriptive of the 
process as it is on-going. Figure 4 presents a number 
of possible trends in the resulting behaviour. 


10 REPORT 


10.1 State that the specimens were treated as directed 


FLOW RATE 
OR 
PERMITTIVITY 


TIME 


4A No or Nominal, Clogging 


Lag 


FLOW RATE 
OR 
PERMITTIVITY 


MODERATE 


TIME 


4C Retarded Clogging 


IS 16389 : 2015 


in this test method or state what modifications were 
made. 


10.2 Report on the following information: 


a) The method of holding the test specimen in 
the containment ring. 


b) The use or non use of soil above the 
geotextile. 


c) The type, style and description of the 
geotextile test specimen. 


d) The type of permeating liquid. 


e) Whether non-saturated or saturated test 
conditions. 


10.3 Report on trends in the results: 


a) The behaviour of the curves (see Fig. 4 for 
possible trends). 


b) The reasons for terminating the tests. 
c) The temperature of the liquid used in the tests. 


d) Possible remediation schemes if clogging 
occurred. 


10.4 Identify the micro-organisms which caused the 
clogging if it occurred (optional). 


FLOW RATE 
OR 
PERMITTIVITY 


TIME 


4B Various Degrees of Clogging 


FLOW RATE 
OR 
PERMITTIVITY 


BIOCIDE 
TIME 
4D Biocide and/or Backflushing Treatment 


BACKFLUSH 


Fic. 4 PossIBLE LONG-TERM FLow BEHAVIOUR OF GEOTEXTILE FILTER SUBJECTED TO LIQUIDS CONTAINING 
BIOLOGICAL MICRO-ORGANISMS 


IS 16389 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacturer Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Patt (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RitikA Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
SHRI Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 


SHRI M. KuMaraswamy Pilay (Alternate) 


Dr SWAPAN GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gurra (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 
SHRI R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. Masoop HUSAIN 


SHRI Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI S. J. Cuirnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI M. BALUCHAMY (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 

SHRI V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 
SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 

SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 
SHRI C. K. CHAUDHURI 

SHRI C. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16389 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai Dr ManisHA MATHUR 
Shrimati Ashwini Sudam (Alternate) 
Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad Suri JANAK NANAVATY 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai Suri S. P. BORKAR 
BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Rar, Scientist “E” and Head (TXD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1122). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IL.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


