**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



(1986): Beating Board [PCD 22: Sports Goods] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangarara Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIHCATION FOR 
BEATING BOARD 



IS:1im T9II 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



UDC 685- 64 J- 5 




® Co^riiht 198€ 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMAK fiHAVA»i 9 fiAKAPUR SMAU 2AFA1 UAHa 

Kvw DELHI noon 
Of 2 Daimkn 1986 



IS : 11588 - 1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
BEATING BOARD 

Sports Goods Sectional Committee, CPDC 4 

Chairman Representing 

Db R. L. Anai!TP Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, 

Patiala 

Members 

Db G. M. MtTTHiAH ( Alternate to 
DrR.L. Anand) 
Shbi a. K. Anand Nelco ( India ) Pvt Ltd, Meerut 

Shbi R. K. Bosh Office of the Development Commissioner, Small 

Scale Industries, New Delhi 
Shbi Chanbeb Mohan Singh Pioneer Sports Works Pvt Ltd, Jalandhar 

Shbi A.N. Chotjdhary Jaya Shree Textile & Industries Ltd, Rishra 

Shbi K. Gopinath ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. S, GHOtTHAir Sports Authority of India, New Delhi 

ShbiV. H. Dbsai liac Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi D. D. Pabshetye ( Alternate ) 
Deputy Secretaby Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports 

Shbi R.K.Ghosh Directorate of Industries (Quality Marking 

Scheme ) Government of West Bengal, 
Calcutta 

Shbi B. B. Ghaki ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. P. Ghosh Central Leather Research Institute, Madras 

Shbi J. K. Khanna {Alternate) 
Shbi O. P. Kedia Prolific Engineers, Delhi 

Shbi D. C. Aggabwal ( Alternate I ) 

Shri Subhash Jain ( Alternate 11 ) 
Shbi Vijay Khabbanda Freewill & Company, Jalandhar 

Shbi R. C. Kohli Beat All Sports, Jalandhar 

Shbi Tilak Raj Kohli International Sports, Meerut 

Shbi M. L. Kohli ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Satya Pbakash Maha JAN Delhi Sports Goods Manufacturers Association. 

Delhi 
Shri K. K. Mehba F. C. Sondhi & Co India Pvt Ltd, Jalandhar 

Gdb T. MisHBA Services Sport Control Board, New Delhi 

Sqn-Ldb p. Govindan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11588 - 1986 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

President All India Sports Goods Manufacturers Federation 

(Regd), Meerut 
Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Pbbsidemt Sports Goods Manufacturers & Exporters 

Association, Jalandhar 
Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Ratnam Madura Goats Ltd, Korathi 

Shri D. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
ShriX. K. Rohatagi Directorate of Industries, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Kanpur 
Shri I. D. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri Mohi-ud-Din Shah Industries & Gommerce Directorate, Government 

of Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar 
Manager {Alternate) 
ShriR. D. Sharma Sports Goods Export Promotion Council, New 

Delhi 
Shri T- K, Suri ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Sharma Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri N. K. Shukla ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Sivia Association of Indian Universities, New Delhi 

Shri M. L. Suri Directorate of Industries ( Quality Marking 

Scheme ) Government of Punjab, Chandigarh 
Dr a. S, Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Gonsr Prod & Med Instrs ) 

Secretary 

Shri M. K. Bhatia 

Deputy Director ( Gonsr Prod & Med Instrs ), ISI 

Gymnasium Equipment Subcommittee, GPDG 4 : 10 

Convener 
Shri D. K. Tandon Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, 

Patiala 

Members 
Shri Gurdial Sikgh ( Alternate to 
Shri D. K. Tandon ) 
ShbiJ. M. Kalia Delhi Sports Goods Manufacturers Association, 

Delhi 
Shri T. R. Kohh International Sports, Meerut 

Shri-M. L. Kohli ( Alternate ) 
Shri Puran Chand Madar U. P. Gymnastic Works, Lucknow 

Gdr T. Mishra Services Sport Control Board, New Delhi 

Sqr-Ldr p. Govindan ( Alternate ) 
President All India Sports Goods Manufacturers Federation 

( Regd ), Meerut 
Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Shri K, K. Rohatagi Directorate of Industries ( Quality Marking 

Scheme ), Government of Uttar Pradesh, 
Kanpur 
Shri D. K. Dinesh ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. K. Shukla Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri M. L. Suri Quality Marking Centre for Sports & Leather 

Goods, Directorate of Industries, Government 
of Punjab, Jalandhar 



IS: 11588 -1986 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
BEATING BOARD 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 27 March 1986, after the darft finalized by the Sports 
Goods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer 
Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from 
BS 1892 : Part 2 : Section 2.4 : 1972 'Specification for gymnasium equip- 
ment: Part 2 Particular requirements: Section 2.4 Beating boards, spring 
boards, balancing benches and jump stands', issued by the British 
Standards Institution. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers requirements for beating boards used in 
gymnastics. 

2. DIMENSIONS 

2.1 The dimensions shall conform to Fig. 1. 

3. MATERIALS 

3.1 The following materials shall be used in the construction of beating 
boards: 

Battens Any of the following species shall be 

used for battens: 

a) Cedrus deodara ( deodar ), 

b) Dysoxylum malaharicum ( white cedar ), 

c) Fraxinus spp. ( ash ), 

d) Tectona grandis ( teak ), and 

e) Terminalia alata ( laurel ). 



IS: 11588 -1986 



Take-off board Laminated board 

( laminated/plywood ) 



Beech, birch or sissoo having 22 rb 1 mm 
thickness, made up of seven laminates 
and bonded with urea formaldehyde 
synthetic resin. 



or 



Plywood 

BWR grade, 22 ± 1 mm thick, 11 -ply 
plywood conforming to IS : 303-1975*. 




600t 3 



dPPlER END 
BATTEN 



TAJKE-OFF. BOARD 




200^10 



RUBBER SCREWED OR STAPLED AT SIDES- 

70- 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Beating Board 



3.1.1 If laminated board is used for making take-off board, it shall be 
constructed from seven laminates, each of 3 mm thickness with two cross 
laminates under the face laminates. 



♦Specification for plywood for general purposes {second revision), 

4 



IS : 11588 - 1986 

4. GONSTRUGTION 

4.1 The upper surface of the board shall be covered with a non-slip 
material with a elastic layer under it The top surface of the beating 
board shall be cross-brushed with medium coarse sand paper to give a 
secure foothold. A batten of minimum length of 600 mm shall be fixed 
at the lower end by five 44-mm long wood screws in screw cups inserted 
through the board. At the upper end of the board, a batten not less 
than 690 mm long shall be fixed in the same manner. 

4.2 R.ubber strip feet shall be secured to the underside of the floor 
supports at each end as shown in Fig. 1 and in such a manner that if the 
rubber is accidentally detached, no fixing heads can make contact with 
the floor. 

4.3 Staples shall be of an industrial type, having a breaking strength of 
650 N and shall be adequately protected against rust. 

5. TEST 

5.1 Elasticity of the Beating Board — For testing the elasticity of the 
beating board, a mass of 6 000 N ( 600 kg ) shall be placed at a distance 
of 300 mm from the front edge in the centre of the highest point. This 
load shall produce lowering ( deflecting of the board ) within 82 ± 5 mm. 
When the load is removed the board shall come back to its original 
position. 

6. MARKING 

6.1 The equipment shall be prominently marked with the manufacturer's 
name, initials or recognized trade-mark, 

6»1,1 The beating boards may also be marked with the ISI 
Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act^ and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which 
is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a 
further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
from the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. PACKING 

7.1 The equipment shall be packed as agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. 



IS : 11588 - 1986 

8. SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

8.1 Lot — In any consignment all the beating boards manufactured 
from the same raw material, under similar conditions shall be grouped 
together to constitute a lot. 

8.1.1 For ascertaining the conformity of the lot to the requirements, 
the standard samples of beating boards shall be collected and tested 
separately for each lot. 

8.2 Number of beating boards to be selected at random from the lot 
depends upon the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 
and 2 of Table 1. 



TABLE 1 SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Lot Size 


Sample Size 


Acceptance Ntjmbeb 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


Up to 15 


3 





16 „ 25 


5 





26 „ 50 


8 


1 


51 „ 100 


13 


1 


101 y, 150 


20 


2 


151 and above 


32 


3 



8,2.1 The number of beating boards in a sample shall be selected at 
random from a lot and in order to ensure the randomness of selection, 
see IS : 4905-1968*. 

8.3 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity — All the 

beating boards in a sample shall first be examined for dimensions, 
materials, construction and test. If any board is found to be failing in 
any of these requirements, it shall be considered as defective. The lot 
shall be considered as conforming to these requirements if the number of 
defective beating boards in a sample does not exceed the number given in 
col 3 of Table 1. 



•Methods of random sampling. 



