**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10391 (1982) : Code of Practice for Chemical Cleaning of 
Boilers [CHD 13: Water Quality for Industrial Purposes] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Tift ^FTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10391 • 1982 

(Rwrfflrm«d1W4) 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
CHEMICAL CLEANING OF BOILERS 

( Fourth Reprint AUGUST 1999 ) 
UDC 621.187.37 : 006.76 



© Copyright 1983 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DBLHI 110002 

Gr 7 March 1983 



AMENJMENT NO, 1 AUGOST1986 

TO 

IS: 10391-1982 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CHEMICAL 
CLEANING OF BOILERS 



(Page 4 t clause 1,1 j - Add the following note 
under clause 1*1: 

'Not* - This code is not applicable to the boilers 
of rivetted construction'. 



(CDC 5T) 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurjs, India 



IS t 10391 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
CHEMICAL CLEANING OF BOILERS 



Boiler Water Sectional Committee, GDC 57 

Chairman Representing 

Shri P. G. D. G. Samuel Madras Refineries Ltd, Madras 

Members 

Shri J. N. Bhowmik West Bengal State Electricity Board, Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Santra ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Chatterjee Delta Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Deputy Director ( CM ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
RDSO, Luoknow 
Assistant Chemist & Metal- 
lurgist, WR, Bombay ( Alternate ) 
Shri Dey Raj Power Engineers Training Society, New Delhi 

Dr N. Devarajan Industrial and Agricultural Engineering Co 

( Bombay ) Ltd, Bombay 
Shri S. C. Dey Ministry of Industry ( Department of Industrial 

Development ), New Delhi 
Shri Shomnath Ghosh Jai Guru Engineering Co ( India )« Calcutta 

Shri An and am ay Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. K. Gupta Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd, Durgapur 

Unit, Durgapur 
Shri A. K. Senoupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. T. Jadeja The Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri G. M. Rawal ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Jha Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Dr V. M. Kelkar Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri G. L. Rajani ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Krishnaswamy Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Shri P. S. Rajalakshmi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Krithivasan Central Electrochemical Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Karaikudi 
Shri T. M. Balasubramahian ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Mahadevah Chemical Consultants, Madras 

Shri C. S. Raohavan ( Alternate ) 

( Continued en page 2 ) 



© Ce^nght 1983 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 195? > and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 10391 - 19S2 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr P. K. Mathur Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri R. Natarajan Bharat Heavy Electrical* Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri T. R. Naoarajan ( Alternate I ) 

Dr A. Prabhaxar Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Shri R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Sub ash Vxrma ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ram Gofal National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 

ShrI R. K. Dwivrdi ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. RamaohaMdran Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. Chandrabkkhar ( Attentat* ) 
Dr S. K. Roy The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Dr V. K. Seth Projects & Development India Ltd, Sindri 

Shri S. K. Shomb Development Consultants Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri R. N. Banrrjeb ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. P. Singh Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Shri K. B. Chhabra ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. P. Singh Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. P. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mathur, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offuio Member ) 

Head ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. K. Bahi. 
Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 



IS t 10391 - 1982 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
CHEMICAL CLEANING OF BOILERS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 November 1982, after the draft finalized by the Boiler 
Water Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 

0*2 Chemical cleaning of internal heating surfaces of boilers was first 
proposed where it was difficult or impossible to clean by other methods. 
Because of early experience with improper technique and limited 
knowledge of cleaning solvents, this method was at first subject to certain 
reservations. With progressive experience and development of materials 
and procedures, much of the earlier uncertainty concerning chemical 
cleaning has been resolved, and the process is now widely used with 
complete confidence as the quickest, cheapest and most efficient method 
of cleaning these surfaces in boilers of all sizes. It is, however, extremely 
important to use a procedure of known reliability under careful control. 

0*3 Removal of pre-operational and operational deposits from the 
internal surfaces of steam generator tubing and other components has 
become an increasingly important maintenance problem in modern 
equipment. Because mechanical cleaning is virtually impossible in 
modern boilers, the effective application of chemical cleaning solvents has 
become a necessary tool pf the power plant operator. Selection of a 
solvent system and procedure should be based primarily on three criteria 
namely, cleaning effectiveness, economics and base-metal attack. 

0.4 The importance of maintaining clean heat-transfer surfaces in boilers 
has been recognized for many years. Tube cleanliness becomes increas- 
ingly more important in higher pressure boilers for two obvious reasons: 
(a) higher operating temperatures reduce the temperature elevation that 
can be tolerated without exceeding metal creep limits, and (b) higher 
temperatures are conducive to chemical corrosion which can proceed 
beneath internal deposits where soluble boiler-water constituents can 
concentrate. 

3 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

0*5 The procedure outlined in this standard is recommended with the 
understanding that the user will depend upon competent chemical 
supervision of the cleaning operations as also expert advice of consultants 
on boiler- water and scale problems. 

0*6 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
the following publications: 

BS 2486 : 1978 Recommendations for treatment of water for land 
boilers British Standards Institution. 

ATWOOD ( KL ) and HALE ( GL ). A method for determining need 
for chemical cleaning of high pressure boilers. Proceedings of American 
Power Conference, 20-22 April 1971. 

Steam and its use. 1967. Babcock & Wilcox Ltd, USA. 

Water chemistry for high pressure boilers — Reference manual. 1978. 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli. 



1. SCOPE 

LI This standard lays down guidelines for chemical cleaning of boilers. 
% PURPOSE OF CHEMICAL CLEANING 

2.1 The primary reasons for chemical cleaning of boilers are to prevent 
tube failures and improve unit availability. Tube failures in low-pressure 
boilers are normally the results of creep which occurs when internal 
deposits produce excessive metal temperature. A relatively smaller 
quantity of deposit creates difficulties in high-pressure boilers. Caustic 
corrosion and hydrogen damage, which occur only in the presence of 
deposits, may cause tube failures at temperatures well below the creep 
limit. Deposits originating both from fabrication and during operation 
should be considered potential problems. 

2.2 All the pressure parts of a steam generator may be subjected to heat 
treatment of some sort during fabrication or erection — during forming 
operations, stress relief, welding or bending. Whenever carbon low alloy 
steels are subjected to high temperatures in the presence of air, oxidation 
occurs; the oxide produced is known as mill scale. Mill scale on boiler 
tubing is normally very thin with the exception of areas near welds and 
bends. Even where mill scale is initially uniform its brittleness upon 
cooling may produce flaking. The resulting non-uniform surface is 
undesirable from the standpoint of corrosion susceptibility. During 
operation mill scale is readily eroded from the steam-generating surfaces 
and may subsequently be redeposited in critical areas. Preoperational 
acid cleaning removes mill scale and serves to remove atmospheric rust 
which inevitably accumulates to some degree during erection. 



IS s 10391 - 1982 

2.3 After a boiler is placed into service, numerous solid constituents may 
enter the unit with the feed water, and some portion of the insolubles can 
be expected to deposit on boiler surfaces. If not removed, these deposits 
accumulate over a period of time to the point where they cause difficulty. 
Control of preboiler corrosion can minimize the quantity of these 
materials; however, complete freedom from deposition is not possible in 
a high-pressure system. The need for occasional chemical cleaning 
during the life of a boiler has become a recognized fact and should be 
accepted as a routine maintenance practice. A frequency of service 
cleaning of every 3 to 4 years is recommended. This frequency should be 
increased if individual unit operating history dictates. 

2«4 Deposits of calcium and magnesium may be present in units that 
experience condenser leakage. This is the exception, and operational 
utility cleanings are directed primarily towards removal of preboiler. 
corrosion products. For this reason, similar procedures are employed 
for both post-operational and preoperational utility- boiler cleaning. Iron 
oxide removal is the major requirement in both cases. Preoperational 
cleaning should be preceded by an alkaline boil out to facilitate removal 
of silica and organic preservatives, while operational cleaning should, in 
most plant cycles, eliminate copper either simultaneously or in a separate 
step. 

3. ADVANTAGES OF CHEMICAL CLEANING 

3.1 Compared with the removal of scale and deposits from internal 
heating surfaces by mechanical means, important advantages of chemical 
cleaning as are follows: 

a) Outage time is reduced. 

b) Extensive dismantling of tt e unit is not required. The solvents 
can be introduced and discharged through existing and some 
extra connections. The only dismantling necessary is the 
removal of drum manhole covers and a few header handhole 
closures for inspection. In some cases it may be necessary to 
remove drum internals also depending on the quantity of deposits 
and the technique involved. 

c) The total cost is less. 

d) Inaccessible areas, such as small tubes, short-radius tube bends 
and irregular surfaces, are readily cleaned since the cleaning 
medium has access to all locations reached by steam or water. 
The result is a better cleaning job. The more thorough removal 
of scale reduces the rate of subsequent formation of deposits. 

e) New equipment can be designed with complete flexibility and 
simplicity for best economy, efficiency and overall cost, since no 
compromise is required to provide accessibility for cleaning. 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

4. GENERAL METHODS 

4.0 Two methods of chemical cleaning have been recommended, namely; 

a) continuous circulation of the solvent through the parts to be 
cleaned, and 

b) filling the unit with solvent and allowing it to soak for a prescribed 
length of time. 

4*1 Circulation Method — In the circulation method, after filling the 
unit the solvent is recirculated until cleaning is complete. Samples of the 
return solvent are tested periodically during the cleaning. Cleaning is 
considered complete when the acid strength of the returned solvent 
reaches equilibrium, indicating that no further reaction with the deposits 
is taking place. Compared with the soaking method, since a solvent of 
lower strength may be used and the solvent is drained from the unit as 
soon as the reaction is complete, the possibility of damage to the surface 
cleaned is less in using the circulation method. Also, the cost of 
chemicals is somewhat less because of the control testing of solvent 
strength. 

4.1.1 The circulation method is particularly suitable for cleaning 
forced-flow boilers, superheaters and economizers with positive liquid 
flow paths to ensure circulation of the solvent through all parts of the 
unit. A complete cleaning job cannot be anticipated by this method 
unless the solvent reaches and passes through every circuit of the unit. 

4.1.2 Cleaning by the circulation method is aided mechanically by the 
constant change of solvent which flows over the deposits on the surface 
This feature is of particular advantage when foaming may occur, as with 
deposits of a calcareous nature. The continuously circulating solvent also 
carries disintegrated undissolved materials through the unit. This is 
especially helpful in preventing clogging of small tubes. Circulation also 
limits the concentration of ferric chloride, which itself is an active 
corrodant against which inhibitor gives very little protection. 

4.2 Soaking Method — In cleaning by the soaking method, after filling 
with the solvent the unit is allowed to soak for a period of 4 to 8 hours 
depending upon deposit condition. To ensure complete removal of 
deposits, the acid strength of the solvent should be somewhat greater 
than that required by the actual conditions since, unlike the circulation 
method, control testing during the course of the cleaning is not conclusive, 
because samples of solvent drawn from convenient locations may not truly 
represent conditions in all parts of the unit. 

4.2.1 The soaking method is preferable for cleaning units where definite 
liquid distribution to all circuits by the circulation method is not possible 
without the use of many chemical inlet connections or where circulation 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

through all circuits at an appreciable rate cannot be assured except by 
using a circulating pump of impractical size. These conditions may 
exist in large natural* circulation units with complex furnace* wall cooling 
systems. 

4.2.2£Advantages of the soaking method over the circulation method 
are: 

a) Simplicity of piping connections, 

b) Assurance that all parts are reached by a solvent of adequate acid 
strength, 

c) And less chemical supervision during the cleaning operation. 
5. SOLVENTS, DEPOSITS AND INHIBITORS 

5.1 Solvents — For the removal of boiler deposits, various solvents 
including acids and a number of alkaline compounds have been recom- 
mended in Table 1. 

In general, the use of alkaline compounds requires considerable time 
and temperature, and while the attack on steel is non existent or negli- 
gible, the surface is not as clean as with the acid solvents. 

5. LI On the basis of cost, availability, suitable inhibitors, and rapid 
removal of deposits, hydrochloric and sulphuric acids aje the most 
practical cleaning agents. Of these two, hydrochloric acid costs less, is 
more effective in dissolving a greater number of the usual constituents of 
boiler deposits, and is more readily available and inhibited. In contrast 
to the reactions of sulphuric acid which produces relatively insoluble 
sulphates, the reactions of hydrochloric acid form readily soluble 
chlorides. 

5.1.2 Pressure parts of alloy steels, particularly those high in chromium , 
should not be cleaned with acid solvents without competent chemical 
advice on the type of acid and inhibitor and the conditions of application 
in each specific case. 

5.1.3 For deposits of certain characteristics, the solvent may require 
additional reagents, such as intensifiers to react with certain constituents 
or wetting reagents to promote solvent penetration of the deposit. The 
need for these auxiliary chemicals should be decided by the chemist 
controlling the specific cleaning operation. 

5.2 Deposits — Preoperational scale deposits and contaminants on the 
internal heating surface of a boiler unit include mill scale, weld scale, 
corrosion products, oil, grease, dust and dirt, temporary protective coatings 

7 



IS 1 10991 - 1982 



& CO CO CO 



CO CO CO CO 



CO CO CO 



CO CO CO 



CO 



<0 CO 



* « co 



w to CO 



co <a 



co to 



CO CO co 



•s ! 



co co 



<* CO 



CO 



— -2 H i a 8 i i< 

ill ti 1st; 



cSZ c 



AS co 

•- •"■ :a .' 



fc > 




IS 1 10391 - 1982 

and other contaminants remaining after fabrication. Scale deposits formed 
on the internal heating surfaces of a boiler unit come from water. In 
general, the constituents belong to one or more of the following groups: 

a) Oxides of iron and copper; 

b) Carbonates, phosphates and sulphates of calcium and magnesium; 
and 

c) Silica and silicates. The deposits may also contain various 
amounts of oil, which are sometimes appreciable in boilers on 
return to service. 

5.2*1 For the most efficient and economical scale removal, the deposit 
should be analysed and that acid should be selected for the solvent which 
will most effectively react with a deposit of this type. This deposit is 
usually a mixture of several compounds, and the acid that will best 
dissolve the different major constituents is generally selected as the 
solvent since the dissolution of the soluble components will free any 
insoluble compounds present which can then be removed by flushing. 

5.2.2 To avoid possible redeposition of other iron compounds, hydro- 
chloric acid is usually preferred in removing iron oxide, even though 
sulphuric acid is theoretically the better solvent. Hydrochloric acid is 
more effective than sulphuric acid in dissolving calcium and magnesium 
salts. Neither has any effect on calcium sulphate, although scales contain- 
ing up to 75 percent of this compound have been successfully removed 
by dissolving the soluble constituents. 

5.2.3 No universal recommendation has been made for silica or silicates 
because some silicates react more readily with hydrochloric acid, some 
with sulphuric acid, and still others with a combination of strong alkalis 
and heat. A preboil for several hours with a 0*5 to 1 percent soda ash 
solution before acid cleaning has been found effective in changing the 
silica scale to a more acid soluble form. In some instances, to remove 
silica scale hydrofluoric acid has been included in the solvent. Except 
under expert chemical advice and supervision, this procedure is not 
recommended. 

5.2*4 Small amounts of oil in the deposit are removed when the 
general deposit is dissolved and disintegrated. For higher percentages 
of oil contamination it may be necessary to use a wetting agent in the 
solvent to promote penetration of the deposit. If the deposit is predo- 
minantly oil or grease, boiling out with alkaline compounds should 
E recede the acid cleaning. In new or repaired boilers where water-soluble 
ibricants have been used in tube expanding, boiling out with alkaline 
compounds may be omitted. 



IS s 10391 - 1982 

5.3 Inhibitors — The following equations represent the reactions of 
acids ( in this instance, hydrochloric ) with constituents of boiler 
deposits: 

Fe 8 4 + 8 HC1 - 2 FeCl 3 + FeCl 2 + 4 H 2 
CaC0 8 + 2 HC1 - CaCl, + H t O + CO, 
Fe 2 0, + 6 HC1 -. 2 FeC] 8 + 3 H 2 

At the same time, however, the acids will also react with and waste away 
the metal of the boiler, as represented by the equation: 

Fe + 2 HC1 - FeCI 2 + H 2 

unless means are provided to prevent or retard this reaction without, of 
course, affecting the attack on the deposits. For this purpose arsenic 
compounds, barium salts, starch, quinoline, pyridine or other products 
have to be added to the acid solvent as inhibitors to prevent or materially 
reduce this reaction with the metal. A number of commercial inhibitors 
are sold under brand names, and still others are made and used by 
companies furnishing complete acid-cleaning service, including the 
prepared solvents. If cleaning is done by the operator's own organi- 
zation rather than by a company specializing in this work, the use of 
commercial inhibitors offered by reputable chemical concerns is 
recommended. 

5.3,1 The following four such commercial inhibitors are available for 
this purpose: 

a) Rodine 213 ( ordinary ) — used with hydrochloric acid at temper- 
atures up to 40°C for inhibiting copper, brass, iron and steel; 

b) Rodine 213 ( special ) — used with hydrochloric acid at temper- 
atures up to 80°C for inhibiting copper brass, iron and steel; 

c) Rodine 115 — used with sulphamic, citric, tartaric and oxalic 
acids for inhibiting copper, brass, mild steel and stainless steel; 
and 

d) Rodine 92 — used with sulphuric, phosphoric and citric acids. 

Other inhibitors which satisfy the requirements for both inhibitor 
efficiency and toxicity aspects may also be used. Details regarding their 
concentrations, inhibiting efficiency to particular metal at definite 
temperature and toxic effects are generally obtained from the manu- 
facturer. However, it is desirable to verify by conducting tests before 
actual use. The approved inhibitors should be present under acid 
conditions at all times to ensure that they are fully dissolved and not 

10 



IS j 10391 - 1982 

subsequently precipitated. If 'these are recommended for use with 
austenitic steel surfaces, chloride content in such inhibitors should be 
practically nil so as not to impart more than 01 mg/1 chloride in the 
solution used for cleaning. 

Note — Whenever a new batch of inhibitors is used, its effectiveness should be tested 
before use. Pre-inhibited solutions should also be tested before use as the inhibiting 
efficiency may go down on storage. 

5.3.2 The effectiveness of acids in attacking boiler deposits as well as 
steel increases rapidly with rise in temperature. However, the inhibiting 
effect decreases as the temperature rises, and at a certain temperature, 
which is likely to vary for each inhibitor, the inhibitor may be decom- 
posed into compounds devoid of inhibiting properties. It should also be 
noted that not all inhibitors are effective with all acids. 

5.3.3 Important points in the use of inhibited acid solvent are sum- 
marised as follows: 

a) Selection of the acid and auxiliary chemicals should depend upon 
the type of deposit to be removed, 

b) The inhibitor should be suitable for the acid selected, 

c^ The temperature of the solvent should not exceed that at which 
the effectiveness of the inhibitor will be reduced or destroyed, 
and 

d) The limiting temperatures for the use of the inhibitor should be 
obtained from the supplier or manufacturer. 

6. DETERMINATION OF SOLVENT CONDITIONS 

6.1 Deposit Samples — The preferred type of deposit sample is a 
small section of tube with adhering deposit. In any case a sample of 
the deposit, down to the bare metal, representing the worst condition in 
the unit, should be obtained. Selection of the acid and auxiliary 
chemicals is then based on an analysis of the sample by chemicals or 
X-ray diffraction, or by other methods. After selection of the acid for 
the solvent and the inhibitor suitable for this acid, it is necessary, to 
ensure complete removal of the deposits, to determine the acid strength 
of the solvent, the solvent temperature, and the length of time required 
for the cleaning process. 

6.2 Acid Strength — Technically, the acid strength should be in 
proportion to the amount of deposit in the unit to be cleaned. However, 
since the determination of the amount of deposit cannot be much more 
than rough approximation and the general average of conditions 

11 



18110391-1982 

observed falls within a fairly narrow range, the acid strength of the solvent 
is usually set satisfactorily by experience. It is, therefore, recommended 
that the acid strength of the solvent, as fed to the unit should be: 

a) three to five percent when the unit is cleaned by the continuous 
circulation method, and 

b) five to six percent when the unit is cleaned by the soaking 
method. 

6*3 Solvent Temperature — To aid in the acid attack on the deposit*, 
the temperature of the solvent should be as high as possible without 
seriously reducing the effectiveness of the inhibitor. Most commercial 
inhibitors break down or lose their effectiveness entirely above 70°C. As 
the temperature rises above 60°C the corrosion rate increases. It is, 
therefore, recommended that the temperature be limited to 60°C unless a 
higher temperature can be tolerated in a particular unit and with an 
inhibitor safe at the higher temperature. 

Nora — Before injecting any chemical, the boiler may be fired slowly with low heat 
if tteam heating facilities are not available, to raise the temperature of water. 
However, thb should be done carefully as the temperature may not be uniform at all 
places and may also overshoot the recommended limits. No firing should be done 
during chemical circulation. 

8*3*1 Care should be taken to inspect the unit thoroughly after the first 
cleaning and after each subsequent cleaning. In this way the actual 
corrosion rate can be determined, and it can be decided either to continue 
cleaning at this temperature, if the rate is not damaging, or to reduce 
the temperature for subsequent cleanings. In making up the solvent to 
the required strength, it should be heated by warm water to 60°C or to 
the temperature decided upon after all conditions are known. The 
temperature of the solvent should not be raised by firing the unit. 
Circulation rate should be,between 0*3 m/s and 1*0 m/s in the circulation 
method for effective cleaning. 

6.4 Cleaning Time — When cleaning by the circulation method, 
completion of the process is determined by analysing samples of the 
returned solvent for acid strength and noting when the acidity reaches 
equilibrium. In using the soaking method, the length of time the solvent 
is to be retained in the unit should be decided upon beforehand. While 
the types and quantity of the deposit and laboratory determination of the 
reaction rate of the solvent on samples of the deposit should apply in 
setting the length of time, a practical guide in determining the solvent 
retention time for the first few cleanings, using the acid strength noted 
above, is given below: 

a) For moderate thickness of relatively soft sludges or for conditions 
that would otherwise require turbining at not less than yearly 
intervals, the solvent retention time should be a minimum of 
4 hours. 

\9 



18 1 10391 - 1M2 

b) For thin coatings ( eggshell thickness ) of relatively hard scale 
formation, the solvent retention time should be 6 hours. 

c) For deposits like those resulting from a severe upset in the feed* 
water-conditioning system, the solvent retention time should be a 
maximum of 8 hours. 

6*4*1 The periods noted are for the actual retention of the solvent in 
the unit. The surfaces are, of course, also wholly and partially subjected 
to the solvent during the time of filling and draining. In establishing 
permanent schedules, the periods recommended should be extended or 
shortened on the basis of the results achieved for specific conditions 
during the first few cleanings, as indicated by visual inspections; test 
turbining of selected tubes, before and after cleaning, in areas typical of 
the worst deposit conditions; or examination of sample sections of tubing 
cut out of the unit. 

7. PREPARATION FOR GLEANING 

7.1 Heat Transfer Equipment — All parts not to be cleaned should 
be isolated from the rest of the unit. To do this, connections to these 
parts may be removed and blanked off or plugged with wood or rubber. 
Where arrangements permit, parts of the unit can be isolated by comple- 
tely filling with hydrazine- dosed water. Bronze or brass parts Should be 
removed or replaced temporarily with steel ones. All valves should be 
of steel or steel alloy. Gauge and meter connections should be closed or 
removed from the unit. All parts of the unit not otherwise protected by 
blanking off or by flooding with water should be covered by the inhibited' 
solvent. Vent* should be provided wherever vapours might be pocketed, 
since acid vapours from the cleaning solution do not retain the inhibitor, 

1& Gleaning Equipment — Continuous circulation requires sufficient 
inlet connections to ensure distribution and to promote circulation through 
all circuits. It also requires a return line to the sump tank from the 
highest point of the unit or from the end of a continuous-tube heat transfer 
apparatus. The soaking method does not require a return line but means 
should be provided, such as a rubber hose, to carry the spill-over from 
the vent to a safe location, and the pump discharge should be connected 
to the lowermost inlet to the unit. Depending upon the volume of the 
liquid to be handled, the pump discharge and the return or vent spill- 
over lines, as the case may be, are usually of 40 to 75 mm pipe size. 

The filling or circulating pump should not be fitted with any bronze 
or brass parts and it should Jiave the capacity to deliver, in not over 1 
hour, at 690 kPa ( 7 kg/cm* ), a volume of liquid equal to the capacity of 
the vessel to be cleaned. For convenience in handling and mixing the 
solution, the sump- tank shdqld be large enough to hold about 5 percent 
of the total volume of liquic\rtqiif red to fill completely the vessel to be 

' 13 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

cleaned. An adequate supply of clean water and steam for heating the 
solvent to the desired temperature should be provided. Provision should 
be made for adding the inhibited acid to the suction side of the filling or 
circulation pump. 

7.3 Cleaning Solutions — To determine the amount of solvent 
required, an estimate should be made of the capacity of the vessel to be 
cleaned, adding 2 percent to allow for wastage and other contingencies. 
Commercial acid suitable for the deposit to be removed should be 
procured in the quantity required to make, when mixed with water, a 
solvent of the amount and acid strength desired. 

7.3.1 An inhibitor suitable for the acid to be used should be procured. 
In obtaining the manufacturer's recommendation for the amount of 
inhibitor to be used, care should be taken to make certain that this 
recommendation is based on full knowledge of the acid strength of the 
solvent and purpose of use, to avoid any possibility of a higher corrosion 
rate than can be tolerated when cleaning a boiler. The amount of 
inhibitor specified for each carboy of acid should be completely dissolved 
or suspended in about 3*5 litres of acid removed from the carboy, taking 
care not to let the solution heat. After pouring the mixture of inhibitor 
and acid back into the carboy, the contents should be thoroughly mixed 
( this can be done for small boilers ). Inhibitor efficiency should also be 
tested during circulation by immersing a degreased nail or steel wool ball 
in a sample of the liquid to see evolution of hydrogen. 

7.3.2 In preparation for the neutralizing process, commercial soda ash 
should be provided to make up a solution sufficient to fill the unit com- 
pletely in the proportion of 1 kg of soda ash to 100 litres of water. This 
will produce a solution strength of about 1 percent. 

7.3.3 If the operator retains an organization specializing in acid clean- 
ing of heat transfer equipment, the latter ordinarily determines and 
supplies the type of cleaning solvent and handling equipment best suited 
for the conditions. 

8. CIRCULATION METHOD 

8.0 In modern chemical cleaning practice, circulation method is more 
common than soaking method as the chemical cleaning of boilers can 
almost go for completion in circulation method and also as it is more 
economical because of the lesser amount of chemicals used. In this 
standard, therefore, only circulation method has been described in detail. 
Circulation method is followed in the following two types of chemical 
cleaning of boilers: 

a) Preoperational cleaning of boilers, that is, cleaning done before a 
new boiler is commissioned ( 8.2 ); and 

14 



18 : 10391 - 1982 

b) Postoperational cleaning of boilers, that is, cleaning done after 
the boiler has been in service for a certain period of time ( 8.1 ). 

8.1 Postoperational Chemical Gleaning of Boilers 

8*1.1 Chemical Cleaning Frequency — The following recommendations are 
made for estimating chemical cleaning frequency: 

a) Maintain a 'need for chemical cleaning 9 log for each high-pressure 
boiler. This log should include a record of all known deviations 
from cycle chemistry. The following should be included: 

1) the number of outages, 

2) method of standby protection, 

3) length of operation when feed water quality limits were not 
maintained, 

4) length of operation when boiler water quality and treatment 
limits were not maintained, 

5) number of suspected and confirmed condenser leaks, and 

6) other contamination of the cycle, such as evaporator carryover 
or demineralizer maloperation. 

b) Perform sufficient routine chemical analyses to adequately define 
the normal cycle chemistry environment. Metal ion ( Fe, Cu and 
Ni ) determinations should be included in the analysis pro- 
gramme. Measurements of these constituents should be made 
twice weekly on the feed water during normal operation and 
more frequently during start-up to establish boiler crud loading. 

c) Establish a cleanliness history for all high-pressure boilers based 
on periodic reviews of the 'need for chemical cleaning 9 log and 
cycle chemical analysis results. Verify decisions regarding 
internal cleanliness of all boilers through an annual tube sample 
analysis programme. 

d) Do not operate any high-pressure boiler longer than 4 years 
between chemical cleanings. This frequency is 'necessary to assure 
long-term boiler integrity. Even though the steam generator may 
have operated without cycle chemistry deviation, chemical clean- 
ing should be considered and utilized on a 4-year basis as a 
proper maintenance tool. 

8.1.2 Method of Tube Sampling — Selecting the location of tube samples 
from a boiler for deposit measurement is very important since deposits 
may vary appreciably in different pares of the boiler. Tube samples 

15 



IS 1 103M - 1982 

should be removed from locations which generally represent areas of 
heaviest corrosion product deposition. Sampling in a band starting at 
the centre line of the uppermost burner and extending up the furnace 
about 3 000 mm is recommended. Operating experience in specific units, 
however, will often determine other problem areas that should be looked 
at, such as arch tubes in natural-circulation boiler or other horizontal or 
low-sloped circuits. 

&1.2.1 Once the tube sample location is selected, the actual method 
of tube removal is important to assure a useful sample. Three adjacent 
tubes should be removed for comparison analysis. Cut-off wheels and 
cutting torches produce slag and fillings, which adhere to the inside tube 
surface near the cutting point. The sample, therefore, should be at least 
600 mm in length to negate this contaminating effect. After the tube has 
been removed, it should be sealed on the ends and sent to the analysing 
laboratory for measurement of deposit amount and composition of 
deposits. 

8.1.3 Relationship of Deposit Quantity to Unit Cleanliness — The amount of 
deposition on clean surfaces is usually less than 15 mg/cm 2 while on 
moderately dirty surfaces it may be 15 to 40 mg/cm 8 and on very dirty 
surfaces, more than 40 mg/cm'. Chemical cleaning should be done 
whenever deposits are more than 40 mg/cm 8 . 

8»1*4 Location of Temporary Equipment — The location of the temporary 
equipment may be decided based On the following considerations: 

a) The dissolving tank should be elevated to suitable height to 
provide the net positive suction head ( NPSH ) specified for the 
acid circulating pumps. A suitable location in the boiler floor 
area can preferably be looked into. Otherwise the tank has to be 
supported externally on temporary structures. 

b) Sufficient care should be taken to locate the dissolving tank at a 
place .where damage to the nearby equipment due to the possible 
spillage of chemical solutions from the tank by overflowing is 
avoided. 

c) Sufficient space should be provided between the pumps to have 
enough access for safe operation. 

d) Circulating pumps and starters should be separated at a safe 
distance to have safety and ease of operation. 

e) It is preferable to locate the pumps nearer to the waste disposal 
point such as main station dram, etc. 

f) The main controlling valves, such as recirculating valve and 
valves for make-up water, steam, system return, amd system 
drain, should be located near the circulating pump at con- 
veniently accessible location for effective control of the process. 

16 



18 1 10391 - 1982 

8.1.5 Neutralizing Arrangement — All the chemical effluents have to be 
neutralized suitably before leaving them off to sewerage. Special care has 
to be taken to neutralize the spent acid after the completion of pickling 
operation effectively if the effluents are discharged to a canal or river 
meant for agricultural or domestic consumption. The spent acid may 
be effectively neutralized with burnt lime in an open concrete type 
storage tank of around 20 m 8 capacity. The tank may be located outside 
boiler area from where it can be connected by open channel to the main 
stream. The tank shall have two or three compartments to provide 
sufficient retention time for effective neutralization. After the initial 
neutralization in the tank the effluents can be further neutralized in the 
open channel by progressive addition of neutralizing chemicals at stages 
during the passage to the main stream. The effluents, after neutraliza- 
tion, shall be diluted with enormous quantity of water taken through a 
fire-fighting point or from some other source. If a suitable alternative 
neutralizing arrangement exists, say in the water-treatment plant, the same 
can be made use of. Hydrazine may be oxidized with bleaching powder. 

8.1.6 Nitrogen Capping — Nitrogen capping is adopted to protect the 
freshly cleaned metal surfaces after pickling from being corroded due to 
exposure to atmospheric air during the subsequent stages of acid cleaning 
operations. 

8.1.6.1 Required number of cylinders of suitable capacity are 
connected to the bus which in turn is connected to the drum air vents 
through a stop valve and a non-return valve. In case smaller cylinders 
are envisaged for the capping, two manifold systems to accommodate 15 
cylinders each, connected through two heavy duty regulators, may be 
employed. 

8.1.6.2 Nitrogen capping should be done during each dumping for 
all operations following pickling. The stop valve in the nitrogen line and 
the air vent valve nearer the drum are kept open while the other air vent 
valve on the drum is kept closed. All other air vents in the system are 
kept closed to prevent ingress of air into the system. As the dumping of 
the system starts nitrogen enters through the non-return valve into the 
system and offers effective blanketing. When the system is completely 
drained and filled with nitrogen, the stop valve in the nitrogen line shall 
be closed. The pressure of nitrogen in the system is to be maintained 
slightly above atmospheric pressure, say about 35 to 70 kPa ( 0*35 to 0*70 
kg/cm* ). When the system is getting filled for next operation, the 
nitrogen in the system is vented through the air vents. The non-return 
valve in the nitrogen admission line prevents entry of water or chemical 
solution to the nitrogen piping system. 

8.1.6.3 Nitrogen capping may be terminated after first stage 
passivation. 

17 



IS s 10391 - 1982 

8.1.7 Connecting Point Details 

8.1.7.1 The temporary equipment and connected pipelines and valves 
shall be erected in accordance with the final layout prepared by the 
customer/consultant depending upon site conditions. 

8.1.7.2 Economizer inlet connection may be given at the main 
isolating valve towards economizer after the non-return valve in the main 
feed control point. The connection may be given at the valve after 
removing the valve wedge and bonnet assembly. However, it is prefer- 
able not to erect the valve to accommodate temporary connections. 

8.1.7.3 The nitrogen capping connection should be given at the 
drum air vents. 

8.1.7.4 The degasifying header connections in the drum are to be 
made. 

8.1.7.5 Bottom ring header connections have to be made through 
hand-holes. 

8.1.7.6 Superheater should be plugged before ' commencement of 
pickling operation. 

8.1.7.7 Downcomers should be orified suitably for the cleaning 
process. 

8.1.7.8 Hydrostatic plugs may be assembled into the safety valves 
after protecting the seats of the valve with laquer or plugging the safety 
valve connections from inside the drum. 

8.1.7.9 The vent lines from economizer and drum are to be led to a 
tank of 1 m 8 capacity located at drum level. 

8.1.7.10 The drains from economizer, and blowdown header and 
ring header are to be connected to the neutralizing pit. 

8.1.7.11 Whenever the economizer recirculation lines are present, the 
non-return valve flaps connecting the downcomers to economizer inlet 
header may be removed and also the isolation valve may be kept open 
during pickling and subsequent operations. 

8.1.7.12 For filling the superheater, a line from circulating pump 
discharge header should be connected to superheater header drain. 

8.1.7.13 For intermittent pressurizing during pickling, if required, a 
separate line through a pressurizing pump may also be connected to the 
superheat iv header drain at a convenient location. 

8.1.8 General Details 

8.1.8.1 Provision of sampling points should be made at the pump 
discharge and return line to the mixing tank. Draining facilities should 
be adequate to drain the entire system preferably within one hour. 

18 



IS i 10391 - 1982 

8.1.8.2 The chemical cleaning should commence at a time to be 
mutually decided upon by the parties concerned. However it is prudent 
to commence chemical cleaning operations at a time when the overall 
commissioning programme of the boiler is geared up to go on without 
any interruption. Completion of chemical cleaning at a premature stage 
w ; ll not realize the full advantage of the process. 

8.1.8.3 All the weldings in the temporary pipelines should be done 
with high-pressure welders and should be of radiographic quality. 

8.1.8.4 The pumps should be thoroughly serviced before commenc- 
ing the operation and should be given a trial run first. 

8.1.8.5 All the temporary valves should be serviced before commen- 
cing for easy operation. 

8. 1.8.6 Gland packing shall be of pure polytetrafluoroethylene. 

8.1.8.7 During chemical cleaning* especially during dosing of 
chemicals, the adherence to safety regulations for handling acids, caustics, 
corrosive chemicals, etc, shall be strictly observed. The persons 
carrying out the chemical cleaning operation should be equipped with 
goggles, rubber gloves, boots, etc. 

8.1.8.8 Adequate lighting facilities should be provided in the boiler 
area. 

8.1.8.9 Sufficient number of telephones should be installed at 
strategic locations for effective control of the process. 

8.1.8.10 An established laboratory facility should be made available 
along with enough trained chemists to carry out the analysis during the 
process effectively on the spot. 

8.1.8.11 A suitable alternate power source for at least one or two 
acid circulating pumps should be made available to meet out any 
emergency in the event of power failure. 

8.1.8.12 The chemical cleaning should be done under close technical 
and chemical supervision. 

8.1.8.13 Before commencing alkali boil-out, all major pipelines in 
the pre-boiler system should preferably be mass flushed and cleaned. 

8.1.8.14 Before commencing alkali boil out feed pump should be 
trial run and made ready for operation. 

8.1.8.15 Before commencing the process, sufficient amount of 
demineralized water storage with filling to dissolving tank at the rate of 
about 100 t/h should be ensured. 

8.1.8.16 For the complete cleaning process sufficient amount of 
heating steam at about 1 MN/m* and 250°C should be made available. 

19 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

8.1*9 Post Operational Chemical Cleaning of Boiler with Economizer But With- 
out Super Heater — The technological procedure for chemical cleaning is as 
given in 8.1.9.1 to 8.1.9.12. 

8.1.9.1 Water washing — Before commencing alkali boil-out, the boiler 
is flushed with water as follows: 

The boiler is filled through economizer, using boiler filling pump up to 
the top of the drum, taking care that the water does not enter the 
superheater. After filling, the water is drained in the shortest possible 
time by opening all the drain valves. This process is repeated two 
or three times till the water collected from drains is reasonably 
clear. 

8.1.9.2 Alkali boil-out — The alkali boil-out operation is performed 
by actual firing of the boiler at half its working pressure, or at 3*9 MN/ 
m 8 ( 40 kg/cm 1 ) gauge when boiler working pressures are above 
7*8 MN/m 2 ( 80 kg/cm 2 J, with 2 000 mg/1 of trisodiuin phosphate. This 
pressure as the case may be is maintained for a maximum of 48 hours. 
Trisodium phosphate may be dissolved in buckets and directly charged 
into the drum through drum manhole. Before charging the chemical, 
the boiler should be filled up to the bottom of the drum. After addition 
of chemicals, before light up, the boiler is filled up to normal operating 
level. 

The boiler is lighted up in accordance with standard instructions 
and pressure is raised gradually to half the boiler working pressure or 
3*9 MN/m 2 ( 40 kg/cm 2 ) as the case may be. Hold this pressure for 
48 hours with hourly blowdowns through individual blowdown valves 
lasting one minute each to remove substantial quantities of impurities 
collected in the water wall headers. During the operation the feeding 
rate is maintained to keep normal level in the drum. Samples are taken 
every two hours and analysis carried out for ^H, alkalinity and conducti- 
vity. Care should be taken to keep the furnace outlet flue gas temperature 
of superheater/reheater within limits. After 48 hours of boil- out, the 
system is drained hot completely at permissible pressure. When the 
boiler water alkalinity and phosphate concentration drops to half of 
their original values additional chemicals may be added to raise 
alkalinity. 

8.1.9.3 Rinsing after alkali boil-out — The rinsing after boil-out i* 
done, after the boiler is considerably cooled, as described for water 
washing till the system is free from alkali solution, that is, ^H of the 
effluent is equal to that of the water used for rinsing. The system is 
then made ready for acid pickling after superheater is filled and plugged, 
drum internals removed and downcomer and water wall downcomer 
orifice plate fixed, and nitrogen blanketing connection is made. 

20 



IS : 10391 - 1962 

8. 1.9.4 Filling of superheater with hydrazine water — Hydrazine 
( 200 mg/1 ) and ammonia ( to raise ^H to 9*6 ) are added to de minera- 
lized water in dissolving tank and slowly pumped to the superheater. 
When the />H of water rises to 9*6 at connecting tubes from superheater 
in drum, the connecting tubes are plugged with special temporary 
accessories. The superheater is kept under pressure ( say 0*5 MN/m 2 ) 
throughout the cleaning process. Suitable arrangements have to be 
provided for pressuring superheater during pickling, if required. 

8.1*9,5 Acid washing — The system is filled with demineralized 
( DM ) water and circulation established. The temperature of the water 
is raised and maintained at 65°C by admitting steam to the dissolving 
tank. The charging procedure is as follows: 

First, inhibitor is charged full and after few minutes the hydrochloric 
acid and ammonium bifluoride ( minimum 0*5 percent by mass ) are 
charged simultaneously. The addition of chemicals should be com- 
pleted within one hour to reach the required concentration of 4 percent. 
Care should be taken to see that the hydrochloric acid concentration 
in the cleaning solution does not increase beyond 5 percent at pump 
suction. The acid concentration should also not fall below 3 percent. 

During acid circulation, the concentration of hydrochloric acid in the 
system is checked every 15 minutes, and of ferric iron every half hour. 
Due to chemical reactions during washing process, the concentration of 
hydrochloric acid decreases rapidly at first and slowly afterwards and 
then it steadies at a constant value. Similarly, iron value increases and 
attains a steady value. The constant values of hydrochloric acid and 
iron content denote the completion of acid washing. The system is then 
drained under nitrogen blanketing and the drained acid is neutralized 
fcefore disposal. When the ferric iron content of the inhibited acid 
reaches 0*4 percent, the acid is drained and fresh charge of inhibited acid 
is used as ferric iron is highly corrosive for steel. 

8. 1.9.6 DM rinse — After draining the pickling solution completely, 
the boiler is filled with DM water and circulation established. When 
uniform concentrations of acid and iron are attained, in the system as 
indicated by analysis, it is drained under nitrogen blanketing. The ^H 
of the DM rinse should not be allowed to go above 4*0 in order to prevent 
precipitation of iron chloride as iron hydroxide which may settle down 
on cleaned boiler surfaces. 

8.1.9.7 Citric acid rinse — The system is again filled with DM water 
containing 0*2 percent by mass of citric acid. While filling the system 
with DM water add proportionate quantity of citric acid so as to give a 
uniform concentration of 0*2 percent. Steam may be admitted to raise 
the temperature to55to60*C. If required ammonia may be added to 
bring up the ^H of the circulating solution to 3*5 — 4*0. After attaining 

21 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

uniform concentration throughout the system circulation is maintained for*' 
one hour and the system drained under nitrogen blanketing. This citric 
acid rinse may be repeated with advantage for the effective removal of 
dissolved iron from the system. 

8.1.9.8 DM rinses — The system is filled with DM water. Circulation 
is established and maintained for one hour. After one hour of circula- 
tion the system is drained under nitrogen blanketing. During the rinsing 
operations the drain samples are checked for ^H and iron content. The 
rinsing operations are repeated till the iron content of the solution drops 
down to less than 25 mg/1 and its ^H approaches that of DM water. 

8.1.9.9 Soda ash washing — The system is filled with DM water 
containing 1 percent by mass of sodium carbonate. Proportionate 
amounts of sodium carbonate may be added while filling the system itself. 
After complete addition of chemicals and establishing circulation the 
temperature is raised to 85°C and circulation maintained for 4 to 6 hours 
at this temperature. The solution should be circulated through the 
system until the return water shows a strong alkaline reaction, as 
indicated by a sample turning red on addition of a few drops of phenol- 
phthalein. The same test should be made on samples from all sampling 
points and vents, to make sure that the soda ash solution has reached all 
areas previously reached by the acid. After the circulation is discontinued 
and soda ash solution is lowered to the normal operating level, the unit 
should be fired to raise the steam pressure and to hold it for 2 hours at 
0*3 to 6 MN/m 2 . This will aid in cleaning the surfaces and will also 
drive off hydrogen from the metal. The unit should be vented several 
times during this period to get rid of the hydrogen liberated. It is 
absolutely essential to vent out all the absorbed hydrogen from the boiler 
metal to prevent any possible embrittlement of steel due to hydrogen. 
When hydrogen venting is over, the firing of the unit is stopped and the 
pressure reduced to zero. The unit is flushed with hot DM water for 
about 1 hour and during this period the vents are opened several times 
to get rid of the liberated hydrogen. Finally, the unit is drained under 
nitrogen blanketing. 

8.1.9.10 Passivation — The object of passivation is to prevent corrosion 
since the cleaned surfaces are more susceptible to corrosion which takes 
place at a very fast rate. The corrosion is prevented by providing a thin 
layer of magnetite ( first stage ) which gets strengthened in the subse- 
quent firing of the boiler ( second stage ). The procedure for passivation 
is detailed below: 

a) First stage passivation — The system is filled with DM water and 
adjusted for circulation. The temperature of water is raised and 
maintained at 85°C by external steam heating. ^H of DM water 
is raised to 9*5 by adding ammonia and hydrazine is charged to 

22 



IS : 10391 - 1982 

get a concentration of 200 mg/1. The solution is left to circulate 
for about 20 hours at a temperature of 90 to 95°C. The hydra- 
zine concentration is maintained at 200 mg/1 throughout the 
operation. After 20 hours, the solution is drained hot from the 
system which is left to aeration by natural draft. 

b) Inspection of fast stage passivation — The drum is inspected 
thoroughly and all loose debris cleaned manually. Ring header 
hand-hole plate connections are removed and the header cleaned 
with water. 

c) Preparatory work for second stage passivation — The superheater plugs 
and downcomer orifice plates are removed and the drum inter- 
nals refitted. All the provisional equipment is dismantled and 
original fittings and mountings installed back. 

The boiler should be prepared as for normal operation. 

d) Second stage passivation — The chemicals namely ammonia liquor, 
for raising the ^H to 9*6, and hydrazine, to get a concentration of 
200 mg/1, are charged in the chemical dosing tank. The boiler is 
filled with feed pump to normal operating level in drum and 
lighted up with one or two oil burners. The steam pressure in 
drum is gradually raised to 4 MPa or half the working pressure, 
whichever is lower, and maintained at that value. Water 
samples are taken from feed line to find out hydrazine concentra- 
tion and pH value. The boiler is kept in service for 24 hours, 
maintaining the hydrazine concentration not less than 25 mg/1 in 
feed water. If the header drains are to be operated the fire 
should be killed. 

At the end of the process, the boiler is boxed up and allowed for 
natural cooling. At 100 or 200 kPa or the pressure recommended by the 
boiler manufacturer, the superheater air vents are opened, and at about 
90°C ( drum temperature ), the water in the system is drained and the 
system is left to aeration by natural draft. 

The second-stage passivation marks the end of the chemical cleaning 
process. It is advisable to put the chemically clean boiler into service 
within a period of seven days. 

If it has not been possible to light up the boiler again within 7 days, 
next fill of 200 mg/1 of hydrazine and ammonia for ^H value 96 should 
be given and the system boxed up completely with an intermittent check- 
ing for the values of ^H and hydrazine content, which should be made 
up by an extra dosing of hydrazine. 

Note — The time gap between the first and second stage inspections should be not 
more than 7 days. 

23 



IS : 10391 - 1982 

8. 1.9. 11 Boiler deposits with copper up to 5 percent — When boiler deposits 
contain copper up to 5 percent, then copper is also removed along with 
iron in a single-step cleaning. But to prevent the dissolved copper plat- 
ing the boiler drums and tubes, the dissolved copper is complexed with 
thiourea and removed. 

8.1.9.12 Boiler deposits with copper more than five percent — When copper 
content in the deposits is known to be higher than 5 percent, a removal 
step is first carried out before acid cleaning. In this process, trisodium 
ammonium citrate solution is used at 50°C and at a^H value of 10*0 with 
the addition of ammonia together with an oxidising agent such as sodium 
bromate or sodium nitrite. 

8.1.10 Post Operational Chemical Cleaning of Boilers ( with Superheater 
Included ) — When superheater is included in the boiler chemical cleaning, 
it is essential to check first the metallurgy of superheater element. If it 
is made of low chromium steel ( chromium less than 5 percent ) the same 
inhibited hydrochloric acid may be used for chemical cleaning of super- 
heaters. But, if superheater is made of high chromium steel or stainless 
steel then the cleaning should be done with inhibited 3 percent citric acid 
to dissolve the scales in the superheater but never inhibited hydrochloric 
acid as it would initiate chloride stress corrosion cracking. When super- 
heater has to be chemically cleaned, it is normally done after chemical 
cleaning of boiler drum and tubes as detailed under 8*1.9. This is done 
to prevent the major portion of deposits removed from boiler depositing 
in the superheater tubes during circulation. 

8.2 Preoperational Chemical Cleaning of Boilers 

8.2.1 Cleaning of Boilers Without Superheater — The same procedure as 
detailed for postope rational cleaning of boilers without superheater ( see 
8.1.9 ) is followed. 

8.2.2 Cleaning of Boilers with Superheater — The same procedure as 
detailed for postoperational cleaning of boilers with superheater ( see 
8.1.10 ) is followed. During flushing operation of superheater velocity of 
water should be about 1*5 m/s. 

9. PRECAUTIONS AND MEASURE OF RESULTS 

9.1 Cleaning should not be considered a substitute for proper water 
treatment. The rigid control maintained in well operated plants to 
achieve the best possible water treatment should not be relaxed because* 
of the relative ease of cleaning by the chemical method. Chemical 
cleaning is ordinarily not necessary more often than once in three years. 
Intervals between cleanings should be extended or reduced as conditions, 
warrant. This is essential since each time a unit is chemically cleaned 
the metal surfaces are depacified or stripped of their protective oxide 
coating, and in addition, a slight amount of parent metal is dissolved 
because none of the known inhibitors is completely effective. 

24 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

9.1.1 In handling acids, the recognized precautions of using goggles, 
rubber gloves and rubber aprons should be observed. Acid should be 
poured slowly into water; never should water be poured into acid. 

9.1.2 Acid cleaning removes mill scale and products of oxidation. A 
thorough visual inspection should be made after cleaning to determine 
whether any parts need replacement. 

9.1.3 Undrainable pressure parts, such as pendent-type superheater 
tube elements, require special attention to make certain that they are 
cleared of all acid solvent and loose deposits. Usually each individual 
element should be separately flushed through a tight fitting hose connec- 
tion, using a similar arrangement at the discharge end to avoid spilling of 
the flushing discharge into other elements. A mixture of compressed 
air and water as the flushing medium has also been used effectively. 

9.1.4 The chloride content of the citric acid, particularly used for 
superheater cleaning, should not be more than 0*1 mg/1 as CI in its 0*2 
percent ( m\m ) solution. 

9.1.5 In case of entry of chemicals to superheater, it should be back- 
flushed properly to the drum and care should be taken for proper 
steam-blowing at later stages before the turbine is taken into circuit. 
This shall be strictly followed both during preoperational and post- 
operational cleaning processes. 

9.1.6 In riveted joints the solvent may enter seams, and damage can 
occur without being detected. Therefore, chemical cleaning of riveted 
drums is usually avoided. This applies particularly to drums calked on 
the outside. 

9.1.7 The possibility of hydrogen gas being generated during acid 
cleaning of internal heating surfaces should never be overlooked. The 
quantity of hydrogen released is a measure of the ineffectiveness of the 
inhibitor. A portion of the hydrogen is absorbed by the metal, while 
the remainder forms part of the atmosphere in the vessel. The portion 
absorbed by the metal is liberated gradually, the time required decreas- 
ing as the temperature of the metal increases. While the metal wastage 
indicated by its generation may be inconsequential, the hydrogen is a 
source of two potentially dangerous conditions, namely, embrittlement of 
the steel and an explosive atmosphere in the vessel. 

9.1.8 On completion of acid cleaning, because of the possibility of 
hydrogen embrittlement, the steel should not be cold-worked ( tubes 
rolled, flanges tightened, seams calked, etc ) in any manner for at least 
four or five days until the pressure boiling out has been completed or the 
boiler has been brought up to steam pressure in the normal manner. 

25 



IS s 10391 - 1982 

9.1.9 In opening a unit for inspection after acid cleaning, the possibility 
of an explosion owing to the presence of free hydrogen in the atmos- 
phere within the unit should be recognized. There have been cases of 
explosion of hydrogen atmosphere in boilers after acid cleaning where 
fatal injuries have resulted. At atmospheric pressure and ordinary 
temperatures, the values for hydrogen content indicated for the inflam- 
mability of a mixture of hydrogen in air range from 4 percent to 75 percent. 
The ignition temperature of hydrogen in air, at atmospheric pressure, is 
between 580 and 590°C. 

9.1.10 Because of the possibility of an explosion, the following precau- 
tions should be observed. 

9.1.10.1 After acid cleaning, no one should enter the unit or get in 
the way of any openings to the pressure parts unless the atmosphere 
within has been cleared of explosive gases. Until this has been done, 
open flames, flashlights, any other lighting equipment, or anything that 
might produce a spark of any kind should not be used within or near the 
openings of pressure parts. 

9.1.11 The following steps may be taken to clear the atmosphere of 
explosive gases within the pressure parts. 

9.1.11*1 Following an acid cleaning, the unit should be thoroughly 
flushed with warm water to a positive overflow from the topmost vent to 
besides other, make certain that all the atmosphere within has been 
displaced. To warm the unit and thus accelerate the libration of 
hydrogen absorbed in the metal, the temperature of the water should be 
held as nearly as possible at 100°C by light firing or other means. 

9.1.11.2 After the unit has been opened, air eductors, placed at 
locations such as open drum manholes, should be used to circulate air 
through the unit for removal of hydrogen being liberated from the metal. 
This should be continued until analysis by a Burrell or other suitable 
instrument shows that the air within is free of explosive gases. 

9.2 Measure of Results — Determination of the type and approximate 
amount of different kinds of scale and impurities removed from a unit 
at a cleaning will be possible if, at periodic intervals during the operation, 
the spent cleaning solvent and the water and solid matter ejected are 
properly sampled and analysed and a record is kept of the total amount 
involved. This information serves as a valuable guide for further 
boiler-water treatment and the determination of the required frequency 
•f cleaning. 

26 



IS 1 10391 - 1982 

9.2*1 Finally, while chemical cleaning with inhibited acid is in progress, 
a cut piece sample of boiler tube should be kept hung in the boiler drum 
throughout the acid cleaning period to see the effect of the inhibited acid 
on the boiler tube cleaning. At the same time a well cleaned and weighed 
small cut piece of boiler tube should also be kept hung in the same boiler 
drum during the acid cleaning operation and weighed again after the 
completion of acid cleaning operation. The loss in mass would denote 
the corrosion on the boiler due to the use of inhibited acid. A typical 
corrossion rate will be 2*5 g/m 2 hour. 



27 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Hoadquarton: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 

Fax : 91 1 1 3234062, 91 1 1 3239399, 91 1 1 3239382 

Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all Offices) 

Central Laboratory: 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 
Regional Officio: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
'Eastern : 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, VIP. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern j CIT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 
tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offices: 

Pushpak*. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 
tPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore - Tumkur Road, 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 
Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 
Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 
Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 
53/5 Ward No. 29, R G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 
5-8-58C, L. N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 
E-52. Chitaranjan Marg, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 
117/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 
Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 

LUCKNOW 226001 
Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
T C. No. 14/1421, University P. O. Palayam, 

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 
NIT Building, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 



'Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. O. Princep Street, 

CALCUTTA 700072 
tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 
tSales Office is at 'F* Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square, 

BANGALORE 560002 



Telephone 


8-77 00 32 


323 76 17 


337 86 62 


60 38 43 


235 23 15 


832 92 95 


550 13 48 


839 49 55 


55 40 21 


40 36 27 


21 01 41 


8-28 88 01 


8-71 19 96 


54 11 37 


20 10 83 


37 29 25 


21 68 76 


23 89 23 


26 23 05 


6 21 17 


52 51 71 


32 36 35 


27 10 85 


309 65 28 


222 39 71 



Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurja, Inda 



