**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  12938  (1990) :  Acceptance  standards  for  radiographic 
inspection  of  steel  castings  [MTD  14:  Foundry] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  1293S :  1990 

(Reaffirmed  2000) 


Indian  Standard 


ACCEPTANCE  STANDARDS  FOR 

RADIOGRAPHIC  INSPECTION  OF 

STEEL  CASTINGS 


tJDC    66914-14 :  62017915 


©  BIS  1990 
BUREAU     OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,      9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW   DELHI  110002 

September  1990  Price  Group  1 


Steel  Castings  Sectional  Committee,  MTD  17 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  on  5  April  1990,  after  the  draft 
finalized  by  the  Steel  Castings  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Metallurgical 
Engineering  Division  Council. 

For  the  interpretation  of  radiographs  and  the  assignment  of  radiographic  quality  levels  to  a  casting, 
it  is  necessary  to  use  a  standard  set  of  reference  radiographs.  The  reference  radiographs  available  from 
ASTM  are  the  only  internationally  issued  and  recognized  documents  that  may  be  used  for  this 
purpose. 

While  preparing  this  standard,  assistance  has  been  derived  from  ISO  4993  :  1986  *Stee]  castings  — 
radiographic  inspection',  issued  by  the  International  Organization  for  Standardization. 


IS  12938 :  1990 


Indian  Standard 

ACCEPTANCE  STANDARDS  FOR 

RADIOGRAPHIC  INSPECTION  OF 

STEEL  CASTINGS 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  specifies  the  general  requirements 
for  the  radiography  of  steel  castings  by  means  of 
X-rays  or  gamma  rays  in  accordance  with  pro- 
cedures given  in  IS  2595  :  1978. 

2  REFERENCES 

2.1  The  Indian  Standards  listed  below  are  neces- 
sary adjuncts  to  this  standard: 

IS  No,  Title 

2595  :  1978  Code    of  practice    for    radio- 

graphic testing  (first  revision  ) 

2953  :  1985  Glossary    of    terms     used  for 

interpretation  of  welds  and 
castings  radiographs  ( first 
revision  ) 

3657:1978  Radiographic      image     quality 

indicators  (first  revision  ) 

8780  :  1978  Code    of     practice     for     non- 

destructive    testing      of     steel 

castings 

3  TERMINOLOGY 


3.1  For     the    purpose    cf 
definitions  given  in  IS  2953 

4  BASIS  OF  PURCHASE 


this    standard, 
1985  shall  apply. 


the 


4.1  The  request  for  radiographic  examination 
and  ail  pertinent  information  relatmg  thereto,  such 
as  sensitivity,  coverage  and  acceptance  criteria, 
shall  be  indicated  in  the  enquiry  and  order. 

It  is  open  to  the  purchaser  to  specify  at  the  time 
of  enquiry  and  order,  different  quality  levels  for 
different  areas  of  even  the  same  casting. 

4.2  Radiographic  coverage  may  be  of  two  types  — 
Pilot  or  Regular  Production  Inspection,  as  may  be 
specified  in  the  enquiry  and  order.  For  both 
types  of  inspection,  the  area  to  be  examined  and 
the  frequency  of  the  examination  shall  be  as 
specified  in  the  enquiry  and  order,  or  as  mutually 
agreed  upon. 

4.3  If  requirements  are  imposed  for  which  no 
accepted  standard    or  document  is   available,   a 


detailed  specification  of  such  requirements  shall  be 
provided  at  the  time  of  enquiry  and  order. 

4,4  Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  enquiry 
and  the  order,  Radiographic  Quality  Level 
(  sensitivity  )  required  for  radiography  shall  be 
2  percent. 

5  TIME  OF  EXAMINATION 

5.1  Unless  otherwise  specified  in  the  enquiry 
and  order,  the  radiographic  examination  may 
be  performed  at  any  point  in  the  manufactur- 
ing cycle,  before  or  after  the  final  heat  treatment. 

5.2  The  surface  preparation  of  the  area  to  be 
examined  shall  be  such  that  any  surface 
irregularities  do  not  mask  or  be  confused  with 
discontinuities. 

5.3  The  penetrameier  or  image  quality  indicator 
to  be  used  shall  conform  to  IS  3657  :  1978,  or 
may  be  of  any  other  type  provided  that  the 
required  sensitivity  level  is  achieved. 

6  PERSONNEL  QUALIFICATIONS 

6.1  Operations  shall  be  carried  out  by  qualified 
personnel.  The  system  of  qualification  shall  be 
agreed  upon  between  the  purchaser  and  the 
supplier  (  foundry  )  and  shall  form  a  part  of  the 
techincal  specification,  or  be  stated  in  the  enquiry 
and  order, 

7  SHOOTING  SKETCHES 

7.1  Shooting  sketches  for  Pilot  Inspection 

When  specified  in  the  enquiry  and  order  prelimi- 
nary shooting  sketches  shall  be  prepared  by  the 
supplier  for  submission  with  the  radiographs  of 
the  pilot  casting  for  approval  by  the  customer. 
These  sketches  shall  show  the  area  of  the  part  to 
be  examined,  and  shall  include  the  following 
information  for  each  exposure: 

a)  The  gamma  source  or  kilovoltage  used. 

b)  The  location  of  radiation  in  relation  to  the 
area  covered,  and  the  film. 

c)  The  physical  size  of  the  source. 

d)  The  area  covered  by  the  film. 

e)  The   placement   of  the  film    and  location 
markers. 


1 


IS  12938 :  1990 


f)  The  film-to-source  distance. 

g)  The  placement  of  the  image  quality  indica- 
tors or  penetrameters  and  the  image  quahty 
value. 

h)  The  section  thickness. 

j)  The  number  and  types  of  films  used. 

k)  The  film  identification. 

m)  The  thickness    and  type    of    intensifying 

screens. 
n)  The  value  of  density  required, 
p)  The  geometrical  unsharpness, 
q)  The  conditions  of  development  of  films. 

7.2  Shooting  Sketches  for  Regular  Production 
Inspection 

The  preliminary  shooting  sketch  may,  by  mutual 
agreement  between  the  supplier  and  the  purchaser, 
be  adjusted  at  the  time  of  examination  of  the  first 
casting  sample.  Subsequent  production  castings 
shall  be  examined  in  accordance  with  the  finalized 
shooting  sketches,  which  shall  include  the  informa- 
ation  as  given  in  7.1.  Any  new  criteria  established 
for  the  radiography  of  the  production  castings, 
such  as  changes  in  the  percentage  of  coverage  of 
the  part  or  changes  in  the  acceptance  standards, 
shall  be  stated. 

8  REJECTION/ACCEPTANCE  CRITERIA 

8.1  The  rejection/acceptance    criteria    shall    be 


specified  in  the  purchase  order  and  shall  be 
based  on  the  applicable  documents  reference  in 
ASTM  reference  radiographs. 

9  FOUNDRY  RESPONSIBILITY 

9,1  Unless  otherwise  specified  at  the  time  of 
enquiry  and  order,  the  responsibility  of  the 
supplier  (  foundry  )  is  limited  to  the  attainment  of 
the  standards  specified  in  the  order  in  all  castings 
or  portions  of  castings  specifically  calling  for 
radiographic  examination.  -Castings  or  portions 
of  castings  not  required  to  be  radiographically 
examined  by  the  foundry  shall  not  be  subject  to 
rejection  based  upon  results  of  any  subsequent 
radiographic  examination.  Also,  castings  shall 
not  be  subject  to  rejection  based  upon  radiographic 
re-examination  subsequent  to  their  acceptance  on 
the  basis  of  the  original  radiography,  if  such 
examination  is  carried  out  by  techniques  other 
than  those  agreed  upon  at  the  time  of  enquiry 
and  order,  and/or  in  a  manner  different  from  that 
described  in  the  finalized  shooting  sketch  (7.2). 

10  RECORDS 

10.1  Unless  otherwise  agreed  upon  between  the 
supplier  and  the  purchaser,  records  of  radiographic 
inspection  shall  be  kept  by  the  supplier  for  a 
period  of  atleast  3  years  from  the  date  of  supply 
of  the  relevant  casting. 


Standard  Mark 

The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards  Act,  1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  Standard  Mark  on 
products  covered  by  an  Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced 
to  comply  with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well  defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  BIS  and  operated  by  the 
producer.  Standard  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  BIS  for  conformity 
to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under  which  a  licence  for  the 
use  of  the  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to  manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained 
from  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in 
any  form  without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS,  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the 
course  of  implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade 
designations.    Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (  Publications  ),  BIS. 

Revision  of  Indian  Standards 

Indian  Standards  are  reviewed  periodically  and  revised,  when  necessary  and  amendments,  if  any,  are 
issued  from  time  to  time.  Users  of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of 
the  latest  amendments  or  edition.  Comments  on  this  Indian  Standard  may  be  sent  to  BIS  givmg  the 
following  reference: 

Doc  :  No.  MTD  17  (  3575  ) 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 
Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  :  ^ 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 

Telephones  :  331  01  31,    331  13  75  Telegrams:  Manaksanstha 

(  Common  to   all  Offices  ) 

Regional  Offices  :  Telephone 

Central  :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  C331  01  31 

NEW  DELHI  110002  {33I  13  75 

Eastern  :  1/14  C.  I.  T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  L  P.  Road,  Maniktola  37  86  62 

CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  445-446,  Sector  35-C,  CHANDIGARH  160036  2  18  43 

Southern  :  C-  L  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600113  41  29  16 

Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (  East )  6  32  92  95 

BOMBAY  400093 

Branches  :  AHMADABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATL  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR,  KANPUR, 
PATNA.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 


Printed  at  Printwell  Pointers,  Oeini,  inaia 


