INATA HTAR IS 18084 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


чт аат Sa — ata Чат d 
5ч & Re utoa иат 


Sample Preparation — Dispersing 
Procedures for Powders in Liquids 


ICS 19.120 


© BIS 2023 


aea Are À 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 SEL SITE sit ATT, Ag (8 - 110002 
—————-—9 MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 10 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Sieves, 
Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


The evaluation of particle size distribution is of crucial importance for research projects, product development, 
process control, quality control, and other technical activities where particle size effects are important. Paints, 
inks, filled plastics, ore processing, pharmaceuticals, agricultural and cosmetic products depend on accurate 
particle size analysis for their commercial production. 


A typical powder is composed of clumps of ‘primary’ particles that are held together by weak or strong forces. 
The size of clumps remaining after the powder has been wetted into a liquid depends in part on how much 
energy has been expended in breaking up these clumps. Since a clump responds to most particle sizing methods 
as a large particle would, the presence of clumps in incompletely dispersed samples skews the reported 
particle size distribution to larger sizes than if all the clumps were broken up. A particle size analysis is 
useful only if the sample is prepared so that the particles are in a well-defined degree of dispersion, preferably 
one in which most clumps are fully deagglomerated and in which the particles do not reagglomerate or adhere 
to the walls of the sample container during the time required for analysis. 


While ‘complete’ dispersion to primary particles is often desired, it is important to remember that in many cases 
the most useful information is obtained when the sample is not fully dispersed. For example, if a customer 
blends the powder into a liquid using a low-shear process that does not break moderately strong bonds in 
clumps, the quality control tests for powder intended for that customer should use similarly low shear 
during sample preparation and analysis. 


Because of the impurities present, the equipment available for breaking up clumps, the methods used for particle 
size analysis, and the dispersing agents available for testing may vary from one site to another, the procedure 
developed at one site by applying the guidelines in this standard may differ from (but be as valid and as useful 
as) that developed at another site for the same powder. 


This standard is not applicable for the formulation of complex and commercial mixtures highly loaded with solids. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in 
this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


ISO 14887: 2000 Sample preparation — Dispersing procedures for powders in liquids 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


SAMPLE PREPARATION — DISPERSING PROCEDURES FOR 
POWDERS IN LIQUIDS 


1SCOPE 


This standard provides guidelines to 
make dispersions from powder/liquid 
combinations. It provides procedures for: 


a) Wetting a powder into a liquid; 

b) Deagglomerating the wetted clumps; 

c) Determining if solution composition can be 
adjusted to prevent reagglomeration; 

d) Selecting dispersing agents to prevent 
reagglomeration; and 

e) Evaluating the stability of the dispersion 
against reagglomeration. 


This standard is applicable to particles ranging in 
size from approximately 0.05 um to 100 um. It 
provides a series of questions on the nature of the 
powder and liquid involved. The answers are used 
with charts that guide the user to generic dispersing 
agents that are likely to be suitable for dispersing the 
powder in the liquid. This standard applies only to 
the preparation of simple, dilute dispersions (less 
than 1 percent by volume of solids) for particle size 
analysis. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 8883 Methods of sampling chemical 
and chemical product: 
(Part 1) : 2005 General requirements апа 
precautions (first revision) 
(Part 2) Sampling equipment, 
(Sec 1): 1978 For solids 
(Sec 2): 1978 For liquids 
(Sec 3): 1978 For gases 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this standard, the following 


terms and definitions apply. 


3.1 Agglomerate — Assemblage of particles 
which are loosely coherent. 


3.2 Aggregate — Assemblage of particles rigidly 
joined together. 


3.3 Clump — Assemblage of particles which are 
either rigidly joined or loosely coherent. 


3.4 Critical Micelle Concentration (CMC) — 
Concentration of dispersing agent above which 
micelles will form. 


3.5 Floc — Assemblage of particles which are very 
loosely coherent. 


3.6 Primary Particles — Units that are to be 
measured in the particle size analysis, in general 
harder to break than clumps. 


3.7 Tyndall Effect — Light scattered perpendicular 
to a beam of light passing through a liquid that 
contains particles. 


4 EXAMINATION OF THE DRY POWDER 
4.1 Sampling 


Sampling shall be as per IS 8883 or any other 
methods as mutually agreed. Sample preparation 
shall always be done consistently so that repeated 
preparations based on replicate samples of a batch of 
powder (which was carefully mixed before being 
sampled or subdivided into samples) give closely 
comparable results. 


4.2 Clump Size Range and Particle Size Range 


Sprinkle the dry powder on a microscope slide and 
examine it using an optical microscope at 
200 x magnification or other suitable magnification. 
Put a cover glass over the powder on the microscope 
slide and tap the cover glass lightly with a spatula 
(take care to avoid breaking the cover glass) to see 
how easy it is to crush the clumps. Note the 
approximate size range of the clumps that are not 
broken up by such crushing. If the majority of the 
particles are smaller than 1 um, use a transmission 
or scanning electron microscope to observe and 
characterize the particles. 


IS 18084 : 2023 


4.3 Shape and Surface Roughness; their 
Variation with Size 


Note whether the surfaces of the fundamental 
particles are spherical or crystalline, smooth or 
rough, porous or nonporous. Determine whether all 
the sizes of particle have the same morphology. If 
the particles are very rough or porous, obtain an 
experimental measure of the volume-specific 
surface area (m?/kg). If this value is large compared 
to the area computed for spheres with the powder's 
particle size distribution, then an unusually large 
amount of dispersing agent (compared to a similar 
size distribution of spherical nonporous particles) 
may be required to stabilize the dispersion. 


NOTE — The volume-specific surface area of spheres may 
be calculated from 


Sy = 6М_;з 
n 
- Xi 

M-13 = Ж qs;In —— 
— Xi-1 
i-1 

where 
S, = Volume-specific surface area (m?/kg); 


M.43 = Complete —1- moment of the density 
distribution of particle volume; 


qz; = Density distribution of particle volume; 
and 
Xi = Upper particle size of the i-th particle 


size interval (m). 


5 SELECTION OF A LIQUID AND TRIAL 
DISPERSION 


5.1 Selection of a Liquid 


List the liquids that are commonly used for 
dispersing the solids for the selected method of 
particle size analysis and shall strike from the list 
any that fail to satisfy the following criteria. 


a) If the method is sedimentation, the 
liquid | shall have a specific gravity that 
differs sufficiently from that of the 
powder to permit the use of this method; 

b) Ifthe method is light scattering, the liquid 
shall have a refractive index (at the 
analytical wavelengths) that differs 
sufficiently from that of the powder to 
permit the use of this method; 

c) The liquid shall have negligible 
reactivity with the powder; 

d) The liquid shall not swell or shrink 
the particles by more than 5 percent in 
diameter; 

e) The liquid shall provide a solubility of 
less than 5 g of powder per 1 kg of liquid; 
and 
NOTE — This is to minimize Ostwald ripening 
that could cause the particle size distribution to 
change during the measurement time. 


f) The liquid shall have a change in the 
solubility (for the powder) with temperature 
of less than 0.1 mg/I/K, or the temperature 
shall be controlled throughout the preparation 
and analysis to keep the solubility from 
changing by more than 0.5 mg/l. 


NOTE — If the particle size analysis method requires 
10 mg of powder dispersed in 1 litre of liquid, a 
temperature rise of 5 K (from an ultrasonic probe or 
particle-analysis instrument warmth) would cause the 
dissolution of 1 mg or 10 percent of the powder. 


5.2 Preparation of a Test Paste of the Powder 


Put two drops (or 0.1 g) of the liquid on an etch- 
roughened glass plate ("frosted" glass). Blend in a 
roughly equal amount of powder by sprinkling 
powder on the liquid surface and rubbing it into the 
liquid using a circular motion of a 10 mm wide 
spatula, applying a moderate amount of pressure 
(sufficient to read 1 kg on the scale of a balance). 
The objective is to wet all the powder surfaces and 
to break up all clumps of powder into primary 
particles. The high concentration of solids provides 
crowded conditions that favour collision between 
clumps and breakup into primary particles. These 
crowded conditions will also favour flocculation 
unless the particles repel one another. 


5.3 Preparation of a Dilute Dispersion of the 
Powder 


Make a dilute dispersion (4 percent by mass) from 
the concentrated paste by adding a few drops at a 
time of the liquid and blending in with the spatula 
until 50 drops (about 2.5 g) of liquid have been 
added. This quantity should be sufficient for 
examination with a microscope. If a larger quantity 
is required for other types of tests, follow 
the instructions given in 6.2. 


6 EXAMINATION OF THE DISPERSION 
6.1 Evaluate for Under- or Over-Grinding 


Examine the dilute dispersion using an optical 
microscope (for particles larger than 1 um in 
diameter) or an electron microscope (for particles 
smaller than 1 шп in diameter). Use 
200 x magnification with the optical microscope 
and view the particles by transmitted light. 


Note whether the clumps originally seen in the dry 
powder have completely broken up during the 
procedure for making the paste and diluting it. If 
not, make a new dispersion using ultrasonic 
treatment (see 8.2). Evaluate this new dispersion 
and increase, as needed, the energy put in to 
breakup clumps until full dispersion is attained. 


Note what fraction of primary particles have 
become broken during the procedure for making 
the paste and diluting it. If the fraction of particles 
broken is over 5 percent, make a new dispersion by 
simply stirring the powder into the liquid. Evaluate 
this new dispersion and increase the energy put in 
to breakup clumps as needed until full dispersion is 
attained with less than 5 percent breakage of 
primary particles (see 8.2). 


Record the conditions that avoid under or 
over-grinding and use these to prepare 
dispersions for evaluation until the  clump 
breakup process is optimized according to the 
procedures in 6.2. 


6.2 Evaluation of Stability 
6.2.1 Introduction 


If the suspending liquid has a viscosity below 
10 mPa.s and the particles are well-dispersed, very 
small particles will appear to move randomly in the 
microscope's field of view. Particles in the 1 um to 
5 um range are best for observing this effect. Note 
that, even if the powder consists mostly of 
larger-size particles, there are likely to be a few 
particles inside the 1 um to 5 um range that can 
indicate whether or not the dispersion is stable. If 
the particles are smaller than 1 um some other form 
of evaluation shall be used, such as measuring the 
rheological stress-strain cycle of a 10 percent by 
volume solids dispersion from 0.1 57! to 100 s^! to 
see if it exhibits hysteresis (indicative of structure 
formation and breakage) or not (in which case the 
dispersion is stable). 


Observe the dilute dispersion using the optical 
microscope. Note what happens when two 
particles come close together. Rate the stability 
as good if the particles repel each other rather 
than coming into contact. Rate the stability as 
marginal if the particles collide and stay together 
briefly before separating again. Rate the stability as 
poor if the particles collide and remain in contact to 
form a permanent floc. If the stability is good, no 
added dispersing agent is required to form a stable 
dispersion. If the stability is marginal or poor then 
either solution conditions (such as pH) shall be 
changed or a dispersing agent shall be added to 
provide stability. 


Other methods for evaluating dispersions are 
noted in Annex A. If microscopy and the other 
techniques are not feasible then particle size 
analysis may be used to evaluate stability. If a 
series of analyses separated by several hours lie 
within the reproducibility of the instrument 
(determined using a dispersion that is known to be 
stable) then the sample dispersion may be 
considered to be stable. 


6.2.2 Notes on Optical Microscopy 


Optical microscopy is the simplest and most 
effective way of evaluating the degree of 
deagglomeration and the stability of dispersions 
containing particles that are above 1 um in size. 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Note that particles whose refractive index is close to 
that of the liquid will not provide enough contrast to 
be viewed with the optical microscope. At a solids 
concentration of a few percent, well-dispersed 
particles will appear to behave as separate entities. 
As the cover glass is moved sideways over the 
surface of the slide, note whether the particles in the 
dispersion move individually and not as a bonded 
group. Note whether particles that are below about 
5 um in size may exhibit ‘brownian motion’, as 
particles move about erratically due to unbalanced 
collisions of the particle with molecules of the 
surrounding fluid. Particles smaller than the limit of 
optical resolution (about 0.3 um) appear as bright 
spots when they are illuminated from the side with a 
dark field behind them ‘ultramicroscopy’. Although 
the width of the spot is indeterminate, the size of the 
particle responsible for the spot may be estimated by 
its brownian motion: the more actively a spot 
moves, the smaller the particle creating the spot. 
The size of the smallest detectable particle using this 
technique depends on the scattering power of the 
particles. 


Particles of titanium dioxide or a metal as small as 
about 0.02 шп may be observed using this 
technique, but for oil droplets the limit of 
observation is about 0.1 шт. 


Dispersion stability is destroyed if the particles 
stick to the glass microscope slide. This is a 
particular problem for positively charged particles, 
since glass is normally negatively charged. Such 
adhesion can also invalidate the measurement 
process, especially for light-scattering methods 
where the amount of solid circulating for analysis 
may be so small that it is completely removed by 
adsorption on the walls of the sample circulation 
system. In such cases, one can chemically treat the 
glass (with a cationic adsorbate such as dodecyl 
trim ethyl ammonium bromide) so that it becomes 
positively charged and thus prevents deposition of 
the particles being analysed. 


6.2.3 Notes on Electron Microscopy 


Evaluation by electron microscopy requires that the 
dispersion be spread out on a thin support film and 
dried. As the liquid evaporates and the liquid 
surface shrinks between two particles, surface 
tension can pull previously well dispersed particles 
into contact to form a clump. This problem can be 
minimized by using a liquid with a low surface 
tension. Dispersion stability shall be judged as 
good if the particles are well spread out on the 
grid and bad if they are found mostly in clumps. 


6.3 Evaluation of any Flocs Formed 


If flocs have formed, put a cover glass over the 
dispersion on the microscope slide. Use a spatula to 
push the cover glass gently from the edge to slide it 
over the dispersion and apply shear force to the 
flocs. Note whether the flocs break up and how 
rapidly they reform. Flocs are reversible if they 


IS 18084 : 2023 


break up under shear and then reform similar flocs. 
Flocs are unstable if shear causes large, loose flocs 
to roll up into small, tight flocs. Flocs are strong if 
they do not break up with gentle sliding. In the last 
case, the addition of dispersing agent may not be 
effective unless a high shear force can be applied to 
break the floc in the presence of dispersing agent. 


7 IDENTIFICATION OF 
DISPERSING AGENTS 


POSSIBLE 


7.1 Wetting of the Solid Particle by the Liquid 


The control of the wetting process allows the 
adhesion forces to be modified between the particles 
and the binding forces produced by liquids in the 
intermediate capillaries to be partially modified. 


The general aim for particle size analysis is 
spontaneous wetting as complete as possible. This 
can be searched by two ways: 


a) Low-interfacial tension liquid/gaseous by 
wetting agents; and 


b) Low-interfacial tension solid/liquid by 
hydrophilizing agents. 


In the case of insufficient wetting, a simultaneous 
mechanical treatment can be recommended (highly 
intensive ultrasonic treatment of the suspension, 
kneading of the system as a plastic mixture with a 
spatula). 


7.2 General Principles 


Complete dispersion of a powder in a liquid occurs 
when the individual particles that made up the 
original clumps have become separated, move 
independently of each other, and remain separated 
from one another. This requires that there be no 
attractive force between the particles as they 
approach one another. If there is an attraction, then 
the solid/dispersion will exhibit non-Newtonian 
flow and have a yield stress (that is, the dispersion 
will be able to support a finite shear stress without 
any flow occurring.) Most of the indirect tests of 
dispersion rely on this effect. For example, a 
dispersion with yield stress enables settling 
particles to form an open structure which does not 
collapse under the force of gravity. Such a 
dispersion will settle to form a higher sedimentation 
volume (lower sediment density) than a completely 
dispersed system would. Highly anisotropic 
particles form a more or less rigid gel at very low 
concentrations of solids when there is a net attractive 
force between the particles. 


7.3 Charge Stabilization 
7.3.1 Introduction 


Particles which bear a surface charge will repel each 
other if the electrostatic repulsion is larger than the 


polarizability attraction (also called the hamaker or 
van der waals attraction). A surface charge 
corresponding to a zeta potential (written as 4) 
greater than 30 mV is generally sufficient to provide 
a stable dispersion. Charge stabilization is the best 
way to stabilize dispersions in which the liquid has 
a relative dielectric permittivity greater than 
30 (methanol at room temperature has a 
relative dielectric permittivity of 33, water of about 
80) and an ionic strength less than 0.1 mol/l (that 
is, a low concentration of ions in solution). 


7.3.2 Surface lonization 


The charge on the particle may arise from ionization 
of surface groups (influenced by the pH of the 
solution). For example, surface amine groups will 
adsorb a hydrogen ion from solution and become 
positively charged if the pH is below the pK» for the 
powder. Surface carboxyl groups will lose a 
hydrogen ion and become negatively charged if the 
pH is above the pK, for the powder. Amphoteric 
surface groups, such as the OH groups found on 
metal oxide or hydroxide, will adsorb a hydrogen 
ion and become positive if the pH is below the pHiso 
for that oxide and will lose a hydrogen ion and 
become negative if the pH is above the pHiso. The 
dependence of hydrogen ion adsorption on pH is 
such that (when the ionic strength is below 
0.1 mol/l) the zeta potential generally becomes large 
enough to stabilize a dispersion if the pH is two or 
more units away from рН. 


7.3.3 Differential Dissolution of Lattice Ions 


If the powder is ionic and does not dissolve 
significantly in the liquid, the presence of a soluble 
salt of one of the ions making up the powder may 
result in the adsorption of the common ion. For 
example, a sodium bromide solution will disperse 
silver bromide in water and a potassium hydrogen 
phosphate solution will disperse calcium 
hydroxyapatite in water. Since these soluble salts do 
not reduce the surface tension of water significantly, 
they are not classified as surfactants. 


7.3.4 Adsorption of Multiply Charged Ions 


If the powder is ionic or has highly polar bonds and 
the liquid is water, multiply charged ions which are 
not part of the crystal lattice may be adsorbed to 
form a charged surface of soluble salts. Examples 
are polyphosphate, hexametaphosphate, 
pyrophosphate and polysilicate ions. Since the salts 
involving these ions do not reduce the surface 
tension of liquids in which they are dissolved, they 
are not classified as surfactants. 


If the powder is a nonpolar organic material and 
the liquid is a polar organic material, surface 
ions can be created by adding a neutral ion-pair 
to the system. The ion-pair adsorbs on the particle 
surface and then dissociates into ions, one of which 


desorbs to leave a charged particle. For example, the 
additive trimethyldodecylamine hydroxybenzoate 
dissociates to form an aliphatic quaternary amine 
(cationic) and a polar organic acid (anionic). 


7.3.5 Adsorption of Surfactant Ions 


Organic powders suspended in water can become 
charged by adsorbing the organic ion of a surfactant, 
leaving the inorganic counter-ion in solution. 
Organic amines adsorb a hydrogen ion to become 
positively charged if the pH is below the pK»; 
organic acids lose a hydrogen ion to become 
negatively charged if the pH is above the pKa. 
Zwitterionics and amino acids have a more complex 
dependence of charge on pH. The dependence of 
ionization on pH is such that (when the ionic 
strength is below 0.1 mol/l) the zeta potential 
generally becomes large enough to stabilize a 
dispersion if the pH is more than two units above the 
pK, of a hydrogen-ion-releasing material or if the 
pH is more than two units below the pK» of a 
hydrogen-ion-accepting material surface. 


7.4 Steric Stabilization 


This is usually the best way to stabilize dispersions 
in which the liquid has a relative dielectric 
permittivity less than 30 or an ionic strength greater 
than 0.1 mol/l (that is a high concentration of ions in 
solution). 


NOTE — Methanol at room temperature has a relative 
dielectric permittivity of 33. 


Magnetic particles have long-range attractive forces 
that cannot easily be shielded by additives. 
Dispersions of such particles may be stabilized 
using reactive anchors attached to polymeric chains 
of high molecular weight that are soluble in the 
dispersing fluid. 


Steric dispersing agents may be anionic, cationic 
or nonionic dispersing agents or block copolymers. 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Their molecules usually consist of an anchor 
section and a backbone section. The anchor is 
designed to absorb on the solid: for example, 
alkane chains or aryl groups will adsorb on 
organics. The backbone is designed to be soluble in 
the liquid: for example, poly (ethylene oxide) 
chains are soluble in water. Soluble polymers that 
do not adsorb or that adsorb weakly shall be 
avoided since these can cause depletion 
flocculation and make dispersion even harder to 
achieve. 


7.5 Procedure for Selection 


7.5.1 The procedure for identifying possible 
dispersing agents for testing is as follows. 


a) Use 7.5.2 to determine the powder 
category for the powder being analysed. 
b) Use 7.5.3 to determine the liquid category 
for the liquid being used to suspend the 


powder. 

c) Use 7.5.4 to determine the dispersing 
agents category for the chosen 
combination of powder and 
liquid categories. 

NOTE — Some categories of solid and some 


of dispersing agents are charged опу in 
specific pH ranges when the suspending liquid 
is water. The effectiveness of that charge in 
stabilizing the system depends on Ше ionic 
strength of the solution. These factors аге 
incorporated in the columns ‘Condition’ and 
‘Dispersing-Agent Category’ in Table 3. 

d) In the dispersing agent listing category, 
find one or more specific materials that 
are in the dispersing agent category 
that | was recommended as likely to be 
effective. 


7.5.2 Determination of the Powder's Category 
(see Table 1) 


Table 1 Powder's Category 


(Clause 7.5.2) 


SI No. Solid Category 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Activated carbon Hydrogen-bonding organic 
NOTE — Activated carbon has a high specific surface area and the surface is often oxidized. 
ii) Adipic acid Organic acid (рК. = 4.5) 
Ш) Alumina See aluminium oxide 
iv) Aluminium Metal 
NOTE — In air, the surface of aluminium becomes aluminium oxide. 
v) Aluminium hydroxide See boehmite 
NOTE — There are several other types of aluminum hydroxide. 
vi) Aluminium oxide Metal oxide (pHiso = 9.2) 
vii) Anatase See titanium dioxide 
viil) Barium sulfate Ionic salt 
ix) Boehmite Metal hydroxide (pHiso = 8.3) 
x) Boron carbide Weakly polar 
xi) Boron oxide Metal oxide 
Ionic salt 


xil) Cadmium sulfide 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SI No. Solid Category 
(1) (2) (3) 
xiii) Calcium carbonate Ionic salt 
xiv) Calcium phosphate Ionic salt 
xv) Calcium sulfate Ionic salt 
xvi) Carbon (see also activated carbon) Metal 
xvii) Carborundum See aluminium oxide 
xviii) Cellulose H-bonding organic 
xix) Cement Metal oxide 
XX) Chalk See calcium carbonate 
xxl) Charcoal See activated carbon 
xxii) Clay See silicate minerals 
xxiii) Copper Metal 
xxiv) Corundum See aluminium oxide 
XXV) Feldspar Metal oxide 
xxvi) Flour H-bonding organic 
xxvii) Fluorinated hydrocarbon Fluorocarbon 
xxviii) Fly ash Metal oxide (рН varies with type) 
xxix) Glass Metal oxide (pHiso varies with type) 
XXX) Graphite See carbon 
xxxi) Gypsum See calcium sulfate 
xxxii) Iron Metal (surface may oxidize in wet air) 
xxxiii) Iron oxide Metal oxide (pHiso = 6.8) 
XXXiV) Iron sulfide Ionic salt 
NOTE — Because HS- is a weak acid, sulfides behave like oxides in aqueous systems and have an isoelectric point. 
XXXV) Kaolin See clay 
xxxvi) Latex (polystyrene) Nonpolar organic 
xxxvii) Lead Metal 
xxxviii) Lead oxide Metal oxide 
XXXİX) Limestone See calcium carbonate 
xl) Magnesium Metal (surface may oxidize in wet air) 
xli) Magnesium oxide Metal oxide 
xlii) Mica See clay 
xliii) Naphtylamine Organic amine (pK, = 9.8) 
xliv) Nickel Metal 
xlv) Nickel oxide Metal oxide 
xlvi) Paraffin nonpolar organic 
xlvii) Perfluoroalkane Fluorocarbon 
xlviii) Pollen H-bonding organic 
xlix) Polyester Polar organic 
1) Polymethylmethacrylate Polar organic 
li) Polyvinyl chloride Polar organic 
lii) Protein H-bonding organic (pHiso = 6.5) 
liii) Pyrite See iron sulfide 
liv) Quartz See silica 
lv) Resin H-bonding organic 
lvi) Rutile See titanium dioxide 
Ivii) Sand See silica 
lviii) Shale See clay 
lix) Silica Metal oxide (pHiso = 2.4) 
NOTE — Silica gel has a very high surface area and may have been treated with organics to make the surface 
hydrophobic. In that case, treat it as a nonpolar organic. 
Ix) Silicate minerals Metal oxide 
1х1) Silicon carbide Weakly polar 
]xii) Silver Metal 
]xiii) Silver halide Ionic salt 
Ixiv) Silver oxide Metal oxide (pHiso = 5.7) 
lxv) Soil — 
NOTE — Soil is a mixture of components and varies widely. Classifying it as sand may not work for all 
variations. 
lxvi) Starch H-bonding organic 


IS 18084 : 2023 
Table 1 (Concluded) 


SI No. Solid Category 
(1) (2) (3) 
Ixvii) Steel See iron 
Ixviii) Sugar H-bonding organic 
Ixix) Talc See silicate minerals 
NOTE — Commercial forms may have hydrophobic surface treatments. 
Ixx) Polytetrafluoroethylene See perfluoroalkane 
Ixxi) Titanium dioxide Metal oxide 
Ixxii) Tungsten carbide Weakly polar 
lxxiii) Zinc Metal 
NOTE — In air, the surface may oxidize to zinc oxide. 
Ixxiv) Zinc oxide Metal oxide 
Ixxv) Zinc sulfate Ionic salt 
Ixxvi) Zirconium oxide Metal oxide 


7.5.3 Determination of the Liquid's Category (see Table 2) 


Table 2 Liquid's Category 
(Clause 7.5.3) 


SI No. Liquid Category 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Acetone Highly polar 
ii) Alcohol See specific type (methanol, ethanol, etc) 
Ш) Butanol See n-butanol or sec-butanol or t-butanol 
iv) Chlorinated hydrocarbon (except Weakly polar 
perchloro) 
v) Cyclohexane Nonpolar 
vi) Cyclohexanone Polar 
vii) Decahydronaphthalene (decalin) Nonpolar 
viii) Dodecane Nonpolar 
ix) Ethanol Highly polar 
X) Ethanol/water (< 5 percent mass water) Highly polar 
xi) Ethanol/water (5 percent to 50 percent mass H-bonding organic 
water) 
xil) Ethanol/water (> 50 percent mass water) Water 
xiii) Ethyl acetate Weakly polar 
xiv) Ethylene glycol H-bonding organic 
XV) Fluorinated hydrocarbon Nonpolar 
XVi) Hydrocarbon solvent Nonpolar 
xvii) Iso-octane Nonpolar 
xviil) Isopropanol See propan-2-ol 
xix) Methanol Highly polar 
XX) Methanol/water (< 5 percent mass water) Highly polar 
xxi) Methanol/water (5 percent to 50 percent H-bonding organic 
mass water) 
xxii) Methanol/water (> 50 percent mass water) Water 
xxiii) Methyl ethyl ketone Weakly polar 
xxiv) Methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) Weakly polar 
xxv) 2-methyl-propan-2-ol H-bonding organic 
xxvi) n-butanol Weakly polar 
xxvii) n-octanol H-bonding organic 
xxviii) Propan-2-ol Highly polar 
Xxix) Propan-2-ol/water (< 5 percent mass Highly polar 
water) 
XXX) Propan-2-ol/water (5 percent to 50 percent H-bonding organic 
mass water) 
XXXi) Propan-2-ol/water (> 50 percent mass Water 
water) 
xxxii) t-butanol See 2-methyl-propan-2-ol 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 2 (Concluded) 
SI No. Liquid Category 
(1) (2) (3) 
xxxiii) Toluene Nonpolar 
xxxiv) Water Water 


7.5.4 Determination of the Category of a Prospective Dispersing Agent (see Table 3) 


Table 3 Category of a Prospective Dispersing Agent 
(Clauses 7.5.1 (c) and 7.5.4) 


51 No. Solid Category Liquid Category Condition Dispersing-A gent 
Category 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Metal a) Water PEO/mercaptan 
Encapsulation in gelatine is also effective 
b) Organic = Organic amine 
il) Carbon a) Water — PEO/alcohol 
b) Organic = PPO/alkane 
iii) Metal oxide a) Water IS « 0.1 Adjutplix рна 
or pH > pHiso + 2 
с Polyion 
b) Organic m Organic acid or organic 
Amine 
iv) Metal hydroxide Use the same guidelines as for a metal oxide 
v) Ionic salt a) Water 15 > 0.1 try common-ion effect 
IS > 0.1 Polyion 
By’ Ht kond organig E» PEO/PPO copolymer 
Che Ерош v PEO/PPO copolymer 
di Weak polar E PEO/alkane 
ES E PEO/alkane 
vi) Protein a) Water IS «0.1 лашон рна 
or pH > pHiso + 2 
IS > 0.1 Polyion 
b) Organic Phospholipid 
vii) Organic acid a) Water IS < 0.1 Adjust pH > pK, + 2 
IS < 0.1 Phospholipid 
b) Organic = Polyester/polyacrylate 
viii) Organic amine a) Water IS « 0.1 Adjust pH < pK, — 2 
IS < 0.1 Phospholipid 
b) Organic = Polyester/polyacrylate 
ix) H-bonding a) Water = PEO/PPO copolymer 
organic b) Organic = Phospholipid 
X) Highly polar a) H-bonding = PEO/PPO copolymer 
organic 
b) Highly polar = PEO/PPO copolymer 
c) Weakly polar = PEO/alkane copolymer 
d)  Nonpolar = PEO/alkane copolymer 
х1) Weakly polar a) Water — Polyionic or polyester 
b) H-bonding = PPO/alkane copolymer 
organic 
c) Highly polar — PPO/alkane copolymer 
d) Weakly polar — PPO/alkane copolymer 
e)  Nonpolar — PPO/alkane copolymer 


Table 3 (Concluded) 


IS 18084 : 2023 


SINo. Solid Category Liquid Category Condition Dispersing-Agent 
Category 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
xii)  Nonpolar a) Water IS «0.1; pH <5 Quaternary amine salt 
IS « 0.1; pH 5 to 8 Organic sulfonate 
IS «0.1; pH > 8 Organic acid salt 
IS > 0.1 Phospholipid or 
PEO/siloxane 
b) H-bonding == PPO/alkane copolymer 
organic 
c) Highly polar = PPO/alkane copolymer 
d) Weakly polar = PPO/alkane copolymer 
e)  Nonpolar — Not needed 
xii)  Fluorocarbon a) Water — Perfluoro-organic acid 
b) Organic == PPO/alkane copolymer 


NOTES 

1 PEO Polyethoxy = (-CH?-CH»-O-),. 

2 РРО Polyisopropoxy = (-CH;-CH(CH;)-O-),. 
3IS Ionic strength (mol/m?). 


4 pHiso pH at which the zeta potential is zero for an amphoteric surface (which is positively charged at lower pH and negatively charged 


at higher pH). 


5pK, pH at which half the hydrogen ions from acid groups are ionized. 
6рКь pH at which half the hydroxide ions from base groups are ionized. 


7.5.5 Identification of Dispersing Agents 


Categories of various dispersing agents are given 
in Annex B. For reference, a list of suitable 
sedimentation liquid along with suitable 
dispersing agents for various materials is given in 
Annex C. 


8 OPTIMIZATION OF THE DISPERSION 
METHOD 


8.1 Introduction 


Day-to-day variations in materials and 
procedures may cause variations in the degree 
of dispersion. Consequently, it is important to 
carry out particle size analyses on a number of 
replicate samples and to observe the dispersions 
under a microscope to see if the procedure 15 
reproducible (successive replicates agree 
closely) and robust (modest variations in 
measurement procedure result in only minor 
changes in the result). 


8.2 Comparison of the Effectiveness of Possible 
Dispersing Agents 


Put about 50 mg of the dispersing agent (one drop) 
on a ground glass plate. Add about 100 mg of 
the liquid (two drops) and mix them well with a 
spatula. 


Continue even if some of the dispersing agent 
does not dissolve. 


Add about 100 mg of the powder (about the 
same volume as the liquid) and mix it into the 
liquid with the spatula. If the powder is resistant 
tobreakage (as determined from the previous 


examination with a microscope), put pressure on 
the spatula so as to break up clumps. Gradually 
mix in about 2.5 g more of the liquid (50 drops), 
then wash the paste off the plate and into a beaker 
using a mix of 0.1 g of dispersing agent in 100 g 
of the liquid. Evaluate the stability of the particle 
size distribution using a particle size analyser. 
Stability shall be considered good if the 
particle size analysis is comparable to 
microscope analysis and repeat runs taken an hour 
apart agree within the repeatability of the size 
analysis method. Refer Annex A for other tests of 
the degree of dispersion. 


8.3 Optimization of the Method of Breaking up 
Clumps 


8.3.1 Notes on Ultrasonic Treatment 


Ultrasonic cavitation can break up clumps of 
powders with less grinding action than occurs 
during spatula-aided wetting. Ultrasonic cavitation 
can be applied to laboratory dispersions from a 
probe or a bath. Alternating pulses of vacuum (that 
can pull the liquid apart to form evacuated cavities 
or microvoids in the liquid) and pressure (that 
causes the cavities to collapse) are created at 
frequencies from 10 kHz to 10 MHz, depending 
on the equipment. These cavities are nucleated by 
surfaces, so they are created where they can best 
help break the bonds holding clumps together. 
The collapsing cavities generate high-temperature 
plasmas near the bubble wall, and these plasmas 
can cause chemical changes on the particle surface 
or in the solution. Ultrasonic baths create a 
pattern of active zones where cavitation takes place, 
and each of these has a low concentration of 
cavities. In an ultrasonic bath, much of the 


IS 18084 : 2023 


cavitation energy is expended in regions of the 
bath outside the sample vial. Ultrasonic probes 
create a single active zone with a high 
concentration of cavities. For a given energy input, 
an ultrasonic probe will break up the clumps in a 
given volume of sample faster than an ultrasonic 
bath will. Ultrasonic probes are more likely to 
cause particle fracture than ultrasonic baths. In both 
cases, it is necessary to ensure that the powder 
sample is circulated through the active zone since 
that is the only place that clump breakup can occur. 


8.3.2 Management of Heat Buildup during Clump 
Breakup 


Ultrasonic probes and other devices to break 
clumps can add considerable heat to the sample, 
raising its temperature and thus increasing the 
solubility of the solid and consequently making 
the observed size smaller. The heat input, during 
the time needed to pass all the dispersion through 
the probe's active zone enough times to achieve 
full dispersion, may be sufficient to boil the 
liquid away. If the temperature rise exceeds 5 K 
during breakup of the clumps, the process shall be 
carried out in a vessel that is actively cooled to 
eliminate or minimize the temperature rise. 


8.3.3 Determination of the Optimum Range for 
Clump Breakup Energy 


The mechanical energy (the product of power and 
time) put into the system to achieve breakup of the 
clumps may also cause breakage of the primary 
particles that make up the clumps. High-velocity 
liquid jets are formed during the collapse of 
ultrasonic cavitation induced microvoids in a liquid 
if the voids are near a particle surface. These jets 
can damage fragile crystals. This is a particular 
problem for elongated crystal shapes, such as 
needles and plates. Run a series of clump breakup 
tests at various energies to establish the optimum 
energy region for dispersion, which is above the 
energy levels that are inadequate to fully break 
up all the clumps and below the energy levels 
that damage primary particles. 


8.3.4 Documentation of the Optimum Breakup 
Conditions 


Select conditions falling within the optimum energy 
region for dispersion and specify the following 
parameters: 


a) adescriptive name for the powder to indicate 
composition and source; 

b) the name of the method of particle size 
analysis for which the dispersion is being 
prepared; 

c) a descriptive name for the liquid to indicate 
composition and source; 

d) type and dimensions of ultrasonic bath or 
probe; 


e) level and material used as fill in the ultrasonic 
bath; 

f) volume and type of container to be used to 
contain the dispersion; 

g) quantity of liquid; 

h) quantity of dispersing agent; 

jp quantity of powder; 

k) initial temperature of the sample mixture; 

m) position of the ultrasonic probe with respect 
to the container centreline and liquid level or 
position of the container with respect to the 
ultrasonic bath corners and position of the 
sample liquid level with respect to the bath's 
liquid level; 

n) size, type, and location and revolutions per 
minute of stirrer in the sample; 

p) rate and temperature of coolant circulation in 
any cooling jacket; 

q) power setting and mode (continuous or 
intermittent, time switched on and off during 
cycles); 

r) duration (total time) of the ultrasonic 
treatment; 

S) final temperature of the sample mixture; and 

t) use these specified conditions to ensure 
reproducibility when preparing dispersions of 
the powder for particle size analysis. 


8.4 Determination of the Optimum Quantities to 
use 


Several factors limit the acceptable upper limit of 
the quantity of dispersing agent in the liquid. 


a) Micelles, droplets or particles of undissolved 
dispersing agent may be counted as particles 
of the sample powder by the particle size 
analyser; and 

b) The powder may have a high solubility in 
micelles or droplets of the dispersing agent, 
and any such dissolution will change the 
particle size distribution of the powder. 


Since adsorbed dispersing agent does not contribute 
to the chemical potential for forming micelles, a 
larger quantity of dispersing agent is required to 
leave enough in solution to achieve 80 percent of the 
critical micelle concentration (CMC). This may 
mean that the initial mixture of dispersing agent and 
liquid will contain micelles, droplets or particles of 
the dispersing agent, but these will dissolve when 
the powder is added and the dispersing agent is 
adsorbed on the powder surface. 


If the solubility, CMC and adsorption per unit 
area on the powder surface (at 80 percent of the 
CMC or solubility) of the dispersing agent are 
known, the quantity of dispersing agent shall be 
calculated as 80 percent of the lesser of 1) its 
solubility or 2) its critical micelle concentration 
(CMC in mol/m?) in the liquid plus the amount 


adsorbed on the surface of the powder at the 
concentration of powder to be used in the particle 
size analysis. 


If there is insufficient information for such a 
calculation, the following procedure shall be 
carried out to determine the optimum quantity 
empirically: 


a) Prepare a series of mixtures with 0.1 g, 0.2 g, 
0.5 g, 1 g, 2 g, and 5 g of dispersing agent in 
1 litre of the liquid; 


b 


МУ 


Reject any mixtures that are cloudy or show 
a Tyndall effect, evidence for the presence 
of undissolved material; 


c 


wm 


Filter the remaining mixtures to remove 
particles (dust, contaminants, etc) that are 
larger than 0.2 um; 


Measure out 50 ml of each of the 
filtered solutions and 0.1 g of powder for each 
solution; 


d 


— 


e 


МУ 


Mix each powder into its solution and break 
up clumps. As a starting point for optimizing 
the energy input, break up clumps using a 
750 W ultrasonic probe in the 
intermittent mode (1 s оп, 1 s off) for 60 s 
while stirring so as to make the particles 
circulate past the probe tip; 


f) Analyse the particle size distribution of 
each dispersion (kept under constant stirring) 
three times a day (for example 8 h, 12 h, and 


16 h) over a period of three days. 
Tabulate the  volume-average size and 
standard deviation; 

g) Note, as the minimum acceptable 


concentration of dispersing agent, the lowest 
concentration at which the volume-average 
size and standard deviation do not vary 
outside the limits of repeatability for the 
size-analysis method used; and 


h 


— 


If several dispersing agents аге under 
study, reject any for which the particle size 
analysis is unstable at any dose or for which 
only a few dispersing agent concentrations 
give stable analyses. 


The quantity of dispersing agent shall be specified 


as grams of dispersing agent per kilogram of liquid 
prior to the addition of the dispersing agent. 


9 MAINTENANCE OF DISPERSION 
STABILITY DURING SAMPLE HANDLING 


9.1 Stability During Dilution 


Size analysis often requires the use of very low 


IS 18084 : 2023 


concentrations of solids. If the particles have a 
solubility that would cause more than 1 percent of 
the mass required for the analysis to dissolve, both 
the solution and the diluent should be saturated 
with the solid under study before adding the 
particles and doing the size analysis. If the 
dispersion is to be analysed at a temperature above 
room temperature, the solution may become 
unsaturated (due to increasing solubility with 
temperature) and some of the particles will 
dissolve, making the particle diameters smaller. 
The smaller particles will dissolve completely 
and the larger ones somewhat less. Even in a 
saturated solution, dissolution and precipitation 
occur continuously and simultaneously, 
with thermodynamics favouring the growth of large 
crystals and disappearance of small ones. Because 
of these conflicting phenomena, the final average 
size may be smaller or larger than the original. 


The stability of а dispersion often depends 
on maintaining an adsorbed layer of stabilizing ions 
or polymer molecules оп the particle 
surface. Dilution of such a system with the 
pure solvent may result in desorption of so 
much dispersing agent that what remains on 
the surface of the particles is not sufficient to 
make the dispersion stable. Such a desorption 
is less likely for polymeric dispersing agents 
of high molecular weight, since these аге 
essentially irreversibly adsorbed. The 
possibility of loss of dispersion stability upon 
dilution is greatest for particle sizing methods 
based on light scattering, most of which require 
drastic dilution before a measurement can be 
made. 


To avoid problems with desorption and 
dissolution of the solid, filter (or gently 
centrifuge) one portion of the dispersion and use 
the clear filtrate (or supernatant) for diluting 
other portions of the dispersion for analysis. 


9.2 Stability During Change in pH 


Changing the pH of the sample, by dilution or 
otherwise, can have a profound effect on the 
stability of the sample. For systems which are 
stabilized by a surface charge (as is often the 
case for mineral oxides) the pH is a principal 
variable controlling the surface charge. The pH 
also controls the ionization of weak-acid dispersing 
agents, such as polyacrylic acid. Both the 
charge and the conformation (extended vs 
tightly coiled) of many natural dispersing 
agents (particularly the proteins) will also be 
markedly affected by pH. Avoid or minimize 
changes in pH during sample handling unless that 
change is known to be beneficial to maintaining 
stability. 


IS 18084 : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Clauses 6.2.1 and 8.2) 
ALTERNATIVE DISPERSION-STABILITY TESTS 


A-1 SEDIMENTATION BEHAVIOUR 


If the dispersion is stable to reagglomeration 
because particles repel one another, the particles will 
move about during sedimentation so as to avoid 
contact, and the resulting sediment will be a densely 
packed array with minimum occluded liquid. Pour 
about 80 g of the dilute, well-mixed dispersion into 
a 100 ml graduated cylinder and observe the 
sharpness, rate of fall, and final height of the 
interface between relatively clear supernate (liquid 
above the sedimentation boundary) and the sediment 
bed. Centrifugation may be required to make small 
particles settle fast enough to complete the 
experiment in a reasonable time. 


Well-dispersed particles will settle 
independently at velocities proportional to the 
squares of their diameters, so there will be no 
sharp dividing line between the sedimenting 
section and the supernate, which will normally be 
opalescent or turbid. Well-dispersed particles 
move independently past one another to form a 
densely packed bed with a small depth. 


If the particles show residual attraction and 
are not completely dispersed, they will stick 
when they collide to form a network as they settle. 
Flocs settle more rapidly than single particles, and 
the resulting sediment bed will have a high 


porosity, so sediment depth is greater for 
flocculated systems than for well-dispersed 
systems. Highly anisotropic particles (disks 


or rods) may form flocs with volumes so 
large that they fill the vessel and the flocs do not 
settle at all. 


A-2 SURFACE-CHARGE DENSITY 


For systems which are being stabilized by 
adsorption of an ionic surfactant or of inorganic 
ions such as phosphate, the parameter which 
measures the effectiveness of the procedure is 
the zeta potential of the particles. The zeta 
potential measures the effective electrostatic 
potential difference between the particle surface 
and the bulk solution around the particle. It is a 
particularly important quantity for aqueous 
dispersions because it monitors the effective 
charge which one particle experiences when it 
moves near to another particle and so measures the 
repulsive force between them. 


Zeta potential can be measured by determining the 
velocity of the particles in an electric field. The 
traditional direct microscopic technique has been 
superseded by more rapid and convenient methods 
based on light scattering or electroacoustics. These 
methods are, in principle, able to monitor both the 
size and zeta potential simultaneously, so a 
combination of minimum size and maximum 
(absolute value of) zeta potential can be taken as 
the best indication of complete dispersion. 


If the stabilization of a dispersion is primarily due to 
electrostatic repulsion, measurement of the zeta the 
dispersion will be stable if zeta potential 
is greater than 30 mV. In 
electrophoresis, the applied electric field is held 
constant and particle velocity is monitored using a 
microscope and video camera. In the electrokinetic 
sonic amplitude technique, the electric field is 
pulsed, and the sudden motion of the charged 
particles relative to their counter-ion 
atmospheres generates an acoustic pulse which can 
be related to the charge on the particles and their 
size. 


A-3 RHEOLOGY 


Since a clump of particles contains occluded liquid, 
the effective volume fraction of a dispersion of 
clumps is larger than the volume fraction of the 
individual particles and there is less ‘free’ liquid 
available to facilitate the flow than if the clumps 
were broken up. The viscosity of a dispersion 
containing clumps will decrease as the clumps are 
broken up. This method is not very sensitive in the 
final stages of clump breakup, when there are only 
afew small clumps left. 


The effect of state of dispersion on the 
theology (or flow behavior) of a dispersion is 


most evident for systems with concentrations 
of solids above 10 percent by volume. 
It is instructive to plot shear stress as a 


function of shear rate, since the slope of the curve 
at any point is the viscosity of the dispersion at 
that shear rate. The plot is linear for a 
well-dispersed system of spheres, indicating that 
the viscosity does not change withshear rate. 
The plot for non-spherical particles has 
decreasing slope with increasing shear rate. In 
other words, the viscosity of such systems 
decreases with increase in shear rate. These 
systems are said to be shear thinning. The usual 
explanation is that the particles become better 
aligned in the flow as the shear rate 
increases, so the flow becomes ‘easier’ and so the 
viscosity is reduced. The effect is much more 
pronounced if the particles have attractive 
forces between them. Indeed, even spherical 
particles will show this shear thinning behaviour 
if they are not completely dispersed, and 
therefore the plot of shear stress as a function of 
shear rate can be used as an indication of the extent 
of dispersion. 


Nonlinearity is usually accompanied by a 
finite yield value at zero shear. This value is 
called yield strength. A non-zero value means that 
the dispersion is able to support a shear stress 
without undergoing any flow (impossible for 
a true liquid). The implications for flow can readily 
be observed by using a slow-speed magnetic bar to 
stir a dispersion with a finite yield strength: the 
upper surface of the fluid, located. 


A-4 ATTENUATION OF SOUND OR 
ELECTRICAL PULSES 


The attenuation of ultrasound (acoustic 
spectroscopy) or high-frequency electrical current 
individual particles than for flocs of those particles, 
because the flocs adsorb energy by breakup and 
reformation as the pressure or electrical waves 


IS 18084 : 2023 


(dielectric spectroscopy) as it passes through a 
dispersion. will be different for well-dispersed 
jostle the flocs about. The degree of attenuation 
varies with frequency in a manner related to floc 
breakup and reformation-rate constants, which 
depend on the strength of the interparticle 
attraction, the size and density (inertia) of the 
particles and the viscosity of the liquid. 


IS 18084 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.5.5) 


CATEGORIES OF VARIOUS DISPERSING AGENTS 
B-1 List of various dispersing agents corresponding to their categories is given in Table 4. 


Table 4 Dispersing Agents under Various Categories 
(Clause B-1) 


SI No. Dispersing Agent Category Dispersing Agents 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Organic acids (and their alkali salts) 


a) Organic acid 
b) PEO/fatty acid 
C) Organic acid salts 
d) Organic acid salt with triethanolamine 
e) Sodium dodecanoate 
f) Sodium linoleate 
g) Sodium oxalate 
il) Organic amines (and amides) 
a) Alkylamine 
b) Ethanolamine, triethanolamine 
c) PEO/long-chain alkylamine 
d) 2-amino-2-methyl-propanol 
e) Alkanolamide 
f) PEO/alkanolamide 
g) Amino acid 
iii) Organic esters 
a) Fatty acid ester 
b) PEO/ester 
c) Glycol esters 
d) Glycerol esters 
e) Lanolin 
iv) Organic phosphate 
a) Alcohol phosphate 
b) PEO/alcohol phosphate 
v) Organic sulfate 
a) Sodium alkyl sulfate 
b) Alcohol sulfate 
c) Alkyl phenol sulfate 
d) Sulfated triglycerides 
vi) Organic sulfonate 
a) Sodium alkyl sulfonate 
b) Sodium alkylbenzene sulfonate 
c) Sodium alkylnaphthalene sulfonate 
d) Sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate 
e) Isethionate 
vii) Perfluoro organic acid 
Perfluoroctanoic acid 
viii) Phospholipid 
Lecithin 
ix) Polyester 
Polyacrylate 
X) Polyionic salt 
a) Sodium tripolyphosphate = Na3PO4.12H20 
b) Sodium tetrapyrophosphate = Na4P207.10H;O 
с) Sodium hexametaphosphate = Nas(PO3)6 
d) Sodium silicate 
e) Sodium citrate = Na3C6Hs07.H20 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 4 (Concluded) 


SI No. Dispersing Agent Category Dispersing Agents 
(1) (2) (3) 


f) Sodium polyacrylate 
NOTE — Any alkali metal ion or ammonium ion may be used in place of sodium. 
xi) Protein a) Albumin 
b) Gelatin 
xil) Quaternary ammonium salt 
a) Trimethylalkylamine chloride or 
bromide 
b) PEO/methylalkylamine chloride ог 
bromide 
c) Betaine 
d) Imidazoline 
e) Taurate 
xiii) Water-soluble organic 
a) Formaldehyde-naphthalene sulfonate 
b) Sulfonated lignin 
c) Tannic acid 
d) Sorbitan laurate 
e) PEO/sorbitan stearate 
f) Tall-oil acid salts 
xiv) PEO/alcohol 
a) Alkyl phenoxy PEO ethanol 
b) PEO/alkanol 
c) PEO/acetylenic glycol 
XV) PEO/alkane 
PEO/alkane 
XVi) PEO/mercaptan 
PEO/mercaptan 
xvii) PEO/siloxane 
PEO/siloxane 
xviii) PEO/PPO copolymer 
a) PEO/PPO copolymer 
b) PEO/PPO derivative of ethylene 
(branched) 


xix) PPO/alkane 
PPO/alkane 


IS 18084 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 7.5.5) 


SUITABLE SEDIMENTATION LIQUID ALONG WITH SUITABLE DISPERSING AGENTS FOR 


VARIOUS MATERIALS 
C-1 Suitable sedimentation liquid along with suitable Where a dispersing agents is used, it is given 
dispersing agents for various materials is given in Table 5. along with the concentration within parentheses. 


Table 5 Sedimentation Liquid and Dispersing Agent 


(Clause C-1) 


SI No. Material Sedimentation Liquid and Dispersing Agent 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Alumina Water; water (calgon, 0.1 percent); water (sodium tartrate, 
0.1 percent); dilute hydrochloric acid (pH of suspension 
adjusted to 3); carbon tetrachloride 

il) Alumina dust Water (sodium oxalate) 

iii) Alundum Water 

iv) Aluminium powder (sp. gr. 2.5) Isopropanol; chloroform 

v) Anthracite Water (perminal BX, 0.1 percent) 

vi) Barytes Water (sodium pyrophosphate), 0.001 mol/litre to 0.005 mol/litre 

vii) Barium carbonate (precipitated) Methyl alcohol 

viii) Barium strontium carbonate Water-ethyl alcohol mixture 

ix) Bronze powder Cyclohexanol 

x) Chromic oxide Water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.001 mol/litre to 0.005 mol/litre) 

х1) Colours (mineral) Water (potassium citrate, 0.1 mol/litre) 

xii) Carbon black Water (aerosol OT, 1 percent); 
gallotannic acid 

xii) Calcium carbonate Water; xylene 

xiv) Calcium carbonate (precipitated) Water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.005 mol/litre) 

xv) Calcium arsenate Ethyl alcohol-water (1 : 1) 

xvi)  Cryolite Glycerol-water (1 : 4; v/v) 

xvi) Calomel Cyclohexanol 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 5 (Continued) 
SI No. Material Sedimentation Liquid and Dispersing Agent 
(1) (2) (3) 

хуш) Coal Water (Aerosol CT, 4 percent); water (sodium linoleate and 
sulphonated loral, 1 percent); ethyl alcohol (calcium chloride, 
0.1 mol/litre); ethyl alcohol ; ethyl industrial absolute alcohol; 
xylene; alcohol-water mixture (1 : 1) acetone or petroleum 

xix) Сау Water; water (sodium oxalate); distilled water (sodium silicate, 
2 percent) 

xx) Copper Water; acetone; rape oil; rape oil + acetone; soyabean oil + 
acetone (1 : 1) 

xxi) Cobalt metal Ethyl alcohol, 95 percent; rape oil + acetone 

xe Shade Water (sodium silicate, 2 percent); water (potassium citrate, 
0.1 g/mol) acetone or petroleum 

xxii) Chalk (precipitated) Isopropanol 

xxiv) Cocoa Isobutyl alcohol; diethyl ester of phthalic acid 

xxv) Coke Water (perminal BX, 0.1 percent); distilled water (tannic acid, 
0.5 g/litre and ammonia, 0.88 ml/litre to 3.5 ml/litre) 

xxvi) Cement Water; kerosene (oleic acid) benzene; 
isopropanol; ethylene glycol (calcium chloride); absolute 
alcohol (anhydrous calcium chloride); methyl alcohol 
(sodium pyrophosphate); butyl alcohol 

xxvii) Alumina cement Glycol (cobalt chloride 11); ethylene glycol (cobalt chloride) 

xxviii) Portland cement Ethyl alcohol; butyl alcohol; benzyl alcohol; glycol; castor oil; 
paraffin oil 

xxix) Diamond powder Olive oil; water (gelatine, 0.1 percent to 0.2 percent and sodium 
carbonate) 

xxx)  Dicalcium phosphate Water and alcohol 

xxxi) Felspar Water (sodium oxalate) 

xxxii) Flint Water (sodium oxalate) 


17 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 5 (Continued) 
SI No. Material Sedimentation Liquid and Dispersing Agent 
(0 (2) (3) 
xxxii) Flours Isobutyl alcohol; isobutyl alcohol + diethyl phthalate; diethyl 
ester of phthalic acid; petrol 
xxxiv) Fluorite Water (gelatine, 0.1 percent to 0.25 percent and sodium carbonate) 
xxxv) Flourspar Dilute nitric acid (0.002 N); methyl alcohol (potassium chloride, 
0.001M) 
xxxvi) Fly ash Water 
xxxvil) Glass powder or spheres Water; water + ethylene glycol; butyl alcohol; methanol 
xxxvii) Graphite Water (Aerosol OT, + percent); ammonia, 0.880 to 3.5 mol/litre 
and sodium linoleate; distilled water (tannic acid, 0.5 g/litre); 
ethyl alcohol 
xxxix) Glass powder (colloidal) Lignin 
Alcohol (calcium chloride, 0.1 mol/litre); glycol 
xl) Gypsum 
(cobalt citrate); ethylene glycol (cobalt citrate) 
xli) Haematite Water 
xli) | Hydrated lime Ethyl alcohol; isopropanol 
xliii) — Limenite Water 
xlv) Iron and iron alloys Rape oil + acetone 
xlv) Iron metal Soyabean oil + acetone (1 : 1 by volume) 
xlvi) Kaolin Water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.005 mol/litre and sodium 
silicate, 0.1 percent); water 
(ammonia, a few drops, if necessary) 
xlvii) Lead Acetone; water 
xlviii) Lead oxide Xylene; ethy alcohol; rectified spirit 
xli)  Lignite Isobutyl alcohol; diethyl ester of phthalic acid 


1) Limestone dust 


Water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.005 mol/litre and sodium 
silicate, 0.2 percent); distilled water (sodium silicate, 2 percent 
and potassium citrate, 0.1 mol/litre); glycerol + water (1 : 4 by 
volume) 


18 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 5 (Continued) 


SI No. Material Sedimentation Liquid and Dispersing Agent 

(1) Q) (3) 

li) Lithophone Glycerine 

lii) Manganese dioxide (pyrolusite) Water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.001 mol/litre to 0.005 mol/litre) 

liii) Magnesite (burnt) Ethylene glycol 

liv) Magnetite powder Water; ethyl alcohol; methyl alcohol; nitrobenzene 

lv) Mineral colours Water (potassium citrate, 0.1 mol/litre) 

lvi) Moulding sand Distilled water (sodium hydroxide) 

lvii) | Molybdenum powder Ethyl alcohol; acetone; glycerol; glycerol + water 

lviii) Nickel powder Rape oil + acetone 

І Water (daxad 23, 0.02 percent and potassium silicate, 

lix) Phosphorus 
0.1 percent) 

Ix) Pigments Water (sodium pyrophosphate); isopropanol 

lxi) Plaster (Stucco) Alcohol-glycol (potassium citrate); water 
(potassium citrate, 0.1 mol/litre) 

lxii) Precipitated magnesium carbonate Acetone 

Ixiii)  Pumicite Water 

Ixiv) Pulp Water (sodium silicate, 1 part in 4 000 parts of liquid) 

lxv) | Quartz Water (sodium oxalate) 

lxvi) Red lead Paint prepared in linseed oil and dispersed in white spirit 
(aluminium stearate) 

Ixvii) Red phosphor (4% concentration) Methylated spirit 

Ixviii) Sand Water; distilled water (sodium silicate, 2 percent); butyl phthalate 
+ alcohol 

Іхіх) Silica Water; water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.133 percent, 
0.005 mol/litre, sodium oxalate, N/100 and calgon, 0.1 percent); 
water + alcohol 
(1 : 1); xylene 

lxx) Silicates Water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.005 mol/litre); water + ethyl 


19 


alcohol (1 : 1) 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Table 5 (Concluded) 
SI No. Material Sedimentation Liquid and Dispersing Agent 
(1) (2) 3) 
lxxi) Sillimanite Water + ethyl alcohol (1 : 1); water (sodium 


lxxii) Shales 
lxxiii) Slag (cement) 


Ixxiv) Starch 


Ixxv) 8015 


Ixxvi) Sugar 

Ixxvii) Sulphides 

Ixxviii) Tin 

Ixix) Titanium 

lxxx)  Tricalcium phosphate 
Ixxxi) Tungsten 

Ixxxii) Tungsten carbide 
Іхххш) Zinc 

Ixxxiv) Zinc oxide (pigment) 
Ixxxv) Zircon 


Ixxxvi) Zirconium metal 


20 


pyrophosphate, 0.005 mol/litre) 


Alcohol (calcium chloride) 
Isopropanol; water 


Isobutyl alcohol; diethyl ester of phthalic acid; isobutyl alcohol + 
diethyl phthalate 


Water; water (sodium oxalate N/100 and 2 percent); butyl 
phthalate + alcohol 


Isobutyl alcohol; diethyl ester of phthalic acid 

Water (saponin) 

Butyl alcohol 

Water (Calgon, 0.1 percent) 

Water 

Glycerol; acetone + rape oil; ethyl alcohol 

Oil 

Ethyl alcohol; hutyl alcohol; acetone 

Water (sodium hexametaphosphate, 0.5g/litre to 1.1g/litre) 
Water; water (sodium pyrophosphate, 0.005 mol/litre); water 


Methyl alcohol (hydrochloric acid, N/100) 


IS 18084 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (90, Savita Vihar, Vikas Marg, 
Delhi 110092) 


AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Associated Soapstone Distributing Co Pvt Ltd, Jaipur 


Cement Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, 


New Delhi 


CSIR — Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR — National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


Haver Standard India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 


Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, New Delhi 
Industrial Wire Netting Company, New Delhi 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of 
Defence, New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Faridabad 


National Mineral Development Corporation Limited, 
Hyderabad 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Kolkata 


21 


Representative(s) 


DR R. P. SINGHAL (Chairperson) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI MADAN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM GOLCHA 
SHRI DILIP JHA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SARASWATHI DEVI 
SHRI ANURAG KUMAR SAINI (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK RAI 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARDEEP SINGH 
SHRI B. K. MUNZNI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
DR NITA DILAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVEN H. SHAH 
SHRI VIKRAM D. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. G. RAUT 
SHRI V. A. SONTAKKEY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI KESHAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRIP. K. JAIN 
SHRI SOMESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRIG. J. NAIDU (Alternate) 


SHRIS. K. SHARMA 
SHRIG. V. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK SHARMA 
SHRIMATI MAYMOLE BOBEN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIPIN KUMAR GIRI 
SHRI SIBABRATA BASAK (Alternate) 


IS 18084 : 2023 


Organization 


Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 
In Personal Capacity (B- 129, F-2, Ramprastha 
Colony, Ghaziabad 201011) 


In Personal Capacity (Indian Institute of Technology, 
Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRAN K. P. 
SHRI DEVENDRA PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI VIRENDRA BABU 


PROF B. PITCHUMANI 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


22 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 55 (18644). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


