NAT Alan IS 17282 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


TAN HAYUN AA aan Aha AT 
adat — ara at arar hefy 
(UTANG STSUTHATCHS ) 


Requirements for Good 
Aquaculture Practices — 
India GAqP Striped Catfish 
(Pangasianodon hypophthalmus ) 


ICS 67.120.30 


© BIS 2019 


anda NAK YO 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR NGA, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Rei - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 6 


Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


FOREWORD 
This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fish, Fisheries 
and Aquaculture Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Considerable milestones have been reached in productivity of aquaculture products in the country. Concerns 
about food safety and quality, sustainability, environmental protection, worker safety and welfare have also 
gained importance. Thus, it is desirable to set up control and compliance systems for various kinds of aquaculture 
produce. In this context, it is necessary to pay attention to the quality of production practices requiring minute 
attention at different aspects of production, storage, handling and distribution. 


In India, aquaculture practices are highly localized occupations and display a lot of variability in cultural practices 
and varietal preferences across regions. Further, with the opening up of the world market, there is a flow of trade 
in the aquaculture products. It is, therefore, necessary to define and assign certain common minimum standards 
to facilitate trade in these products and to win the confidence of the consumers within the country and outside. 


Such standards envisaging focused approach for implementing good aquaculture practices, traceability etc. 
through appropriate infrastructure, record keeping and monitoring would reap following broad benefits: 


a) Development of basic infrastructure at the field level, 
b) Build up culture for good aquaculture practices by the farmers, 
c) Uniform approach across farms regardless of their sizes, 


d) Increased awareness among the producers, as well as the consumers about the need for consumption of 
good quality and safe food, 


e) Traceability through complete integration of food chain, 

f) Improvement in the environment, 

g) Worker safety and welfare. 

h) Reputation in the international market as a producer of good quality and safe produce, and 

j) Overcoming the technical barriers to trade (TBTs). 
This Standard is part of a series of Indian Standards on Good Aquaculture Practices under development. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been provided by Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research - Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture, Bhubaneswar (ICAR-CIFA). Contribution of Dr. S. K. 
Sahoo, Principal Scientist, (ICAR-CIFA) is also duly acknowledged. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


REQUIREMENTS FOR GOOD AQUACULTURE 
PRACTICES — INDIA GAqP STRIPED CATFISH 
(PANGASIANODON HYPOPHTHALMUS) 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard covers the control points and 
compliance criteria necessary to be followed by the 
producers (individual producers and/or members of 
a producer group) of Pangasianodon hypophthalmus 
(striped catfish). This standard applies to the good 
aquaculture practices (GAP) to be followed at all 
stages of the production of this catfish in freshwater 
pond including practices followed for stocking, pond 
management, harvesting and post-harvest handlings 
prior to transportation to market. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
terminologies shall apply: 


2.1 Good Aquaculture Practices (GAqP) — Practices 
that address environmental, economic and social 
sustainability for on-farm processes, and result in safe 
and quality food and non-food aquaculture products. 


2.2 Applicant Producer/Producer Group — 
Individual/organization that has applied for certification 
to India GAqP certification body. 


2.3 Hazard — A biological, chemical, physical agent 
in, or condition of, with the potential to cause an 
adverse health effect. 


2.4 Individual Producer — A person/organization 
legally responsible for on farm production, who retains 
ownership of all the produce covered in the India GAqP 
licence. 


2.5 Inspection — An examination of all aquaculture 
practices in order to verify compliance to requirements 
specified in this standard. 


2.6 Record — Document showing objective evidence 
of the tasks performed and results achieved. 


2.7 Self-inspection — Internal inspection of the 
registered product carried out by the grower on his/her 
farm using control points and compliance criteria. 


2.8 Traceability — The ability to trace the history, use 
or location of a product (that is, the origin of materials 


and parts, processes applied to the product, or its 
distribution and placement after delivery) by means of 
a record. 


2.9 Catfish — The fish without scale and bearing 
barbels. 


2.10 Worker — Any person on the farm who has 
been contracted to carry out a task. This includes farm 
owners and managers. 


2.11 Producer Group — A recognized group of 
producers applying for certification with an internal 
procedure and internal control of all the members 
registered to the India GAqP requirements, and 
complying the requirements as specified in this 
standard. 


2.12 Field — Separate unit of land within a farm. 


2.13 Farm — A farm is an agricultural production unit 
or group of agricultural production units, covered by 
same operational procedures, farm management.- 


2.14 Environment — Surroundings in which an 
activity takes place including air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelation. 


2.15 Customer — A customer is anyone who purchases 
products or services from a supplier. 


2.16 Certification — All actions leading to the issuance 
of an India GAqP licence. 


2.17 Standard Operating Procedure — A written 
document which details an operation, analysis, or 
action whose mechanisms are prescribed thoroughly 
and which is commonly accepted as the method for 
performing certain routine or repetitive tasks. 


2.18 Major Requirement — The mandatory 
requirement that shall be fully complied with. In 
case of non-compliance, it will seriously affect the 
quality of freshwater aquatic animal as well as safety 
of consumers. It means that the requirement shall be 
complied with relevant laws and regulations as well. 


2.19 Minor Requirement — The requirement that shall 
be mostly complied with. In case of non-compliance, it 


IS 17282 : 2019 


will affect the health of freshwater aquatic animal or 
product quality. 


2.20 Veterinary Drug —Any substance applied or 
administered to any food-producing animal, whether 
used for therapeutic, prophylactic, or diagnostic 
purposes or for modification of physiological functions 
or behaviour. 


3 CONTROL POINTS AND COMPLIANCE 
CRITERIA 


3.1 Control points and compliance criteria required 
to be followed by the applicant producer (individual 
producer and/or member of a producer group) as well 
as by the certification body for independent verification 
of the aquaculture practices that have gone into the 
production of the produce are given in Table 1. In 
addition, the applicant producer (individual producer 
and/or member of a producer group) shall demonstrate 
compliance with all applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements. 

NOTE — The standards given in Annex A may be read to 

facilitate the implementation of this standard and are for 

guidance purpose. 


3.2 These criteria are marked as “Major”, “Minor” or 
‘Reco’. The criteria marked as ‘Major’ have a definite 
effect on the safety and quality of the produce and shall, 
therefore, be complied with, or shall give adequate 
assurance about the safety and quality of the produce. 
The criteria marked as “Minor”, though have a bearing 


on quality, are those which, if implemented, would 
provide an advantage to the assessment for India GAqP 
certification. The criteria marked as “Reco”, are those, 
which though may not have direct bearing on safety 
and quality of produce but may have other benefits to 
the producer and are recommended for implementation 
and are advisory in nature. 


3.3 For the purpose of verification, a grading pattern 
given below shall be followed for grant of India GAqP 
licence: 


Category of Compliance Compliance 
Licence of Major of Minor 
Requirements Requirements 


(in Percent) (in Percent) 


India GAqP — A 100 90 
India GAgP — B 100 80 
India GAgP — C 100 75 


4 BIS INDIA GAQP CERTIFICATION 


BIS India GAqP certification shall be as prescribed 
under the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and Rules and Regulations framed thereunder. 
The details of the conditions under which the licence 
may be granted to producer (individual producer and/ 
or member of a producer group) may be obtained from 


the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


Table 1 Control Points and Compliance Criteria 


( Clause 3.1 ) 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 

1 LOCATION AND LAYOUT OF FISH FARM, SITE RECORD AND TRACEABILITY 

1.1 Identification and Major India GAqP registered 1. Ascertain that each registered grower, society, 
traceability produce shall be traceable farm and the produce has been given a code 

back or trackable from the number. Simultaneously a package of practice 

registered farm or other must be followed for accurate trace-back of the 

relevant registered areas, produce. 

where it has been produced. 2. Verify that there is a documented identification 
and traceability system that allows IndiaGAqP 
registered product to be traced back to the 
registered farm or, in a farmer group, to the 
registered farms of the group, and tracked 
forward to the immediate customer. Harvest 
information shall link a batch to the production 
records or the farms of specific producers. 
Produce handling shall also be covered, if 
applicable. 
NOTE — The first traceability starts with the 
registration/identification number given to 
the farm. Next traceability is plot and batch 
identification. 

1.2 Farm location Minor Survey No./Part-Survey “Verification of complete area of the farm complying 
No., village, tehsil, district, with the records. 
state where the farm is 
located along with total 
area under cultivation 
and the area under India 
GAgP certification shall be 
specified. 

1.3 Farm layout Minor Fields/plots and structures Verification of the pond position and other 
shall be identified on the infrastructures are to be made for their correctness as 
layout map of the farm. per the layout of the farm. 

Minor Availability of good water Visual inspection of the design of water inlet and 
supply, inlet and outlet outlet system for the water supply and drainage 
system. among the ponds to prevent cross contamination. 

1.4 Vicinity of production Minor Vicinity of farm with 1. Find out the micro-climate of the area which 
area to potential risk reference to chemical or affects the productivity, safety and quality of 
source other industries, saline the aquaculture product. 

regime, agriculture fields, 2. Verify measures taken to minimize 
rivers, other water sources, contamination or loss. 

hill rocks, and reclaimed 

land shall be specified. 

1.5 Access to the farm Minor Convenient access to the Visual inspection and suggestion. 
farm from both outside 
and inside for easy farm 
operation and transportation 
of the inputs and produce. 

2 SOIL AND WATER MANAGEMENT 

2.1 Soil Mapping Minor Land should be classified 1. Verify that class of land has been decided based 


based on topography, 
texture and structure of 
soil, gradient, surroundings, 
etc. Soil maps should be 
prepared for the farm. 


on prevailing land capability classification 
systems of the appropriate authority. 


. Verify that the type of soil is identified for each 


site based on a soil profile or soil analysis or 
local (regional) cartographic soil type map 


. Verify that the analysis is carried out for the 


soil from actual depth of interest for farming 
the targeted species. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
22 Soil Health Minor Soil health shall be Verify that the soil is ideally suited for the species, 
determined based on based on soil reaction (Electrical conductivity, pH), 
physical and chemical soil nutrient status, etc. Refer soil analysis reports. 
composition and soil 
profiling 
2.3 Water source Major Water source can be surface 1. Verify that the water from source is free from 
water or ground water, any pollutants (pesticides, heavy metals). 
and the source need to be 2. Verify that the water supply and drainage are 
identified two separate system in the farm to avoid cross 
contamination 
2.4 Water quality Minor Water quality shall be Verify that the water quality is suitable or is being 
determined based on monitored to provide ideal growing environment for 
standard chemical analysis the proposed species 
2.5 Waste water drainage Minor Effluent disposal should 1. Verify that the effluent water is treated 
comply with relevant through treatment plant before release to the 
2 environment 
laws and regulations . . 
2. Verify the quality of treated water before 
disposal 
3 GROWER RECORD 
3.1 Type of farming Reco Records relevant for Verify the type of aquaculture activities and relevant 
the type of farming (co- records 
operative, contract, lease 
farming, individual farmer, 
group farming/  public/ 
Governmental agencies) 
should be maintained 
32 Farm management Reco Grower’s accomplish-ment 1. Verify that farmer or the farm manager is 
capability in catfish farming, technical well versed in aquaculture and specially on 
back ground in aquaculture, catfish farming through formal education, skill 
skills acquired and development training or experience 
knowledge support available 2. Verify, if the farmer is getting technical know- 
shall be documented. how from Government or any other competent 
organization or individuals 
3.3 Maintenance of Minor Records on types of culture 1. Verify that records are maintained for the 
records system, cultivated species species cultured in the particular system for 
and stocking density shall be the current and previous growing seasons and 
maintained for a minimum period of six months for new 
applicants. 
2. Verify that records are maintained for crop 
history of particular plots 
3.4 Retention period of Reco All records requested during Verify that the producers keep up to date records for 
records the inspection shall be a minimum of two years from the date of previous 
accessible and shall be kept inspection 
for a minimum period of two 
years 
3.5 Internal Evaluation Minor The farmer/society/ Verify that self-evaluation based on applicable 
co-operative body shall criteria is conducted annually or seasonally during 
undertake internal self- crop duration 
inspection on scheduling of 
crop production practices 
and shall exercise necessary 
supervision in their adoption 
3.6 Corrective Actions Major Effective corrective actions Verify, validate, implement and check documentation 


shall be taken as a result of 
internal self-inspections. 


of all corrective actions 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


IS 17282 : 2019 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
4 CULTURE SPECIES AND SYSTEM 
4.1 Culture System Reco The culture system needs to 1. Verify that the culture system is specified 
be specified 2. Verify that the practitioner has basic knowledge 
and acquired skill to operate in the culture 
system 
4.2 Culture practice Major Culture practice followed Verify that the practitioner is trained/acquired 
need to be recorded knowledge and skill on the culture practice 
4.3 Grow-out system Reco Technology recommended Verify that the technology recommended by State 
by State Agriculture Agriculture Universities (SAUs)/National Research 
Universities (SAUs)/ Institutes/other Government organizations/ 
National Research Institutes/ Government approved organizations shall be used 
other Govt. Organizations/ 
Govt. approved 
organizations shall be used 
5 GROW-OUT CULTURE PRACTICES 
5:1 Pre-Stocking Pond Preparation 
5.1.1 Preparation of dry and Major Pond preparation to be 1. Verify that pond preparation carried out with 
seasonal pond done following suitable appropriate dosages of organic manures and 
protocol of liming and other lime. 
chemicals. 2. Verify from record if any unscrupulous 
y p 
chemicals having long retention period and 
ill effect on the food chain are used during 
pond preparation 
5.1.2 Preparation of Major Pond preparation to be done 1. Verify that pond preparation carried out with 
perennial pond following suitable protocol prescribed use of lime and other chemical 
of weed clearance, liming fertilizers as per the source technology. 
etc. 2. Verify that unscrupulous chemicals having 
long retention period and ill effect on the food 
chain are not used during pond preparation 
6 SEED SOURCING 
6.1 Traceability of Seeds Major Seed procured from a Verify that the seed used is procured from a reputed/ 
reputed/certified hatchery certified hatchery and record is maintained on the 
shall be used procurement date and batch of seed production 
6.2 Quality of seeds Major The seeds shall be active 1. Verify claim on seed, regarding size and 
and apparently healthy, freedom from known diseases endemic to the 
free from known major area. 
diseases of the cultivated 2. Verify that necessary documentation is 
Species: maintained on verification of the claim 
6.3 Seed transport Reco Seed should be transported Verify that the seed has been transported in hygienic 
in hygienic conditions conditions and with minimum stress to the animals 
and with minimum stress. 
Standard protocol for seed 
transportation should be 
followed. 
7 STOCKING 
7.1 Stocking size Minor Stocking size should not Verify from the records that fingerling or juveniles 
be less than fingerling or are only stocked to achieve the desired final size in 
juveniles depending on pre-define culture duration 
the duration of culture and 
targeted production. 
7.2 Acclimatization Minor Seed to be acclimatized to Verify that proper seed acclimatization done prior to 


the new pond environment 
prior to release 


release to ensure higher survivability. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
7.3 Density and species Minor Stocking density of the Verify that stocking density complies to the targeted 
ratio (in case of species need to comply with production. 
polyculture) the recommendation of the 


8.2 


8.3 


8.4 


8.5 


8.6 


8.7 


source of technology. 


POST-STOCKING POND MANAGEMENT 


Manuring or Minor 
fertilization 

Supplementary feed Minor 
and feeding 

Pond environment Minor 
monitoring and 

management 

Health management Minor 
Reporting of disease Major 
outbreak 

Use of veterinary Major 
drugs and chemicals 

Harvesting Minor 


POST-HARVEST MANAGEMENT 


Cold Chain Transport 
Sorting and Grading Reco 


Packing Reco 


Water quality should be 
maintained with interim 
application of lime or other 
chemical. Manuring must 
be stopped 15 days before 
harvest. 


Type of feed is selected based 
on nutritional require-ment. 
Feed should be farm-made 
or sourced from a reputed 
company.  farm-made or 
sourced from a reputed 
company. 


Pond environment 
management is done 
following suitable protocols 
of liming or fertilization as 
per the need. 


Fishes should be periodically 
sampled for regular health 
check. In case of abnormal 
symptoms, 

management measures 
shall be considered prior 
to application of any 
therapeutics/veterinary drugs/ 
chemicals. 


In case of disease outbreak, 
farmer shall immediately 
inform the nodal department. 


Use only permitted veterinary 
drugs and chemicals 


The harvesting should be well 
planned as per the demand 


Harvested fishes are to be 
graded as per sizes. 


Packing is done to maintain 
product quality. 


Verify from record that only recommended lime 
and other chemicals are used in prescribed dosage 
to maintain the water quality 


1. Verify the nutritional claim of the feed. 


Verify that the forms (semi-floating and 
floating) and size of the feed pellet suits to 
the feeding behaviour 


Verify from record that daily feed ration 
is tailored to meet the actual requirement 
of feed to minimize wastage of feed and 
pollution 


Verify that record is maintained on water 
quality parameters and corrective measures 
taken to maintain the water quality within 
tolerance range of striped catfish 


Verify that pond environment management 
is done with appropriate protocol of interim 
liming or fertilization as per the source 
technology 


. Verify from daily record of farming activity 


on any disease incidence 


Check if the abnormal condition can be 
normalized through management measures 
Verify that effective preventive and 
prophylactic measures taken 


Verify that un-scrupulous chemicals are not 
used to cure or curtail the disease incidence 


. Verify the record of water quality and 


feeding schedule. 


Verify for any earlier similar disease 
incidence and corrective measures taken 
thereafter 


Verify the application record of veterinary 
drugs and chemical undertaken as corrective 
measures of the disease incidence. 


Verify the record of carcass characteristics 
and effluent water. 


Verify from the records that harvesting was well 
planned and carried out in an organized manner 


Verify that harvested fishes are graded before sale 
to fetch size specific sale price. 


1. 


Verify that the harvested fishes are properly 
packed to ensure better quality. 


Verify that packing is done with approved 
packaging materials. 


Table 1 ( Continued ) 


IS 17282 : 2019 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 
9.1.3 Transport Reco Harvested fish to be 1. Verify that appropriate fish : ice ratio 
transported to the market. maintained in pack based on transport 
distance and duration to maintain product 
quality during short and long-term 

transportation in cold chain 

2. Verify that no unscrupulous chemicals/anti- 
biotic used during the packaging to extend 
the keeping quality 

9.1.4 Product withdrawal and Major Procedures for product 1. Verify that each product batch is given 
recall withdrawal a number for tracing back in case of 
withdrawal 

2. Verify that a procedure for withdrawing the 
product consignment is available. 

3. Verify from record and interview with the 
workers regarding any history of product 
withdrawal in the farm 

10. BUILDING, EQUIPMENT AND OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE 
10.1 Storage facility for feed, Minor Farm should have well 1. Visual inspection to verify that the store is 
feed ingredients, lime, ventilated storage facility clean, well ventilated and protected from 
fertilizers and other for feed to maintain the feed moisture and has provision to store feed 
inputs quality during storage. bags in stacks 
Farm should have suitable 2. Verify that the store is free from rodents. 
provision to keep other inputs 3. Verify that the limes and other chemicals 
in good condition and fertilizers are of fresh stocks and are 
being stored 
10.2 Store facility for farm Minor All the farm implements, Visual inspection 
implements equipment used for farm 
operation are properly 
maintained, clean and orderly 
placed, in hygienic manner in 
store, 
10.3 Maintenance/ Reco Maintenance schedule/plan of 1. Verify that the farm implements are 
calibration protocol farm machinery maintained properly 

2. Verify the record that all measuring 
implements such as balance, gadgets for 
water quality monitoring, etc. are calibrated 
periodically as per requirement 

10.4 Office building Reco Well-equipped office and 1. verify the farm has a good laboratory for soil 
laboratory and water quality management 

2. Visual observation of the office room for 
facility like discussion table and other 
accessories inside for record keeping and 
sitting 

11 HYGIENE CONDITION IN IN FARM 
11.1 Discharge water from Major Treatment of discharge water Verify that the farm should have a well-designed 
pond in effluent treatment system ETS to treat the discharge water before its release 
(ETS) before release to the and this water should not contaminate the source 
environment. water. 
11.2 No discharge of Major Farm should be free from Only through visual inspection. 
domestic waste or receiving any household 
animal house waste waste or waste or wash water 
from animal shed. 
11.3 Toilet in farm Major Hygienically designed toilet Verify the location of the toilet and its storage 


should be located at safe 
distance from the pond to 
prevent possible sewage 
contamination. 


chamber. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


SI No. Item Level Requirements Compliance Criteria 

12 PERSONNEL HYGIENE AND WELFARE 

12.1 Personnel hygiene Minor All workers should be free Verify the records of medical examination and 
from any contagious disease. health screening of workers 
This should be ensured 
through periodic health 
screening of workers. 

12.2 Sanitary facilities Minor Avoidance of contamination Verify that proper facilities (hand washing, clean 
from human source clothing, clean toilet) are available for the workers 

in the farm 

12.3 Visitors Reco Only authorized access only Verify the facility that is used (clean clothing, 
in certain area after proper using chlorinated water for washing feet, etc.) to 
sanitary measures avoid contamination from the visitor, especially in 

the hatchery system 

12.4 Amenities Reco Designated and well Visual inspection 
maintained areas scaled as per 
the number of farm workers 
for sitting and dining 

13 TRAINING TO FARM PERSONNEL 

13.1 Training requirements Reco Assessment of training 1. Verify from record that personnel have basic 
requirement for the personnel training on farming 
for fish farming and handling 2. Verify that the personnel have been given 
of farm implements refresher course periodically on the recent 

techniques of carp farming and post-harvest 
handling 
14 RECORD KEEPING 
14.1 Maintenance of record Minor All the major activities of the Verify that all these records are maintained. 


farm, records of employee, 
culture operation, input 
use, disease incidence, fish 
growth, harvest and sale 
records should be maintained. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 3.1 ) 


A-1 GOOD AQUACULTURE PRACTICES FOR GROW-OUT 
PHASE OF STRIPED CATFISH 


India is well established as a leading aquaculture 
producing country in Asia. Indian major carps 
contribute largely to the aquaculture production 
other than prawn and catfishes. Hence, India is the 
second largest fish producer of the world with its 
aquaculture production from the freshwater sector 
approximately exceeding 5.1 million tonnes during 
2013-14 (Handbook on Fisheries Statistics, DAHD&F, 
2014-15). The wide choice of fish for consumption by 
the consumers becomes instrumental for working on 
the diversification of species and system. Research 
results on the aquaculture of minor carps, medium 
carps, catfishes and air-breathing fishes has opened 
up the opportunity for larger adaptation of wide 
range of fish species by the fish farmers. One of the 
catfish, Pangasinodon hypophthalmus (striped catfish) 
recently introduced in India has taken acceleration in 
aquaculture due to its good growth and high density 
culture. If we see the world aquaculture scenario, only 
72 species were farmed during 1950, which increased 
to 115 during 2006 (FAO, 2006, Bartley et al., 2009). 
The sutchi catfish production has achieved a space in 
the fish production scenario of the world due to the 
high production level in the basin of Mekong river. 
The farming of sutchi catfish has been growing over 
the past few years, which supports food security and 
income generation among the rural communities in 
Bangladesh. India has also witnessed similar trend of 
peak production of this catfish from aquaculture during 
2010-11, even there is a considerable concern on its 
impact on biodiversity. This rapid higher production 
was suddenly felt somewhat unplanned, uncoordinated 
and unregulated, which was probably due to the policy 
decrees. Hence, the primary criteria like pond size, level 
of stocking, farm operation, water use/environment, 
food and feeding management, disease occurrence and 
marketing the production as per the need of domestic 
and foreign market are to be considered importantly to 
sustain the production. 


A-2 POTENTIAL CHARACTERS 
SPECIES 


OF THE 


a) It has immense food value; 

b) It adapts well in freshwater and matured in 
captivity; and 

c) The catfish is having accessary respiratory organ, 
which helps it to survive in low oxygenated 
condition. 


A-3 PROBABLE ISSUES 


a) High fish production compared to the low demand; 


b) Low farm gate price due to low market value as 
observed during 2010-11 in 


Andhra Pradesh; 
c) Poordisease surveillance and disease management; 
d) Lack of entrepreneurship approach; 
e) Conversion of agricultural land to ponds; 
f) Water pollution resulting from pond effluents; 


g) Excessive use of ground water and other freshwater 
supplies for filling ponds; 


h) Excessive use of drugs, antibiotics, and other 
chemicals for aquatic animal disease control; 


j) Negative effects on biodiversity due to escape 
of non-native species illegally introduced for 
aquaculture; 


k) Spread of aquatic animal diseases from culture of 
organisms to native populations; and 


m) Irrational use of feed and feed ingredients. 


Such issues and constraints should be resolved on a 
continuous and priority basis to maintain the pace of 
the development in the coming years. 


A-4 NECESSITY OF GAQPS IN SUTCHI AQ- 
UACULTURE 


Responsible management practices could avoid or 
reduce the negative impacts in pond environment for 
sustainable Sutchi production. The Good Management 
Practices (GAqP) is adopted to improve the farming 
at a given time for efficient and optimized resource 
utilization, improved growth, higher productivity, 
production of quality fish and with good pond 
environment during its aquaculture. 


A-4.1 The Pond 


Earthen ponds are more preferred for the aquaculture 
of the catfish. The pond should bear more soil percent 
to reduce the seepage loss. The height of pond dyke 
must be maintained higher than the normal condition to 
restrict the fish from escapement as it is an exotic fish to 
restrict the impact on biodiversity. The opened part of 
the pond must be provided with creepers to reduce the 
soil erosion of the dyke. The water inlet and outlet must 
be provided for the easy working in future with a slight 
slope to one end for complete drainage at the necessity. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


Usually <5 ha ponds are seen in Asian countries for the 
grow-out culture of this catfish with 2-6 m water depth. 
However, a larger water body is necessity for its good 
growth. The ponds of small holdings to larger water 
body upto 3-5 ha areas are seen in India for its culture. 
However, bigger water body of 2-3 ha with 2-3 m depth 
may be useful for good growth as they need more space 
for their swimming activity. Further the population size 
may be manipulated during its production system. 


A-4.2 Pre-stocking Pond Preparation 


The pond bottom must be kept dry and cleaned before 
use. In case of second crop, sediment of the previous 
crop should be scrapped in case of new pond or muk 
removal of old pond must be carried out after proper 
drying of the bottom. It is better not to pile the removed 
sediment on the pond dyke. However, soil pH plays an 
important role on pond productivity and environment. 
The ponds bearing pH of slight above neutral range do 
not pose much problem on the growth of fish or fish 
production. Ponds in acid sulphate region or acidic 
soil pose more problem during fish culture. A standard 
method/dose of quick lime treatment with frequent 
water flush may rectify the problem. The dose of quick 
lime may be referred as literature published (Gupta et 
al., 1997). The perennial ponds must be free from weed/ 
predatory or weed fishes before stocking the seed. This 
activity may be undertaken with the standard procedure 
like manual/ chemical/ biological method as published 
for carp species. 


A-4.3 Seed Stocking 


The stocking density in catfish is determined as per 
the size of seed, types of production system, growing 
period, the investment capacity of the farmer, etc. High 
density culture of this species is observed in Mecong 
river basin. That situation is not prevailed in Indian 
Pangasid culture. However, government of India has 
recommended 20,000/ha density for the Indian scenario 
with a maximum production target of 20 t/h/yr. But it 
is not followed properly and low or high stocking are 
observed among the farmers in India. As learned from 
the Pangasid culture in Asian countries, it is desired to 
stock juveniles of 50-100 g to achieve quick growth, 
low mortality and high production within the desired 
density as mentioned above. It was also observed 
multiple stocking/multiple harvesting of Pangasids in 
Cambodia/Vietnam like carp aquaculture in India. This 
activity results high production of Pangasid. But it may 
not be desired in Pangasid culture in India as learned 
lesson from the non-saling of excess production and 
their poor marketing in Andhra Pradesh during 2010-11. 
Hence, single stocking with planned way harvesting 
may lead to sustainable aquaculture of this species. 


10 


A-4.4 Post-stocking Management Measures 


A-4.4.1 Supplementary Feeding 


Cost of the supplementary feed with balanced nutrient 
forms the major investment for the grow out farming. 
The importance of feed management in pond culture 
is important as excess feeding is not only an economic 
loss, but also degrades the pond environment while 
underfeeding depresses growth. The feeding of 3-4 
percent of body weight is usual in Pangasid culture. 
As the fish grow, the requirement of reduced feeding 
must be considered to curtail the cost of production. 
This Pangasid is a voracious feeder as seen from 
outside while feeding. But the fishes feed more than the 
requirement, which they vomit in subsequent period. 
Many commercial feeds are available for Panasid 
culture in India in the form of semi-floating or floating 
in nature, which is to be distributed throughout the 
pond to give ample opportunity to all the survived fish. 


A-4.4.2 Interim Activity 


There is requirement of application of lime or chemicals 
to maintain the good environment. This Pangasid is an 
obligatory air-breather. Many times, the shortage of 
oxygen level (<4 ppm) in the environment is observed 
due to deterioration of water quality or high density 
culture. It is desired to use aeration device to saturate 
the oxygen level in the environment. Sometimes the 
water exchange from the cultured pond is required to 
keep the hygiene of the water environment as well as to 
enhance the product quality. 


A-4.4.3 Health Management 


Prevention has always been preferred over the 
treatment. Maintening good water quality along with 
optimum feeding prevent most of the disease outbreak. 
Outbreak of disease in Indian Pangasid culture has 
not been observed. Certain diseases like Epizootic 
Ulcerative Syndrome (EUS), Argulosis, etc are very 
much common in aquaculture during the winter months 
for which we must be alert with suitable medicine 
like CIFAX (@ 1 liter/ha). Slow growth and reduced 
activeness of this catfish is also observed during the 
low water temperature. 


A-4.4.4 Harvesting 


Good marketing of Pangasid is observed when the 
fish reaches | kg and beyond. Repeated netting with 
minimum handling during harvest must be followed. 
The harvested fish must be stored in chilled water 
before ice packing to maintain the quality of fish. 
Further planning must be made during harvesting for 
the harvest of desired quantity. 


IS 17282 : 2019 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fish, Fisheries and Aquaculture Sectional Committee, FAD 12 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute, 
Barrackpore 


Central Institute of Brackish Water Aquaculture, 
Chennai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai 


Central Institute of Fisheries Technology (CIFT), 
Cochin 


Central Institute of Fresh Water Aquaculture, 
Bhubaneswar 


Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Kochi 


Coastal Aquaculture Authority, Chennai 


Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 
Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


Fisheries Division, DAHD&F, Min. of Agriculture, 
Gol, New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


National Fisheries Development Board, Hyderabad 


National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology 


and Training (NIFPHATT), Cochin 
Sea Food Exporters Association of India, Alleppy 
Society of Aquaculture Professionals, Chennai 


The Marine Products Export Development Authority 
(MPEDA), Kochi 


Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean Studies, 
Kochi 


All India Shrimp Hatchery Association 


Director General, BIS (Ex-officio Member) 


Representative(s) 
Dr JoyKRUSHNA JENA, (Chairperson) 


Dr Bisay KUMAR BEHERA 
SHRI DHARMENDRA KUMAR MEENA (Alternate) 


Dr K. AMBASANKAR 
Dr SuBHENDU KUMAR OTTA (Alternate) 


Dr GoPAL KRISHNA 
DR B. B. Nayak (Alternate) 


Dr K. AsHoK KUMAR 
Dr MADHUSUDANA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr KEDAR NATH MOHANTA 
Dr P. C. Das (Alternate) 


DR A. K. ABDUL NAZAR 


ProF R. JAYARAMAN 
Suri S. MANI (Alternate) 


Dr N. GOPALAN 
Suri R. M. MANDALIK 


SHRI PAUL PANDIAN 
Suri I. A. SIDDIQUI (Alternate) 


Ms VINITA VERMA 
Dr RasesH KUMAR (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (TECHNICAL) 


SHRI VARGHESE JOHN 
MR Kamat Ras (Alternate) 


SHRI NORBERT KARIKKASSERY 
PRESIDENT 


JOINT DIRECTOR 
Deputy DIRECTOR (QC) (Alternate) 


Dr T. V. SANKAR 


SHRI D. RAMRAJ 
Suri K. MADHUSUDAN REDDY (Alternate) 


SHRI P. RAJESH, 
HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT) 


Member Secretary 


Ms Navita YADAV 


SCIENTIST ‘C’ (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 12 (14331). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


