NAT HIAF IS 11977 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


chet Gl Tears & few ANtehstenr 


( Teel TRIAT ) 


Guide for Ripening of Bananas 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.080.10 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 3 


Fruits, Vegetables and Allied Products Sectional Committee, FAD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fruits, Vegetables and Allied Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Banana (Musa spp.) is an important fruit crop in India. The fruits are very hard when harvested at mature green 
stage but are highly perishable when they are ripened. Bananas continue to develop physiologically after they 
have been harvested, and their state of ripeness when they are placed in the ripening room will depend on their 
state when harvested and on different conditions to which they have subsequently been submitted. 


Uniform ripening of banana hands with yellow surface colour is essential for proper marketing of banana. 
Commercial cultivars of banana belong to different genomic groups. For example, the AAA group bananas 
(Dwarf Cavendish, Robustaa, Grand Naine, etc.) require low temperature during ripening to develop into attractive 
yellow surface colour. Otherwise at higher temperatures the surface colour development will be either greenish 
yellow or yellowish green in the bananas belonging to this group. However, AAB (Poovan, Rasthali, Nendran), 
ABB (Karpooravalli) or AB (Ney Poovan) group bananas develop yellow peel colour after ripening, irrespective 
of the temperature. 


This standard was first published in 1987 by adopting ISO 3959 : 1977, Green bananas — Ripening conditions, 
identically under dual number system. The first revision of this standard is being brought out to align the conditions 
of ripening of bananas with those prevailing in Indian scenario. Considerable assistance has been derived from the 
work carried out at ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, Bengaluru. 


This Indian Standard provides guidance on ripening of bananas, however, because of the variability of the product 
according to the time and place of cultivation, local conditions may make it necessary to define other conditions 
for ripening of bananas. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. 


IS 11977 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
GUIDE FOR RIPENING OF BANANAS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard describes about optimum conditions 
for ripening of important varieties of banana belonging 
to different genome groups. 


1.2 The guidelines apply to mature green bananas 
of different cultivars, namely Grand Naine, Dwarf 
Cavendish Robusta, Ney Poovan (Elakki Bale) Poovan, 
Rasthali, Karpooravalli, Nendran. 


2 CONDITIONS FOR RIPENING 


2.1 Harvesting and Maturity for Ripening 


Bananas are harvested at mature light green stage and 
the maturity can be judged by degree of fullness of the 
fingers that is, disappearance of angularity. As the fruit 
matures on the plant, the fingers become less angular 
and more round. However, bananas harvested even at 
85-90 percent maturity can be ripened to good quality 
with artificial ripening. 


2.2 Pre-ripening Operations 


2.2.1 De-handing 


In this operation the banana hands are cut-off from 
the central peduncle/stem of the bunch. Though 
the harvested bunches can directly be placed in the 
ripening room, it is highly preferred to de-hand them 
before ripening. De-handing should be carried out with 
a sharp, clean, curved banana knife, making a smooth 
cut close to the stem. Care is required when de-handing 
to prevent fruit damage by the knife. Banana hands 
should not be handled by lifting with one or two central 
or end fingers which may cause finger breakage and 
will cause pedicel bruising that can lead to problems 
during ripening. Dirty or blunt knives will increase the 
levels of crown disease development and trimming the 
crown close to the fingers will result in crown breakage. 
Knife has to be dipped in antiseptic solution (KMnO,) 
frequently. 


2.2.2 De-latexing 


After de-handing, the fruit should be placed with the 
crown facing downwards onto a layer of leaves to allow 
for latex drainage. 


2.3 Ripening 


Mature bananas left to ripen naturally will eventually 
soften but the change in colour will not be uniform 
and the peel will be dull, pale yellow and unattractive. 
Further, natural ripening in banana (especially 
Cavendish type) is a slow process that leads to more 
weight loss, desiccation of fruits and uneven ripening. 
In order to attain a bright uniform yellow peel colour, 
a firm pulp texture and good flavour, bananas are 
ripened artificially. The artificial ripening of fruits has 
also become essential in order to regulate the supply 
chain in the markets. Artificial ripening of banana is 
a necessity during their commercial handling and is 
a standard practice all over the world. In india, only 
ethylene gas is permitted for artificial ripening of any 
type of fruits. 


2.4 Optimum Conditions for Ripening 


Bananas are commercially ripened by exposing 
the fruits to ethylene gas (100 ppm) in the airtight 
rooms/ripening chambers for 18-24 h. Optimum 
temperature for ripening is around 20 °C with a relative 
humidity of 80-90 percent. Where humidity is too low, 
the weight loss will be more because of more moisture 
loss. Room ventilation after gassing with ethylene is 
essential to prevent the built up CO, (carbon dioxide) 
concentration released by the fruits so as to avoid its 
bad effects. The chamber temperature is maintained at 
18-2 °C till green tip stage or stage 4 (Refer 4). At this 
stage the fruits are sent to market which would ripen to 
bright yellow colour in another 2 days. After ripening 
to bright yellow stage it would have a yellow life of 
1-3 days depending on the holding temperature. 
NOTE — When the external ambient temperature is below 
12 °C in temperate regions, it is necessary to protect the 
bananas from chilling injury, by maintaining the temperature 
above 12 °C in the ripening rooms using appropriate heating 
system. 


3 USE OF ETHYLENE GAS FOR RIPENING 


3.1 Sources of Ethylene Gas 


Ethylene gas obtained through the following systems 
may be used for ripening of banana in the ripening 
chambers. 


IS 11977 : 2022 


Fic.1 BANANA RIPENED WITH ETHYLENE GAS 


3.1.1 Ethylene Gas Cylinders 


Ethylene gas is available in large steel cylinders where 
it is kept under pressure. As it is highly flammable, the 
use of pure gas is discouraged and is usually diluted 
with nitrogen or other inert gases. Typical mixtures 
are 95 percent nitrogen and 5 percent ethylene or 
90 percent nitrogen and 10 percent ethylene. 


3.1.2 Ethylene Generator 


This is a portable device, which is placed inside the 
ripening room. An ethylene releasing liquid is filled 
into the tank fitted with ethylene generator and it is 
connected to an electric power source. The liquid gets 
heated in a controlled manner in the presence of a 
catalyst and produces ethylene gas. 


3.1.3 Ethylene Gas Cans 


These are small tin canisters filled with ethylene gas and 
available in different sizes and capacities. They usually 
contain 5 percent ethylene and balance nitrogen gas. 
The gas can be sprayed into the chamber in required 
quantities. 


3.1.4 Ethylene Gas from Liquid 2- Chloroethyl 
Phosphonic Acid 


In this ethylene gas can be cheaply produced by the user 
itself by taking calculated quantity of liquid and adding 
required quantity of alkali (sodium hydroxide). As 
standardized at ICAR-IHR, 2 ml of liquid is required 
for every | cubic meter of room size (when at least 3/4 
volume of room is filled with fruits) and 1/4" gram of 
sodium hydroxide is needed per every ml of liquid used 
to liberate the ethylene gas in the chamber. 


3.2 Method of Using Ethylene 


Banana hands should be neatly placed in ventilated 
plastic crates and staked in the ripening chamber. 
Maintain the temperature and RH as mentioned 
above. Ethylene gas from any of the above source 
may be introduced directly into the ripening room and 
maintained at a concentration of 100 ppm. The quantity 
of gas introduced should be controlled using appropriate 
sensor mechanisms and circulation of the air is essential 
to spread the ethylene gas uniformly in the ripening 


room. After the introduction of the ethylene, the room 
should remain closed for a period of 24 h. After this 
period the ripening chamber is ventilated to remove the 
built up carbon dioxide and the chamber temperature is 
maintained dependent upon the variety. As mentioned 
earlier, the temperature controlled ripening is essential 
only in case of Cavendish bananas, particularly for 
colour development, while all other varieties ripe 
with ethylene under normal atmospheric temperature. 
However, ripening of banana under controlled 
temperature and humidity levels will certainly help to 
prevent moisture loss during ripening irrespective of 
the variety. 


Thus the essential requirements of an effective ethylene 
ripening system are: 
a) Areasonably airtight room with insulation; 
b) A temperature control system for cooling and/or 
heating; 
c) Humidity control; 
d) An air circulation and ventilation system; 


e) An ethylene gas injection system; and 


f) Ethylene (C,H,) and carbon di-oxide (CO,) gas 
sensors with control systems. 


Fic. 2 RIPENING CHAMBER WITH ETHYLENE GAS AND 
TEMPERATURE CONTROL 


Depending upon temperature of room where bananas 
are placed after ethylene gas exposure, it may take 4 to 
10 days for completion of ripening process, lower the 
temperature of ripening longer the duration. The lowest 
temperature that can be used for ripening or storage of 
banana after ripening is 13 °C. 


IS 11977 : 2022 


4 RIPENESS STAGES FOR SUPPLY TO 
RETAILERS 


Table 1 explains about different stages of banana 
ripening based on the surface colour development. The 
degree of ripeness of bananas which are supplied to 
the retail trade should depend on the season and the 
temperature conditions in the retail shop. In summer, 
the bananas should be supplied at the stage when they 
are turning yellow (yellowish green). In cold weather, 
the bananas should be supplied with a more marked 
yellow colour than in summer (yellow, with green tips). 


5 CAUSES OF DEFECTIVE RIPENING OF 


BANANAS 
Table 2 gives the principal factors which are responsible 
Fic. 3 BANANAS EXPOSED TO ETHYLENE GAS AND for the defective ripening of bananas. Maturity harvest, 
Kept AT 15°C rough handling that causes mechanical injuries, too 


low and too high temperature in ripening rooms and 
concentration of ethylene gas are the factors to be 
considered to avoid the ripening defects. 


Table 1 Stages of Banana Ripening 


( Clause 4 ) 
Stages/Degree of Appearance of Skin Characteristics 
Ripeness 
1 Green Mature green colour at time of loading 
2 Green with faint hint of yellow First change in colour as a result of ripening 
3 More green than yellow Initial de-greening of skin indicates continuing ripening process 
4 More yellow than green Correct degree of ripeness for wholesalers to supply to retailers and delivery from 
ripening rooms 
Yellow with green tip Best condition for retail sale, as the fruit can still be kept for a few days 
Completely yellow Fruit appears at its best and is very tasty. When the fruit is this ripe, the skin is very 
sensitive to mechanical influences 
7 Yellow with brown spots Small brown spots (anthracnose spots known as sugar spots) indicate that the fruit 
is fully ripe. Its aroma and flavor are at their best 
M M 
Green Greenish Yellow Yellowish Green M 
Green tip & stalk 
Yellow with brown spot Fully Yellow Yellow with Green stalk 


FIG. 4 VARIOUS STAGES OF BANANA RIPENING 
3 


IS 11977 : 2022 


Table 2 Causes of Defective Ripening 


( Clause 5 ) 


Uneven ripening 


Bananas with uneven degrees of maturity 


Ripening too slowly 


Immature initial fruits 
Temperature too low in the ripening room 


Gas leak in chamber or very low concentration of ethylene 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


Defective colour 


Flesh soft and skin blackening 


Development of rotting 


Too low or too high temperature in ripening room 
Too high accumulated carbon-dioxide gas 

Too high a temperature 

Mechanical injuries during or after harvesting 
Injuries due to rough handling 

Defective de-handling 


Insufficient disinfection of the ripening room 


vi) 


Finger dropping from hands 


Too high concentration of ethylene gas 


Overexposure time to ethylene 


IS 11977 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fruits, Vegetables, and Allied Products Sectional Committee, FAD 10 


Organization 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


All India Food Processors Association, New Delhi 


Association of Food Scientists and Technologists 
India, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


College of Agricultural Engineering Post-Harvest 
Technology, Gangtok 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade and Industry, 
New Delhi 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Dabur Research and Development Centre, Ghaziabad 
Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 


Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 


ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, 
Lucknow 


ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR-Central Plantation Crops Research Institute, 
Kasaragod 


ITC Limited, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology, 
Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


Jain Irrigation Systems Limited, Jalgaon 


Mother Dairy Fruit and Vegetable Private Limited, 
Noida 


Representative(s) 
Dr M. R. Dresa (Chairman) 


Dr R. K. BANSAL 
Ms Mamta Arora (Alternate) 


Dr REVATHY BASKARAN 
Dr K. V. HARISH PRASHANTH (Alternate) 


DR P. VIJAYANAND 
DR A. S. CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


DR SUJATA JENA 
DR SAID PRASHANT PANDHARINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PRIYANKA SHARMA 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamata (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH C. PANDEY 
MR Sumit NaRa (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. CHOUHAN 
DR A. JAGANNATH(Álternate) 


SHRI PARMOD SIWACH 


Dr C. R. MEHTA 
Dr M. K. TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


Dr R. B. TIWARI 
Dr D. V. SUDHAKAR Rao (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA GARG 


DR RAMESH KUMAR 
DR SUNIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANITHA KARUN 
Dr M. R. MANIKANTAN (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN B. 
SHRI PRAKASH SELVARAJ (Alternate) 


DR V. R. SINIJA 


DR TANWEER ALAM 


SHRI SUNIL GUPTA 
SHRI VINAY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI KUMAR KALPAM 
Nancy TALWAR (Alternate) 


IS 11977 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
National Institute of Food Technology Dr SUNIL PAREEK 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Sonipat 
In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link I, SHRI PITAM CHANDRA 
Greater Noida) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (EXx-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI VARSHA GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (FAD), BIS 


Review of Indian Standards Related to Storage, Transport and Ripening of 
Fresh Fruits and Vegetables, FAD 10: Panel 2 


Organization Representative(s) 
ICAR-Central Potato Research Institute, Shimla Dr BRAJESH SINGH (Convenor) 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai Dr SATYENDRA GAUTAM 
ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticulture Research, Dr D. V. SUDHAKAR RAO 
Bengaluru 
ICAR-Central Institute for Subtropical Horticulture, DR BHARATI KILLADI 
Lucknow 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority, SHRI VINAY KUMAR CHAUHAN 
New Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 10 (17055). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


