**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13340 (1993) : Power Capacitors of Self-healing Type for 
AC Power Systems having Rated Voltage up to 650 V [ETD 29: 
Power Capacitors] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13340: 1993 

i:r ^ j%^ ^ $ f^ ^^: ^ ^ ^ 650 ^5r 

/rtfif/flrt Standard 

POWER CAPACITORS OF SELF-HEALING TYPE 

FOR AC POWER SYSTEMS HAVING RATED 

VOLTAGE UP TO 650 V — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 621-3I9-4-027-465 



® BIS 1993 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1993 Price Groap 9 



Power Capacitors Sectional Committee, ET 29 



CONTENTS 

Page 

1 ScoPF ,,. I 

2 REFrRPNcrs . . i 

3 Terminoi ogy 1 

4 SERVfcr Conditions 2 

5 Ratings 2 

6 OVFRLOADS 3 

7 Safety KrQuiRrMiNT% . . 4 

8 GUJDF FOR iNSFALLATION AND OpFRATlON OF POWCR CaPACITORS 4 

9 Imormaiion TO BE Given NMTH Enquiry OR Order . 4 

10 Marking 4 

11 Test Rfquirimfnts 5 

12 Cl ASSIFK AlION OF IfSTS 6 

13 VisuAi Examination 7 

14 SrAiiNG Test / 

15 MfASuiuMFNis ot Capacitanci: AND Oljtpui 7 

16 iNSLffAflON RfSfSTANCE BlTWLEN TERMINALS AND CaP^CJTOR CONFAINCR 7 

17 Capacitor Loss Tanoent ( Tan 5 ) Measurement 8 

18 ac VoLTAdfe Ifst UrTw^rN Terminais 8 

19 ac VoLTAor TrsTs Bi iweln Terminals and Container 8 

20 Test lOR DiscHARoi Devices 9 

21 Thermal Seability Test 9 

22 Capacitor 1 oss I anoene ( Ian S ) Measurements at Elfvated Temperature 10 

23 Sfif Hfaiing Test 1 

24 Lk.htning Impuise Voltage Tpsr Bftween Terminals and Container i 

25 Short Circuit Discharge Test 1 

26 Agmng TrsT 1 

27 DisiRucTiON Test 1 
Annex A I ist of Reeirred Indian Standards 12 
Annex B Formulae ior Capacitors and Installations 12 
Annex C Eehcis of Harmonics 16 
Annex D Guidi for Insialeahon and Oiuration 16 
Annfx E Information to be Given wieh Enquiry or Order . 20 
Annix F Sampling Plan for Shlnf Capacitors for Power Systems 21 



tUKhWUKU 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft fianlized 
by ihe Power Capacitors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnicai 
Divi**inn Counc li 



( Continued on third cover ) 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 2002 

TO 

IS 13340 : 1993 POWER CAPACITORS OF 

SELF-HEALING TYPE FOR AC POWER SYSTEMS 

HAVING RATED VOLTAGE UPTO 650 V — 

SPECIFICATION 

( Page 6, clause 12.2.2) — Delete h) and j) 

( P<ig(* 7, clause 12 J.2 ) — Add the following new clause after 12J.2. 

'12.4 Special Tests 

These tests shalJ be earned out by the manufacturer The following shall 
consutute special tests 

a) Ageing test ( see 26 ). and 

b) Destruction test (j^tf 27 ). 



(CT29) 



ReproKnc^iy Unit. BIS, N«w Ddhi, ladu 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 JUNE 2002 

TO 

IS 13340:1993 POWER CAPACITORS OF 

SELF-HEALING TYPE FOR AC POWER SYSTEMS 

HAVING RATED VOLTAGE UP TO 650 V — 

SPECIFICATION 

( First cover page and page I, iille ) — Substitute '1 000 V' for 

650 V 

( Page 1 , clause 1.1 , Une 4 ) — Substitute ' 1 000 V^ for '650 V . 

( Third cover pa$e, ForewordJmes9, 11, Hand [5 ) — Substitute M 000 
V'/or '650 V and wherever occurs in the text. 



(ET29) 



Reprography limt, BIS. New Dethi. India 



IS 13340 : 1993 



Indian Standard 



POWER CAPACITORS OF SELF-HEALING TYPE 

FOR AC POWER SYSTEMS HAVING RATED 

VOLTAGE UP TO 650 V — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard applies to self healing 
capacitor units and banks intended to be used, 
in particular, for power factor correction of ac 
power systems of upto and including 650 V 
rated voltage and frequency 15 to 60 Hz 

NOTE — Additional rccjutrcmLnts for cnacttoT'i 
protected by inUrnal fuses as well as rLquir^mcnts 
for the internal fuses art giv^n m IS 12672 J989 

1.2 THl following are excluded fiom the scope 
of this standard 

a) Shunt capacitois of non-self healing type 
for ai. power systems having rated voltage 
of up to 650 V, 

b) ShuiU capacitors for ac power systems 
having a \ated \oUa£e ab; ve 650 V, 
( urdcr p ep iration } 

c) Capacitois for induction hcat-gcnerating 
plants, op^idling at frcquentics between 
40 and 24 00(/ Hz, 

d) Series capacitors ( IS 9835 . 1981 ), 

e) Capacitors for motor applications and 
the like ( IS 1709 1984 and IS 2993 
1975 ), 

f) Coupling capacitors and capacitor 
dividers ( IS 9348 1979 ), 

g) Capacitors to be used m power electronic 
circuits ( IS 13648 1993 ), 

h) Small ac capicitois to h-^ used for 
fluorescent and discharge lamps ( IS 1569 
1976), 

j) Capacitors for suppression of radio 
interference ( IS 3723 ), 

k) Capacitors intended to be used in various 
types of electrical equipment and thus 
considered as components, 

m) Capacitors intended for use with dc 
voltage stipcrimposed on ac vohage 

1.3 Accessories such as insulators, switches, 
instrument transformers, fuses, etc, shall be in 
accoidance with the relevant Indian Standards 



2 REFERENCES 

The Indian standards listed m Annex A are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 The following definitions m addition to 
(hose given in 13 1885 ( Part 42 ) 1986 i.hd(( 
apply 

3.1 Capacitor Unit 

An assembly of one or more capacitor elements 
in the same container with terminals brought 
out 

3.2 Capacitor Bank 

A number of capacitor units ( two or more ) 
connected electncaiiy so as to act together 
A three-phase bank may be composed of three 
single-phase capacitor units 

3.3 Sclf-Healing Capacitor 

A capacitor, the electrical properties of tvhich, 
after local breakdown of the dielectric, arc 
rapidly and essentially restored 

3.4 Rated Capacitance of a Capacitor ( Cn ) 

The capacitance value foi which the capacitor 
has been desig,ned 

3.5 Rated Output of a Capacitor ( Qn ) 

Ihc reactive power derived fiom the rated 
values of capacitance, frequency and voltage 
( or current ) 

3 6 Rated Voltage of a Capacitor ( Uv ) 

The rms value of th^; alternati ig voltage for 
which the cipicltor has been designed 

NOTE — III the CISC of cipacitors consisting of one 
or mo!c scpintc cireuits ( for cxnmple, single phase 
units mtenUcd for use in polyphase corvvvwcuon oi 
polyphase units with SLparatc eirctnt ) Us rcfeis 
to ihe rated vohage of each circuit For pul> phase 
capacitors vviih internal ekctricj/ conntctions be 
Vween the phases and for polyphase capACitot bAr\ks, 
Un refers to the phase to phase voltage 



IS 13340 : 1993 



3.7 Rated Frequency of a Capacitor ( Fn ) 

The frequency for which the capacitor has been 
designed 

3.8 Rated Current of a Capacitor ( In ) 

The rms value of the alternating curienl for 
vvfiich the LcTpaciCor has been designee/ 

3.9 Voltage Factor ( Vf ) 

The ratio of maximum permissible voltage 
level to the rated voltage of the capacitor 

4 St RVKL CONDI nONS 

4.1 Normal Service Conditions 

This standard pi escribes requirements for 
capacitors intended foi Ui.c m the following 
conditions 

a) Residual Voltage at Lnergization - Not 
to exceed 10 percent lated voltage ( see 
clause 7.1 D-5 dtid B-3 ) 

b) Altitude — Not exceeding 1 000 m 

c) AmbuntjAir Tempeuiture Categoms — 
Capiciiois arc classified in tcnip.iaturc 
c itcgorics, each Ctitcgorv being specifie<l 
b) a number follov^ed by a letter The 
number tepresents th^ hwest ambient/ 
an lempLi ituic at which the capacitor 
may opciau I he Icttcis represent upp'^r 
limits ol iLinpcrature variation ranges, 
having maximum values specihcd in 
lable 1 The temperature c itcgorics 
(.o\er the tempcratuie range of — 10^ to 

1 "C 

4 1.1 Ilij lowest ambient air temperature at 
which the eapaeitoi may be operated should be 
- 10 C 



for indoor use, i lower 
normally applicable 



limit of -5X IS 



Table 1 is based on service conditions in which 
the capacitoi does not influenee the ambjenl 
air temperature ( for example, outdoor install- 
ations ) 

4.1.2 If the capacitor influtMices the air tem- 
perature, the ventilation and/or choice of 
capacitor shall be such thai the Table 1 limits 
aic maintained The cooling air temperatuie 
in such an installation shall not exceed the 
temperatuie limits of Tabk- I by moic than 
5X 

Any combination of mmimum and maximum 



values can be chosen for the standard tempera- 
ture category of a capacitor, for example, 

-10/A or -5/D. 

Preferred standard temperature categories are 
-10/A and -5/C 

4.2 Unusual Service Conditions 

Unless otherwise agreed between the manufac- 
tuier and the purchaser, this standaid doet 
not apply to eapaeitoi!^, the service conditions 
of which, m general, aie incompatible with the 
requirements of the present standard 

5 RATINGS 

5.1 Rared Outputs 

The preferred rated outputs of capacitor unit 
in kVar at a frequency at 50 Hz shall be 1 , 2, 3, 
4,5 10, 12 5, 15, 20,25,30 40 and 50 

NOIf - PafLrrcd rated output for capacitor bank 
should be in combmations of uml si/e chosen 

5.2 Preferred Rated Voltage 

The pufLiied rated voltage of the unit or bank 
shill b^ 240 V tor single phase and 415 or 410 V 
for three-phase systems ( S'-e IS 12360 1985 ). 



Table 1 Categories of Ambient Temperatures 

{Clauses 4 1.4.1 \ and4\2) 



Symbol 


Maximum 


Anibiont Air Tempeiaturo 

( "C ) Highest Mejn Over 

any Period of 






24 hou s 


1 year 


A 


40 


30 


20 


B 


45 


35 


25 


C 


50 


40 


30 


n 


55 


45 


35 



NOTES 

1 The IcmpLratuic values according to Table 1 may 
fte found tn fftc nKtcr^oiagfi^l Ucnpertitiirc Ublcs 
covering the installation site 

2 Higher tcmpiralurc values thAn those indicated 
in Tible 1 may bs considered in special applications 
by mutual agreement between manufacturer and 
purchaser In this case, the temperature category 
shall be indicated by the combination of minimum 
and maximum tempenture values, for example 
- 10/60 

5.3 Rated Frequency 

The standard frequency feu the purpose of this 
standard shall be 50 Hz. 



IS 13340 : 1993 



NOTE — If a frequency higher or lower than that 
slated above is <ipicified by the puichaser, it docs 
preclude compiiance with this standard. In such a 
case corresponding changes, where necessary, shall 
be taken into account as indicated in then relevant 
places, 

6 OVERLOADS 

6.1 Maximum Permissible Voltages 

6.1.1 Long Duration Voltages 

Capacitor units shall be suitable for operation 
al voltage levels according to Table 2 ( see D'2 
and D-5 ). 

The aiPphtude of the overvoUages that may be 
tolerated without significant deterioration of 
the capacitor depends, on their duration, the 
number of applications, and the capacitor 
temperature ( see 0-2 ). Jt is assumed that ihc 
overvoUages given in Table 2 and having a 
value higher than M5 x Un occur 200 times 
in the life of ihc capacWor. 

6.1.2 Switching Voltage 

The switching of a capacitor bank should be 
earned out by a rcstrike free circuit breaker 
so that the lust peak of transient overvoltage 
docs not exceed 2^ 2~tmics the applied voltage 
( rms value ) for a maximum duration of 1/2 
cycle. 



6.1.2.1 Five thousand switching operations per 
year are acceptable under these conditions 
taking into account the fact that some of them 
may take place when the internal temperature 
of the capacitor is less than C but within the 
temperature category. [ The corresponding 
transient overcurrent may at a peak reach 100 
times the value In ( sec D-6 ) ] 

In the case of capacitors that are switched 
more frequently, the values of the ovei voltage 
amphludc and duration and the transient 
overcurrent shall be limited to lower levels 
with the use of current limiting devices 
( seciy-1 ). These limitations and/or reductions 
shall be agreed upon between the inanufacturer 
and the user. 

6.2 Maximum Permissible Current 

Capacitor units shall be suitable for contmuous 
operation at an rms current of 1-30 times the 
current that occurs at rated sinusoidal voltage 
and rated frequency, excluding transients. 
Taking into account the capacitance tolerances 
ofM Cn, the maximum permissible current 
can be up to 1-43 In. 

These overcurrent factors arc intended to take 
care of the combined effects of harmon\cs ( see 
Annex B ) and overvoUages up to and including 
1. 10 Un, according to 6.1,1. 



Tabic 2 Permissible Overloads 

( Clause 6.1.1 ) 



Operating Frequency 



Voltwgc Factor ( Vf ) Maximum Duration 



ObservAtfon 



Power frcquei cy 



Power frequency 



1 00 



MO 



Continuous 



12 h in every 24 h 



Highest avtjage value during any 
period of cdpdLUor energizition Foe 
energization periods Ic-b than 24 h, 
c'ACt-piJons apply as iiidic iieJ below 
( see D-2 ) 



System voltage regulation and 
fluctuations 



Power frequency 



M5 



30 min in every 24 h 



System voUdge regulation and 
fluctuations 



Power frequency 


120 


5 mm 


Voltage rise at light load ( see D.2 ) 


Power frequency 


1-30 


1 min 




Power fri.quency 
plus harmonics 


Such that the curreut docs not exceed the value given in 6.2.1 ( see also D^ and 0-7 ) 



IS 13340 : 1993 



7 SAFETY REQLJKEMENTS 

7.1 Discharge Device 

Lach capacitor unit or bank shall be provided 
with a directly connected discharse device. 
The discharge device shail reduce the residual 
voltage from the crest value of the rated value 
Un to 50 V or less within I nim» aftei the 
capacjtoi is disconnected from the source of 
supply 

There must be no switih, fuse or any other 
tsoldtmg device between the capacitor unit and 
the discharge device. 

A discharge device is not a substitute for shoit- 
circuilMig the capacitor termtnaL together and 
to earth bclore handling 

NOTPS 

1 Capacitors connected dtrcctiy (o other electrtcii 
equipment providing a discharge path shall be 
considered properly dischaigcd, provided that (he 
circuit characteiistics aic such as to ensure the 
discharge of the capacitor withm the times specified 
above 

2 Discharge circuits must have adequate current- 
carrying capaeify to diichirge the cipacHor fjom 
the peak of ilic 13 Un ovurvoltige according 
to 6.1.1 

3 A formula for the cileulation of the discharge 
resistance is given ni B-4.3 

4 Since the residual voltage at energisation must 
not exceed 10 pojccnt ol the i Ucd voltage [ vrc 4 I 
(0] dischijyc resiilojs with lower jesistanCc or 
addilioiuil svMtche'l Jisdvngc di^viee iniy be needed, 
if the capaeitois aic automatically c intiolLd 

5 A residual charge may sometimes b^ Ltt on the 
inti.rconnec ions ot series connected capacitois due 
to blovv'D fusLS, inttjruptLd nurnil cMincCtions, 
ornonlineai behaviour of the dieleetiic resulting 
from ovLf stj ^siiig Thtse intei connLLti ^ns, llure- 
fofL, slull b(. sh-iit ciituilcd to cHth btlote 
handling 

7.2 Container Connections 

To e lablc the potential oi the metal container 
ol the capacitor to be fixed, and to enable tarry 
the fault cuiicnt m the event of a breakdown to 
the contaner, the contaiaei shall be provided 
with a connection capable of cat lying the fault 
current 

7.2.1 Harth Connection 

If the metal container of a capacitor is at earth 
potential in normal service, it shall be possible 
10 connect it to earth m a reliable way, and 
clearly marked with the symbol J_ . 

7.3 Other Safety Kequirements 

Capacitors shall comply with the relevant 
general safety icgulations for power installa- 
tii>iv^, tlwt IS, Indian riectiiclty Rules, 1956, 



8 GUIDE FOR INSTALLATION AND 
OPERATION OF POWER CAPACITORS 

&,! A general guidance for proper installation 
and operation of shunt capacitors is given m 
Annex D. 

9 INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN WITH 
ENQUIRY OR ORDER 

The particulais required in Annex E shall be 
provided by the purchaser if required by the 

manufatlurer. 

10 MARKING 

10.1 Rating Plate of the Unit 

I he following information shall be marked 
indelibly, either d)rcct]y or by means of a 
plate, on each capacitor unit. 

a) Reference to this Indian Standard ( for 
example IS .. ), 

b) Identity of the source of manufacture, 

c) Identification number and year of manu* 
facturc The year may be a part of the 
identification number or in code foira; 

dj Rated output, Qvf in kilovais. 

For three-phase units the total output 
shall be given ( see Annex B ), 

e) Rated voltage Uv, m volts or kilovolts; 
fj Rated ficquency fn, m Hertz; 

g) Tempetatuie category, 

h) Diseharg" device shall be indicated by 
wording or by the symbol ~-\ — i— or by the 
i< led resistance m kdo-ohms ormegohms; 
the iiymbols I or h shall be used for 
inteiiial or external discharge device anti 
IC for inductive coil when provided m 
the capacitor, 

j) Reierence to self healing design, SM oi/ 
:^\: and type of dielectric MPP/MP 
{see N Jte 4 ); 

k) Connection Symbol - Alt capacitois, 
cxtept single-phase units having one 
capacitance only shall have their connec- 
tion indicated For siandaidized con* 
ncction symbols ( see 10.2 ); 

m) Internal fuses, if included, shall be indi- 
cated by wo] ding or by the symbol- ^^ *; 

n) Insulation level Ut in kV (Only for 
units having all terminals insulated from 
the containei. )^ 



IS 13340 : 1993 



The insulation level shall be marked by 
means of two numbers separated by a 
stroke, the first number giving the rms 
value of The power frequency lest voltage 
in kilovolts, and the second number 
giving the crest value of the lightning 
impulse test voltage, in kilovolts ( for 
example, 3/15 kV). 

For units havjng one termmal perman- 
ently connected to the contamer and 
units for non-exposed installation and 
not tested according to 24, this informa- 
tion should be 3/-. 

p) Symbol for the overpressure disconnec- 
tor, 4r, if provided in the capacitor. 

NOTES 

1 For small units where it is impracticable to 
indicate all the above items on the rdtmg plate, 
items (k), (n) and (j) may be stated in an instruction 
sheet. The rating plate shall bear a reference to 
this sheet. 

2 Fnrther infoimalion which is of importance for 
the safety of persons or equipment shall be stated 
cither on the rating plate or in an instruction sheet. 
In the latter case the rating shall bear a reference 
to this instruction sheet. 

3 A warning mstruftion that -DISCHARGE 
CAPACITORS BEFORIr HANDLING' should be 
prominently marked in red. 

4 The notations used fc- diclecuic are MPP = 
Metallized polypropylene, and MP = Metallized 
paper. 

10.2 Standardized Connection Symbols 

The type of connection shall be indicated 
either by letters or by syinb:)lb. jiivcn below. 

D or A =^ delta 

Y or Y - star 

VNor Y -- star, neutral brought out 

llf or {{[ ^ three sections without 
intcieonneciions 

10.3 Marking of the Bank 

The following minimum information shall be 
given by the manufacturer in an instruction 
sheet, or alternatively, on request of the 
purchaser, on a rating plate: 

a) Reference to this standard that is 
IS 13340: 1993, 

b) Identity of the "Source of manufacture; 

c) Rated output Qv, in kilovars ( total 
output to be given ); 

d) Rated voltage Un, in volts; 



e) Connection symbol; [or standardized 
connection symbols (5fc 10.2). The con- 
nection symbol may be part of a 
simplified connection diagram. 

f) Minimum time required between 
disconnection and rcclosure of the bank. 

10.4 Marking of the Terminals 

10.4.1 The marking of terminals of the capaci- 
tors of various configuration shall be: 



Configuration of 
Correction 

a) TTnTce-pli^ase 
capacitors 
having three 
terminals only 

b) Single-phase 
unit having 
two insulated 
terminals 

c) Three-phase 
capacitors with 
electrically 
sepaiate phases 

d) Two-phase, 3 
wire capacitor 



Marking of 
Terminal 



No marking is 
necessary 



A2, Al; B2, Bl; C2, 
CI; corresponding to 
each separate phases 

A2, B2, N correspond- 
ing to each phase 
teririnals and neutral 
or common terminal^ 
respectively 

e) Two-phase, 4 A2, B2 corresponding 
wire capacitors to each phase and Al, 
Bl corresponding to 
neutral terminal 

10.5 The capacitor unit or bank may also be 
maiked with the Standard Mark. Details for 
use of Standard Mark may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 

11 TEST REQUIREMENTS 

11.1 General 

The requirements specified in 11 to 27 lay 
down the requirements for capacitor units. 
The supporting insulators, switches, instrument 
transformers, fuses, etc, shall be in accordance 
with the relevant Indian Standaid. 

11.2 Test Conditions 

Unless otherwicc specified for a particular 
test or measurement, the temperature of the 
capacitor dielectric at the sttid of the lest shall 
be in the range of f lOX to 45^'C. It may be 
assumed that the dielectric temperature is the 



IS 13340 : 1993 



same as the iimbient lempcrature, provided 
that the capacitor has been left in an un- 
cnergizcd state at a constant ambient 
temperature for an adequate period. 



NOTE — Capacitor banks shall be made fiom 
capacitor units tested as per 12.1.1 

12.2 Type Tests 



When a correction has to be applied, the 
reference temperature to be used is 27 ^h 2X 
unless othciwisc agreed to between the manu- 
facturer and the puichaser. 



Type test are carried out in order to ascertain 
that, as legards design, size, material and 
construction, the capacitor complies with the 
spf^cjfied characteristics and operation require- 
ments detailed in this standard. Unless other- 
Thc ac tests and measurements shall be carried wise specified, every capacitor sample to which 
out a! A frequency of 50 Hz irrespective of llie it i^ intended to apply the type test shall first 
latcd frequency of the capacitor, if not other- have \Mihstood satisfactorily the application of 
wise specified. all the routine tests given in 12.1. 

Capacitois having a rated fiequciicy below The type tests shall have been carried out by 
50 H/ shall be tested and measured at 50 Hz if the manufacturer, and the purchaser shall, on 
not otherwise spccifie<l. request, be supplied with a ccrtiQcute detailing 

the results of such tests. 
12 CLASSIFICATION OF TESIS 



12.0 The tests arc classiiled as; 

a) Routine tests ( see 12.1 ), 

b) Type tests ( vee 12.2 ), and 

c) Acceptance tests ( see 12.3 ). 

12.1 Routine Tests 



12.2.1 Criteria of Approval 

One sample or more shall be submitted for 
testing together with relevant data. The testing 
authority shall issue a type test approval certi- 
ficate if the capacitors arc found to comply 
with requirements of te^t given in 12.2.2. 



12.2.2 The following shall constitute type tests 
Routine K-ls shall have been caiiied out by ^^^^ ^^apacitor units: 



the luanufaLtuici on every capicUL)r befoic 
dclivciy. If the puichaser so requests, he shall 
be supplied with a ccitificati; detailing the 
lesults ot sLuh tests. 

12.1.1 The followMg shall constitute routine 
tests on capacitor unlt^: 

a) Visual examination ( see 13 ); 

b) Scaling test ( see 14 ); 

c) Measurements of capacitance and output 
{Me 15), 

d) Insulation resistance between tciniinals 
and capacitor container ( .\ce 16 ); 

e) Capacitoi los, tangent ( tan B ) measure- 
ment ( .see 17 ), 

f) ac voltage test between termmals 
( see 18 ); 

g) ac voltage tests between teiminals and The routine and/or type tests, or some of 
container ( see 19 ); and them, may be repeated by the manufacturer m 

h) Te.t foi discharge devices ( stT 20 ). connection with any contract by agreement 

With the purchaser. The kind of tests, the 

12.1.2 The following shall constitute routine numbei of samples that may be subjected to 
tests on capaciloi banks: such repeated tests and the acceptance criteria 

, .- , i , I , . i'liall be subject to agreement between the 

a) Measurement of capacitance and output nianufacturer and the purchaser. Unless agreed 
( i(r 1. ), ano otherwise, the recommended plan of sampling 

b) Insulation resistance between terminals for acceptance tests given in Annex F shalJ 
and container ( see 16 ); be followed. 



a) Voltage test between terminals (see 18.2); 

b) Voltage test between terminals and 
container ( see 19.2 ); 

c) Thermal stability test ( ^ee 21 ); 

d) Capacitor loss tangent ( tan B ) measure- 
ments at elevated tempeiature ( see 22 ); 

e) Self-healing test (see 23 ); 

f) Lightning impulse voltage test between 
terminals and container ( sec 24 ); 

g) Shoit ciicuit discharge test ( see 25 ); 
h) Ageing test ( see 26 ); And 

j) Tcstruction test ( see 27 ). 

12.3 Acceptance Tests 



IS 13340 : 1993 



12.3.1 The following are recommended as 
acceptance tests on capacitor units: 

a) Visual examination ( see 13 ); 

b) Test for capacitance and output {see 15); 

c) Capacitor loss tangent ( tan 5 ) measure- 
ment ( see 17 ); 

d) Insulation resistance ( see 16 ); 

c) ac voltage test between terminals 
( see 18 ); 

f) ac voltage tests between terminaU and 
container ( see 19 ); 

g) Test for discharge device ( see 20 ); and 
h) Sealing test ( see 14 ). 

12.3.2 The following are recommended as 
acceptance tcst^ on capacitor banks: 

a) Test for capacitance and output (see 15), 
and 

b) Insulation resibtance ( see 16 ). 

13 VISUAL EXAMTNAl ION 

The capacitor unit bank shall be manufactured 
in accordance with g )od engineering practice 
The visual examination shall be sufficient for 
checking compliance with w(Mkmanshipi finish 
and marking ( 10 ). 

14 SEALING TEST 

After dcgreashig, unenergized capacitor units 
shall be stored in a position most likely to 
reveal leakage and heated thioughout so that 
all parts of the container reach a temperature 
not lower than 20°C above the miximum value 
in Table 1 corresponding to the temperature 
symbol and shall be matntamed at this tempeia- 
lure for 2 h. 

No leakage shall occur. 

It IS recommended that a suitable indicator 
such as talcum powder be used to detect 
leakage. 

NOTE — If the manufacturer certifies that capacitor 
contains no matenala that are liquid at the scaling 
test temperature, than the test may be omitted as 
routmc test 

15 MEASUREMENTS OF CAPACITANCE 
AND OUTPUT 

15.1 Capacitance 

The capacitance shall be measured at the rated 
voltage and at the frequency chosen by the 
manufacturer. The method used shall not 



include errors due to harmonics or accessories 
extcinal to the capacitor to be measured such 
as reactors and blocking circuits m the measur- 
ing circuit. The accuracy of the measuring 
method and correlation with the values mea- 
sured at rated voltage and frequency shall be 
given. The capacitance measurement shall be 
earned out after the voltage test between 
terminals ( see 18 ). 

Measurement at a voltage between 9 and M 
times the rated voltage and at u frequency 
between 8 and 1*2 times the rated frequency 
shall be performed on the capacitor used tor the 
theimal stability test { see 21 ), the ageing test 
( see 26 ) and the self-healing test ( see 23 ) 
before these tests and could be performed on 
other capacitors on request of the purchaser in 
agi cement with the manufactuier. In polyphase 
units, ihe value of the line cuticnt with 
symmetrical supply voltage shall not differ by 
more tlian 5 percent fiom the highest value. 

15.2 Output 

A formula for calculation of the output of a 
three-phase capacitor from single-phase capa- 
citance measurements is given in Annex B. 

15.3 Tolerances 

The capacitance and output shall not differ 
from the rated capacitance by more than: 

— 5 to -[- 10 percent for units and banks up 
to 100 kvar 

— to + 10 percent for units and banks 
above 100 kvar 

The capacitance value is that measured under 
the conditions of 15.1 

[fi three-phase units, the ratio o[ maximum to 
minimum value of the capacitance measured 
between any two line leiminals shall not 
exceed 105. 

16 INSULATION RESISTANCE BETWEEN 
lERMINALS AND CAPACITOR CONTAINER 

Every capacitor shall be subjected to an insu- 
lation test between terminals and container ex- 
cept when one terminal of the capacitor is 
connected to the container. Ihe test shall be 
made with a dc voltage not less than 500 V. 
The ripple content in the lest voltage shall be 
not mote than 10 percent. The insulation 
resistance so determined shall be not less than 
50 megohms. In case of capacitors having 
thiec terminals bt ought out, the insulation 
resistance shall be determined between teimi- 
nals ( all connected together externally ) and 
the container. 



IS 13340 : 1993 



17 CAPACITOR LOSS TANGENT ( TAN B ) 
MEASUREMENT 

17.1 The dielectric loss angle ( tan 5 ) shall be 
measured by means of Schering Biidge or other 
method capable of giving sufficient accurate 
results. The measurements shall be carried 
out within standard ambient temperature range 
( .U'c 11.2 ) and at 0-9 to M time the rated 
voltage, at standaid rated frequency. In the 
case of ihree-pliasc delta connected capacitor 
bank, the measurements may be made in turn 
between terminals I and 2-3 connected together, 
2 and 3-1 connected together and 3 and 1-2 
connected together. The measurements of 
capacitor loss shall be carried out after the 
voltage lest between terminals ( see 18 ). 

The capacitor loss angle measurements shall 
be performed on the capacitoi used for thermal 
stability test { see 21 ) piior to this test and 
could be performed on other capacitors on 
request of the purchaser in agreement with the 
manufacturer. 

NOTE — The tan g vaiue of certain types of 
diclcciiic IS a fiincuon of the energization time 
before the mcasuument. 

17.2 Loss Requirements 

The value of tan 8 measured in accordance 
with 17.1 shall not exceed the value agreed to 
between the manufacturei and the user. How- 
ever, the vaJuc of tan S shall not exceed the 
following: 



a) Metalli/cd polypropyUne film 
with 1 n t crna 1 i nd uci i ve co 1 1 
and cUschaige resistor 

b) Double melaliized paper with 
plain polypropylene iilm im- 
prei^iiaicd with dielectric oil 

c) Smgl: metalli/ed paper with 
plain polypropylene film im- 
picgnated with dieleetiic oil 

18 flc VOLTAGE TEST BE 1 WEEN 
TERMINALS 



18.1.2 During the test no permanent break- 
down or flashover shall occur. Self-healing 
breakdowns are permitted. Before and after 
the voltage test, the capacitance shall be mea- 
sured. The change in capacitance shall be 
limited to 2 percent. 

NOTES 

1 For polyphase capacitors, the test voltages shall 
be adjusted as appropriate. 

2 Operation of internal element fuses is permitted, 
provided the capacitance tolerances ( see 15.3 ) are 
still met and that not more than two fusei have 
operated per unit. 

18.2 Type Test 

Each capacitor shall be subjected to an ac test 
at Ut = 1-75 Un for a duration of 10 sec. The 
ac test shall be carried out with a substantially 
sinusoidal voltage. 

18.2.1 During the test no permanent break- 
down or flashover shall occur. Self-healing 
breakdowns are permitted Before and after 
the voltage test, the capacitance and loss tan- 
gent delta shaJI be measured. The change in 
capacitance shall be limited to 2 percent and the 
increase in value of tan 5 to 2 x lO"-* when 
measured at 27' ± 2°C. 

NOTES 

1 For polyphase capacitors, the test voltages shah 
be adjusted as appropi late 

2 Operation of internal element fuses is p^rnaitted, 
piovided the eapdcitanw lolcranceii {see 15.^) are 
sltll met. 

19 ac VOLTAGE TESTS BEfVVEEN 
TERMINAL AND CONTAINER 



0002 5 l^'l Routine Tests 



0-00 1 



002 



18.1 Koutiue Test 

Every capacitor shall be subjected to an 
test atUt^l75 Un for a minimum time 
2 sec. 



ac 
of 



18.1.1 The ac lest shall be carried out with a 
.substantially sinusoidal voltage at a frequency 
between 15 Hz and 100 Hz and preferably as 
near as possible to the rated frequency. 



Units having all terminals msulated from the 
container shall be subjected to a voltage applied 
between the terminals ( joined together ) and 
the contamcr, of 3 kV for 10 sec or 3-6 kV for 
2 sec. Duiing the test, neither puncture nor 
flashover shall occur. 

19.1.1 The test shall be performed, even if, in 
scivicc, one of the terminals IS intended to be 
connected to the container. 

19.1.2 Three-phase units having separate phase 
capacitances may be tested with respect to the 
container with all the terminals joined together, 

19.1.3 Units having one terminal permanently 
connected to the container shall not be subjec- 
ted to this test. 

19.1.4 When the unit container consists of 
insulating material this test shall be omitted. 



IS n340: 1993 



19.1.5 If a capacitor has separate phases or 
sections , a test of the insulation between 
phases or sections should be made, at the same 
voltage value as for the terminals to container 
test 

19.2 iypeTest 

Units having all terminals insulated from the 
container shall be subjected to a test accord- 
ing to 19,1 with a voltage of 3 kV for a dura- 
tion of 1 mm 

19.2.1 The test on units having one terminal 
permanently connected to the container shall 
be limited to the bushing(s) and, container 
( without elements ) ]f the capacitor contai- 
ner is of insulating material, the test voltage 
shall be applied between the terminals and 
metal foil wrapped closely round the surface of 
the coiitainet excluding the surface carrying 
capacitor terminals 

19.2.2 The test shall be made under dry condi- 
tions for indoor units and with artificial ram 
[see\S201\ (Pan2) 1976 ] for units to be 
used outdoors 

19.2.3 During the test, neither puncture nor 
flashover shall occur 

NOTE — Uniis inlcndtd foi ruldoor irstilladon 
may besubjettctl to t ury test oj ly The manii 
facturei slidl) in sLoh a case supply a scpar'ite t>pt, 
test report showing thdt the bushing will withstand 



the wet tesi voltage for 1 mm 
20 TEST FOR DISCHARGE DEVICES 

20.1 Internal Discharge Device 

The resistance of the internal discharge device, 
if any, shall be checked uthei by a rcsbtance 
measurement (^ff also 20 2 ) or by measuriig 
the sclf-dischaiging rate ( see 7.1 ) Ihe choice 
of the method is left to the manufacturer 

The test shall be m ide after the voltage tests 
( see 18 ) 

20.2 Efficacy of Discharge Dei/ice 

In general the method of test employed shall 
depend up )n the nature of the discharge device 
fitted to the capacitor These devices fall in 
two main groups, namely, (a) those which 
consist mainly or entirely of a high resistance, 
and ( b ) those that possess a high inductive 
reactance which may be of moderate or low 
resistance only 

20.2.1 Procedure 

The resistance value of the first group of 
discharge devices can be measured by a dc 



test and the discharge time calculated fiom 
that measured resistance and the known capa- 
citance of the capacitor ( or capacitor group ) 
to which it IS connected. 

If C IS the capacitance in microfarads of the 
capacitor shunting the resistance R in ohms, 
the time f to discharge to 50 volts can be 
calculated from the formula 

? = 2 3 X 10-« CR ( logio r/x - 1 55 ) sec 

wheie 

Un is the rated rms voltage of the capacitor 
in volts Usually this test should be made 
with a dc voltage equal lo 1 4 times the 
rms rated voltage of the capacitor since the 
charge in the capacitor may be at this 
voltage if the switch opens at or near the 
peak of the ac voltage \^ave Mtasuremejit 
at this voltage is necessary because any of 
the resistance discharge devices have a 
non-lincar characteristic and in consequence 
have a diflercnt resistance value at high 
voltages from that which they showallow 
voltagLS 

In the case of the second type of discharge 
device the application of high dc voltage might 
cause damage to or destruction of the discharge 
device owing to its relatively low ohmic resis 
tance so that some other method of test, such 
as an actual measurement of the discharge time 
should be employed 

21 THERMAL STABILITY TLSl 

21.1 General 

This test provides the following information 
about the capacitors subjected to it 

a) It d^tLrmncs the thermal stability of 
ihtcapaeiLor under overload conditions 
(see 6) 

b) It CO ditions thecapiciior to enable a 
reproducible tangent \obi, mcaiuremcnt 
to be made 

21.2 Measuring Procedure 

21 2.1 The capacitor unit subjected to the test 
shall be placed between two other units oi the 
same rating which shall be energized at the 
same voltage as the test capacitor Alternati- 
vely, two dummy capacitors each containing 
resistors may be used The dissipation in the 
resistors shall be adjusted to a value such that 
the case temperatures of the dummy capacitors 
near the top opposing faces are equal to or 
greater than those of the test capacitoi The 



IS 13340 : 1993 



separation between the uaits shall be equal to, 
or less than, the normal spacing. The assembly 
shall be placed in still air in a heated enclosure 
in the most unfavourable thermal position 
according to the manufacturerN instructions 
for mounting on site. The ambient air tem- 
pciature shall be maintained at the appro- 
priate tcmpcialure shown m Table 3. 

Tt shall be checked by means of a thermometer 
having a thermal lime consant of approxi- 
mately 1 h. 

The ambient air thermometer should be shiel- 
ded so that It is subjected to the minimum 
possible theimal radiation from the three 
energized samples, 

21,2.2 After all parts of the capacitor have 
attained the temperature of the ambient air, 
the capacitor shall be subjected for a period 
of at least 48 h to an ac voltage of substant- 
ially sinusoidal form The m^ignitude of the 
voltage shall be kept constant throughout the 
test. Its value is computed from the measured 
capacitance ( see 15.1 ) to give a calculated 
output of the capacitor equal to 1 44 times its 
rated output The voltage to be applied for 
obtaining the output should be calculated from 
the following equation" 



Ut 



1 



where 

Cn 

Ct 



capacitance corresponding to the 
rated output, and 

measured capacitance oi the capa- 
citor to be tested. 



During the last 10 h the tempeiatuie of 
the containet noar the lop shall be measured 
at least six times at an intcival of appioxima- 
tcly 2 h Throughout this petiod of 10 h, aftei 
38, 40, 42, 44, 46 and 48 houis the temperatuie 
rise shall not increase by more than 2 C 
between the readings. Should a grcatci change 
be observed, the lost may be continued until 
the above lequircment is satisfied for four 
consecutive measurmcnts during a 10 h period. 
In case the thermal stability condition is not 
reached in 72 h the testing shall be stopped 
and the capacitor shall be declared to have 
failed in this test 

At the end of the stability test the dilTerencc 
between the measured temperature of the case 
and cooling an temperature shall be recorded. 

Before and after the test the capacitance 
(sec 15) shall be measured ( see 15.1 ) within the 
standaid temperature range for testing and two 



measurements shall be corrected to the same 
dielectric temperature. 

Change of capacitance greater than 2 percent 
shall not be allowed from these measurements, 

A measurement of loss angle ( see 17 ) shall be 
made before and after the thermal stabdity 
test at a tempeiature of 27 i 2".C The mea- 
surement shall be carried out at rated voltage 
and rated frequency of the capacitor unit. 

The value of the second measurement of loss 
angle shall be not greater than that of the first 
by more than 2*10"^. 

When interpreting the results of the measure- 
ments, two factois shall be taken into account. 

a) The reproducibility of the measurements, 

b) The fact that internal change in 
dielectric may cause a small change of 
capacitance without puncture of any 
element of the capacitor or blowing oi 
an internal fuse having occurred. 

NOTrS 

1 When checking whether (he capacitor losses or 
tempejature conditions aie satisfied, fluctuations of 
voltage, frequerLcy and cooling air temperatuie 
during the lest shall b^Maken into account. For thia 
reason, it is advisable to plot thc!>c p<irameters and 
the tangent tf ihe loss angle at the temperature 
rise as a furction of iinic The measurement being 
tairicd out at rated voltage ind rated frequency 

2 Three phase cipacitoi banks oi unils shall require 
three phase power supply and s>iiigl^-phasc units 
shall be tested with snigk phase liarsformcis while 
ci trying out theimal stability test 



22 CAPACITOR LOSS TANGENT ( TAN 6 ) 
MEASUREMENTS AT ELEVATED 
TEMPERATURE 

22.1 Measuring Procedure 

The capactiot losses ( tan 5 ) shall be measured 
at the end of the thermal stability test 
( see 21 ) The measuring voltage shall be that 
of the thermal stability test. 



Table 3 Ambient Air lemperature ( °C ) 

( Clause 21 2 1 ) 



Symbol 
A 
B 
C 
D 



Ambient Air Temperature 

40 
45 
50 
55 



Temperature tolerance ± 2° C 



10 



IS 13340 : 1993 



22.2 Requirements 

The value of tan 5 measured jn accordance 
with 21.1 shall not exceed the value given 
in 17.2 or the value agreed upon between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser for the 
temperature and the voltage of the test. 

23 SELF-HEALING TEST 

The capacitors covered by this standard shall 
meet the requirements of 6 IS I334I : 1992. 

24 LIGHTNING IMPULSE VOLTAGE TEST 
BETWEEN TERMINALS AND CONTAINER 

24.1 Only units having all tcrmmals insulated 
from the coniainer and intended for installation 
exposed to overvoltages of atmospheric origin 
shall be subjected to this test. 

24.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the purchas^cr, the impulse 
test shall be performed with a wave of 12 to 
5/50 ^fi having a crest value of 15 kv [ see 
IS 2071 ( Part 2 ) : 1976 1 3 impulses of positive 
polarity followed by 3 impulses of negative 
polarity shall be jpplicd between terminaU 
joined together and the container. 

24.3 After the change of polarity it is 
peimissible to apply some impulses of lower 
amplitude before the application of the test 
impulses. 

24.4 The absence of failure during the test 
shall be vciified by a cathode tay osLillogiaph, 
which is used to recoid the voltage and to 
check the wave shape 

24.5 If the capacitor container IS of insulating 
maleiial the test voltage shall be applied bet- 
ween the terminals and a metal foil wrapped 
closely round the surface (>f the cmtamei. 
'Ihe metal foil of suitable thickness shall be 
wrapped upto l(^p edge of the capacitoi 
excluding the terminals. 



NOTE — PiJilial discharge in the insulation to the 
container may be indicated by the modidcition of 
the wave shapes bciwccn ihe diffe;eni impulse. 

25 SHORT CIRCUIT DISCHARGE TEST 

25.1 The units shall be charged by means of 
dc and then discharged through a gap situated 
as close as possible to the capacitor. They 
shall be subjected to five such discharges within 
10 mm. 

25.1.1 The test voltage shall be equal to 2 Un. 
Withm five minutes after this test, the unit 
shall be subjected to a voltage test between 
tcimmals ( see 18.1 ). 

25.1.2 The capacitance shall be measured 
before the discharge test and after the voltage 
test. The measurements shall not dilTcr by an 
amount corresponding either to breakdown 
of an element or to blowing of an internal 
fuse or by more than 2 percent. 

25.2 For polyphase units the lest shall be 
earned out between two tciminals only. In 
the case of three-phase delta connection, two 
terminals shall be short-circuited. For star 
connection, no terminals shall be short- 
circuiled. 

25,2.1 The test voltage shall be adjusted to 
have voltage 2 times rated element voltage. 
If the first peak of the test current exceeds the 
value of 200 IN ( rms ) it may be kept at this 
limit by means ol an external coil. 

26 AGEING TEST 

The self-healing capacitors shall meet the 
requirements ot 5 of IS n341 : 1992. 

27 DESTRUCTION lESr 

The self-healing cap icitoi s shall meet the 
rcquiicmcntsof Tot IS 13341 . 1992. 



11 



IS 13340 : 1993 



ANNEX A 

( Clause 2 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No Title 

1885 Electrotechnical vocabuiari; 

(Part 42)- 1986 Pari 42 Power capacitors 
( seivnd revision ) 

2071 Methods of high voltage 

(Part2) 1976 testing* Pait 2 Test procc- 



3723 



4905 1968 



9224 



Capacitors foi radio inter- 
ference suppression ( fssuctf 
in pails ) 



Methods 
samplini|f 



foi 



random 



Low voltage fuses ( Issued 
in parts ) 



IS No. 
12360 1988 



12672 1989 



( Part 1 ) • 1993 



11341 1992 



Title 
Voltage bands for electrical 
installations including pre- 
ferred voltages and frequency 
Internal fuses and internal 
ovei pi cssui c disconnectors 
for shunt capacitors 
Shunt capacitoa for ac 
power systems having a rated 
voltage up to and including 
650 V Part I Specification 

Requirements for ageing 
test, self-healing test and 
destiuetion test on shunt 
capacitors of the self-healing 
type foi ac powei systems 
having a rated voltage up to 
and intluding 650 V 



ANNEX B 

[ Clauses AA (a), lO.l (d) «/2J 15.2 ] 

FORMUIAE tOR CAPACITORS AND INSTALLATIONS 



B-1 COMPUIATION OF THE OUTPUT Of 
IHRLL-PIIASECAPACIIORSIROMIHREE 
SINGLE-PHASE CAPACITANCE 
MEASUREMENIS 

B-1.1 The capacitances measured between any 
two line teiminah of thice-phase capacitor of 
cither delta oi star connection are denoted as 
C\\, Cb and Cc It the symnielry requirements 
laid down in 15.1 are fulhllcd, the output O of 
the capacitor can be computed with sufficient 
accuracy fiom the formula 

2_ 2 (Ca + Cb ^Cc)a> t/N^xlO-^ 

where 

Cn, Ch and Cc are exprc'^cd in ^F, 

C/n is expressed jn V, and 

Q is expressed in kvar. 



B-1.2 Computatiou 
Current Method 



oT Output from Voltage 



An alternating voltage shall be applied and 
the cutrent taken by the capacitor measured. 
The kvar output shall be calculated from 
voltages and curre(\t readings using the 
formulae given in Table 4 

Where the capacitor is arranged for polyphase 
connection, the mean value of the rms line 
currents ( ignoring neutral current, if any ) 
shall be used for calculating the kvar output. 

When using this method, the supply fiequency 
should be checked and the supply voltage 
should be substantially free from harmonics. 

If the test frequency differs from the rated 
frequency, the kvar output should be calculated 
from the test results, bearing m mind that 



12 



IS 13340 : 1993 



Table 4 Reactive Outputs for Different Connections 

( ClameBA.!) 



Diagram 



(I) 



n 

L 



;" 



U 



!■• Vn "^ 






II ,62 



Vn N 



A 



•^:^" 



1'" 



Type of 
Connection 



(2) 



Capacitance Measured 
Between 



(3) 



Single phase 



Line terminals 



Formulae for 
Calculating kvar 



From Current From Capa 
Reading utancc 



Method I 



(4) 



Reading 
of Col 3, 

Method 2 
(5) 



kvar 
Factor 



(^) 



1000 



' 71 fCVl 



Two phase four 
wire 



Ai and At also Bi 
and Bt 



1 000 



4 -IT fcy, 



W 



Two-phase 
three wire 



/f J and ^' 
Z?, and ^ 



2K,/i 

1 000 



^-rrfCV^ 



lO" 



Thrtc pha^e 
delta coni.L'Lted 



Three pairs of 
line terminals 



I 000 



109 



v/3- 



Three-phase 
star connected 



Three pairs of line 
terminals 



Three Imc terminals 
iep \ratcly and 
neuiraJ if brought 
out 



I COO 



A7TfCV\ 

10* 



10" 



\^3 



vhtre 

/ - Rated frequency, 
Vy, — Rated vultage, 
C - Capacitance ( microfarads ), and 
/l ^ Line current ( amperes ) under normal worlctng conditions. 



13 



IS 13340:1993 



output IS directly propv^jrlional to the frequency 
at constant voltage. If the applied voltage 
differs fjom the rated voltage, then the kv^r 
output shall be calculated from the test results 
hearing in mind that output is proportional to 
the square of the applied voltage at constant 
ficqucrcy, 

B-2 RESONANCE FREQUENCY 

A capacitor will be in resonance with a harmo- 
nic, in jccordiince with the following equation 
in whith n IS an inleger. 



V 



where 

5 ^ shoii circuit power ( MVA ) wheic 
the capacitor is to be inslulled; 

n harmonic number, that is the ratio 
between the resonant harmonic 
( H/ ) and the network frequency 
(]!/), and 

Q IS expressed, in Mvar ( see 8-1.1 ). 

B-3 VOLTAGE RISE 

Connection of a shunt capacitoi will cause the 
steady-state voltiige rise given by the following 
cxpiessioii' 

AO _ Q 
V " :i 
where 

l\U ^ voll;^ge rise. 
V ~ \oltagc before connection of the 

capacitor, 
5 ^- the short-circuit power ( MVA ) 
where ihe Lapaiitor js to be instal- 
led, and 
Q =- txpiesscd in Mvar. 

B 4 INRUSH TRANSIENT CURRENT 
B-4.1 S>\itching of Single Capacitor 



where 

A — crest of inrush capacitor current, 

In — rated capacitor current ( rms ), 

S = the short-circuit power ( MVA ) 
where the capacitor is to be installed, 
and 

Q -= expressed in Mvar. 

B-4.2 Switching of Capacitor in Parallel with 
Energized Capacitor (s) 

/S = ■ z 

\ Xc Xi 

h ^ crest of inrush capacitor current, 

U — phase-to-earth voltage ( V ), 

A'c = series-connected capacitive reactan- 
ces per phase ( U ), 

Xl = inductive reactance per phase 
between the banks ( il ), 

/h ~ ficquency of the inrush current ( Hz), 
and 

/n ~ lated frequency ( Hz ). 

B-4.3 Discharge Resistance in Single-phase Unit 
or in One Phase cf Polyphase L^nits 

R . - 



'■■""(-\~) 



where 
/ 



/s ftt /n 



= time for discharge from (/n v 2 

to i/R(s), 

R = equals discharge resistance [ MO ], 
C -3 rated capacitance { ^F ) per phase, 
Vs ~ lated voltage of unit ( V), 
C/r = permissible lesidual voltage (V) 
( see 7.1 for limits of t and Ur ), 

k - coefficient depending on both resis- 
t.ince and capacitor unit connections. 



14 



IS 13340 : 1993 



G2 



k = l 



Kq) 



cJ^^yS" 



Kb) 




k -.] 



1(c) 




k = 1 




.R k'T 



1(e) 




k = 3 




k r3 



Kg) 



Fig. 1 Examples of Capacitor Units and Value of CoErpiciENT 'k' 



15 



IS 13340 : 1993 



ANNEX C 
(Clause 6 2.1 ) 

EFFECTS or HARMONICS 



C-1 EFFECT OF HARMONICS 

C-1.1 The reactance of a capacitor is inversely 
proportional to the frequency. Hence, if the 
applied voltage includts components having 
fiequencics highci than the fundamental frequ- 
ency, the current will be gieater than that 
would be pioduccd by the same voltage at the 
fundamental ficquency 

C-1.2 As a lesult of thi^ a comparatively small 
component of one of the higher harmonics can 
produce a curient component comparable in 
magnitude to the normal capacitor current 
when fed from a pure sinusoidal supply and so 
cause an appreciable increase in the total capa- 
citor cuirent and couespondmg increase in the 
kvar loading 

r-1.3 The actual cuirent taken by a capacitor 
when highei freqaency voltage comp iicnts are 
present is the square root of the sum of the 
squares of the vaiious current cjmpinents 
including the f\indamcntal 

CI. 4 In piacticc the higher frequency compo- 
nents are almost i ivai i.ibly th; higher odd num- 
ber harmonics of the fuidim:jnta( supply 
ficquency, such as the thud, hfth, seventh, etc 

C-I.5 If the various haimonic voltages hj, hs, 
h;, etc, aie expressed as a percentage of the 



fundamental voltage, the rms value of the 
re^iultant voltage wave is given by the 

following- 



K-OOIK, V (IWh h^^-Hhs^' + hAelc) 

The total capacitor current is given by the 
following expression: 



/=0-01/i ^/{WQ' H9h/+23h7T49h?7etF)" 
where 



V 

I 



rms circuit voltage, 

== rms value of voltage at the funda- 
mental frequency; 

~ rms capacitor current; 

— rms value of capacitoi current due 
to K,, and 



h^. h,, etc, are the rms values of the 
third, lifth, seventh, etc, harmonics expressed 
as a percentage of K^. 

The percentage increase in teactive output due 
to the existence of harmonics voltage is given 
to an adequate approximLition by 

A kvar = 01 (3h/ i- 5[v h 7h/ K etc ) 

NOTE - Tt should b^ noted ihit th; peak voltage of 
the wave may amount to the sum of the fundamental 
and all the individual tiirmonic peak voltages. 



ANNEX D 
{Clmse^A ) 

GLIDE FOR 1NSTAII.AT10N AND OPERAIION 



D I GENERAL 

D-l.l Unlike most electtical apparatus, shunt 
capcitors, whenever energized, operate conti- 
nuously at full load, or at loads that deviate 
from this value only as a result of voltage and 
frequency vaiiations. 

Overstressing and oveiheating shorten the life 
of a capaciti)i, and therefore, the operating 
conditions ( thai is temperature, voltage and 
cuirent ) should be stiictly controlled. 



It should be noted that the introduction of 
concentrated capacitance in a system may 
produce unsati^factoiy op;?iating conditions 
( foi cxmple, amplification of harmonics, self- 
cxcitation of machines, ovetvoltages due io 
switchmg, unsatisfactory woi king of audio- 
frequency remote-control apparatus, etc ). 

Because of the different types of capacitor and 
the many factors involved, it is not possible 
to cover, by simple rules, installation and 



16 



IS 13340 : 1993 



operation in all possible cases. The following 
information is given with regard to the more 
important points to be considered. 

In addition, the instructions of the manufac- 
turer and the power supply authorities must be 
followed, especially those concerning the 
switchmg of capacitors when the net work is 
under light load conditions. 

D-2 CHOICE OF THE RATED VOLTAGE 

D-2.1 The rated voltage of the capacitor shall 
be equal to the service voltage of the network 
to which the capacitor is to be connected, 
account being taken of the influence of the 
presence of the capacitor itself. 

In certain networks, a considerable difference 
may exist between the service and rated 
voltage of the network, details of which should 
be furnished by l"hc purchaser, so that due 
allowance may be made by the manufacturer. 

This is of importance for capacitors, since 
their perfoimancc and life may be adversely 
affected by an undue increase of xhe voltage 
across the capacitor diclectiic. 

\Vhere circuit elements arc inserted in series 
with the capacitor to reduce the effects of 
harmonics, etc, the resultant increase in the 
voltage at the capacitor terminals above the 
service voltage of the neivvurk necessitates a 
corresponding increase m the rated voltage 
of the capacitor. 

If no infoiraation to the contraiy is available 
the seivice voltage shall be assumed as equal 
to the rated ( oi dccUted) voltage of the 
network. 

When determining th©" voltage to be expected 
on the capacitor terminals, the following 
considerations shall be taken into account: 

a) Shunt connected capacitors may cause a 
voltage rise fiom tho source to the point 
where they arc located ( see Annex B ); 
this voltage risemay be greater due to the 
presence of harmonics. Capacitors are 
therefore, liable to operate at a higher 
voltage than that measuied before 
connecting the capacitors. 

b) The voltage on the capacitor terminals 
may be particularly high at times of 
light load conditions ( see Anne:ft B ); in 
such cases, some or all of the capacitors 
should be sw'itchcd out of circuit in 
order to prevent over stressing of the 
cap'AcUovs atxd u!;\due voltage iucrease 
in the netwoik. 



Only in case of emergency should 
capacitors be operated at maximum 
permissible voltage and maximum 
ambient temperature simultaneously, and 
that to for short period of time. 

NOTES 

1 An excessive safety margin in the choice of the 
rated voltage Un should be avoided, because this 
would result in decrease of output when compared 
with the lated output, 

2 See 6.1 concerning maximum permissible votlage . 

D.3 OPERATING TEMPERATURE 

D-3,1 General 

Attention should be paid to the operating 
temperature of the capacitor, because this has 
a great influence on jts Ijfe. In this respect, 
temperature of th? hot spot is a determining 
factor, but it is difficult to mcasuie this 
temperature in practical operation. 

Temperature in excess of v Max accelerates 
electrochemical degradation of the dielectrjc. 
Temperature below v Mm or very rapid changes 
from hot to cold may initiate partial discharge 
degradation in the dielectric, 

D-3.2 InstaUation 

Capacitors shall be so placed that there is 
adtqiiate dissipation by convection and radia- 
tion of the boat produced by the capacitor 
losses. 

The ventilation of the operating room and the 
arrangement of the capacitor units shall provide 
good air cuculationaiound each unit. This is 
of importance foL units mounted in rows one 
above the other. 

The temperature of capacitors subjected to 
radiation firm the sui or from any high-tcm- 
pjrature suifacc will be increased. 

Depending on the cooling air temperature the 
intensity of the cooling and the intensity and 
duration of the radiation, it may be necessary 
to opt for one of the following remedies: 

a) To protect the capacitors from radiation; 

b) To choose a capacitor designed [or a 
higher ambient air temperature ( for 
example, category -5/B, mstcad of -5/A, 
which lb otherwise suitably designed ); and 

c) To employ capacitors with rated voltage 
higher than that laid down in D-2, 



17 



IS 13340 : 1993 



Capacitors installed at high altitudes ( more 
than 1 000 m ) will be subjetted to decreased 
heat dissipation, which shall be considered when 
determining the power of the units 
[ see D-4 (e) ] 

D-3.3 High Ambient Air Temperature 

Symbol C capacitors are suitable for the majo- 
rity of applications under tropical conditions 
In some ! )cations however, the ambient 
temperature may be such that symbol D capa- 
citor IS icquircd The latter may also be needed 
for (hose cases where the capacitors are 
frequently subjected to the radiation of the sun 
for several houis ( for example, in dcseit tern- 
tones ), even though the ambient tcmpeiature 
IS not excessive ( uc D-3.2 ) 

In exceptional cases, the ambient temperature 
maybe higher than 5S C maximum, or 45X 
daily aveiage Wheie it is impossible to increase 
the cooling conditions, capacitors of special 
design oi with a highei rated voltage shall be 
used 

D-3.4 Fvaluation of Losses 

If losses are to be evaluated, all accessorKS 
producing losses, such as external fuses, rLac- 
tors clL shall be included in ihc calcuUlnn o^ 
total b nk losses 

D-4 SPECIAL SERVICl CONDITIONS 

D-4. 1 Apirt f.om the conditions pievailing at 
both limits ol the temp^raluie category 
( set D-3.1 ), the most imp jrtaiU conditions 
which the manufactuicr shall be intoimcd about 
aie the following 

a) High Relative Humidity — It may be 
necessary to use insul ilori of special 
design Attention is drawn to iht pL>ssi- 
biliiy of external luses being shunted by 
a dept sit ol moisture on their suitaces 

b) Rapid Mould Growth - Mould growth 
does not develop on metals, cciumie 
materials and some kinc's cf paints and 
lacquers hor other matciials, mould 
growth may develop on humid places 
espcei illy where dust, etc, may settle The 
ust i f tunijicidal products may improve 
the behaviour of these materials but such 
pioduetsdo not retain their poisoning 
pioperly for more than a certain period 

c) Qorroswe Atmosphere — Corrosive atmos- 
phere is found in industiial and coastal 
areas It should be noted that in climates 
of higher temperature the elTects of such 



atmospheres may be more severe than in 
temperate climates Highly corrosive 
atmosphere may be present even in indoor 
application 

d) Pollution —When capacitors are mounted 
in a location with a high degree of pollu- 
tion, special precautions shall be taken 

c) Altitude hxceedtng 1 000 m — Capacitors 
used at altitudes exceeding 1000 m aie 
subject to special conditions. The choice 
of the type should be made by agreement 
between the purchaser and the 
manufacturer 

D-5 OVERVOLTAGES 

D-5.1 Overvoltage fietors arc specified in 6.1. 
With the manufacturer's agreement, the ovei- 
voltage factor may be increased if the estimated 
numbei oi overvollages is lower, or if the 
temperature conditions arc less severe These 
power frequency overvoltage limits are vaJjd, 
provided that tiansient f veivoltages aie not 
superposed on them The peak voltage shall not 
exceed I 41 times the given rms value. 

Capacitors that are liable to be subjected to 
high overvoltages due to lightning should be 
adequately protected If lightning arresters are 
used, they should be located, as near as possible 
to the capaeitois 

SpwCial arrcsteis m ty be rcquiied to take care 
of the discharge current from the capacitor, 
cspw^eially from large banks 

When a capacitor is permanently connected to 
a motor diffieulties may aiisc allci diseonneet- 
ing the motor from the supply Ihc motoj, 
while still revolving may act as a generator by 
self-excitation and may give rise to voltiges 
considerably in excess of the system voltage 
This, however can usually be pi evented by 
ensuring that the eapicitor current is less ih m 
the magnetizing eurrcnt of the motor, a value of 
about 90 percent is suggested As a precaution 
live parts of a motor to which a capacitor is 
permanently connected should not be touched 
bel ire the motor stops 

NOTES 

1 The niaintauKd voltage due tj seJf txcitaiioi after 
th^ maehne is switched off is particuUrly danger > is 
for induction gLiuraiot^ and for motors with a 
braking syitenn mteidecl to be op^^ratcd by loss of 
voltage ( for example, lift motors ) 

2 In the CISC where the motor stops when briked 
heavily while stopping afier having t>een disconnect- 
ed from the supply the compensaiLon naay exceecJ 
90 pviewnt 



13 



IS 13340 : 1993 



D-5.2 When a capacitor is connected to a motor 
associated with a star-delta starter the arrange- 
ment should be such that no overvoltage can 
occur during the operation of the starter 

D-6 OVERLOAD CURRENTS 

0-6.1 Cip'\citors should never be operated with 
currents exceeding the maximum value specified 
in 6.2 

Overload currents may be caused either by 
excessive voltage at the fundamental fiequenty 
or by harmonics, or both The chiet souiccsof 
harmonics arc rectifieis and saturated trans- 
former cores 

If the voltage rise at times of light load is 
increased by capacitors, the saturation of trans- 
foimer cores maybe considerable In this case, 
harmonics of abnormal magnitude are produced, 
one of which may be amplified by resonance 
between the transformer and the capacitor 

This IS a further reason for rccomniending the 
disconnection of capacitors at times of light 
load, as referred to in D-2.1 (a) 

If the capacitor current exceeds the maximum 
value specified in 6.2.1, while the voltage is 
withm the ptrmissiblc limit of 1 10 J/n, as 
specified in 6.1.1 the predominant hirmonic 
should be detcimined in oidcr to find the best 
remedy 

The following lemedies should be considered 

a) Moving some or all of the capacitors to 
other parts of the system, 

b) Connection of a leactor in scries with the 
capacitor, to lower the resonant 
frequency of the circuit to a value below 
that of the disturbing harmonic, and 

c) increase of the capacitance value when 
the capacitor is connected close to 
rectifiers 

The voltage waveforni and the network 
charactcnstics should be dctermmed before 
and after installing the capacitor, when sources 
of harmonics such as large lectificrs are present, 
special care should be taken 

Transient overcurrents of high amplitude and 
frequency may occur when capacitors are 
switched into circuit Such transient effects are 
to be expected when a section of a capacitor 
bank is switched in parallel with other sections 
that are already energized ( see Annex B ) 

It may be necessary to reduce these transient 
overcurrents to acceptable values m relation to 



the capacitor and to the equipment by switching 
on the capacitors through a resistor ( resistance 
switching), or by the insertion of reactors in 
the supply circuit to each section of the bank 

If the capacitors are provided with fuses ( inter- 
nil or external ), the peik value of the over- 
currents due to switching operations shall be 
hmited to a maximum of 100 /n ( rms value ) 

D-7 SWITCHING AND PROTECTIVE 
DEVICES AND CONNECTIONS 

D-7.1 The switching and protective devices and 
the connections shall be designed to carry 
continuously a current of 1 3 times the current 
that would be obtained with a sinusoidal voltage 
ot an rms value equal to the rated voltage at 
the rated frequency As the capicitor m'\y have 
a capacitance equal to I 1 times the vilue 
corresponding to its rated output, this current 
may have a maximum value of I 3 x 110 times 
the rated cuirent 

Moreover, hnrmonic components, if present, 
may have a greater heating efi*ect than the 
correspmding fundamental component, due to 
skin clfect 

The switching and protective devices and the 
connections ^hall be capable of withsianding the 
electro-dynamic and thermal stresses caused by 
the tiansitnt overcurrents ol high amplitude 
and frequency that may occur when switching 
on 

Such transients are to be expected when a 
capacitor ( unit or bank ) is switched in parallel 
with other capicitor(s) that aie already 
energized 

When consideiation of the electro dynamic and 
thermal stiesses would kad to excessive dimen- 
sions special precautions such as those 
mentioned in D-6 for the purpose of protection 
agtinst ovcrcunents, should be taken. 

NOTES 

1 Fuses in particulir should be chosen wUh 
adequate thermal capacity {see IS 9224 1979 and 
IS 12672 1989) 

2 In certain cases, for example when the capTcitors 
uc automatically controlled rtpcitcd switching 
operations m »y occur at rcl itiVLly short intervals of 
time Switthgcar and fuses must be seltcttU to with 
stand these conditions 

3 Breakers connecUd to the same busb-^r may be 
subjected to special itrcis in the event of switUung 
on ^ shoit circuit 

4 Breiktrs for switching off puallel banks shall be 
able to withstind the iniush current ( amplitude and 
frequency ) resulting when one bank is connected to 
a bu«;bar to whieh other bank(s) ire already 
connected 



19 



IS 13340 : 1993 



It IS recommended that capacitors be protected 
against overcurrenl by means of suitable over- 
current iciays, which are adjusted to operate 
the circuit-breakers when the current exceeds 
the permissible limit specified in 6.2 Fuses do 
not gc^nerally provide suitable overcurrcnt 
protection 

MOTE — Depending on the design of the capacitors, 
their cap'icitanc will vary more or less wuh 
tempirJlurc 

Allenlion should be piid to the fact that the 
capacitance may chinge lapidly after the 
cnergizUion oi cold capacitors 

This may cause needless functioning of the pro- 
tective iquipmcnl 

If iron-cored rcactois are used, attention should 
be paid to possible saturation and overheating 
of the co'e by haimoiics 

D-7.2 Any bad contacts in capacitor circuits 
may give ns. lo arcjng, causing high-f]t.quency 



oscillations that may oveiheat and overstress 
the capacttors 

Regular inspection of all capacitor equipment 
contacts is, therefore, recommended. 

D-8 CHOICE OF CREEP AGE DISTANCE — 

( Under consideration ) 

D-9 CAPACITORS CONNECTED TO 
SYSTEMS WITH AUDIO FREQUENCY 
REMOTE CONTROL 

D-9.1 The impedance ot capacitors at audio- 
frequency IS very low When they are connected 
to systems having audio-frequency remote- 
control, overloading of the remote control 
transmitter and unsatisfactory \^orkl^g may» 
thcrcfoje, result 

There are various methods of avoiding these 
deficiencies, the choice of the best method 
sh(iuld be made by agiecment between all 
parties concerned. 



ANNEX E 

( Clause 9 ) 

1N10RM\TI0N TO BE GIVEN WITH ENQUIRY OR ORDER 



E-l The following inform Uion is lecommended 
to be given at the stagL^ of enquiry or order of 
the shunt power l \patUors 

1 Output rLquiicd m k\ai/Mvar 

2 Raicd voltage 

3 Rated frequency 

4 Nun\bci of phages 

5 St itc whi^thLM iiy abitirmil voltage ris3s 
are expected If so, state highest voltage 
exp' cttd 

(} Upper limit of tempcratuie catcgoiy 

7 Proposed location of capacitor indoois or 
outdoors 

8 Altitude above sea level of capacitor loca- 
tion, if abivc the limit specified m 4.1 

9 Nature cf supply cucuit, foi example, 
v/hether the capacitor is to be connected 

a"! to a local substation ( if so state kV\ 
radng of transformers^ etc ), or 



b) to a local undergiound network, or 

c) to overhead lines 

10 It capacitot is to be connected directly to 
overhead lines 

a) are thunder storms prevalent in the 
locality '^ 

b) are lightning airestcrs or surge 
diveitcrs fitted to the lines ? 

11 Details of switchgcar or automatic 
coatrolgear to be used with the capacitor, 

12 If capacitor is to be connected directly to 
thj terminals of a motor, state motor 
rati ig, speed, type, manufacturei and 
serial number 

13 Any special requirement that may affect 
the dcaign or operation ot the capacitor 

14 Whether the unit capacitor is to be used 
on line directly or assembled for forming 
capacitor bank 



IS 13340 : 1993 



ANNEX F 

( Clause 12 3 ) 

SAMPLING PLAN FOR SHUNT C\PAC1T0RS FOR POWER SYSTEMS 



r-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

F-1.1 Lot 

All the shunt cipacjtois of the same rating 
manufjctiircd from the s\me mat(.rial undei 
similar conditions ot production shall be 
grouped together to constitute a lot 

F-1.2 The number of shunt capatitt»is to be 
selected from each lot shall depi.nd upon the 
size oi the lot and shall be in i(.i.ordancc with 
Cbl 1 and 2 of Table 5 

F-1.2.1 These shunt capacitors shall be selected 
Irom the lot at random In ordci to ensure the 
randomness of selection, proccdurL given in 
IS 4905 1968may betolUnvcd 

F-2 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRIILRU 
FOR CONFORMIIY 

r-2.l The shunt c ipicitors sLltcted at landoni 
accoiding to col i and 1 oi Tabh 5 shall hz 



subjected to each of the iCLCptance tests A 
shunt tapaLitor failing to satisfy the require- 
ments of any of these tests shall be leimed as 
defective The lot shall be considered as 
contorming to these requirements if the number 
of defeetivcs found in the sample is less than 
or equal to the coriesponding permissible 
numbei given in col 3 of fable 5 otherwi-iC the 
lot shall be rejected 

1 «ble 5 Sample hut and PormjswWe 
Number of Defectives 

( Clauses V-\ 2 andf-l 1 ) 



Lot Size 

(1) 

Up to \m 

tOl to 300 


Sumple Size 

(2) 
S 
13 


Permissible No. 
of Defectives 





301 to 500 


20 


1 


501 to 1 OOO 


32 


2 


1 001 ajid ibovo 


50 


3 



21 



( Continued from second cover ) 

The shunt capacitors are extensively recommended for improvement of power factor \n the 
electricity distribution hncs. Therefore, the capacitors/capacitor banks play a vital role in the 
economies of energy consumption. 

IS 2834 : 1964 covered safety and performance of shunt capacitors. Its revised version IS 2834 : 
1986 covered non-self-healmg and self-healing tvpe shunt capacitors for power system irrespective 
of Its voltage ratings. It has now been found convenient to prepare separate standards on shunt 
capacitors and the special type test as follows: 

a) Shunt capacitors of non-self-heahng type for ac power systems having rated voltage up to 
650 V. 

b) Shunt capacitors of self-healing type for ac power systems having rated voltage up to 
650 V. 

c) Shunt capacitors for ac power systems having rated voltage above 650 V ( Un(Jer 
preparation ). 

d) Requirements for endurance testing of shunt capacitors for ac power system having rated 
voltage above 650 V. 

This standard is based on lEC Pub 831-1 ( 1988 ) 'Shunt capacitors of the self-healing type for 
ac power systems having a rated voltage up to and including 660 \\ issued by the International 
Electrotechnical Commission. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with. 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be lounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 . 1960 *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )*. The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of 
the specified value in this standard. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act^ \986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products arc also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Barean af ladlaa Staadardi 

BIS IS a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Aei, 1986 to 

promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Cofyrigbt 

BIS has the copyright of all Its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form wivhout the prior permission m writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS 

Rerisioo of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are m possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook* and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions*. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. ET 29 ( 3205 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 
Telephones. 3310131, 331 13 75 



Regional OMces : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

NEW DELHI 110002 
Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branch ; AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE, 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUYANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
Common to all Offices) 




Telephone 




r33l 01 31 
\331 13 75 


'37 84 99, 
^7 86 26, 


. 37 85 61 
. 37 86 62 


'53 38 43, 
' 53 23 84 


, 53 16 40 


r235 02 16. 
\235 15 19. 


235 04 42 
235 23 15 


f 632 92 95. 
\632 78.9l. 


632 78 58 
632 78 92 



Prmtvd at Priotwell Priotert . Aligarh, lodia 



