(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS : 11521- 1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CARGO HANDLING NETS
Cordage
Chairman
SHRI R. M. TELANG

Sectional

Committee,

TDC

14

Representing Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Bombay

Members SHRI K. N. RAMACHANI,RAN Shri R. M. Telang ) SHRI A. T. BASAK
( Altcrnatc to

Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi COL A. K. RRATTACHARYA Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta SHRI S. K. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) DEPUTY CHIEF MECHANICAL Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ENQINEER ( MARINE ), NORTH EASTERN RAILWAY, PATNh SHRI D. K. DUTTA Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta SHRI G. D. GANJKHANE Neomar Limited, Vadodara SHRI T. N. GHABRIJ Ministry of Defence ( DPIN ) STO/JSO ( CHEMICAL ) OF CINS ( B ) ( Alternate ) SHRI A. GHOSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI SEK~IAR GUHA Eskaps ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta SHRI N. B. SENGUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI TAHER S. M. KHANDAN M. M. Tayebally, Calicut SHRI SHABBIR S. M. KHAXD~N ( Alternate ) CAPT S. B. KUNDEI~GI Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI B. MAJUMDER Export Inspection Agency, Calcutta SHRI G. MITRA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. C. MATRUR Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) SHRJ S. C. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. MEHRA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI S. P. CHAKRABORTY ( Alternate ) Gujarat Filaments Ltd, Vadodara SHRI K. N. MISRA SHRI G. N. PRABHU Coir Board, Ernakulam SHRI V. ABDUL MAJEED ( Alternate ) Rail India Technical and Economic Services Ltd, SHRI Y. K. RAMA Rao New Delhi SHRI P. R. MALLIC~ ( Alternate ) ( Cwztinucd on page 2 ) @ Coplri~ht 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the In&n C#fiyiiht Acf ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any meana except with written permission of the publisher &all be deemed to be an infrineement of comrisht under the said Act.

IS : 11521- 1985
( Continued from page Members CAPS B. R. RAO REPRESENTATIVE REPRESENTATIVE

1)
Representing

The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd, Bombay The Ganges Rope Co Ltd, Howrah Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, Calcutta Indian Rope Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta SHRI NORMAL K. SO3lANI Saar 7'. BRATTBCHARYA ( Aknate ) Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence), SHRI H. C. TANEJA New Delhi S~sr R. VISHVAN~TH ( Alternate ) M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing CO, Bombay SHRIKANTILAL G. THANAWALA SHI~I MADHUKANT G. THANAWALA( Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SL~RIR. I. MIDRA, Director ( Tex ) Secretary SHRI A. R. BANERJEE Joint Director ( Tex ), IS1

2

IS: 11521- 1985

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CARGO HANDLING NETS

0. 0.1

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 November 1985, after the draft finalized by the Cordage Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council.

0.2 The safe use of cargo handling nets is of utmost importance from the from user's point of view. The cargo handling nets are manufactured only polyamide and polypropylene ropes as these ropes possess good shock absorption properties and are hence safe for cargo lifting purposes, whereas other synthetic fibre ropes, such as high density polyethylene ropes and natural fibre ropes are not suitable for manufacturing cargo handling nets due to the absence of desired shock absorption properties. 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements of cargo handling nets made from polyamide and polypropylene ropes and designed to lift material from and into ships, etc. Recommendations on the care of nets have been given in Appendix B of this standard. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose apply.
*Rules for rounding

of this standard,

the following definitions shall

off numerical

values

( revised ).

3

IS:11521-

1985 Cord or rope from which the mesh of the net is

2.1 Mesh Cord constructed.

2.2 Border Cord - The cord or rope surrounding ning the overall dimensions of the net. 2.3 Hands - The ropes attached the net by which the net is lifted. to the border

the net and determicord at the corners of

2.4 Mesh Side - The distance between two sequential measured from centre to centre when the cord between fully extended.

knots or joints these joints is

2.5 Nominal Size - The overall dimensions of the uet when laid evenly on a flat surface in a relaxed condition and without any tension on the border cords. 3. MATERIAL 3.1 The cargo lifting nets shall be made from man-made fibre ropes, either polyamide as per IS : 4572 ( Part 2 )-1983* or polypropylene rope as per special Grade of IS : 5175-1982t. The choice of the material shall be determined by the circumstances in which the nets are to be used, the purpose and the prevailing conditions, etc. 4. CONSTRUCTION 4.1 Safe working principles: loads are chosen in accordance with the following is 9 and calculated the basic basic

a) The basic safety factor for polyamide ropes safety factor for polypropylene ropes is 6. b) The safe working formula, as follows: Safe working of net where V = number H = number of vertical of horizontal mesh cords, and mesh cords. load _ load of a net has been

from the of

specified breaking load mesh rope 0'67 ( V + H) x 4 x basic safety factor of the rope

This formula for safe working load of a net is applicable of small parcels have to be lifted. *Specification for polyamide multifilament specific applications ( rrcond rrsisian ).
Wpecification ( j%t rrtisios ). for polypropylene ropas

when a number

: Part 2 Hawser-laid

rope1 for plaited )

roper ( S-strand hawser laid and 8-etrand

4

IS : 11521-1985 4.2 Design 4.2.1 The net shall have nominally square construction, in which the lenzth of its vertical mesh cord should be equal to the length of its ho&ontal mesh cord. 4.2.2 Nets shall be made with a square mesh and the length of the mesh side shall not be greater than 30 cm. 4.2.3 a) Woven Nets may be constructed b) Tucked c) Knotted as per the following three methods: As shown in Fig. 1 As shown in Fig. 2 As shown in Fig. 3

FIG. 1

WOVEN

FIG. 2

TUCKED 5

FIG. 3

KNOTTED

However, the safe working load for nets manufactured as per the construction method (b) and (c) shall have a safe working load of 50 percent of that calculated by the formula mentioned in item 4.1(b). 4.2.4 percent Border greater cords and the hands shall have a diameter than the mesh cords. of at least 33

4.2.5 Each net shall be manufactured using rope of only one type of material, that is, either polyamide or polypropylene. Further, each net shall be manufactured in such a way that the mesh cords, border cords and hand rope come from one lot and one rope manufacturer onIy respectively. Thus the load elongation characteristics of all mesh cords, border cords and hand rope shall be same and the stress concentration on the cords shall be matched. 5. REQUIREMENTS

5.1 The requirements of cargo nets shall be as specified in Table 1. Nets of other designs can be arrived at, at the convenience of the buyer and the seller. However, such net designs and constructions shall be as per 4.1
6

IS I 11521-1985 and 4.2 when tested as per Appendix A and tolerances on nominal mesh size and `nominal length of hands' shall be f 10 percent. The nets shall also meet the proof load requirement when tested as per A-3. 6. PACKING 6.1 All nets shall be neatly folded and suitably packed to prevent damage IS : 3256-1980* may be followed as regards the during transportation. packing and stitching materials. 7. MARKING 7.1 Each net shall have securely attached carrying the following information: Nominal a> size of the net, mesh size, of mesh cord, border cord and hand boldly rope, and two labels on the border cords

b) 4

Nominal

Diameter c>

Safe working

load of the net written name and trade-mark.

in capitals,

Manufacturer's e>

7.1.1 The net may also be marked

with the ISI Certification

Mark.

NOTE The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality ISI control which is `devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that Details of conditions, under which a licence for the standard as a further safeguard. use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, mav be nhtained from the Indian Standards Jnstitution.

8. SAMPLING 8.1 Lot 8.1.1 The quantity size, length of hands,
conditi& constitute and a lot.

of nets of the same nominal size, tvoe and size of rooe manufactured
to a buyer igainst a

deli&led

nominal mesh under similar despatch note shall

*Code for inland packaging of ropes and cordages (Jirst revision ).

7

TABLE

1 REQUIREMENTS OF CARGO ( &WS6 5.1 )
NOMIKAL SIZE OF M&H

HANDLING

NETS

t: .. Y $ Y I 5f 8

SL No.

NOMINAL SIZE OF NET

NOXI~AL

LENOTE v---d OF HANDS Vertical

No.os

MESH CURDS
---7 Horizontal

SIZEOF ROPE SAFE WOBKIN~ ( IN DIAXETEB ) LOAD OB NET -------7 WOVEN TYPE kN Mesh Border Cord Cords and Hand Rope
(7) mm 12 12 20 20 20 (8) mm 16 16 28 28 28 (9) 2548 29.40 35.28 44.10 49.98 -

(I) i) ii) iii) iv) v) Tolerancc Method of Test

(2) m 3x3 3.6 x 3.6 3x3 3.6 x 3.6 3.6 x 3.6 f 10 percent

(3) mm 125 x 125 125 x 125 225 x 225 225 x 225 200 x 200

(4) m 1.50 1.80 1.50 1.80 1.80 *lo percent

(5) 23 27 12 15 17 -

(6) 23 27 12 15 17 -

percent

f 10

Appendix A

Appendix A

Appendix A ( Ssc Note 1 )

NOTE 1 - The cargo net shall he proof loaded to 125 percent of its specified safe working load as per Appendix A, that is, the proof load on a cargo net with safe working load of 2548 kN is 31.85 kN. NOTES - A cargo net of any design and safe working load shall be acceptable as long as it is manufactured as per this specification, its safe working load calculated as per the formula given in 4.1 and tested as per Appendix A as declared by the manufacturer.
NOTE 3 1 kN 102 kgf approximately.

IS :115218.2 Sample Size

1985

8.2.1 Sampling shall be as representative as possible of the lot subjected The sample shall be drawn at random to the measurements and tests. at the rate shown by the following formula:
where S is the number of nets to be drawn for sampling and .hfis the number of size of the lot expressed in number of nets. When S is calculated and is not a whole number, it is rounded off and the value obtained is given a whole number in accordance with the requirement In case where S is less than 1 draw one sample net for of IS : 2-1960*. testing.

APPENDIX A ( Clause 5.1 and TabZt 1 )
METHOD A-l. DlMENSIONS OF TESTING

A-l.1 The specimen cargo nets shall be unfolded and spread on the floor. Initial tension shall be applied by pulling on the hands and then the net shall be allowed to relax on the floor for 3 minutes.
A-1.2 The length and width of the net shall be measured from centre to centre of the border cords. The length of the hands shall be measured from one end of its eye to the other end ( as shown in Fig. 4 ).

A-l.3 Three meshes shall be measured per net, shall be near the centre of the net and at least one the net. The distance between two sequential vertical and in the horizontal side measured from give the two dimensions of the mesh. A-2. BREAKING STRENGTH OF ROPE
size to be tested IS :

of which at least one shall be at the edge of knots or joints in the centre to centre shall

A-2.1 Polyamide Rope - of the same mesh cords, declared by the manufacturer lots used for fabricating the nets shall be laid down in IS : 4572 ( Part 1 )-1982t and

as the border cord8 and coming from the same as per the requirements 4572 ( Part 2 )-1983$.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rauirrd ). for TSpecification for polyamide multifilament ropes : Part 1 Genrral raquirrmcnts hawser-laid and plaited ropes ( rrcond ruiion ). $Specification for polyamide multifilament ropes : Part 2 Howncr-laid ropes for specific applications ( srcond rrvrrion ).

9

IS :11521-

1985

VERllCAL MESH ROPE/C.0

DETAIL

AT A

FIG.

4

CARGO HANDLING NET

A-2.2 Polypropylene Rope - Polypropylene rope of the same size as the border cords and mesh cords, declared by the manufacturer to be coming from the same lots used for fabricating the nets shall be tested as per the requirements laid down in IS : 5175-1982*.

A-2.3 It is imperative that each net shall be made out of the same type of rope and from the same lot ( see 4.2.5 ). In case of any doubt the rope manufacturer should be asked to certify the same.
(first revision ) .

*Specification for polypropylene ropes ( J-strand hawser-laid and 8-strand plaited ) 10

IS : 11521 - 1985 A-3. PROOF LOAD
Gunny kg are 25 pernet is at least

A-3.1 The specimen of cargo net is spread out on the floor. sacks containing sand and each weighing between 30 and 50 spread uniformly over the mesh cords until a total mass which is cent in excess of the safe working load is reached. The specimen then lifted by means of its hands off' the floor up to a distance of 500 mm.

A-3.2 The net remains suspended for five minutes and is then lowered This net is then visually examined on the floor and the load removed. to check whether any fractures or splice slippages have taken place in the mesh cords, border cords and hands. A-3.3 A specimen net which has been proof loaded as above and has, after this test, no fractures or splice slippages is deemed to have a safe working load as specified.

APPENDIX ( c1m.sc 1.l )
CARE B-l. GENERAL OF CARGO

B
NETS

HANDLING

B-l.1 Cargo nets made from any material are liable to wear and to mechanical damage, and can be weakened to some extent by various agencies such as chemicals, heat and light. Regular inspection by a competent person is necessary to ensure that the nets are still service* able.
B-l.2 It should also be emphasized that no matter what agency has weakened the net, the effect will be more serious on smaller size cordage Consideration should, therefore, be than on the larger size cordage. given to the relationship of the surface area of the cordge and cross section. B-1.3 Inspection should be done by examination of the net in small sections, the cordage being turned to reveal all sides before continuing. At the same time the cordage should where practicable, be opened up to allow for internal examination. B-l.4 To define a standard of acceptance or rejection is much more difficult than to describe the method of inspection. There can be no well defined boundary between nets that are safe and those that are not, because this depends on the stresses placed on the net in an emergency. 11

IS : 11521- 1985 The decision whether to continue to use a net or to take it out of service should be based on an assessment of the general condition of the net. This is necessary because many of the conditions that will guide the competent person cannot be exactly described but only stated in general If, after examination, there should be any doubt about its safety, terms. it should be withdrawn from service. It should again be emphasized that the effects of wear and mechanical damage are relatively great on thinner cordage, which therefore requires more stringent standard of acceptance. B-2. CAUSES OF DAMAGE

B-2.1 External wear due to dragging over rough surfaces causes filamentation. However, some type of filamentation is in a way effective, as this filamentation protects rope from further abrasion and damage. B-2.2 Physical cuts on the ropes of cargo nets can take place if the net is handling sharp edged items or comes in contact with other sharp edges. A net which has even one strand of any of its cords completely cut should be discarded immediately. B-3. SPECIFIC CAUSES OF DAMAGE fibre nets have very good fibre abrasion cordage to

B-3.1 Abrasion resistance.

Man-made

B-3.2 Overloading - The resistance of man-made damage due to repeated overloading is excellent.

B-3.3 Chemical Attack - The chemical resistance of man-made fibre is in general very good and a brief description of the resistance to chemical attacks of the different man-made fibres is given below. B-3.3.1 Resistance of polyamides to alkalies is good but the resistance to acids is poor. The resistance of the polyolefin ( for example, polypropylene ) to both acids and alkalies is good. B-3.3.2 Resistance of man-made fibres to hydrocarbon common organic solvent is good, although certain man-made swell in some chlorinated solvent. Attack by concentrated polyamide fibres is severe and contact should be avoided. B-3.3.3 As a general rule, if acids or alkalis of any brought into contact with a man-made fabric net, allowed to dry off and thus concentrate the chemical, be washed out well and taken out of service. Advice on the most suitable material if a net is to be used where chemical contamination is likely. oils and fibres may phenols on

concentration are they should not be but the net should should be taken in an environment

B-3.3.4 Net should not be subjected to execssive heat, fire or steam and they should not be used where they could be damaged by falling sparks or molten metal from welding equipment. 12

