( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:4545(Parf7)-1983

Indian Standard

METHODSOFMEASUREMENTON RECEIVERS FOR TELEVISION BROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART ( 7 FIDELITY

First Revision )
Sectional Committee, LTDC 20

Radio Communications
Chairman

Representing

SHRI H. S. JOLLY
Members

All India Radio, New Delhi

P. KHUSHU ( Alternate to Shri H. S. Jolly ) AUDITIONAL DIRECTOR STANDARDS (S&T ) JOINT DIRECTORSTANDARDS ( S & T ) - IV S. S. BAIDWAN CT-CDR A. BHOMICK( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. BASAK SHRI V. V. R. PRABHU ( Alternate SHRI El. M. BHATNA~AR SHRI V. K. SETHJ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. CHANDRAMOULI SHRI K. RAMASESHU ( Alternate SHRJ R. G. DEODHAR
) )
CDR

SHRI 0.

Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ) Ministry of Defence (DPI) Development Commissioner, New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers
(

~(Alternate

)

N ), New Delhi Small Scale Industry,

Association, New Delhi

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Wireless Planning and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communications ), New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Indian Telephone Industries Ltd. Bangalore National Test House, Calcutta The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay Federation of Associations of Small Industries of India, New Delhi of Electronics and Telecommunication Institution Engineers, New Delhi Directorate of Coordination ( Police Wireless ), Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi
( Continued on page 2 )

SHRI M. L. DHAR SHRI P. K. DH~NGRA ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. GHOSE SHRI N. K~ISHNAN KUTTY( AIternate ) SHRI B.P. GHOSE SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA
SHRI T. S. Bux~ ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA SHRIP. S. SACHDEV ( Alternate ) SHRI B. S. GUPTA

DR S. K. HAJELA SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN
SHRI R. P. MATHUR ( Alternate

)

LT-COL KRISH.~NLAL LT-COLB. S. NATRAJAN ( Alternate )

Q Copyright

1986 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( Continued from page 1) Members
SHRI R. LALWANI SHR~R. C. PANDEY SHRI C. M. KRISHNAMIJRTHY( Alternate SHRI A. K. N. PRA~AD SHRI M. G. SRIDHARAN( Alternate ) SHRI W. Y. RAMANA SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER ( Alternote ) SHRI P. K. RANOOLE SHRI H. K. JAIN ( Alternate SHRI M. SANKARALIN~AM

Representing

Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi
1

SHRI v. v. CHAUDHARY ( Afternate

Ministry of Defence ( DTD & P ) ( AIR ), Bangalore
)

Hindustan Aeronautics

Ltd, Bangalore

Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad Directorato General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Centr;i,zectronics Direct;;;; Engineering Research Institute, New

)

General of Supplies and Disposals,

SHRI R. S. ARORA( Alternate ) SHRI S. SHARMA DR K. S. K. SAI ( Alternate ) SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN

Department of Electronics, New Delhi Electronics Trade and Technology Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Development

SHRI K. K. TANEJA

SHRI SURESH CHANDRA

SHRI ISHWARDUTT ( Alternate)

National Physical Laboratory! New Delhi Dirocgto;;; General of Techmcal Development, New
)

SHRI H. S. D~BEY ( Alternate SHRI C. M. THIRUMURTHY

SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics )

Gujarat Communications and Electronics Vadodara Director General, IS1 ( En-o#icio Member )
Secretary SHRI D. K. NAWAR

Ltd.

Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel for TV Receivers,
Convener
SHRI N. N. M~HANTY

LTDC 2O/P3

All India Radio, Now Dolhl

Members
SHRI A. S. GUIN ( Alternate

to
M/s Chawla & Company, New Delhi Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Association, New Delhi Federation of Associations of Small Industries India Ltd, New Delhi Directorate General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad
1

ASSISTANT WIRELESS ADVISER ( PLANNIN~~ ) SHRI H. M. BHATNA~AR SHRI R. B. LAL ( Alternate SHRI R. S. BHATNA~AR

Shri N. N. Mohanty ) SHRI M. L. ARORA

)

of

SHRI K. B. BORKER SHRI M. BUTCHIRAJU SHRI P. JANARDHAN ( Alternate SHRI R. K. CHAKRAVARTI SHRI A. GHAFFAR SHRI S. JANAKIRAM SHRI K. L. KANDOI SHRI S. MITRA

Department of -Electronics, New Delhi U.P. Electronics Corporation Ctd, Lucknow Relations Information BE Public Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad The Radio Electronic and Television Manufacturers Association, Bombay Elect~;miRegtonal Test Laboratory ( North ), New
I)

SHRI INDERJEET BANAIJDHA ( Alternate SHRI C. L. KAUL ( Alternate II ) SHRI A. RAZZAQUB REPRESENTATIVE SHRI P. K. SANDELI, SHRI C. G. SIJBRAMANYAN (Alternate SHRI C. S. ARORA ( Alternate II ) SHRI V. V. R. SASTRY SHRI V. K. SEKHRI SHRI SUR~SH CHANDRA SHRI INDERJEET BANAUDHA ( Alternate

Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, Pilani Tamil Nadu Local Admlnistration Radio and Television Manufacturers Organization, Madras Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi
I)

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Electr~rc$omponents Industries Association, New National
)

Physical Laboratory, New Delhi

2

IS:: 4545 ( Parf 7 ) - 1983

Indian Standard

METHODS OFMEASUREMENT ON RECEIVERSFORTELEVISIONBROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 7 ( FIDELITY

First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 7 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The first version of IS : 4545 covered the methods of measurement for television broadcast receivers having monochrome vision reception. With the introduction of colour television receivers, this~standard is now being revised to make it applicable to receivers designed for both monochrome and colour vision reception and published in a number of parts to deal with different aspects of characteristics of television receivers. 0.3 This standard ( Part 7 ) covers methods of measurement for fidelity of television receivers. Other parts in this series are : Part 1 General considerations Part i Tuning properties and general measurements Part 3 Geometrical properties of the picture

Part 4 Synchronizing quality Part 5 Sensitivity Part 6 Selectivity and response to undesired signals Part 8 Compatibility with audio visual recording equipment Part 9 Electrical and acoustic measurements at audio frequency 0.4 This standard ( Part 7 > is largely based on IEC Publication 107- 1 ( 1977 ) `Recommended methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmission : Part 1 General considerations and electrica~l measurements other than those at audio-frequencies', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 7 ) covers methods of measurement for parameters relating to fidelity of television receivers, namely:

d h)

Errors of chrominance tion angle;

signal

demodula-

a>Modulation
b) d)

c>

frequency/response characteristic, luminance and chrominance channel; Linear waveform response luminance and chrominance channel; Black level and its stability; dc component distortion luminance channel; distortion, distortion, colour difference colour 3 signal;

Effects of phase distortion on incoming signal for small picture areas; .\ delay inequality; J) Luminance/chrominance G-4 signal matrixing error; k) m) Primary colour signal matrixing error; n) Spurious line sequential effects; and P) Line time non-linearity. 1.2 Th'1s standard ( Part 7 ) shall be read conjunction with IS : 4545 ( Part 1 ) - 1983*. broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General ( first revision ).
*Methods of measurement on receivers

in

dc component e>

f) dc component
si gnal;

primary

for television considerations

IS : -4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 2. GENERAL 2.1 The overall electrical fidelity is the response at the picture tube electrodes to all modulation frequencies from zero up to the limit of the system for which the receiver is intended, the modulated radio-frequency signal being applied to the receiverinput terminals through a suitable matching network.
NOTE- Where electrodes of the picture tube other than those used for measurement are not adequately decoupled, care shall be taken in interpreting the results ofthe measurements. Three types of measurement are described: a) The modulation-frequency response from 100 kHz upwards, b) Response to limited spectrum pulse and bar signals, and c) The low-frequency response.

2.2 Influence of Vestigial Side-band Filter - A vestigial side-band filter need not be used with the radio-frequency signal source if the combined radio-frequency/intermediate frequency circuits sufficiently limit the radioof the receiver frequency spectrum. When it is desired to know if the spectrum is so limited, the radio-frequency/ intermediate frequency response of the receiver shall be measured as described in 2.2 and 3.2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 6 > - 198$*. The vestigial side-band filter mentioned in the following clauses shall be introduced if the area B of the portion of the radio-frequency/intermediate frequency response curve indicated in Fig. 1 is greater than 2 percent of the area A within the passband.
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 6 Selectivity and response to undersired signals (first revision ).

y

Co-channel

sound Sign&

Radiated

energy

Co-channel

vision signal

Receiver response

Adjacent

sound

I I I i
Channel limit

i

I rVision carrier

I i

Adjacent vision

car&#

Channel limit

FIG. 1

EXAMPLE OFANALYSISOF RECEIVER SELECTIVITY FOR APPLICATION OF VESTIGIAL SIDE-BAWD FILTER

4

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 Where a vestigial side-band filter is used, care shall be taken that the resultant signal is free from group delay errors, and that any precorrection of the group delay characteristic required by the system standard in use is fulfilled. 3. MODULATION-FREQUENCY/RESPONSE ;;iI-IkyLERISTIC, LUMINANCE 3.1 DeGnition - The luminance channel modulation-frequencies/response characteristic represents the amplitude of the luminance signal picture modulation at the picture tube electrodes as a function of the modulation frequency. 3.2 Method of Measurement - The modulationfrequency/response characteristic in the range from approximately 100 kHz upwards is measured on a representative range of channels in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and the method used stated in the results. The radio-frequency carrier is modulated with a video signal having sinewave picture modulation, adjustable to swing lover the following ranges: a) Black level to white level, b) 25 to 75 percent picture modulation, and c) 40 to 60 percent picture modulation. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial side-band filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983t so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The receiver is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. On at least one channel, the measurement shall also be carried out with maximum and minimum input signal levels as defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1933t. When a luminance channel response control is provided, measurements shall be carried out in each position where it is switchable and over a range of positions where it is contnuously adjustable. When automatic control is provided modifying the response when a colour signal is received, measurements shall be carried with and without the chrominance signal reference burst or chrominance carrier signal included.
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ). TMethods of measurement on receivers for television Part 5 Sensitivity (first broadcast transmissions: revision ).

When a vision interference limiter control is provided, it shall be set to give the least effect on the picture. An oscilloscope is connected in place of the picture tube in such a manner that the frequency response of the video circuits is unchanged and the electrodes continue to have suitably applied potentials. In a co!our receiver each electrode driven by the luminance signal, either directly or as a component of a primary colour signal is to be measured. The level of the picture modulation is kept constant, the frequency being varied between approximately 100 kHz and the sound/vision carrier-frequency difference. The peak-to-peak amplitude of the picture modulation either side of mid-grey level displayed on the oscilloscope is plotted as a function of the modulation frequency. The measurements are carried out for the three levels of picture modulation defined above. Measurement may be carried out by means of a video sweep generator instead of the sinewave signal generator, the result being displayed on a suitable indicator. 3.3 Graphic Representation - The amplitude of the picture modulation of the waveform displayed on the oscilloscope is plotted as a function of the modulation frequency. When a swept signal is used, the result may be recorded. The frequency scale on the abscissa and the amplitude scale on the ordinate may be either linear or logarithmic ( see Fig. 2 ). 4. LINEAR WAVEFORM RESPONSE, LUMINANCE CHANNEL 4.1 Definition - The linear waveform response, luminance, is the waveshape measured at the picture tube electrode or electrodes when applying the stated limited spectrum test signals to the input terminals of the receiver. The results are expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and maximum white level. A rating factor K may also be used in some cases; this allows for the differing subjective effects of the various distortions. Alternatively, the results may be presented by photographic records of the various waveforms. Four types of response measurement are described indicating the frequency and group delay response throughout the video frequency range: a) Line rate bar response,

b) Pulse response, cl Pulse-to-bar ratio, and
d) Field frequency
square wave response.

1s : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983
Relative Amplitude `$0

1

60

Picture

modulation

10

\

0 0

1

2

3 Linear Scales

4

5 Modulation

~6

MHz

Frequency

m
-0 5 .g E 6

-4 -8 -12 -16 -20 Picture modulation

.z
5

Q)

G

K

-28 -32 10-l 2 4 6 8 100 Scales 2 4 6 Modulation 810MHz Frequency

Logarithmic

FIG. 2

EXAMPLESOF MODULATION FREQUENCY/RECEIVERRESPONSE CHARACTERISTICS T ' = 2fc

4.2 Method of Measurement - The response a, b, c and d to the appropriate signal are

measured on a representative range of the channels in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver must be tuned in ~accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983". The radio-frequency signal is modulated with a video signal corresponding to a 2 T pulse and bar, a field-rate square wave and a composite 2 TC pulse and bar.
*Methods of measurement on receivers for ~television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (firsr revision ).

where SC is the nominal upper limit of the system. TC = __l-.2fCC video frequency

where

feeis the difference between fc or the
upper limit of the chrominance signal passband, whichever is the lower value, and thechrominance sub-carrier frequency. 6

Suitable networks for band-limiting the ;spectrum of pulse and bar signals are shown in Fig. 3. The waveforms of the test signals are shown in Fig. 4. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband ~filter as required -by the standards of the television system used and a suitable The input signal level is matching network. adjusted to be between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983* and such that noise effects do not influence measurement. Where the system in use requires that the signal be pre-corrected for receiver group delay characteristic. This pre-correction must be included in the test signal generator. The receiver is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. On at least one channel the measurements shall be carried out with maximum and minimum input signal levels as defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983". When a luminance channel response control is provided, measurements shall be carried out in each position where it is switchable and over a range of positions where it is continuously adjustable. When automatic control is provided modifying the response when a colour signal is received, measurements shall be carried with and without the chrominance signal reference burst or chrominance sub-carrier signal included. When a vision interference limiter control is provided it shall be set to give least effect upon the picture.
*Methods of measurement broadcast transmissions :
revision ).

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 An oscilloscope is connected in place of the picture tube in such a manner that the frequency response is unchanged and the electrodes continue to have suitably applied potentials. In-a colour receiver, each electrode driven by the luminance signal, either directly or as a component of a primary colour signal, shall be measured. 4.3 2 T Bar Response - The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 5 so that the halfamplitude points of the bar transitions coincide with paints ml and m,. Points A and B respectively at black level and the mid-point of the bar are then set at unit-amplitude. The maximum departure b of the bar from unit-amplitude between points extending to 0'01 H from the half-amplitude points of each transition is measured and expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and white level. The result may be expressed in terms of the rating factor Kusing the expression given below. Krating of 2 T bar response function of b:
K = 1 b-100

expressed 1

as a

4.4 2 T Pulse Response - The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 6 such that the sweep velocity corresponds with the time scale indicated, the black level of the response coincides with the horizontal axis and the peak of the response falls on the unit-amplitude line and the half-amplitude points of the response are symmetrically disposed about the vertical axis. The amplitude of the signal is measured at the indicated points on the horizontal axis and expressed as percentage b of the peak response. The difference in time CL between the half-amp&

on receivers for television Parr 5 Sensitivity (first

75 c

L1 1;~ Ls Lo

= = = =

T(9,478)+1% T(1,851). T(18,546)+1% T(18,207)* 1%

CI C2 Co cq cs

= = = = =

T(475,25)*2% T(13006)&0,5% T(4554,5)*2% T(3399,3)+0,5% T(998,S)If:2%

Inductances to have Q > 100 1.025 9 *Adjusted for minimum response at f = T Exciting Pulse < -$ Induction values are in microhenrys Capacitance in picofarads Frequency in Megahertz Time in microseconds SUITABLE NETWORKS FOR BAND-LIMITING 7

FIG. 3

PULSE AND BAR SIGNALS

IS: 4545( Part 7) - 1983

Mlhite

level

,_____-i__-___ Black level ____ _____ ----_-~--------L--

_ _

Sync. level

a) Luminance test signal, synchronization

pulse omitted when applied to colour system coder.

ted Difference and white be:ween level black level

sub-carrier

Modulated

sub-carrier

b) Chrominance test signal.
White level

Black level Sync. level

_ I

_

_____`_-----_-__-_--L-_ I0.27 40.23 H--&0,39 H 1

c)

Composite test signal formed from (b) and (a) with luminancepicture

modulation component to 50 percent level.

V

\I

White

level

Black

level

Sync, level

V = field period Synchronizing pulses, omitted when applied to colour system coder d) Field frequency square wave signal. FIG. 4 WAVEFORMS OF LIMITED SPECTRUM PULSE AND BAR SIGNALS 8

White level

-1

f----

1 I
L--l

I

0.4 H----t

B = is

H = line period A = point at black level midpoint measured between ml and m2
__--__-_--------0

FIG. 5

BAR RESPONSE AND PULSE-TO-BAR RATIO -_-_
Unit amplitude level

i

A

I ,/

\ \A

A /
? 2 IIT

c
Blat k level I 4 nl

V ,4 nT 2nT

7

v nT Verti'cal axis.

t nT

FIG. 6 nT PULSE RESPONSE tude points of the response is measured and K=i'"",,"l These values may-be expressed is nanoseconds. expressed in terms of the rating factor K using 4.6 Chrominance Sub-carrier Response of Luminathe expressions given below: nce Channel - The oscilloscope is adjusted as in 4.3 using the 2 T pulse and bar signal ( Fig. 4A ). K rating of 2 T pulse half-amplitude duration The composite chrominance pulse and bar signal a in the same unit as T ( Fig. 4C ) is then applied and the peak-to-peak excursions of the chrominance sub-carrier in the K neighbourhood of point B is measured. The chrominance sub-carrier response is K rating as a function of Points on time axis expressed as the ratio of the peak-to-peak excurpercentage of peak and unit intervals sions of the chrominance sub-carrier measured response b as above to the difference between black level b and white level. K= 400 The measurement shall be repeated with the composite chrominance pulse and bar signal picture modulation reduced by 50 percent and half the difference between black level and white level used in expressing the result. K= & I I 4.7 Composite Chrominance Sub-carrier 2 Tc 4.5 2 T Pulse/Bar Rating -The oscilloscope is Pulse Response of Luminance Channel - The adjusted as shown in Fig. 5 and indicated in 4.3. composite chrominance 2 Tc pulse and bar signal The oscilloThe ratio of the amplitude of the 2 T pulse to is applied as picture modulation. scope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 7 such that the amplitude of the 2 T bar response at point the sweep velocity corresponds to the time scale B is measured and may be expressed in terms of indicated, the black level of the response the rating factor K using the expression given coincides -with the horizontal axis, the peak of below. the response corresponds to unit-amplitude and the half-amplitude points are symmetrically disK rating of 2 T pulse to bar ratio expressed posed about the vertical axis. as a function of b; 9

I I

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983
<
----_d_-I_--_--____

Unit

amplitude

level

-------i-----w-wSub-carrier envelope

Level

5o%

Black 4 n7 2n7 n7 Vertical axis nT

level

2 nl

4 nl

FIG. 7

RESPONSE OF LUMINANCECHANNELTO A CHROMINANCE CARRIER PULSE 5. MODULATION-FREQUENCY /RESPONSE CHARACTERISTIC, CHROMINANCE CHANNEL ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) channel 5.1 Definition - The chrominance characteristic modulation-frequency/response represents the amplitude of the chrominance signal picture modulation at the picture tube electrodes as a function of the modulation frequency. 5.2 Method of Measurement - The chrominance channel modulation-frequency/response characteristic in the range from 100 kHz upwards is measured on a representative channel chosen from those in which the receiver is designed to The receiver must be tuned in accor%$%ith 2 of-IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983*. Tlie receiver is adjusted to provide standard A suitable test pattern video output voltage. signal is then applied and the receiver adjusted to provide _optimum colour decoding. *Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions : Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ).
White level !

The maximum excursions of the envelope are measured at the indicated points on the horizontal axis and expressed as a percentage of the peak response. 4.8 Field Frequency Square-wave Response The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 8 so that the half-amplitude points of the bar transitions coincide with points ml and ma and so that the mid-points of the positive and negative excursions correspond with points A and B. The display is adjusted so that points A and B correspond to the unit amplitude, the synchronizing pulse being ignored. The maximum departure b of the bar amplitude above and below the unit-amplitude level B, between points 0'01 V from, the half-amplitude points of each transition, are measured and expressed as a percentage of unit-amplitude ( V is the duration of one vertical field 1. The results may be expressed in terms of the rating factor K using the expression given below: K rating of field frequency square-wave response expressed as a function of 6: K=
--

b-100 I 2

I
0.01 v-+~--~~--++,,,,

1
I

V

I ! I
I_
-------_-----------A--

mT
---I

/

. t i

m2

Level

50%

I
10

,I--_ Black level

I

FIG. 8

FIELD RATE SQUAREWAVE RESPONSE

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 The radio-frequency carrier is modulated with the output signal from the appropriate colour system coder havinginputs for the three primary colours and an independent luminance channel. A 50-percent constant level grey pedestal is applied to the luminance channel input and sinewave picture modulation swinging over the ranges 25 to 75 percent and 40 to 60 percent, is applied in turn to the three primary colour inputs of the coder. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983* so that noise effects do not influence measurement. An oscilloscope is connected in place of the picture tube, to each appropriate primary colour or colour difference output signal in turn, in such a manner that the frequencyresponse of the video circuits is unchanged and the electrodes continue to have suitably applied potentials. The level of the picture modulation is kept constant, the frequency being varied between approximately 100 kHz at the nominal system upper limit of the chrominance passband. The peak-to-peak amplitude of the picture modulation to either side of the mid-value displayed on the oscilloscope is plotted as a function of the modulation-frequency. Measurements are carried out at the two levels of picture modulation defined above. Measurement may be carried out by means of a video sweep generator instead of the sine-wave signal generator, the result being displayed on a suitable indicator. 5.3 Graphic Representation - The amplitude of the sinusoidal component of the picture modulation waveform displayed on the oscilloscope is plotted as a function of the modulation frequency. When a swept signal is used, the result may be recorded photographically. The frequency scale on the abscissa and the amplitude scale on the ordinate may be either linear or logarithmic ( see Fig. 9 ). 6. LINEAR WAVEFORM RESPONSE, CHROMINANCE CHANNEL ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVER ) 6.1 Definition - The linear waveform response, chrominance is the wave shape measured at the appropriate picture tube electrodes when applying the stated limited spectrum test signals to the colour system coder providing the video signal
*Methods broadcast revision ). of measurement on receivers for television transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first

to radio-frequency modulator. The results are expressed as a percentage of the difference between-black level and the signal level occurring in the appropriate channel corresponding to unit-amplitude. A rating factor K may also be used in some cases; this allows for the differing subjective effect of various distortions. Alternatively, the results may be presented by photographic records of the various waveforms. Four types of response measurement are described indicating the frequency and groupdelay response over the chrominance passband and the chrominance carrier frequency band. They are:

4 line rate bar response,
b) pulse response, c) -pulse-to-bar ratio, and d) field frequency square-wave

response.

6.2 Method of Measoremeut - The responses (a,, (b), (c) and (d) to the appropriate signals are measured on a representative range of the channels in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983*. The receiver is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is then applied and the receiver adjusted to provide optimum decoding. The radio-frequency carrier is modulated with the output signal from the appropriate colour system coder having inputs for the three primary colours and an independent luminance channel. A 50-percent grey level constant pedestal is applied to the luminance channel input and picture modulation corresponding to a 2 Tc pulse and bar and a field rate square-wave is applied, in turn, to the three primary colour inputs of the coder at 55 percent and 30 percent of the maximum system level. Suitable networks for band-limiting pulse and bar signals are shown in Fig. 3. The waveforms of the test signals are shown in Fig. 4, and TC is as defined in 4.2. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. Where the system in use requires that the signal be pre-corrected for receiver group delay characteristic, this pre-correction shall be included in the signal generator. The input level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983t so that noise effects do not influence measurement. An oscilloscope is connected in place of
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurement (first revision ). tMethods of measurement on receivers for televiG$; broadcast transmission:s Part 5 Sensitivity
revision ).

l,l

80

60

Picture

modulation

1.0

7.5

2.5

M&

Modulation

frequency

a) Linear scale

10-l

2

4

6

81

2

4 Mt.&

Modulation

frequency

b) Logrithmic scale
FIG. 9 the picture EXAMPLESOF MODUL.4TIONFREQUENCY~CHROMINANCE CHANNEL RESPONSE

tube to each appropriate Frimary colour or colour difference output Signal In turn, in such a manner that the frequency response of the video circuits is unchanged and the electrodes continue to have suitably applied potentials. 6.3 2 TC Bar Response - The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 5 so that the halfamplitude points of the bar transitions coincide with points ml and ma. Points A at black level or the grey pedestal level and B at the midpoint of the bar are set at unit-amplityde. The maximum departure of the ~bar fromH unlt-amplitude between points extending to 30 from the half-amplitude points of each transition is measured and expressed as a percentage b of The result may be expressed unit-amplitude.

in terms of the rating factor K using the expression given below: K rating of 2 Tc bar response expressed as a function of b: K=lb-1001 6.4 2 Tc pulse Response - The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 6 such that the sweep velocity corresponds with the time scale indicated, the black level or grey pedestal level of the response coincides with the horizontal axis, the peak of the response corresponds with unitamplitude and the half-amplitude points of the response are symmetrically disposed about the vertical axis. The amplitude of the signal is measured at the indicated points on the horizontal axis and expressed as a percentage of the peak response. The difference in time between 12

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) -

1983

the half-amplitude points of the response measured and expressed in nanoseconds.

is

7. BLACK LEVEL AND ITS STABILiTY 7.1 Introduction - Black level is the television signal level during the active line period in the absence of picture modulation. It applies to the luminance signal, the individual primary colour signals, and the individual colour difference signals. Measurements of the luminance generated by the picture tube when the signal is at black level may be carried out or of the equivalent signal voltage level at the picture tube electrodes. This clause deals with measurements of the variation of the voltage corresponding to black level at the picture tube electrodes with respect to time, temperature, supply voltage, input signal level and between monochrome and colour operation. It must be borne in mind, when interpreting the following ~electrical measurements, that the picture tube luminance corresponding to black level may be influenced by changes in supply potentials and voltages or ancillary electrodes of the picture tube. 7.2 Voltage Corresponding to Black Level 7 The voltage corresponding to black level is the potential on a controlling electrode of the picture tube relative to ground potential or the potential of a supply rail. All guns of a multigun colour picture tube are to be measured individually. Where more than one picture tube electrode is modulated with the same signal or with associated signals, the difference in potential between the two controlling electrodes measured with the signal at black level, is the voltage corresponding to black level. 7.3 Variation of Black Level with Time - If no other influence is present, the variation of the voltage corresponding to black level with time is mainly due to the temperature dependence of the component characteristics and the internal heating of the receiver. It is the change in the voltage corresponding to black level expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and white level, as a function of time. 7.4 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted to be between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ).

These values may be expressed in terms of the rating factor K using the expressions below: a--2Tc K= 10 TC ( a and TC are expressed in the same units >. K Rating as a Function Points on Time Axis
in Unit Intervals of Percentage of Peak Response b

K =

l-1

b 400

6.5 2 Tc Pulse/Bar Rating - The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 5 and indicated in 6.3. The ratio of the amplitude of the 2 TC pulse to the amplitude to the 2 TC bar response at a point B is measured and expressed in terms of the rating factor K using the expression given below:
K rating of 2 TC pulse/bar function of b:

ratio expressed as a

,.+lO;;bI 6.6 Field Frequency Square-Wave Response The oscilloscope is adjusted as shown in Fig. 8 so that the half-amplitude points of the bar transitions correspond with points ml and m2 and so that the mid-points of the positive and negative excursions correspond with points A and B. The display is adjusted so that points A and B correspond to the unit-amplitude, the synchronizing pulses and the grey pedestal, if either are present, being ignored. The maximum deviations above and below the unit-amplitude level up to points 0'01 V from the half-amplitude point of each transition are measured and expressed as a percentage of unit-amplitude. The result may be expressed in terms of the rating factor Kusing the expression given below. of field frequency squarewave K rating response expressed as a function of b: K_ I b-100 2 I

6.7 Presentation of Results - Since -significant differences in the responses of the colour difference channels can give rise to errors in colour transitions, the response to a given test signal may be superimposed on a single graph with those relating to the various colour difference channels, being suitably identified in order to indicate the presence of such differences.

13

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 IS : 4545 ( Part 5 > - 1983* so that noise effects do not influence measurements. The radiofrequency signal is modulated with a selectably monochrome or colour video signal having picture content at black level. An oscilloscope is connected to the appropriate picture tube electrode or electrodes and the variation of the voltage corresponding to black level measured at specific time intervals under constant supply voltage, ambient temperatue and relative humidity without touching the receiver controls. If applicable, it is recommended that the measurements be repeated at the lowest and highest values of ambient temperature to be encountered in practice. Measurements may also be repeated for a range of ambient temperatures. Measurements shall be carried out with both monochrome and colour signals and in the case of a colour receiver, for the electrodes or groups of electrodes generating the individual primary colour images. When the picture tube has a number of electrodes influencing the sensitivity of the main control electrodes, variations in the operating potentials of these electrodes shall also be measured under the various conditions and any significant changes recorded with the results. 7.5 Period of Initial Variation of Black Level The period of initial variation of black level is the time elapsing between initial switching on and the establishment of a condition in which the voltage corresponding to black level stays within a specified tolerance. The initial variation of black level is the value of the variation of the voltage corresponding to black level and the difference between the highest and lowest voltages corresponding to black level expressed
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television Sensitivity ( jirsf broadcast transmissions: Part 5
revision ). %
Percentage of the difference between black level and white level +lO +8 +6 +4 +2 0 -2 -4 -6 __ 8 -of Period of initial black level variation Initial variation

as a percentage of the difference between black level and white level occurring in this period. 7.6 Method of Measurement - Before corn--� mencement of the measurements, the receiver shall be switched off for a sufficiently long period for all parts of the receiver to attain approximately the test room temperature. The duration and extent of the initial variation of black level shall be derived from a series of measurements from the moment of switching on, but measurements of the voltage corresponding to black level begin as soon as these are performable. The signals used for measurement, their application to the receiver and the measurement intrumentation are as in 7.4. Due to the necessity of commencing measurements at room temperature, arrangements may be made to carry out various measurements simultaneously or to restrict the number of measurementsto those considered the most sign&ant. 7.7 Presentation of Results - The variation in the voltage corresponding to black level expressed as a percentage of the ~difference between black level and white level is plotted as a function of time in a curve having as abscissa, time in minutes on a logarithmic scale and as ordinate, the change of voltage. As reference, the voltage corresponding to black level at either 1 minute or 1 hour after initial switching on may be chosen. An example of curve showing the variation of voltage corresponding to black level as a function of time is shown in Fig. 10. 7.8 Black Level as a Function of Supply Voltage A variation in the supply voltage may result in a change of the voltage corresponding to black level. The signals used for measurements and the instrumentation are those of 7.4. The voltage

-10
1 2 4 6810 2 4 6 8102 2 4 6 8103 Time in minutes

FIG. 10

EXAMPLEOF VARIATION OF VOLTAGE CORRESPONDINGTO BLACK LEVEL AS A FUNCTION OF TIME

14

fS:4545(Partil)-1983 corresponding to black level is measured as defined in 7.2 as a function of supply voltage, the latter being varied within the appropriate limits as selected from those laid down in 6 of IS : 4545 ( Part 1).1983*. This measurement shall not be performed during the period of initial variation of black level. When the picture tube has a number of electrodes influencing the sensitivity of the main control electrodes, variation in the operating potentials of these electrodes shall also be measured and any significant changes recorded with the results. 7.9 Presentation of Results -Curves representing the voltage corresponding to black level as a function of the supply voltage are plotted with the voltage variation as ordinate expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and white level on a linear scale. The supply voltage variation is expressed as a percentage on a linear horizontal scale. An example of a curve showing. the variation of the voltage correspondini to black level as a fuctioiof supply voltage is shown in Fig. 11. 7.10 Black Level as a Function of Input Signal Level - A variation in the input signal may result in a change of the voltage corresponding to black level. The signalsused for measurement and the instrumentation are those of 7.4. The voltage corresponding to black level is measured as defined in 7.2 as a function of input signal, the latter being vari ed within the appropriate limits over the full range of the values in accordance with 9of IS : 4545 (Part 1 )-1983*. This measurement shall not be performed during the period of initial variation of black level. When the picture tube has a number of electrodes including the sensitivity of the main control electrodes, variations in the operating potentials of these electrodes shall also be measured and any significant changes recorded with the results. 7.11 Presentation of Results - Curves representing black level as a function of input signal level are plotted with the variation of the voltage corresponding to black level expressed as a percentage of difference between black level and white level as ordinate on a linear scale. The recommended reference value depending on the receiver sensitivity being that contained with an input signal level of -50 dB ( mW ). The input signal is expressed in decibels as the abscissa on a linear scale. An example of a curve showing variations of voltage corresponding to black level as a function of input signal level is shown in Fig. 12. 7.12 Change to Black Level Between Colour and Monochrome Operation - Due to the preSenCe of a chromkwe

as a reference carrier burst or the presence of the chrominance carrier itself in colour systems employed frequency modulation of the chrominance carrier, differences in black level can occur between monochrome and colour operation. It applies to the luminance black level and to both the individual primary colour signal land the individual colour difference signal black levels. 7.13 Method of Measurement - The sign& used for measurement and the instrumentation are those of 7.4. The voltage corresponding to black level is measured as defined 7.2 first for monochrome operation and then for colour operation. Measurements are carried out at the extreme positions of any colour saturationcontrol as well as at the position giving optimum decoding. 8. DC COMPONENT DISTORTION LUMINANCE CHANNEL g-1 Deanitlon - The distortion of the dc comnonent of the luminance signal is the shift of tge voltage corresponding to-black level on or between the control electrode or electrodes of the picture tube due to a change in picture luminance signal level. 8.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 )-1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. When a vision signal interference limiter control is provided, it shall be set to have least effect upon the picture. The radiofrequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filteras required by the standardsof the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those level defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )1983? so that noise effects do not influence measurement. Measurements arealso carried out at high and low signal levels as defined respectively in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5)-1983t ( the low signal level being, however, such that measurement accuracy is not impaired by noise ). The radio-frequency signal is modulated with a video signal corresponding, successively to black level 50 percent of white level and white level. The signals at 50 percent white level and white level shall include a small area at black level ( see Fig. 13A).
*Method of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ). tMethods of measurement on receivers for teleyssi broadcast transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity revision ).

synchronizing

signal such
for television considerations

*M&hods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General (first revision ).

15

IS:4545(Psrt
Percentage difference between and white black level level of the

7)-1983

Supply voltage variations

FIG. 11

EXAMPLE

OF VARIATION OF CORRESPONDING TO BLACK LEVEL AS A FUNCTION OF THE SUPPLYVOLTAGE

Percentage between

of the black level

difference and white level

+4 +3

.L5

I `I -100

I.
-80

I

I
-60

I
-40

I

I

I
-_20

I

I
0 d8WW lcput level signal

FIG. 12

EXAMPLE OF VARIATION OF CORRESPONDING TO BLACK LEVEL AS A FUNCTION OF THE INPUT SIGNAL LEVEL

An oscilloscope is connected to the appropriate picture tube electrode or electrodes and the voltage corresponding to black level is measured at the control electrodes or electrode of the picture tube. The shift in the voltage corresponding to black level for the three picture signal conditions is expressed as a percentage of the difference in potential between black level and white level for standard video output voltage ( see Fig. 13B >. In a coIour receiver, each electrode driven by the luminance signal either directly or as a component of a primary colour signal, IS to be

measured. Where both grid and cathode of a picture tube electron gun have a luminance signal or luminance signal derived component applied, a differential oscilloscope measurement shall be made between the appropriate electrodes. Care shall be taken in making measurements to observe whether any distortions to the dc component are due to beam current limiting arrangements. Any such effects should be noted in the results. When the picture tube hasnumber of electrodes influencing the sensitivity of the main control~electrodes, variations in the operating potentials of those electrodes shall also be 16

Black

level

reference

13A -----------

Input Signal for dc Component Measurements
------------

138 FIG.

Video ~Output Signal for dc Component D.C.

Measurement

COMPONENT DISTORTION IN THE LUMINANCECHANNEL Measurements are also carried out at low measured under various conditions and any signal levels as defined in 5 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5)significant changes recorded with the results. 1983*, the low signal level being, however, such that measurement accuracy is not impaired by 9. DC COMPONENT DISTROTION, noise. The radio-frequency signal is modulated COLOUR DIFFERENCE SIGNAL by the output of a suitable colour system coder. (NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME Input signals corresponding successively to TV RECEIVERS ) black level, 50 percent of peak level and peak 9.1 Definition - The distortionof the dc compolevel, with the latter two including a small area nent of the colour difference signals, where these at black level of the primary colour signals, are are applied to the picture tube electrodes applied, in turn, to the red, blue, green, blue separately from the luminance signals, is the and green, red and green, and red and blue shift of the voltage corresponding to colour primary colour inputs of the coder ( see difference signal black level on the control Fig. 14 A ). electrode or electrodes of a given gun of the An oscilloscope isconnected to the appropriate picture tube due to a change in picture-colour picture tube electrodes in turn and in each case difference signal level. the voltage corresponding to the colou+ difference 9.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is signal black level is measured for the three signal conditions applied in the six combinations to the carried out on a representative channel of those coder inputs. The change in the voltage expresin which the receiver is designed to operate. The sed as a percentage of the difference in potential receiver shall be tuned in accordance with between black level and the level corresponding IS : 4545 ( Part 2 )-1983* and is adjusted to proto the maximum level as measured when the inA test vide standard video output voltage. put signal is a full amplitude, full purity colour pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for bar signal with the white bar at white level. Care optimum decoding. shall be taken in making measurements to observe The radio-frequency signal is applied to the whether any effects are due to beam current input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial limiting arrangements. Any such effects shall sideband filter as required by the standards of be noted in the results ( see Fig. 14B and 14C ). the television system usedand a suitable matching The input signal level is adjusted 10. DC COMPONENT DISTORTION, network. PRIMARY COLOUR SIGNALS ( NOT between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983t so that noise effects do APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV not influence measurement. RECEIVERS ) 10.1 Definition - DC component distortion of the primary colour signals is the shift of voltage *Methods of measurement on receivers for television 13 MEASUREMENT OF
broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ). tMethods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmission: Part 5 Sensitivity (first revision ). *Methods broadcast revision ). of measurement transmissions: on receivers for television Part 5 Sensitivity (first

17

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983

corresponding electrode of a colour singal primary colour

to black level on the control picture tube, to which a primary is applied, due to a change in signals level.

11. ERRORS OF CHRO_MINANCE SIGNAL DEMODULATION ANGLE ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROM% TV RECEIVERS )

10.2Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. the receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Fart 2 )-1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequeney signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network.

11.1Definition - Three aspects of the chrominance signal demodulation measured are: a) the demodulation angles of the carrier chrominance signal, b) the delayed carrier chrominance signal phase matching, and c) the amplitude matching of delayed and undelayed carrier chrominance signals. 11.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 )-1983" and is adjusted to provide a standard video output voltage. A test between The input signal level is adjusted pattern is applied and the receiver ~adjusted for those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 `optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal so that noise effects do not ( Part 5 )-1983t is applied to the input terminals of the receiver influence measurement. Measurements are also through a vestigial sideband filter as required carried out at low signal levels as defined in 5 of by the standards of the television system used IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )-19531 the low signal level and suitable matching network. The input being, however, such that measurement accuracy signal level is adjusted between those levels defined is not impaired by noise. The radio-frequency in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )-1983t so that signals is modulated by the output of a suitable noise effects do not influence measurement. colour system coder. Input signal corresponding Measurements are also carried out at low signal successively to black level, 50 percent of peak levels as defined in 5 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )level and peak level, with the latter two including 1983?, the low signal level being, however, such a small area at black level of the primary colour that the measurement accuracy is not impaired signals are applied, in turn, to the red, blue, by noise. green, blue and green, red and green, and red 11.3 Errors of Chrominance Signal Demodulation and blue primary colour inputs of the coder Angle - The radio-frequency signals modulated ( see Fig. 14A ). by the output of a suitable colour system coder, the input signals being colour bars occurring on An oscilloscope is connected to the appropriate lines being at picture tube electrodes in turn and in each case alternate lines, the intermediate black level. the voltage corresponding to the primary colour An oscilloscope is connected to the approsignal black level is measured for the three signal priate point in the circuit where .the R - Y conditions applied in six combinations to the signals may be observed. The R - Ymodulation coder inputs. The change in the voltage correscomponent is switched off at the coder. ponding to black level for the various conditions is expressed as a percentage of the standard video The mean phase of the chrominance carrier output voltage. Care shall be taken in making reference bursts is adjusted to achieve a minimum measurements to observe whether any distortions response averaged over pairs of lines. The to the dc component are due to beam current value and sign of the necessary shift are recorded limiting arrangements. Any such effects shall be as the R - Y error. The mean phase of the noted in the results. When the picture tube has a reference bursts where this has been shifted is number of electrodes, influencing the sensitivity now returned to nominal and the oscilloscope of the main control electrodes, variations in opeconnected to a suitable point to observe the rating potentials of these electrodes shall also be B - Y signal. The R - Y modulation at the measured under the various conditions and any coder is now switched on and the B - Y modusignificant changes recorded in the results ( see lation switched off. The mean phase of the Fig. l4D ). chrominance carrier reference bursts is adjusted
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (jirsf revision ). TMethods of measurement on receivers for television transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (firer broadcast
revision ).

*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ). tMethods of measurement on receivers for telev(i$sis; transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity broadcast
revision ).

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983
Peakleve 1
Black

reference Level50%

--

Blacklevel

Active line period
14A Coder Input Signals

Black level shift

146
Picture tube bias: level --------_--_-__--_-______

Colour

Differencr

Output

Signal for Positive

Polarity

I

$1 ,
4 A
Difference between peak level and black level

t
Black level shift --l-l

14C

Colour

Difference

Output

Signal for Negative

Polarity

Picture tube bias level

_-_-__---___------

-_--

Difference between peak level and black level

Black level shfit 14D Primary Colour Output Signal

FIG.

14

MEASUREMENTOF D.C. COMPONENTDISTORTION COLOUR DEFERENCE SIGNALS AND PRIMARY COLOUR SIGNALS

19

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 that the measurement accuracy is not impaired at the coder to give minimum response averaged by noise. over pairs of lines. The value and sign of this phase shift is recorded as the B - Y error. The radio-frequncy signal is modulated by the 11.4 Delayed Chrominance Carrier Signal Phase output of a suitable colour system coder having Matching - The measurement is as defined in inputs for the three primary colours and an 11.3 when measuring the R - Y error. An error independent luminance channel. A 50 percent indirect and delayed path phase matching will grey level constant pedestal is applied to the result in a different adjustment at the coder of luminance channel and picture modulation the chrominance carrier reference burst mean corresponding to a 2 TC pulse and bar is applied phase to~achieve minimum response on each of to the three primary colour inputs of the coder the adjacent lines in time. This difference in at 55 percent and 30 percent of the maximum phase shift is measured observing the R - Y system level. Suitable networks for band-limiting The differences expressed either in output. pulse and bar signals are shown in Fig. 3. The degrees of chrominance carrier phase or converwaveforms of the test signals are shown in ted into time in nanoseconds is recorded as the Fig. 4 and TC is as defined in 4.2. error. 11.5 Amplitude Matching of Delayed and Direct An oscilloscope is connected in place of the Chrominance Carrier Signal - The test set-up picture tube to each appropriate Fprimary colour is as defined in 11.3, the oscilloscope being conor colour difference output signal, in turn, in nected to observe the R - Y signal. The B - Y such a manner that the frequency response of modulation of the coder is switched off and the The 2 TC pulse/ the video circuits is unchanged. amplitude of the R - Y signal measured on bar ratio is measured as indicated in 6.5 and the adjacent lines in time. The amplitude matching peak-to-peak amplitude of the pulse is measured. error of delayed and direct signals is the ratio of The mean phase of the reference chrominance the smaller to the larger expressed as a percentage. carrier burst at the coder is advanced 30" in The pulse to phase from the nominal condition. 12. EFFECTS OF PHASE DISTORTION ON bar ratio is again measured as above and the SMALL INCOMING SIGNAL FOR peak-to-peak value of any Hanover blind effect PICTURE AREAS ( NOT APPLICABLE occurring on the peak of the pulse is also TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) measur'ed. These measurements are then repeated with themean phase of the reference chrominance 12.1 Definition - Chrominance signal sideband carrier burst at the coder retarded 30" in phase. asymmetry in the receiver will cause the decoder to respond differently to transients as compared 12.3 Presentation of Results - Results are to large areas of the picture when there is distortabulated for the three primary colour signals tion of the phase relationship between the and in each case, for the three conditions of chrominance carrier reference bursts and the phase and two of amplitude showing the pulse/ carrier chrominance picture signal as receiver. bar amplitude ratios and the changes in the Hanover blind effects may arise on transitions amount of Hanover blind effects on the pulse, and the transient response may be degraded. as shown in Fig. 15A and 15B. 12.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those l3. LUMINANCE/CHROMINANCE DELAY in which the receiver is designed to operate. The INEQUALITY ( NOT APPLICABLE TO receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) IS : 4545 ( Part 2 )-1983* and is adjusted to provide a standard video output voltage. A test 13.1 Definition - Luminance/chrominance delay pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for inequality is a measure of the error in relative optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal timing of the luminance and chrominance is applied to the input terminals of the receiver components of the primary colour signals or the through a vestigial sideband filter, as required equivalents saparate luminance and chrominance by the standards of the television system used signals applied to the picture tube. and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels 13.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )-1983t carried out on a respresentative channel of those so that noise effects do not influence measurein which the receiver is designed to operate. The ment. Measurements are also carried out at low signal levels as defined in 5 of IS : 4545 (Part 5) - receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and is adjusted to 1983* the low signal level being, however, such provide standard video output voltage. A test *Methods of measurement on receivers for television patttern is applied and the receiver adjusted for
broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ).C _ _ j-Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first revision ). *Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning general measurements (first revision ). for television properties and

20

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983

Hanover

blind

~effect

-

Black

level

Pulse to bar ratio with phase shift
15A Colour Difference Signal Nleasurement, -Positive Polarity

Pulse to bar ratio with phase shif'

Black

level

Hanover

blind

effect

Initial 15B Colour Difference Signal

pulse

to

bar

ratio Polarity

Measurement,

Negative

l5C

Primary Colour

Signal Measurement,

Positive

Polarity

FIG. 15

DISTORTION OF SIGNALPICTURE AREAS, PAL SYSTEM

21

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983

ISD

Primary Colour Signal Measurement,

Negative Polarity

Lr

FIG. 15

DISTORTIONOF SMALL PICTURE AREAS, PAL SYSTEM Where there is a luminance/chrominance timing error, the pulse component will not disappear entirely but will leave a residual sinusoidal disturbance. Where this sinnsoidal distbabance commences in the direction of white level, the chrominance channel is delayed relative to luminance and when in the other direction, luminance is delayed relative to chrominance. The chrominance component is switched off and the amplitude of the pulse measured. The chrominance component is then switched on and the peak-to-peak magnitude of the sinusoidal disturbance is measured. These values are used in the formula below to determine the magnitude of the luminance/chrominance timing error. Typical resulting waveforms are shown in Fig. 16. .j-=- 2 Tc A WB where I = the magnitude of the delay inequality, Tc = as defined in 4.2. A = peak-to-peak amplitude of sinusoidal disturbance, and B = amplitude of luminance channel pulse alone. 13.3 Presentation of Results - The results are tabulated for the three primary colour channels at the two stated levels showing the magnitude and sign of the relative timing error between the luminance and chrominance components. MATRIXING ERROR 14. G - Y SIGNAL (NOT APPICABLE TO MONOCI!IROME TV RECEIVERS ) 14.1 Definition - Where the G - Y signal is obtained by matrixing proportions of R - Y, and B - Y, this measurement defines the deviation of these proportions from the nominal value. 14.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) -1983* and is adjusted to *Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first

optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by -the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )-1983* so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radio-frequency signal is modulated by the output of a suitable colour system coder having inputs for the three primary colours and an The input independent luminance channels. signals of the coder consist of 2 Tc pulse and bar signals applied in the proportions indicated below, according to the primary colour channel being measured. Coder Inputs in Percentage of Maximum Value ---h----_.,__,..~ .f-----Channel to be B G Y Measured R 75 775' 2: 7: BR 0 7: 75 G 30 ;: R z: 27 3: 0 300 12 : 30 Three primary colour channels are measured in turn at the two levels de&red above by connection of an oscilloscope in place of the picture tube to the primary colour output in such a manner that the frequency response of the video circuits is unchanged. Where luminance and colour difference components are applied in separate picture tube electrodes, a differential oscilloscope shall be used to give an indication of the primary colour signals. In the case of each primary colour channel, the appropriate input signals to the coder are applied and the receiver chrominance channel gain control adjusted to nullify the bar component of the pulse and bar signal. Where the system in use requires that the signal be pre-corrrited for receiver gro;falyel;; pre-correction characteristic, included in the signal generator. *Methods of measurement on receivers for television transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first broadcast
revision ).

revision ).

22

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983

I I

I\ I\

-r
'
\\iA
t

..m-~~~.D~~

I

I

I
I

\J

I I !

-I1
El

Luminance

-

Disturbance due to timing error

a) chromiaaace delayed relative to luminance.
"L-----y

I

\
Disturbance due to timing error

1

&J
I
0

Luminance alone

b) Disturbance due to timing error FIG. 16 LUMINANCE/CHROMINANCE TIMING ERROR MEASUREMENT provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )-1983* so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radio-frequency signal is modulated by the output of a suitable colour system coder. The input signals to be coded consists of a constant pedestal signal of 50 percent maximum amplitude to the blue input and 14 percent maximum amplitude to the green input with no signal applied to the red An oscilloscope is connected to a channel. suitable point to observe the G - Y signal or where this is not available, the green signal. The chrominance signal is switched off at the coder and the signal level on the oscilloscope observed. The chrominance signal is restored and the amplitude of the green input is adjusted for zero GY output, that is, the same level as when the chrominance signal was not present. The level of the green input signal to the coder is measured.
NOTE -Where the G - Y measurement -may be facilitated square-wave for the blue and permitting observation of the conditions without the need chromjnance signal at the coder.

error of the B - Y signal contribution to the G-Y signal calculated as follows. From the measured value of the green signal input to the coder and the known blue signal input, the equivalent values of R - Y and B - Y are calculated using the standard formulation for Y, the luminance signal that is Y' = 0'30 R' + 0'59 G' + W 1 B'. The values are normalized for unit value of K - Y by dividing the coefficient of B - Y by the coefficient of R- Y. The resulting decimal fraction is expressed as a percentage of 0'37, this being the nominal ratio of B - Y and R - Y contribution to G - Y. This percentage represents the measured contribution of B - Y to the G - Y signal. 15. PRIMARY COLOUR SIGNAL MATRIXING ERROR ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIV-ERS ) 15.1 Definition - These measurements define the accuracy with which the blue and green primary colour signals are formed from the luminance and colour difference signal components, with the receiver adjusted to correctly proportion the red colour separation signal. 15.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver must be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ).

signal is observed, by using a line rate green input signals amplitude under both to switch off the

14.3 Presentation of Results - The result of the measurement is expressed as the percentage *Methods of measurement vn receivers for television Part 5 Sensitivity (first broadcast transmissions:
revision ).

23

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983* so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radiofrequency signal is modulated by the output of a suitable colour system coder. The signals applied to the coder are constant pedestal signals of 60 percent maximum amplitude to the red, blue and green inputs. An oscilloscope is connected to observe the red primary colour signal where it is applied to the picture tube. Where luminance and chrominance signals are applied to separate terminals of the picture tube, the primary colour signal may be observed by using an oscilloscope with differential inputs. The level of the signal at the red output is noted and the blue and green inputs to the coder removed. If necessary, the receiver chrominance channel gain control is adjusted to provide the same output level as existed when all three inputs were applied to the coder. The oscilloscope is now transferred to the blue signal output to the picture tube and the signal level noted with the signal applied to all three coder inputs as before. The~red and green inputs to the coder are removed and the level of the signal noted, expressed as a percentage of that when all three inputs were applied to the coder. The oscilloscope is now transferred to the green output to the picturetube and the signal level noted with signals applied to all three coder inputs as The red and blue inputs to the coder before. are removed and the level of the signal noted, expressed as a percentage of that when all three inputs were applied to the coder. 15.3 ,Presentation of Results - The results of the measurements are expressed as the percentage of the B-Y contribution to the blue primary colour signal and the C - Y contribution to the green primary colour signal, 100 percent being the nominal value, Calculated using the followwhere n is the percentage ing expressions obtained from the measurements in 18.2. Blue primary colour signal B- Y contribution as a percentage of nominal = 100 (n - 11 ) percent 89 Green primary colour signal contribution G- Y as a percentage of nominal
_ 100 ( n -

16. SUPRIOUS LINE SEQUENTIAL EFFECTS (NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHaOME TV RECEIVERS ) 16.1 Definition - Receivers may show differences in signal levels or different levels of spurious signals on lines sequential in time. 16.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 )- 1983* andis adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 )-19831_ so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radio-frequency signal is modulated by the output of a suitable colour system coder. A colour bar signal is applied to the coder that will give rise to chrominance signals having approximately 75 percent of the maximum value. An oscilloscope is connected to the tube electrodes, in turn, to which the colour difference signals are applied. Where luminance and chrominance signals are applied to separate terminals of the picture tube, the colour difference signals are observed by using an oscilloscope with differential inputs. The oscilloscope is triggered so that lines sequential in time are superimposed. The magnitude of any line sequential level difference or the presence of any line sequential spurious signal is noted, the value being expressed as percentage of the difference between black level and white level. 16.3 Presentation of Results - The magnitudes of the measured effects are tabulated for the colour separation signal outputs, showing the levels in the various colour bars where some are more significant than others. 17. LINE TIME NON-LINEARITY, LUMINANCE SIGNAL 17.1 Definition - The non-linearity distortions in the luminance channel are measured with a five riser staircase signal of line time duration extending between black level and white level. Intermediate lines are interposed at black level or white level to cause maximum shift of the mean signal level.
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements ( jirsf revision ). *Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first
revidon ).

of

41
*Methods broadcast
revision ).

59) percent
on receivers for teievision Sensitivity (first Part 5

of measurement transmissions:

24

fS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 of Measurement - Measurement is carried out or a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the -receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983t so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radio-frequency signal is modulated by a video signal consisting of a five riser staircase in every fourth line. The intermediate three lines may be at black level or white level, as desired. An oscilloscope is connected to each electrode of the tube to which a luminance signal is applied. The departure of the amplitude measured at the centre of each step from its nominal amplitude is expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and white level. Measurements are made with intermediate lines both at black level and white level ( see Fig. 17 ). 17.3 Presentation of Results - The measured values expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and white level are tabulated for each electrode measured, each step of the staircase signal and the two levels of the intermediate lines. *Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and
general measurements ( first revision ). iMethods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first revision).

17.2Method

COLOUR 18. LINE TIME NON-LINEARlTY DIFFERENCE SIGNALS ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 18.1 Definition - Where colour difference signals are applied to picture tube electrodes separately from the luminance signal, measurements are made of the non-linearity distortions for both positive and negative going excursions, using a five riser staircase signal of line time Intermediate lines are interposed at duration. black level and maximum level to cause maximum shift of mean signal level. 18.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accordance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching network. The input signal level is adjusted between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 1983i' so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radiofrequency signal is modulated by the output of a suitable colour system coder. The signal applied to the coder consist of three lines of a five riser staircase covering the range from black level to maximum level foIlowed by nine lines *Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements ( firsr revision ).
broadcast revision ), White of transmissions: Part receivers for Sensitivity

level

or maximum

levd

' 5

m of difference between

black level and white or maximum level

A

-Black

level

FIG. 17

FIVERISERSTAIRCASE SIGNALFORNON-LINEARITY MEASUREMENTS

25

IS : 4545 ( Part 7 ) - 1983 either at black level or maximum level. An oscilloscope is connected to the tube electrode driven by the R- Y signal and the staircase signal applied to the red input of the coder. The departure of each step from its nominal amplitude, measured in the centre of each step, is expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and maximum level. Measurements are made with the intermediate lines at black level and maximum level. The staircase signal is then applied simultaneouslyto the blue and green inputs of the coder and the measurements repeated. The oscilloscope is then transferred to the electrode driven by the G-Y signal and the measurements above carried out first with the staircase signal applied to the green input of the coder and then simultaneously to the blue and red inputs. ~The oscilloscope is then connected to the picture tube electrode driven by the B- Y signal and the measurements carried out first with the staircase signal applied to the blue input of the coder and then applied simultaneously to the red and green inputs ( see Fig. 17 ). NorI? - Tor systems employing a one-line delay, four lines of chrominance component will be displayed on the oscilloscope. The second and third of these
lines shall be used fourth ignored. for ~measurement and first and

18.3 Presentation of Results - The results of the measurements are tabulated for each of -the colour difference signals and for the two coder input conditions showing the departure of each step of the staircase from its nominal amplitude expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and maximum level, for both conditions of the intermediate lines. 19. LINE TIME NON-LINEARITY PRIMARY COLOUR SIGNALS ( NOT APPLICABLE TO MONOCHROME TV RECEIVERS ) 19.1 Definition - Non-linearity distortions of the primary colour signals are measured for both positive and negative going excurs!ons of the associated colour difference signals by using a five riser and staircase signal of line time duration. Intermediate lines are interposed at black level and maximum level to cause maximum shift of mean signal level. 19.2 Method of Measurement - Measurement is carried out on a representative channel of those in which the receiver is designed to operate. The receiver shall be tuned in accor-

dance with 2 of IS : 4545 ( Part 2 ) - 1983* and is adjusted to provide standard video output voltage. A test pattern is applied and the receiver adjusted for optimum decoding. The radio-frequency signal is applied to the input terminals of the ~receiver through a vestigial sideband filter as required by the standards of the television system used and a suitable matching The input signal level is adjusted network. between those levels defined in 5 and 15 of IS : 4545 ( Part 5 ) - 19837 so that noise effects do not influence measurement. The radiofrequency signal is modulated by the output of a suitable colour system coder. The signal applied to the coder consists of three lines of a five riser staircase covering the range from black level to maximum levelfollowed by none lines selectably at black level or maximum level. An oscilloscope is connected to the tube electrode driven by the primary red colour signal and the staricase signal applied to the red input of the coder. The departure of each step from its nominal amplitude measured in the centre of each step is expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and maximum signal level, with theintermediate lines both at black level and maximum level. The measurements are repeated with the staircase signal applied simultaneously to the red and blue inputs to the coder. The oscilloscope is then transferred to the electrode driven by the primary blue colour signal and the measurements above carried out with the staircase signal applied first to the blue input of the coder and then simultaneously to the blue and green inputs. The oscilloscope is then connected to the picture tube electrode driven by the green primary colour signal and measurements carried out with the staircase signal applied to the green input of the coder. The measurements are then repeated with the staircase signal applied to the green and red inputs of the coder ( see Fig. 17 ). 19.3 Presentation of Results - The results of the measurements are tabulated for each of the primary colour signals showing the departure of~each step of the staircase from its nominal amplitude expressed as a percentage of the difference between black level and maximum level .for the two coder input conditions and both conditions of the intermediate lines.
*Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 2 Tuning properties and general measurements (first revision ), tMethods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 5 Sensitivity (first revision ).

26

