anda HAF IS 18000 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


TİTRE fetrect ŞİR — 
LEISIAU ESRC LLE TA a Ed 


Unified Digital Infrastructure — 
ICT Reference Architecture 
(UDI-ICTRA) 


ICS 33.020, 35.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM aa 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEMAR TH Ari, ay İde — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 15 


Smart Infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Infrastructure 
Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology Division Council. 


The development of a series of standards for enabling a Unified Digital Infrastructure across the country was 
motivated by the Smart Cities initiative of the Government of India. A defining feature of Smart Cities is the 
ability of various components and systems to function efficiently in an integrated manner as well as independently. 
Unified, Smart, and ecure Digital Infrastructure will facilitate efficient integration of various Systems and 
Applications/Services across the city. 


This standard provides a reference architecture and models for achieving such a unified digital infrastructure and 
can serve as a template for both the City Administrators, who are the consumers of such ICT based solutions, as 
well as the ICT Solution Providers who develop and deploy such solutions. The reference architecture described 
in this standard, while providing functional, technology, and information reference models, does not describe the 
implementation details. 


The standard has been developed in collaboration with the Smart Cites Mission, Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs (MoHUA), Government of India. During the preparation of this standard, several consultation meetings 
and discussions were held with a wide cross section of stakeholders. A few workshops were also organized for 
the Smart Cities with an objective to create awareness among the stakeholders, to discuss the technical details of 
the standard with them, and to get critical input from the representatives of several Smart City implementation 
entities. In addition, feedback was also sought from all the 100 Indian Smart City implementation entities at 
different stages of development of this standard. 


All the diagrams, and key elements of the architecture are made/captured in Archimate 3.1, an enterprise 
architecture modelling language developed by “The Open Group”, and the resulting files are available online in 
BIS Website and also in github and is a live representation of this architecture. 


The standard was developed under the panel, LITD 28/P6 ICTRA that comprises experts from Academia, 
Industry, Government bodies etc. The composition of LITD 28/P6 and the committee LITD 28 responsible for the 
formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 
1 SCOPE 
2 REFERENCES 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
3.1 Terms and Definitions 


3.2 


Abbreviations 


ARCHITECTURE DEFINITION PROCESS 


CONCEPTUAL MODEL 


STAKEHOLDERS AND CONCERNS 


6.1 


Stakeholder Roles 


PROPERTIES 


FUNCTIONAL REFERENCE MODEL 


8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
8.9 
8.10 
8.11 
8.12 
8.13 
8.14 
8.15 


Insights and Dashboards 

Command and Control 

City Domain Services 

Government Service Enablement and Tracking 
ERP Applications and Services 

Stakeholder Connectivity and Communication 
Digitalization and Data Capture 

Data and ICT Services Sharing and Marketplace 
New ICT Services and Capabilities Enablement 
IT and OT Operations and Management 

OT Operations and Management 

Data Governance and Management 
Applications and Devices Connectivity and Communication 
ICT Security and Authorization 

Geo-Spatial Enablement 


TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODELS 


9.1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 


Smart City's Unified Digital Infrastructure 
ICT Infrastructure 

IoT System 

Platforms, Tools and Services 

Application Services and Components 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Page No. 


— 


RR 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Page No. 
10 INFORMATION REFERENCE MODEL 0012 
10.1 Data Access Model m 42 
10.2 Data Reference Model n 44 
10.3 Information Extraction Model .. 45 
104 Insights Extraction Model we 45 
ANNEX A SYSTEM OF SYSTEMS EXAMPLE 018 
A-1 CLASSES OF IT SERVICE COMPONENTS 018 
A-2 CITY DIGITAL SENSING SYSTEM (CDSS) 48 
A-3 CITY E-GOVERNMENT SYSTEMS (CEGS) 49 
A-4 CITIZEN GOVERNMENT COLLABORATION SYSTEMS (CGCS) 49 
A-5 CITY GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS (CGIS) .. 49 
A-6 SYSTEM OF SYSTEMS INTERACTIONS — EXAMPLE w 49 
ANNEX B REALIZING STAKE HOLDER’S EXPECTATIONS we ol 
ANNEX C REALIZING FUNCTIONALITIES 54 
ANNEX D ERP APPLICATIONS AND SERVICES > 
D-1 ACCOUNTS, BUDGET, INVESTMENTS AND PLANNING we 99 
D-1.1 Budgeting e 59 
D-1.2 Financial Accounting we 59 
D-1.3 Investment and Treasury se 695 
D-1.4 Financial Planning and Analysis a 59 
D-2 ASSET, LAND AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT 56 
D-2.1 Maintenance Operations se 56 
D-2.2 Linear Asset Management ss 56 
D-2.3 Resource Management s 56 
D-2.3 Real Estate Management . 56 
D-3 PROJECT (WORKS) MANAGEMENT a 56 
D-3.1 Portfolio and Project Management . 56 
D-4 PROCUREMENT AND MATERIAL MANAGEMENT w 56 
D-4.1 Inventory Management . 56 
D-4.2 Procurement Management we OF 
D-5 HR PAYROLL AND SELF SERVICE we “D7 
D-5.1 Core HR and Payroll se Dİ 
D-5.2 Time and Attendance Management e D7 
D-5.3 Skill Management se ol 
ANNEX E COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 58 


BIBLIOGRAPHY we 61 


FIGURES 


Fic. 
Fic. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
FIG. 


Fic. 
Fic. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


Fic. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fic. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fic. 
Fig. 
Fig. 
Fig. 


W BEM -— 


ARCHITECTURE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 

SMART City CONCEPTUAL MODEL 

ICT Reference Architecture: Conceptual Model 
Functional View of the ICT RA 


APPLICATION FUNCTIONALITY GOVERNMENT SERVICE ENABLEMENT 
AND TRACKING-LEVEL 2 VIEW 


Accounts, BUDGET, INVESTMENTS, PLANNING 

ASSETS, LAND AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT 

Project (Works) Management 

Procurement and Material Management 

HUMAN RESOURCES, PAYROLL AND EMPLOYEE SELF SERVICES 

IT Operations and Management 

OT Operations and Management 

ICT SECURITY AND AUTHORISATION 

Geo-Spatial Enablement VIA GIS Platform 

Technology Reference Model for Smart City’s Digital Infrastructure 
Ict Infrastructure Technology Reference Model 

IoT System Technology Reference Model 

Platforms, Tools And Services Technology Reference Model 
Application and Services Integration Platform 

Data Management Platforms 

Data Governance Process, Tools and Services 

Application Components and Services Technology Reference Model 
Multi-Modal Interaction Applications 

Information Reference Model 

Data Access Model 

Data Reference Model 

Information Extraction Model 

Insights Extraction Model 

System of Systems Example 

USE Case OF CITIZEN SAFETY 

Realizing Municipal Corporation’s Concerns 

Realizing Smart City SPV’s Concerns 


Realizing Citizen’s Concerns 


iii 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Page No. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Tables 


Table 1 
Table 2 
Table 3 
Table 4 
Table 5 


Stakeholder and Concerns 

Properties of UDI 

Primary Functionalities 

The Data Layer Reference Architecture Capabilities 
Platform Capabilities of Geospatial Hub 


Page No. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


INTRODUCTION 


A smart city is one that can effectively leverage technology, infrastructure, public policy, government and citizen 
engagement to create an urban environment that fosters economic growth and productivity, innovation, social 
mobility, inclusiveness, and sustainability. 

Cities are complex entities having: 


a) Diverse Stakeholders: Citizens, visitors, city administration, state government, central government, 
vendors, system integrators, business, academia, other organizations. 


b) Diverse Geographical Entities: Parking lots, streets, buildings, electric stations, etc. 
c) Diverse Services and Business Processes: With diverse functionality and consumers need to be developed. 
d) Diverse ICT Technologies: Data systems, sensor technologies, software systems, networking systems etc. 
While it is almost impossible to engineer a smart city from scratch, it will be possible to adopt the right architectural 
framework along with appropriate practices and policies to nudge the evolution towards smart cities. 
The three key principles for facilitating such an emergence/evolution towards a smart city ecosystem are: 
1) Interoperability — Refers to the ability of diverse systems and components to work together, even as 
parts from diverse set of suppliers are substituted and integrated; 
2) Composability — Refers to the ability to combine discrete components into a complete system to achieve 
a set of goals and objectives; and 
3) Harmonization — Refers to achieving compatibility between technologies and systems, even when they 
at first appear incompatible. 


This standard provides a reference architecture for achieving such a unified digital infrastructure and can serve 
as a template for both the City Administrators, who are the consumers of such ICT based solutions, as well as the 
ICT solution providers who develop and deploy such solutions. 


vi 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


UNIFIED DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE — 
ICT REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE ( UDI-ICTRA ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard defines the reference architecture 
and models for information and communication 
technologies needed to realize a Unified Digital 
Infrastructure (UDI) in Smart Cities. The reference 
architecture includes functional reference models, 
technology reference models and information reference 
models. The standard offers a blueprint for realizing the 
unified digital infrastructure, but does not mandate any 
specific components. The reference architecture can be 
used to define various levels of architectural maturity, 
based on which components are included, from a 
basic level to an advanced level of the unified digital 
infrastructure. However, this categorization is not part 
of this standard. 


1.2 The implementation details are also excluded from 
the scope of this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


Other Standards Title 
ISO/IEC/IFEE 4: 2010 Systems and software 
engineering — 
Architecture description 
ISO 8000 (Series) Data Ouality 


ISO/IEC 20547 Information technology — 
(Series) Big data reference 
architecture 
ISO/IEC 11179 Information Technology — 
Metadata registries 
(MDR) 
ISO 15000 Electronic Business 
Extensible Markup 
Language (ebXML) 
ISO/IEC 20802 Open Data Protocol 
(Series) (OData) 


Other Standards Title 
ISO/IEC 29161 Data structure — Unigue 
identification for the 
Internet of Things 
ISO/IEC 30182 Smart city concept 
model — Guidance for 


establishing a model for 
data interoperability 


Smart City Concept 
Model — Guidance for 
establishing a model for 
data interoperability 


ISO/IEC 30182 


ISO/IEC 27001 Information technology — 
Security techniques — 
Information security 
management systems — 


Requirements 


ISO/IEC 27034-1 : 
2011 


Information technology — 
Security techniques — 
Application security — 
Part 1: Overview and 
concepts 


ISO/IEC TR 24772 
(Series) 


Programming languages — 
Guidance to avoiding 
vulnerabilities in 
programming languages 


Special Publication 800-53 


Data Security Standard 
(PCI DSS) 


NIST 
PCI 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


3.1 Terms and Definitions 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1.1 Accessibility — Extent to which products, 
systems, services, environments and facilities can be 
used by people from a population with the widest range 
of user needs, characteristics and capabilities to achieve 
identified goals in identified contexts of use. 


NOTE — To entry: Context of use includes direct use or use 
supported by assistive technologies. 


[SOURCE: ISO 9241-11:-, 3.1.14] 


IS 18000 : 2020 


3.1.2 Availability — Property of being accessible 
and usable upon demand by an authorized entity. 
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 27000 : 2016, 2.9] 


3.1.3 Citizen — <of a city> person who lives and/or 
works, within a city. 


3.1.4 Composability — The ability to combine discrete 
components into a complete system to achieve a set of 
goals and objectives. [Source: ISO/IEC 30141 : 2018, 
Modified] 


3.1.5 Confidential Computing — The protection 
of data-in-use through isolating computations to a 
hardware-based trusted execution environment (TEE). 
While data is traditionally encrypted at rest and in 
transit, confidential computing protects your data while 
it’s being processed. 


3.1.6 Confidentiality — Property that 
information is not made available or disclosed to 
unauthorized individuals, entities, or processes. 
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 27000 : 2016, 2.12] 


3.1.7 Data Capture — The action or process of gathering 
data for storage, communication and processing, either 
directly from sensors and other field devices or as it 
gets generated by the digitization or digitalization 
processes. 


3.1.8 Data Classification — Process of organizing 
data by relevant categories so that it may be used 
and protected more efficiently. On a basic level, the 
classification process makes data easier to locate and 
retrieve. Data classification is of particular importance 
when it comes to risk management, compliance, and 
data security. 


3.1.9 Data Governance — Collection of practices and 
processes which help to ensure the formal management 
of data assets within an organization. 


3.1.10 Data Privacy — Rights and obligations of 
individuals and organizations with respect to the 
collection, use, retention, disclosure and disposal of 
personal information. [SOURCE: ISO/TS 19299 : 
2015, 3.32] 


3.1.11 Data Quality — Refers to the state of qualitative 
or quantitative pieces of information. There are 
many definitions of data quality, but data is generally 
considered high quality if it is “fit for its intended 
uses in operations, decision making and planning”. 
Moreover, data is deemed of high quality if it correctly 
represents the real-world construct to which it refers. 


3.1.12 Data Transformation — Process of converting 
data from one format or structure into another format 
or structure. It is a fundamental aspect of most data 
integration and data management tasks. 


3.1.13 Data Variability — Changes in transmission rate, 
format or structure, semantics, or quality of datasets. 
(Source: ISO/IEC 20546 : 2019] 


3.1.14 Data Variety — Range of formats, logical 
models, timescales, and semantics of a dataset. 
NOTE — To entry: Data variety refers to irregular or 


heterogeneous data structures, their navigation, query, and data 
typing. [Source: ISO/IEC 20546 : 2019] 


3.1.15 Data Velocity — Rate of flow at which data is 
created, transmitted, stored, analysed or visualised. 
[Source: ISO/IEC 20546 : 2019] 


3.1.16 Data Veracity — Completeness and/or accuracy 
of data. [Source: ISO/IEC 20546 : 2019] 


3.1.17 Data Volatility — Characteristic of data pertaining 
to the rate of change of these data over time. [Source: 
ISO/IEC 20546 : 2019] 


3.1.18 Data Volume — Extent of the amount of data 
(see 3.1.5) relevant to impacting computation and 
storage resources and their management during data 
processing Note 1 to entry: Data volume becomes 
important in dealing with large datasets. [Source: 
ISO/IEC 20546 : 2019] 


3.1.19 Data Warehouse — A system used for reporting 
and data analysis, and is considered a core component of 
business intelligence. 


3.1.20 Digital Infrastructure — Infrastructure that is 
required to support various IT, communication, and 
Digital systems in a city or any geographical region. 


3.1.21 Digitalization — Process of automating business 
operations with the use of ICT and digital technologies. 


3.1.22 Digitization — Act of generating a digital 
(quantized) representation of a continuous signal. 
[SOURCE: ISO 20998-1 : 2006, 2.7] 


3.123 Discoverability — Discoverability is the 
characteristic of an endpoint on the network to be found 
dynamically and for that endpoint to report its services 
and their capabilities through a guery mechanism or 
self-advertising mechanism, whichever is suitable for 
the device in guestion. The endpoints concerned could 
be IoT devices, services and applications, or even users. 
Related discovery services allow endpoints to be located, 
identified and accessed according to variable criteria, 
such as geographic location or service type. 


3.1.24 Emergence — Principle that entities exhibit 
properties which are meaningful only when attributed to 
the whole, not to its parts. 

NOTE — To entry: These properties cannot be reduced or 


decomposed back down to those of any individual constituent 
system. 


[Adapted from ISO/IEC/IEEE 21840 
3.1.3] 


: 2019. (en), 


3.1.25 Emergent Functionalities — Functionalities that 
are not directly designed in, but which become available 
due to the unplanned or unanticipated interactions and 
interplay of a large number of existing functionalities, 
subsystems, components and entities. 


3.1.26 Evolutionary Development — Process of 
incrementally and adaptively changing and enhancing 
a system to meet emerging needs. 


3.1.27 Extendable — Ability to add to a systems 
capability over time, beyond what it was originally 
designed with. 


3.1.28 Flexibility — Flexibility is the capability of a 
system, service, device or other component to provide 
a varied range of functionality, depending on need or 
context. [Source: ISO/IEC 30141 : 2018 Modified] 


3.1.29 Functional view — Architecture view from the 
functional viewpoint. 


[Source: ISO 14813-5 : 2020] 


3.1.30 Geographic Distribution — Spread of a 
system and/or its subsystems or components across a 
geographically large area. 


3.1.31 Heterogeneity — Difference arising from 
different descriptions of the same concept. 


[Source: ISO/IEC TR 20943-5 : 2013] 


3.1.32 Infrastructure — System of facilities, equipment 
and services needed for the operation of an organization, 
society, or a city. 


[SOURCE: ISO 9000 : 2015, 3.5.2, adapted] 


3.1.33 Integrated Command and Control Center 
(ICCC) — An Integrated Command and Control Centre 
(ICCC), as the name suggests, works as a brain for all 
smart solutions implemented across a city — be it a 
surveillance system, smart traffic management, waste 
management, utilities management, environmental 
sensors, public information system, (variable message 
boards, public address systems, kiosks, etc). 


3.1.34 Integrity — Property of accuracy and 
completeness. [SOURCE: ISO/IEC 27000 : 2016, 2.40] 


3.135 Manageability — Manageability addresses 
aspects of systems such as device management, network 
management, system management, and interface 
maintenance and alerts. Manageability is important 
to meet system reguirements. Components capable of 
monitoring the system and changing configurations are 
needed for manageability of the IoT device, network 
and system. 


(Source: ISO/IEC 30141 : 2018, adapted] 


3.1.36 Managerial Independence — A system has 
managerial independence from another system, when 


IS 18000 : 2020 


the two system's management functions are carried 
out independently of each other, either by different 
management entities and/or by different management 
protocols and processes. 


3.1.37 Master Data Management — Master data 
management (“MDM”) is a technology-enabled 
discipline in which business and Information 
Technology (“IT”) work together to ensure the 
uniformity, accuracy, stewardship, semantic consistency 
and accountability of the enterprise’s official shared 
master data assets. 


3.1.38 Metadata — Data about data. 
[SOURCE: ISO 19115 : 2003] 


3.1.39 Modularity — Degree to which a system or 
computer program is composed of discrete components 
such that a change to one component has minimal 
impact on other components. 


(Source: ISO/IEC/IEEE 24765] 


3.1.40 Non-repudiability — Attribute of capturing the 
source or provenance of data, which once set, cannot 
be removed or corrupted, without damaging the 
data/information itself. 


3.1.41 On-Prem — On-premises software (commonly 
misstated as on-premise, and alternatively abbreviated 
“on-prem”) is installed and runs on computers on 
the premises of the person or organization using the 
software, rather than at a remote facility such as a 
server farm or cloud. 


3.1.42 Openness — Absence of barriers to allow any 
entity access to a system’s aspects like its specifications, 
its interfaces, its data models, its interaction modalities, 
its design etc. There can be varying degrees of openness 
depending on what aspects are exposed to whom. 


3.1.43 Operation Independence — A system has 
operational independence with respect to another 
system when a substantial portion of its operations 
doesn’t depend on the other system’s operations or 
liveness. 


3.1.44 Operational  View/Business Operational 
View — Perspective of business transactions limited 
to those aspects regarding the making of business 
decisions and commitments among Persons, which are 
needed for the description of a business transaction. 


(Source: ISO/IEC 14662 : 2010] 
3.1.45 Personally Identifiable Information (PII) 


Any information: 


a) that identifies or can be used to identify, contact, 
or locate the person to whom such information 
pertains, 

b) from which identification or contact information 
of an individual person can be derived, or 


IS 18000 : 2020 


that is or might be directly or indirectly linked to a 
natural person. 


[Source: ISO/IEC 29100 : 2011, 2.9, adapted] 


3.1.46 Real-time Capability — Real-time capability is a 
characteristic of a system or mode of operation in which 
computation is performed during the actual time that an 
external process occurs, in order that the computation 
results can be used to control, monitor, or respond in 
a timely manner to the external process. Additionally, 
the system has the ability to perform an action or 
function, or to call a service within a specified period 
of time, thereby supporting deterministic operations. 
(Source: ISO/IEC 30141 : 2018] 


3.1.47 Reference Architecture — Architecture 
description that provides a proven template solution 
when developing or validating an architecture for a 
particular solution. [Source: ISO/IEC 20924 : 2018] 


3.1.48 Reliability — Property of consistent intended 
behaviour and results. (SOURCE: ISO/IEC 27000 : 
2016, 2.62] 


3.1.49 Repudiation — Ability to prove the occurrence 
of a claimed event or action and its originating entities. 
[SOURCE: ISO/IEC 27000 : 2016, 2.54] 


3.1.50 Resilience — Ability of a system to reduce 
likelihood of failure, to absorb effects of such failure if 
it occurs and to recover quickly after failure. [Source: 
ISO 13824 : 2020, 3.8] 


3.1.51 Safety — Freedom from unacceptable risk, 
danger or injury. 


3.1.52 Scalability — Characteristic of a system to 
continue to work effectively as the size of the system, 
its complexity or the volume of work performed by the 
system is increased. [Source: ISO/IEC 30141 : 2018] 


3.1.53 Smart City — City where improvements in 
quality of life, services, sustainability, inclusion and 
resilience are accelerated by the effective integration 
of digital, physical, and social systems and the 
transformative use of data and technology. 


3.1.54 Smart City Organization — Entity responsible 
for driving the adoption of technologies to realise the 
smart city vision. 


3.1.55 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) — Special 
purpose vehicle is a legal entity especially constituted 
to undertake a set of business processes. The SPV will 
plan, appraise, approve, release funds, implement, 
manage, operate, monitor and evaluate the Smart City 
development projects.’ 


3.1.56 Stakeholder — Individual or organization 
having a right, share, claim or interest in a system or 


in its possession of characteristics that meet their needs 
and expectations. 


[Source: ISO/IEC 12207 : 2008] 


3.1.57 Technology View — Architecture view from the 
technology viewpoint. 


3.1.58 Unified Digital Infrastructure — Interconnected 
and integrated digital infrastructures from a collection of 
diverse entities and organizations, working seamlessly 
together to present a logically unified, digital view for 
the collective. 


3.1.59 Urban Local Body (ULB) — Refers to the 
governing body responsible for city/town/township/ 
village administration such as Municipal Corporation, 
Municipal Council, Municipality etc. 


3.1.60 Vendor — One who sells and/or delivers 
equipment and/or engineering services. 


[Source: ISO 35101 : 2017(en), 3.16] 


3.2 Abbreviations 


Abbreviation Full Form 

UDI Unified Digital Infrastructure 

ICCC Integrated Command and Control 
Center 

ICT RA Information Communication 
Technology Reference Architecture 

GIS Geographical Information Systems 

IT Information Technology 

ICT Information and Communication 
Technologies 

OT Operations Technology 

SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 

RFP Reguest For Proposals 

SOP Standard Operating Procedure 

KPI Key Process Indicators 

IoT Internet of Things 

ULB Urban Local Body 

ERP Enterprise Resource Planning 

COTS Commercial-off-the-shelf 

Al Artificial Intelligence 

ML Machine learning 

G2X Government to entity 

ITIL Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library 

SWM Solid Waste Management 

ETL Extract Transform Load 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Sabka Saath Sabka Vikaas $$) BIS LITD 28 Sectional $| 
; Committee | 
J 
Stakeholders 
Citizens © Other © ye Sakehold = 
Stakeholders )) | eholder 
(1..n) can keholder o) » Expectations from 
| Smart City's Unified 
d \ Digital Infrastructure 
A 
Municipal © Smart City © i 
Corporation SPV | Addresses 
yal 
Realizes ip a 
Technology ICT Reference ‘aa 
Reference Model Architecture * Reference Model 
Last Mile loT Reference Data Layer “Implementation | Data Models & | 
Communication Architecture Reference Guidelines Taxonomy 
Protocol Architecture 
Data Exchange 


Reference 
Architecture 


Fic. 1 ARCHITECTURE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS 


4 ARCHITECTURE DEFINITION PROCESS 


A Smart city is a system of systems as described in 
Annex A, and defining an ICT Reference Architecture 
for such a complex system requires a systematic 
approach that is articulated in Fig. 1. The figure uses 
the notation developed by the open group capture the 
process, principles and outputs of this activity. 


Our development process assumes the need to work 
with existing legacy systems, as well as cater to 
development of new systems. 


One of the main driving principles of our architecture 
definition process is “Sabka Saath Sabka Vikaas” that 
is, “together, we develop”. In that spirit, the description 
of the Smart City-ICT Reference Architecture in this 
standard starts with capturing the stakeholder concerns 
(i.e. their expectations). These stakeholder concerns 
naturally lead to a set of functionalities that are needed 
to meet the expectations and these functionalities 
constitute the Functional Reference Model. The 
technology reference model and information 
reference models that are needed to support/realize 
the functionalities are derived from the functional 
reference model. The four while the exact concerns 
and functionalities may change over time, the process 
defined in this standard remains applicable and can be 
used to regularly update the reference architecture with 
the changing needs. 


The ICT reference architecture consists of defining the 
following key components: 


a) Conceptual model (see 5); 

b) Stakeholder expectations (see 6); 

c) Functional reference model (see 8); 

d) Technology reference models (see 9); and 
e) Information reference models (see 10). 


Annex B provides guidelines on how to address 
concerns of different stakeholders through 
functionalities by mapping different stakeholder 
concerns to one or many of the functionalities. 


Annex C diagrammatically represents how different 
functionalities are realized by a combination of 
underlying components, tools, and services. 


The ICT reference architecture naturally points to 
further areas in need of standardization and some 
of these are indicated in Fig. 1. These include the 
communication (last mile communication protocols 
and related standards), the data layer (data layer 
reference architecture, data exchange framework 
and related standards), the IoT related standards 
(IOT reference architecture), data models and 
taxonnomy, GIS reference rchitecture and 
implementation guidelines. 


All the diagrams, and key elements of the architecture 
are made/captured in Archimate 3.1, an enterprise 
architecture modelling language developed by “The 
Open Group”, and the resulting files are available 
online www.bis.gov.in and is a live representation of 
this architecture. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


5 CONCEPTUAL MODEL 


A smart city can be modelled and viewed in multiple 
ways and a layered or tiered view is one of the easiest 
to visualise and understand and one such view is 
given in Fig. 2. The layered view shows how the 
basic building blocks of a smart city fit together. For 
example, Domain applications and solutions, such as 
solid waste management, transit management, smart 
parking, etc., are built on top of a foundational set of 
ICT infrastructure and solutions. Similarly, stakeholder 
services, such as command and control are built on top 
of domain solutions whereas security and management 
span across layers and are present in every layer. 


The Unified Digital Infrastructure ICT Reference 
Architecture (UDI-ICT RA) deals with the 


standardisation of a specific set of layers of the Smart 
city model. Specifically, the layers/blocks listed below: 

a) ICT infrastructure and solutions; 

b) GIS; 

c) Stakeholder service enablement such as command 

and control; 

d) Management; and 

e) Security. 
This sandard does not deal with any of the domain 
solutions except e-Governance in this ICT reference 
architecture. Separate standards exist for field 


operational technology (OT) devices and omain 
solutions. 


Stakeholders 


Aunseg 


Domain Apps, solutions and services 


jyuswebeuey 


ICT Infrastructure solutions and services 
Field devices and Data sources 


Fic. 2 SMART City CONCEPTUAL MODEL 


Expectations from 
Smart City's Unified 


Stakeholder 
Digital Infrastructure 


j 


A 


Addresses 


Realizes 


Technology 
Reference Model 


Realizes 


Sas 
Information 
Reference Model 


Fic. 3 ICT REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE: CONCEPTUAL MODEL 


6 


As depicted in Fig. 3, the ICT reference architecture 
comprises of three main reference models: 


a) Functionalities reference model (FRM); 
b) Technology reference model (TRM); and 
c) Information reference model (IRM). 


The FRM captures all the desired functionalities that 
need to be provided by the digital infrastructure for 
smart cities. These functionalities address (or meet) all 
the concerns/expectations of all the stakeholders and is 
the first entity that gets defined. 


These functionalities are then realized by the 
combination of technology and data (or information) 
which are further elucidated in TRM and IRM, 
respectively. 


The components of FRM and TRM are specified at a 
high level of abstraction, that captures their essential 
characteristics, yet-allows for diverse realizations, 
based on the needs, costs and available resources. 


The IRM is also defined at an abstract level to bring 
out the relationships between various constituent 
elements like data models, data sets, taxonomies etc. 
as a template. Concrete instances for all of these can 
be defined for each domain and use case that follows 
this template. 


6 STAKEHOLDERS AND CONCERNS 


The smart city concept has opened up many 
opportunities by utilizing the power of data science 
and geographical information systems for enabling 
exchange of ideas, innovations, and solutions across 
the country that can be at the right place and time to 
help cities across the country solve local challenges and 
improve citizen service, satisfaction, liveability, and 
citizen involvement. 


A Smart city involves many stakeholders right from 
the citizens, local city government, and administration 
all the way to the State and Central governments. The 
stakeholders can largely be divided into two groups 
namely, Internal and External. 


Internal stakeholders are the municipal 
corporation/local city administration, the smart 
city SPV, utility service providers, state and 
central governments; and external stakeholders 
are the citizens, vendors, businesses, system 
integrators/tech Oo companies/start-ups, Oo academia, 


research institutions, etc. Each of the stakeholders has 
specific concerns about the services provided by the 
smart city. For example, on one end of the spectrum, 
a municipal corporation or local city administration 
is concerned about 360° view of the services and 
operations of the city, enabling close coordination 
between various departments and service providers 
to carry out smooth and seamless work activities 
across the city, emergency and disaster management 
and handling, etc. On the other side of the spectrum, 


IS 18000 : 2020 


academia and/or research institutions are concerned 
about non-discriminatory and timely access to relevant 
data for analysis, innovation, development activities 
and to provide insights. Each of these stakeholder 
concerns impacts different characteristics or domains 
of the ICT reference architecture. While the municipal 
corporation’s concerns are more operational and 
informational in nature, the academia’s concerns are 
more technological. A smart city SPV plays a major 
role in ensuring a fine balance between the two ends 
of the spectrum thus enabling better citizen service 
and fostering innovation yet maintaining privacy and 
security of valuable citizen data. 


6.1 describes the stakeholders, their concerns and the 
relevant characteristics/areas of the ICT reference 
architecture that covers or addresses the concern. 


NOTE — Concerns can be expectations and/or interests. 


6.1 Stakeholder Roles 


6.1.1 Municipal corporation/municipal council/urban 
local body/municipality 


Local governing body that works for providing 
necessary community services like health care, 
educational institution, housing, transport, etc. by 
collecting property tax and fixed grants from the State 
Government. 


6.1.2 Utility Service Providers and other Departments 


Utility service providers are organisations which 
provide basic services like water sewerage, energy, 
transportation, telecommunications, police, disaster 
management agency etc.. 


6.1.3 Smart City SPV 


The SPV will plan, appraise, approve, release funds, 
implement, manage, operate, monitor, and evaluate 
the smart city development projects. Projects involve 
ICT to enhance the quality and performance of utility 
services and community services. 


6.1.4 Citizens 


Citizens are an important aspect of smart cities. A city 
cannot be built smart until and unless citizens participate 
in the transformation. The success of smart cities relies 
on citizens engaging with technology solutions. 


6.1.5 System Integrators 


Systems integrator (or system integrator) is a company 
that specializes in bringing together component 
subsystems and suppliers into a whole and ensuring 
that those subsystems function together for the smart 
city. 


6.1.6 Vendors 


IT hardware vendors, hardware component makers, 
software vendors, business entities and channel partners 


IS 18000 : 2020 


such as resellers and distributors who help in providing 
different systems to the system integrator. 


6.1.7 Business/Research Institutes 


Startups, academic institutes, and research organisations 
focussing on urban development and issues. Table 1 
identifies all the important concerns (or expectations) 
of key stakeholders who will be impacted by a city’s 


7 PROPERTIES 


Cities being complex entities with diverse organizations 
having heterogeneous ICT systems, the Unified 
Digital Infrastructure (UDI) should embrace the 
system of systems perspective, which means allowing 
heterogeneous systems, developed and owned by 
different stakeholders to interact with each other in an 


unified digital infrastructure. 


Each concern should be addressed by an appropriate 
architectural view(s) of the UDI-ICTRA. 


efficient way. 


To support this distributed digital ecosystem to evolve 
and develop in an optimal fashion, the UDI needs to 
have certain characteristics or properties as listed in 
Table 2. 


Table 1 Stakeholder and Concerns 
(Clause 6.1.7 ) 


SI No. Stakeholder Concern (Expectation) 

ULB.I Complete view of city’s operations, with appropriate information also made available to various 
stakeholders as needed. 

ULB.2 Allow for smart decision support-Data-driven decision making for service delivery and resource 
sustainability. 

ULB.3 Allow for efficient SOP implementation and their tracking. 

ULB.4 Allow for easy adoption of new SOPs. 

ULB.5 Facilitate better coordination between various departments, organizations and citizens through 

Urban Local Body | Integration of relevant applications and workflows across diverse systems. 

ULB.6 Emergency and disaster handling, management and guidelines. 

ULB.7 Implement a city data policy as per existing policies and regulations for example, the data maturity 
assessment framework developed by the Smart Cities Mission, Govt. of India. 

ULB.8 Avoid vendor lock-in at various layers. For example, while adding a new device, add a new storage 
server, deploy a new app/dashboard algorithm through any vendor. 

ULB.9 Improve compliance with various standards and guidelines, for example, the ICCC Maturity 
Assessment Framework developed by Smart Cities Mission, Govt. of India. 

SPV.1 Enable easy creation and rapid deployment of new ICT based services for the city and assist municipal 
corporation with unifying the digital infrastructure and process. 

SPV.2 Allow quick and high-quality RFP specifications, that can build on and add value to existing system. 
Allow for archiving and sharing of various documents to enable easy knowledge dissemination and 
collaborations. 

SPV.3 Allow easy engagement and participation of partners like academia, small businesses, citizens etc in 
solution development for the city. 

SPV.4 Allow easy and guick onboarding/interconnection with existing systems from private or public entities 

SPV.5 Effective & collaborative monitoring and management of city operations across various agencies 

SPV.6 Provide tools for going towards sustainable operations, via sale of specific, value-added services. 

SPV.7 Allow easy onboarding and integration of new vendors. 

SPV.8 Continuous and reliable service to various stakeholders. 

SPV.9 Smart City SPV | Smooth integration with systems (existing/future) of other civic bodies in the city. 

SPV.10 Reliable network connectivity with options for backup and switch over to other ISPs. 

SPV.11 Evaluate subsystems effectively before awarding the project. 

SPV.12 Ability to provide ICT services to other urban local bodie. 

SPV.13 Monetization of services for sustainable operations of smart city initiatives. 

SPV.4 Data security, data sharing, data governance capabilities for effective realization of city’s data policy. 

SPV.15 Cataloguing, managing and enabling transport of city data as either data owner or data fiduciary with 
necessary permissions, security precautions and protocols. 

SPV.16 Access to operational data of municipal corporation and other agencies for urban planning and 
scenario analysis. 

SPV.17 Ownership/custodianship of smart city assets (field devices/IoT devices) and asset lifecycle. 

SPV.18 Provide single window of city services to citizens. 


8 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Table 1 (Continued) 


SI No. Stakeholder Concern (Expectation) 
Gel Enable a single window to access all government services. 
C.2 Privacy preserving and informed consent for processing PII data. Also allow secure and private 
channels for engagement with urban local body and smart city. 
C3 Mechanism to enhance voices of citizens - grievance, feedback and sentiment analysis. 
C.4 Multi language capabilities across platforms. 
GS Citizens Access to open data. 
C. 6 Contribution to data (crowdsourcing). 
C.T Traceability and predictability of government services and functions. 
C.8 Emergency and disaster behavioural guidelines. 
C.9 Equitable access to all citizens including differently abled, digitally excluded and older sections of 
society. 
C. 10 know the realized benefits of already deployed and plans for future deployments. 
VN. 1 Vandre Allow for a standard based, well specified, neutral and reasonable RFPs to enable fair chance to win 
contracts. 
SL 1 Identification of appropriate standards to enable a compliance-based solution allowing for easy 
integration and deployment, and also covering data ingestion, exchange, analysis and governance. 
SL 2 Facilitate extraction and tracking of city KPIs. 
SL 3 System Integrators | Identification of appropriate standards for operations, management, incremental integrations and life 
cycle management 
SL4 Stakeholder and project management processes and guidance and allow for phased deployment and 
rollout. 
US. 1 Reports or information given back to the service providers by integrating their data and co relating 
with other data. 
US. 2 Data security. 
US. 3 — . Regular updating of data to facilitate better coordination between various departments. 
Utility Services - : - - 
US. 4 Ease of integration with smart city/ICCC/other stakeholders. 
US. 5 Relevant analytics/reports based on data obtained from other stakeholders as well, including obtaining 
real-time alerts. 
US.6 Citizen service feedback. 
BR. 1 Businesses/ Non-discriminatory data availability for Innovation in business, start-ups and research and 
Research Institutes | development activities. 
SG. 1 Enable a wholistic and summary view of operations and status of all cities in the state. 
SG. 2 Enforce compliance and adherence to relevant state policies and guidelines and ensure adoption of the 
standards compliant system. 
SG. 3 een AN Identify and rectify capacity and process related issues at the ULB level and upgrade to digitally 
enabled business processes as and when it is available. 
SG. 4 Data availability for decision making (decision support system). 
SG. 5 Coordinated emergency and disaster handling, management and guidelines. Facilitate data recovery 


within time bounds. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


SI No. Stakeholder Concern (Expectation) 
CG. 1 Enable a wholistic and summary view of operations and status of all cities in the country. 
CG. 2 Track progress and compliance of central missions and schemes including fund utilization, works 
completion and citizen feedback. 
tral : : : ri z ae : : 
CG.3 Pemain Enforce national standards including data semantics in various urban domains including accounting, 
water, sewerage, solid waste management etc. 
CG.4 Data availability for decision making (decision support system). 
CG. 5 Coordinated emergency and disaster handling, management and guidelines. 
OM. 1 Operation and Documentations, maintenance contract, licenses. 
Maintenance Team 
VS.1 Ease of access to city information (maps, places of interest, hotels, restaurants, bus stops, hospitals 
etc). 
VS.2 Improved access to landmarks and other places of attractions (city's tourism attractions, helping 
e tourists find the best times to visit, buy tickets in advance or give accurate directions on the go, 
Visitors transportation and travel). 
VS.3 Improved communication with host communities (linguistic services, bot guides, lost and found). 
VS. 4 Real-time information during disasters and emergencies - (Restricted zones and ePass for restricted 
area, Safest route of travel to and in a city). 
Table 2 Properties of UDI 
(Clause 7) 
SI No. Properties Description 
Pd Operation independence UDI shall allow operational independence of constituent systems. Operations can be managed 


independently by each independent organization managing the system. Efficiencies can be 
achieved by autonomous organizational systems through negotiation of policies, having no 
compromise on guality with ascertainment of reliability and implementation viability, for 
achieving goals according to constraint. 


P.2 Managerial independence UDI shall allow managerial independence of constituent systems. Component systems can be 
acguired by separate program offices and run by separate operation units. These organizations 
may not even be connected by common membership or any structure. 

B.3 Evolutionary development UDI shall be designed to be evolvable over time thereby helping adapt to changing needs. For 
example, a property model that identifies the property location only through address and pin 
code can evolve to include latitude/longitude to provide for better location resolution. 

P.4 Geographic distribution UDI shall allow geographic separation of constituent systems. 

P5 New and emergent UDI should allow new functionalities to emerge via integration of constituent systems. 

functionalities 

P. 6 Interoperability UDI shall enable interoperability of systems by adopting open, standards-based interfaces, 
protocols, common data models and communication methods at key interaction points between 
constituent systems. 

P7 Openness UDI shall be technology and vendor neutral. It should foster wider ecosystem participation and 
innovation through collaboration and extensibility. (Being Open also helps leverage ecosystem 
expertise at the time of designing and evolving the standards.) 

P.8 Extendable UDI should be extendable thereby providing ecosystem adopters the capability to leverage these 
standards and innovate for their context while maintaining interoperability. 

P.9 Data privacy, security and UDI shall provide for the mechanisms to keep the data secure (for example, mandating SSL 

empowerment for data in transit) and private (for example, consent based data access) while still allowing for 
mechanisms to exchange needed information between trusted parties. 

P.10 Non-repudiability UDI shall provide for mechanisms to view and verify attribute trails - for example, who accessed 


or updated what and when-through mechanisms like digital signatures and tamper proof audit 
trails. 


10 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Table 2 (Continued) 


SI No. 


Properties 


Description 


P. 11 


Accessibility 


UDI shall allow all stakeholders to benefit and participate via Multi-Lingual, Multi-UI, 
Multi-Devices, Multi-Modal methods to interact with the City’s Digital Infrastructure. 


Availability 


UDI should make its functionalities available, accessible, and usable on demand by authorized 
entities. “Authorized entities” can be both human users and service components. 


Confidentiality 


UDI Shall support protecting the Confidentiality of information so that it is not made available 
or disclosed to unauthorized individuals, entities, or processes. 


Integrity 


Protection of personally 
identifiable information (PII) 


UDI Shall protect the integrity of information 
U 


DI shall ensure protection of PII in compliance with the applicable legal or regulatory 
requirements in the applicable jurisdictions. 


Reliability 


UDI should be reliable. Reliability is a property of consistent, intended behaviour and results. 
An appropriate level of reliability in capabilities such as communication, service and data 
management are important to meet system requirements. 


Resilience 


UDI should be resilient. Resilience is the ability of the system or its components to adapt and 
continue to perform their required functions flexibly in the presence of faults and failures and 
other ad hoc changes without loss of operation and performance level. 


Safety 


UDI should be safe. Safety is the state in which the risk of harm (to persons) or damage is 
limited to an acceptable level. Risk is the probability of the occurrence of harm combined with 
the severity of that harm. Harm includes injury or damage to the health of people, or damage to 
property or the environment. Harm can be due to malfunction, failure, or accident. While prior 
traits describe the desired behaviour of the system when operating correctly, safety includes the 
consideration of failure modes with the intent of preventing, reducing or mitigating the potential 
for undesired outcomes; specifically, damage, harm or loss. 


P. 19 


Composability 


UDI should promote composability of services and solutions. Composability is the ability to 
combine discrete system components into a larger component to achieve a set of goals and 
objectives. 


P.20 


Functional and management 
capability separation 


UDI should allow separation of functional and system management capabilities. Separation of 
functional and management capabilities means that the functional interfaces and capabilities 
of a system component, (for e.g., an IoT device) are cleanly separated from the management 
interfaces and capabilities of that component. This typically means that the management 
interface is on a different endpoint from that of the functional interface and the management 
capabilities are handled by different software components than the functional interfaces. 


P21 


Heterogeneity 


UDI shall support a diverse set of systems and components, from multiple vendors, as well as 
legacy and state-of-the-art systems and components. 


P.22 


Modularity 


UDI should be made of modular components, whose life cycle management should be 
easily integrated as part of the overall management framework. Modularity is a property of 
components that can be combined to form larger systems of components. Modular components 
can be removed cleanly from a system and replaced with a module of comparable size and with 
similar physical and logical interfaces. 


P.23 


Scalability 


UDI shall be scalable. Scalability is the characteristic of a system to continue to work effectively 
as the size of the system, its complexity or the volume of work performed by the system is 
increased. 


P. 24 


Unigue identification 


UDI shall allow unigue identification of all its constituent systems and components. Unigue 
identification is the characteristic that allows for unambiguously and repeatedly associating the 
entities within the system with an individual name, code, symbol, or number, and to interact 
with the entities, or trace or control their activities, by referencing that name, code, symbol, 
or number. These entities include all the components of the system itself, such as software 
components, sensors, actuators, network components, computers and any other assets associated 
with the UDI. 


P:25 


Well-defined components 


UDI should maintain a registry of all constituent components and the associate description 
of their capabilities and including any associated uncertainties or limitations. Capability 
information includes not only information about the specific component functionality, but 
configuration, communication, security, reliability, and other relevant information. 


P. 26 


Compliance 


UDI shall be compliant to all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and policies. Compliance is 
the characteristic of conforming to rules, such as those defined by a law, a regulation, a standard 
or a policy. All the constituent systems, services, components and applications can be deployed 
in circumstances which require adherence to a variety of laws, policies, or regulations. Such 
support can be inherent in the system or its components, or can require specific configuration, 
programming, modification or extension to ensure compliance. 


11 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Table 2 (Concluded) 


SI No. 


Properties 


Description 


P.27 


Data characteristics—volume, 
velocity, veracity, variability 
and variety 


UDI shall be able to handle the “data 5Vs” of volume, velocity, veracity, variability and variety. 
The data 5Vs derive from big data systems-city systems are the sources of data which is large 
in volume, delivered at speed across network links, whose veracity needs to be validated 
(for example, due to malfunctioning sensors or improper inputs), which can vary over time and 
can contain a wide variety of different data types from different system components. 


P. 28 


Discoverability 


UDI shall allow discoverability of functionalities, services, data and any other relevant resources 
via both human and software agents. Discoverability is the characteristic of an endpoint on the 
network to be found dynamically and for that endpoint to report its services and their capabilities 
through a query mechanism or self-advertising mechanism; whichever is suitable for the 
system or component in question. The endpoints concerned could be IoT devices, services and 
applications, or even users. Related discovery services allow endpoints to be located, identified 
and accessed according to variable criteria, such as geographic location or service type. 


P29 


Flexibility 


UDI shall be flexible. Flexibility is the capability of the system to provide a varied range of 
functionality, depending on need or context. 


P. 30 


Manageability 


UDI shall be manageable. Manageability addresses aspects of systems such as device 
management, network management, application management, user management, system 
management, and interface maintenance and alerts. Manageability is important to meet system 
reguirements. Components capable of monitoring the system and changing configurations are 
needed for manageability of all the systems and their constituents. 


P. 31 


Real-time capability 


UDI shall support real-time services. Real-time capability is a characteristic of a system or mode 
of operation in which computation/analytics is performed during the actual time that an external 
process occurs, in order that the computation results can be used to control, monitor, or respond 
in a timely manner to the external process. Additionally, the system has the ability to perform 
an action or function, or to call a service within a specified period of time, thereby supporting 
deterministic operations. 


P, 32 


Service and data 
subscription 


UDI shall allow subscription to services and data by users who can be human or software agents. 
The subscription process can include payments, and a clear statement of any prerequisites as 
well as service and/or licensing terms and conditions that apply to the user. 


P. 33 


User Friendliness 


Any components requiring human interactions will be designed in such a way that each of the 
constituent systems should be user friendly, efficient, effective, and easy to navigate. Navigation 
through the component should flow smoothly and it should be intuitive and adaptive to use. 


Functional View - Level 1 


Application 


Infrastructure 


Insights & 


Stakeholder 
Connectivity & 
Communicatio 


IT Operations 
& Maintenance 
Applications & 
Devices Connectivity 


City Domain 
Services 


Command & 
Control 
Geo-Spatial 
Enablements 


Digitalization & 
Data Capture 


ERP 
Applications & 
Services 


New IGT Capabilities 
& Services 
Enablement 


OT Operations 
& Maintenance 


ICT Security & 
Authorization 


Data & ICT 
Services Sharing 
& Marketplace 


Data Governance 
& Management 


& Communication 


Fic. 4 FUNCTIONAL VIEW OF THE ICT RA 


12 


8 FUNCTIONAL REFERENCE MODEL 


Figure 4 captures in an abstract form, all the key 
functionalities of a smart city ICT system for it to meet 
the expectations/concerns of all the stakeholders. 


There is no implication of the implementations of these 
functionalities. 


For a complex entity as a city, it is highly likely that 
these functionalities will have to be orchestrated across 
multiple applications, spread across diverse individual 
systems, managed by different entities. 


These functionalities are grouped into three categories 
as defined as below: 


a) Application — These functionalities are required 
to meet everyday city administration’s business 
operations. Applications fall under the following 


IS 18000 : 2020 


4 categories: Government to Citizen (G2C) 
engagement, City Operations, Inter and Intra 
Department processes automation and Decision 
Support Systems. Each block is expanded to level 
2 where individual constituents of these blocks 
will be explained in brief. 


b) Service — These functionalities are independent 
of any specific business process but are required to 
enable many of the application/business process 
functionalities. 


c) Infrastructure — These functionalities provide 
core capabilities and services to maintain, manage 
and run the ICT infrastructure through which all 
ICT functionalities are enabled. 


Table 3 lists out all the primary functionalities and a 
brief description of the functionalities that are needed 


to meet the stakeholder concerns. 


Table 3 Primary Functionalities 


( Clause 8 ) 


Description 


Insights and dashboards will enable stakeholders to get a holistic view of the city’s 
operations and status. In addition, they will enable data driven and evidence-based 
decision making and planning. 


This functionality will help the City’s Administrators to carry out the city’s operation 
both during normal times as well as during emergencies, in a holistic and integrated 
manner, should be available 24/7 and be accessible by all the relevant stakeholders. 


A multitude of city specific application services in the domains such as traffic 
management, waste management, parking, health, etc. will be supported via these 


The core functionalities of City’s Administration to deliver all G2X services (G2G, 
G2B, G2C) in a measurable way. 


Enterprise resource planning and management via a suite of applications and services 
to fulfil City Government’s operations like procurement and inventory management, 
asset management, project management, HR and payroll and financial management on 
a single, integrated, real time platform. 


Tools and services to connect with all the stakeholders. Examples include web portals, 
web-apps, mobile apps, chatbots, public messaging systems, social media, email, SMS 


Data capture refers to the tasks for capturing physical signals electronically via sensors 
(through process of digitization) or data from people via forms or other human-digital 
interaction means and finally data from within digital systems themselves. 


Digitalization refers to onboarding of physical documents (based on paper) into the 
digital domain via scanning. In addition, it includes capture of existing business 
processes into the digital domain to enable better tracking and management of these. 


These functionalities will enable creation of data collaborations amongst various 
stakeholders, as well as enable release of non-sensitive and non-PII data from the 
government departments under Govt’s Open Data Policy. These will include creation 
and maintenance of data and service catalogs, which will be machine discoverable. In 
addition, certain data could be made available for commercial use under a marketplace. 
Moreover, the City’s ICT infrastructure could also provide other services to various 
stakeholders (for example, ERP services and ICT services to smaller departments, etc.). 


ICT tools to provision, integrate and orchestrate new services on the City’s digital 
infrastructure to enable it to grow and adapt to new requirements and concerns. These 
should be user-friendly to use by the technical teams of the concerned departments. 


SI No. Functionality 
F1 Insights and dashboards 
F.2 Command and control 
F.3 City domain services 
functionalities. 
F.4 Govt. services enablement and 
tracking 
F.5 ERP applications and services 
F.6 Stakeholder connectivity and 
communication 
etc. 
F.7 Data capture and digitalization 
F.8 Data and ICT cervices sharing and 
marketplace 
F. 9 New ICT services and capabilities 
enablement 
F. 10 IT operations and management 


Sets of tools and services to help maintain, administer and manage the IT infrastructure 
and all the services running on it. Provide support for creating and managing service 
logs to derive various KPIs and metrics. 


13 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Table 3 (Concluded) 


Description 


Capabilities to realize data governance in terms of data transformations and cleaning, 
data quality checks and improvements, data validation and audit, data security and 
classification, adherence to data privacy laws, meta-data creation and management etc. 
Capabilities to realize data management in terms of data retention and archiving, data 
storage, backup and redundancy management, master data management, data querying 


Capabilities to manage the provisioning, operations and maintenance of ICT hardware, 
system software and firmware, their configuration, security provisioning and patches, 


Capabilities to provide connectivity and communication amongst applications and 
devices for achieving unification in the digital infrastructure. These will be realised 
through enterprise service busses, messaging middlewares etc. at application level and 
wireless and wired communication networks at the device level. 


ICT security shall encompass all the systems and components and include devices, 
data, software, network elements, computers and storage elements. Authorization 
encompasses the ability of service and data owners to define access policies and 
authorize access privileges to consumers. Consumers can be human or software agents. 


Capabilities to aid in Geo-Spatial enabled planning, design and operations for various 


Each of the above functionalities are composed of 
various sub-functionalities and are explained in 8.1 to 
8.15. 


8.1. Insights and Dashboards 


8.1.1 Dashboards and Visualizations 


Data rendered in its appropriate context, leading to a 
meaningful interpretation, is of great value to all the 
stakeholders. This rendering of data along with its 
context can be done in response to a specific query 
or could be a continuous ongoing process. Such 
information can be rendered as text, images or graphs, 
audio or video. ICT Platforms and tools should enable 
each stakeholder to access information of use to them, 
customised as per their preferences. It is critical to 
ensure that there is equity and fairness to access 
and render information, no matter the stakeholders’ 
constraints or background or abilities. Advanced AI 
and ML technologies coupled with new and emerging 
user interfaces, should be used to make the access and 
rendering of information in as natural and easy way as 
possible. 


8.1.2 Insights and Predictive Analytics 


Extracting deeper insights from information will 
involve an active process of playing with data and 
looking at it in various forms, with various contexts. 
The ICT framework should make it easy to develop 
processes and capabilities to allow various kinds of 
explorations with data, in pursuit of insights as well as 
predictions. These predictions could also be connected 
with the notification system to raise alarms so that 
preventive actions can be taken by the supervisors. 


SI No. Functionality 
FE Data governance and management 
and analytics orchestrations. 
F.12 OT operations and management 
device life cycle management etc. 
F. 13 Applications and device connectivity 
and communications 
F. 14 ICT security and authorization 
F. 15 Geo-spatial enablements 
urban and city activities. 


Generation of insights and predictions should be doable 
by a professional analytics team or by an individual 
stakeholder, using both current as well as historical 
data. Access to large volumes of data will be important 
to create sophisticated machine learning based models. 
The ICT framework should enable easy creation and 
sharing of such models, as well as allow such models 
to be created in a federated way without compromising 
privacy and confidentiality. 


8.2 Command and Control 


The basic functions of command and control can be 
summarized as”: 


a) Establishing intent; 

b) Determining roles, Oo responsibilities and 
relationships; 

c) Establishing rules and constraints; 

d) Monitoring and assessing the situation and 


progress; 
e) Inspiring, motivating and engendering trust; 
f) Training and education; and 
g) 
UDI will play an important role to enable and support 
these functionalities. 


Provisioning of resources. 


These functionalities are fractal in nature that is, they 
are applicable across different organizations as well 
as across different units within the same organization. 
Hence, a key requirement for the UDI is the facilitation 
of collaboration, cooperation and coordination via 
sharing of data, information, insights and knowledge 
across various entities. 


D Understanding Command and Control, Alberts, D.S., and Hayes, R. E., 2006, CCRP Publication Series 


14 


The functionalities listed above are also in play across 
three-time scales: 


1) Immediate Term or Reactive 


In this mode, the business processes that 
are already put in place, are live and in 
operation. As new data or information flows 
in, appropriate workflows and actions are 
carried forward to further the objectives of 
the processes. These workflows are usually 
activated by the arrival of new data, leading 
to alerts and triggering of the appropriate 
business processes. ICT can play an enabling 
role in automating many aspects of these flows 
to ensure smooth and efficient realization of 
these business processes. 


2) Medium Term or Tactical 


Data when rendered in the appropriate context, 
leads to creation of information that can be 
interpreted by the human agents. Rendering of 
information can be textual or visual and will 
allow the human agents to make sense of the 
various ongoing processes. This will allow 
them to fine tune, adapt and improve existing 
processes as well as add new processes or 
remove stale processes. 


3) Long Term or Strategic 
Analysis of data and information to draw 


insights will lead to better understanding and 
planning for long term systemic changes. 


8.2.1 Establishing Intent 


The articulation of mission goals and objectives and 
its codification into measurable outputs and outcomes 
are a key requirement for any organization. These goals 
and objectives effectively translate into “commands or 
goals” for the enterprise to achieve. Synchronization 
and synergizing of mission goals across different 
inter-related entities in the city will lead to more 
effective outcomes and outputs for the entire ecosystem. 
Effective communication of these goals and objectives 
to all the participating stakeholders will lead to more 
efficient implementations. Tools and mechanisms like 
collaboration platforms, messaging platforms and 
document management and sharing platforms can 
go a long way in easing the implementation of these 
functionalities. 


8.2.2 Determining Roles, Responsibilities and 
Relationships 
Planning, defining and articulating the roles, 


responsibilities, and relationships of the various 
participating entities is an essential requirement to 
achieve the mission goals for the enterprise. This 
includes: 


a) Streamlining and standardization of operations; 
and 


b) Interdepartmental collaboration. 


15 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ICT tools can help codify, constrain and regulate these 
interactions via standard operating procedures (SOPs), 
as per the mission requirements. 


With multiple entities, across different organizations, 
involved in working collaboratively to achieve 
mission goals, it becomes important to have automated 
frameworks and tools that can help to facilitate and 
regulate the flow of information and interactions. 


Many of the mission goals need to be achieved 
in a distributed, collaborative manner as opposed 
to a hierarchical approach. Examples like, public 
health, cleanliness etc will need widespread citizen 
participation and hence, it is even more important to 
have appropriate mechanisms to help communicate, 
define, inspire, encourage, support, and monitor such 
activities. 


Such mechanisms will also play an important role 
in Planning, through aids for Predictive modelling, 
Simulations and exploration of What-If scenarios. 


8.2.3 Establishing and Enforcing Rules and Constraints 


The laws of the land, contractual obligations, policies 
and other moral and implementation constraints 
(like health, environment, employee morale etc.) will 
lead to rules of engagement and operations. ICT can 
play an important role in codifying as well as enforcing 
adherence to these, via incorporation into standard 
operating procedures, data logging for audits and 
analytics driven alerts to inform when constraints or 
rules are close to being violated. 


8.2.4 Monitoring and Assessing the Situation and 
Progress 


Getting continuous and timely data that can lead 
to a holistic view of the ongoing mission projects 
and operations is critical to ensure that the eventual 
outcomes and outputs are successfully realized. An 
integrated command and control centre (ICCC) play 
an extremely important role in facilitating this. Data 
collection from various sources and its rendering 
in meaningful ways via dashboards and alerts, and 
its contextualization with overlays from different 
inter-related data sources, will allow a complete 
situation awareness, and will make it easier to adapt and 
modify to meet evolving needs and changing scenarios. 


8.2.5 Inspiring, Motivating and Engendering Trust 


Many of the city’s operations involve voluntary 
participation from various stakeholders. Inspiring 
and motivating them to participate is an important 
and challenging task. Transparent processes, wide 
spread data sharing, open systems are some of the 
ways trust can be built. ICT will play a major role 
in the latter (via open data, standards and trusted 
process and frameworks). Additionally, modern ICT 
communication and collaboration platforms will 
allow effective communication and dialogue amongst 


IS 18000 : 2020 


various stakeholders, including providing a “Citizen’s 
view”, thus increasing the quality and quantity of their 
participation. 


8.2.6 Training and Education 


Continuous training and education of all the 
stakeholders is essential to ensure smooth operations 
of all processes. ICT platforms can play a pivotal role 
in enabling this as once the processes are codified in a 
digital form, they can be easily shared across different 
stakeholders and cities. In addition, ICT platforms 
will enable easy content creation and sharing as well 
as knowledge sharing via online portals, forums and 
learning platforms. 


8.2.7 Provisioning 


Provisioning of resources is a critical task to ensure the 
success of any operation. ICT tools to help plan and 
manage this activity is essential, especially for complex 
operations that involve scale or involve many different 
stakeholders. 


8.2.8 Integrated Command and Control Centre 


An Integrated Command and Control Centre 
(ICCC) can act as the “nerve centre” for operations 
management, day-to-day exception handling and 
disaster management. It can also enable derivation 
of insights by processing complex data sets at an 
aggregated level to derive intelligence for improved 
planning and policy making. The ICCC should 
aggregate information across multiple applications 
and sensors deployed across the city, and then provide 
actionable information with appropriate visualization 
for decision makers. Such a service might also be 
made available to other stakeholders (for example, for 
smaller urban local bodies). 


The ICCC should also have control capabilities 
of the city domain systems for cases where this is 
needed. It should be able to seamlessly monitor and 
provide command and control to these systems across 
any application vertical and across any application 
technology. 


The ICCC can be configured to deliver several 
functionalities of interest to the various stakeholders. 
Examples include use cases for: 


a) Utilities (like water, roads, power, sewerage, 
streetlights etc.); At a minimum, the ICCC can 
integrated key data points from these various 
systems and provide an integrated view of the state 
of these systems, including their key performance 
indicators. At the other end of the capability, the 
ICCC can also become the operational and control 
centre for these utilities. 

b) Mobility services like public transport, traffic, 

public parking, etc. The ICCC can help provide 

various stakeholders with specific views and 


16 


insights as per their requirements. For a commuter, 
ICCC can facilitate creation of mobility apps, by 
feeding them with data from diverse mobility 
service providers. For an urban planner, the ICCC 
can provide data and analytics tool to extract 
mobility patterns and allow them to do what-if 
scenario planning. For urban local body or traffic 
police, the ICCC can provide real time traffic 
situation for better congestion management. 


Safety, surveillance and disaster management: 
Integrated archival and real-time views from 
multiple data providers (public as well as private 
sources), will enable entities like police and other 
first responders to offer better safety and disaster 
mitigation services. 

d) Convergence, governance and interactions: 
ICCC can integrate convergence and integration 
of multiple and diverse applications including 
e-Governance, ERP, GIS, etc. In addition, ICCC 
can enable a wholistic and synergistic interactions 
with multiple stakeholders via different modalities 
like call centres, grievance cells, mobile apps, 
website, messaging displays, etc. 


8.3 City Domain Services 


A successful smart city strategy hinges on the ability 
for cities to collaborate and innovate across various 
domain areas like safety, health, transportation, utilities, 
buildings, sustainability and education. A few examples 
of domain services in a smart city are-crime detection 
and prevention, automated solid waste collection from 
homes, early disaster detection and management, 
leakage detection, intelligent streetlights, virtual health 
assistance, 24x7 water supply, 24x7 energy supply, 
multi-modal public transportation etc. 


There are a host of solutions which are deployed across 
all these city domains, like facial recognition system, 
enterprise management system, public address system, 
variable message display system, smart lighting system, 
adaptive traffic control system, smart parking system, 
energy metering, water metering, etc. These domain 
solutions could be either IoT based, non-IoT based 
or a combination of both, and demonstrate complex 
operation and maintenance processes, mainly related to 
their nature, and involvement of multiple stakeholders 
from different disciplines and domains. 


Seamless access and experience for all the consumers 
across all these services is needed, regardless of who or 
which combination of stakeholders fulfil the services. 
Thus, there is a need to facilitate interoperability, 
collaboration, coordination, orchestration and synergy 
across diverse participants in each of these city domains 
in order to improve guality of life of citizens and 
increase costsavings for the city. Besides the operational 
complexity, various smart city domain solutions have 
to fulfil strict guality reguirements such as reliability, 
availability, maintainability, interoperability, security 
and privacy. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Level 2 View - Application functionality - Govt. service enablement and tracking 


Citizen-centric Services Departmental Services/Stakeholder services 


` >) D ( DA DA 
Complaints/ Role based 
Trade services Service requests Collaboration BPM/Workflow 
Grievances redressal Dashboards 
d 4 ya IN > 
>) p] 
Tax and other Se : Links to State govt. Departmental Knowledge F : 
Government 5 Tourist information : y Mail and Messaging 
payment services services/schemes Solutions Management 
Service oe eer See) Ka —— ie 
enablement 
i Licenses and Links to Central govt. City Informational Document Departmental 
and tracking J y 5 Analytical services 
Permissions services/schemes services Management Services Directory 
Certificates and Document Citizen Mobile App Departmental Mobile 
Verifications Upload/Download Services J App Services 
AA AA Si 
Convenience services| | Online Building Plan 
Others 
(ewallets, City cards) | permissions J 


Fic. 5 APPLICATION FUNCTIONALITY GOVERNMENT SERVICE ENABLEMENT AND TRACKING-LEVEL 2 VIEW 


8.4 Government Service Enablement and Tracking 


Figure 5 shows level 2 view of the Application 
functionality government service enablement and 
tracking. For services provided by the government 
entities, UDI should provide a single logical window 
to the service consumer to request, access and track 
government services. These government services could 
be provided by different departments, yet a single access 
point to discover and consume these services will be 
a great benefit to all the stakeholders. Orchestration, 
integration, tracking and management of these services 
across different participating government departments, 
will be needed. UDI should accommodate easy 
onboarding of new departments, new services as well 
as modification and removal of services. These services 
could be complex workflows involving a mix of human 
and IT interactions. 


8.5 ERP Applications and Services 


City governance system comprises two broad building 
blocks: 


a) Citizen service delivery platform (CSDP); and 


b) Integrated back-office operations platform (IBOP) 
or ERP. 


Each of these building blocks serve a unique purpose 
and play an important role in the transformation 
of the city’s governance, 8.5.1 to 8.5.5 gives an 
overview of level 2 functionalities of ERP while 
Annex D describes them in detail. This block 
in the city governance architecture comprises 5 
functionalities that are key to financial sustainability 
of city governments. These functionalities are: 


1) Accounts, budget, investment and planning; 
2) Asset, land and real estate management; 


17 


3) Project or works management; 
4) Procurement and materials management, and 


5) Human resource, payroll and employee self 
service. 


All the 5 functions are truly integrated and form the 
backbone of the expense management for a city. 


8.5.1 Accounts, Budget, Investments and Planning 


Financial management is a key reform area in the public 
sector, especially in local bodies. A comprehensive, 
end to end financial management system would go 
a long way in transforming local bodies and making 
them sustainable. As indicated in Fig. 6, the functional 
architecture for Financial management system is built on 
4 pillars, budgeting, financial accounting, investments 
and treasury and management accounting or planning. 
Each pillar is tightly integrated to the other to ensure 
a seamless flow of information across these modules. 
These can further be visualized via a GIS enabled 
dashboard for ward wise, asset wise etc. expenditures, to 
provide better insights to the administrators. 


8.5.2 Asset, Land and Real Estate management 


Asset, land and real estate management (see Fig. 7) 
is an often-neglected area in cities. Cities hold assets 
such as Lands, roads, bridges, plants and equipment, 
and other assets worth a large amount of money. 
Poor visibility and management of these assets lead 
to losses as well as inefficient spending. An efficient 
asset management system for a city will help it achieve 
sustainable development without putting pressure on 
revenue budgets. Further, it will help minimize cost, 
facilitate long term planning and help respond better to 
disaster/pandemic situations. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Budgeting Budget Maintenance 


Financial accounting 
(GL, AP, AR) 


Financial Accounting 


Contract Accounting 


Investments & Payments & Bank 


Budget Execution 


Asset Accounting 


Financial Close 


Cash & Liquidity 


Budget Reporting and 


i Grants Management 
Closing g 


Joint Venture 


Inventory Accounting EOE 


Compliance Reporting 


Debt & Investment 


uneasy Communication Management Management 
Management Financial Planning & Overhead Cost Product/Service Cost Profitability & Cost 
Accounting/Planning Analysis accounting Management Analysis 
Fic. 6 Accounts, BUDGET, INVESTMENTS, PLANNING 
Maintenance Master Maintenance Planning Maintenance Work Clearance 
N Data and Scheduling Execution Management 
Maintenance 
Operations 
Linear Asset Geographical Enablement Framework for 
Management Asset Management 
Resource Kğ £ z i 
Management Utilization Tracking Resource Scheduling Resource Forecasting 
Real Estate 
5 tract & Lease r 
Management Real estate portfolio Land management Gar Space planning 
management 
Environment, Health nevi aarti Environment Health & Safety 
and Safety Management Management 


Fic. 7 Assets, LAND AND REAL ESTATE MANAGEMENT 


8.5.3 Project (Works) Management 


City infrastructure development is one of the key 
deliverables for any city government and there’s an 
increased focus on monitoring capital expenditures of 
the city. Cities are not only expected to increase their 
capital spend but also ensure efficiency in that spend to 
get maximum value out of every rupee spent. Capital 
project management (see Fig. 8) plays an important role 
in the day-to-day life of city engineers as it helps them 
keep track of the progress of each project, assess and 
manage associated risk, and keep a tab on the actual vs 
planned expenditures. 


8.5.4 Procurement and Material Management 


Transparent and efficient procurement system goes 
a long way in improving the financial health of the 
city. With right checks and balances, correct supplier 
information and up to date procurement records, cities 
can utilise this platform to save cost by procuring the 
right quantity and quality. Similarly, real time visibility 
of inventory and its movement can help reduce 


18 


leakages. A strong inventory management system can 
have an positive impact on the organization’s balance 
sheet and financial standing that can go a long way in 
improving a city’s credit worthiness. Procurement and 
material management is depicted in Fig. 9. 


8.5.5 Human Resource, Payroll and Employee Self 
Service 


Human capital management (HCM) is an upcoming 
subject in the public sector, but its importance 
cannot be overstated. Something as simple as timely 
and correct processing of payroll can help improve 
employee morale and at the same time save hours of 
effort in accounting. Another area where HCM will 
play an important role is the area of skill management. 
The changing paradigm around us requires public 
sector employees to don many hats and an integrated 
skill assessment and management solution would help 
recognize individual skills and training requirements. 
Human resource, payroll and employee self service is 
depicted in Fig. 10. 


Enterprise 
Portfolio and 
Project 
Management 


Inventory 
Management 


Sourcing & Contract 
Management 


Operational 
Procurement 


Portfolio Management 


Project Management 


Project Financial Control 


Resource Management 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Project Logistics Control 


Quality Management 


Fic. 8 Prosect (WORKS) MANAGEMENT 


Goods Movement 


Purchase Contract 
Management 


Self-Service 
Requisitioning 


Physical Inventory 


Central Sourcing 


Purchase Order 
Processing 


Classification & 


Supplier Management Segmentation 


Supplier Evaluation 


Fic. 9 PROCUREMENT AND MATERIAL MANAGEMENT 


HR Administration 


Core HR & payroll 


M ‘Empl 4 
anager/Employee Notices & Actions 
Self Service 
Time & attendance Time Capture Time Calculation 


Skill Management Goal and Performance Management 


Payroll 


Stock Room Inventory Analytics 
Management and Control 
Purchase Analytics 
Service Purchasing 
Invoice Processing 
Organizational Compensation 
Management Management 


Benefits Enrollment 


admini ün Full & Final Settlement 


Absence Management 


Skills Assessment Skill Management 


Fic. 10 HUMAN RESOURCES, PAYROLL AND EMPLOYEE SELF SERVICES 


8.6 Stakeholder Connectivity and Communication 


Stakeholder connectivity and communication is a 
critical functionality to enable an inclusive, responsive 
and efficient smart city. These functionalities should be 
integrated with the city’s business processes to allow 
efficient delivery of government services. 


8.6.1 Broadcast, Messaging and Alerting Platforms 


Web portals, public messaging via variable messaging 
systems, social media platforms, SMS, chat platforms, 
broadcast emails are well known methods for sending 
out messages and alerts groups of citizens/stakeholders. 
A critical requirement here is establishing mechanisms 


19 


to ensure authentication of the sender (to prevent 
fake news), message integrity (to prevent tampering), 
minimalistic messaging (to prevent spams), real-time 
ness (for critical alerts related to disaster management), 
multilingual and multi-modal (text, voice, video) to 
allow widest coverage and inclusiveness. 


8.6.2 One-to-One Communication Platforms 


Email, SMS, messaging applications, chatbots, 
interactive voice response system, web forms and 
automated speech interfaces, with multilingual 
capabilities, in order to provide two-way 
communication between individual stakeholders and 


IS 18000 : 2020 


city administration. These tools should be integrable as 
part of business processes, with digital signature and 
other authentication technologies, to allow for easy 
delivery of G2X services. 


8.7 Digitalization and Data Capture 


Creating, managing and using data in a digital form is 
one of the most important features of the unified digital 
infrastructure. Digitalization and data capture refer to 
the set of functionalities that allows digital data sets to 
be created. 


8.7.1 Digitalization of Non-Digital Data 


A lot of data in our government offices is on paper as 
documents. Transferring them to a digital format will be 
of critical importance to realize the vision of a unified 
digital infrastructure. A rigorous process and SOP have 
to be established to allow this transfer to the digital 
domain to happen in a secure, non-repudiable, accurate 
and verifiable way, along with creation of meta-data. 


8.7.2 Data Capture by and of People 


Data capture by people refers to crowdsourcing via 
smartphone applications. Creating smart phone tools, 
processes for incentivization, sustainability and data 
quality checks, will enable low-cost data capture 
via this approach. Data capture of people refers to 
data about various aspects pertaining to individuals 
like their health etc. This data is clearly of private 
in nature and will need informed consent but will be 
important for the city from an overall administration 
context, public health being one example. Tools and 
processes to enable privacy preserving data capture, 
storage and analysis, consent gathering, and fiduciary 
responsibilities will help in proper management of 
data on behalf of the stakeholders. A rigorous process 
and SOP need to be established to allow for secure, 
non-repudiable, accurate, privacy preserving ways 
to capture, store and process this data along with its 
meta-data as per the country’s data protection laws. 


8.7.3 Data Capture from Devices 


Data capture from devices refers to capturing data from 
devices like sensors and any other hardware elements 
like computers, switches, etc. using IoT technologies, 
provides another source of valuable data. Tools and 
processes to ensure authenticity of devices, integrity of 
their software and hardware, integrity and security of 
the communication links, security of the data and its 
non-repudiability and creation of meta-data are some 
of the important considerations. 


8.7.4 Data Capture from Applications 


All software applications either explicitly or implicitly 
generate data, many of which could be useful for 
analytics or insights. Setting up SOPs and using tools 
like application integration bus (or enterprise service 


20 


bus), API gateways, messaging buses etc. will provide 
a generic way to capture data and create its meta-data 
from a diverse set of applications. 


8.8 Data and ICT Services Sharing and Marketplace 


Data collected by different entities in a smart city 
ecosystem, can be of a broader value to many other 
stakeholders. To facilitate this, the City’s digital 
infrastructure should support the functionality of 
sharing of data through standardized application 
programming interfaces with appropriate mechanisms 
for access control, privacy and security. Additionally, 
many of the technology components that are deployed, 
might have excess capacity that could be made 
available for use by other entities, provided appropriate 
service interfaces are set up. Such sharing of data 
and services could eventually be driven through a 
marketplace mechanism, so that true value and costs 
can be discovered and shared. However, these will be 
governed by appropriate polices (for example, the City 
Data Policy), guidelines, regulations and applicable 
laws. 


8.8.1 Catalogues, Discovery, Reviews 


Collecting meta-data about the data sets and services, 
and sharing in a standard format, will allow easy search 
and discovery of the datasets and services and hence 
allow more widespread use. Standardized APIs to allow 
geo-spatial and attribute-based search and querying of 
the data sets and services will allow both humans and 
software to determine the presence of these. Meta-data 
should be rich enough to allow easy interpretation of 
data, its provenance, its publisher, licensing conditions, 
usage conditions, payment terms, and connections to 
other datasets. Having a review mechanism will allow 
consumers to rate the data sets and services, which 
will add more value to these from new consumer’s 
perspectives. 


8.8.2 Access Control Policies, Authorization, Pricing 
and Payments 


The data or service publisher should have the ability 
to set appropriate access control policies to determine 
the consumption of the same. They should be able to 
determine who can consume what service for how 
long. The policies should be easy to set up even for a 
non-expert via smart phones-based apps etc. Data 
sets and services will be exposed only to authorised 
consumers as per the access control policies. This 
mechanism will provide a unified way to handle data 
of all classes (negative list, restricted, shareable, 
sensitive). Authorization can be gated by payments 
via standard payment gateways, in case the data sets 
have pricing requirements. More sophisticated market 
mechanisms for adaptive pricing, bidding etc could be 
supported in the future. 


8.8.3 Access Regulation 


Access regulation ensures data and service resources 
will be made available to the consumer only upon 
presenting valid authorisation credentials. In order to 
support diverse resource servers, multiple industry 
standards mechanisms will need to be supported 
through data regulation. Support for access revocation 
must also be provided. 


8.8.4 Data Sharing 


Data sets to be shared, shall be provided by data servers 
via API calls upon presentation of valid authorisation 
tokens. 


This will allow standardized entry points for developers 
to access the smart city data sets under a governed 
manner. 


Since there is a diversity of data sets (files, media, 
messages, records etc), having standardized APIs 
will allow for easy portability of applications across 
different smart cities. 


In case of very sensitive or confidential data, 
data in its raw form might not be shared. Instead, 
either anonymized views or aggregated versions 
or differentially private versions might be shared. 
Such anonymization should be strong to prevent 
re-identification of PII. Alternatively, a confidential 
computing approach might be used to share data only 
in trusted computing zones, to authorised applications 
only. In addition, the city may provide a sandboxed 
data portal, where developers can build solutions and 
models on the exposed data. 


Having the ability to share data (under privacy and 
access control), will enable tapping into new revenue 
streams. 


8.8.5 Service Delivery 


ICT services could be delivered via API gateways 
using one of many API forms, with REST APIs being 
the most common. For time critical applications, 
more optimized APIs (for example, grpc) could be 
used. Application as a service could be delivered via 
containers or over trusted connections to departments. 


8.9 New ICT Services and Capabilities Enablement 


To allow for the digital infrastructure to grow, evolve 
and add new capabilities via third party ecosystem, 
this becomes a critical functionality and may have 
multiple facets. Such a capability will also allow 
small and medium enterprises to provide value in a 
low-cost manner. Different components in the “New 
ICT Services and Capabilities Enablement’ are 
described in 8.9.1 to 8.9.3. 


21 


IS 18000 : 2020 


8.9.1 API Gateways 


API gateways will allow access to APIs of the various 
services (especially the infrastructure services) to third 
party applications, and hence become an essential 
component. These gateways shall be able to handle 
scale and diverse set of protocols, shall be secure and 
robust to failures. 


8.9.2 Application Integration 


Integration of diverse applications will be enabled by 
technologies/platforms like enterprise system bus or 
messaging buses or similar technologies and will be 
important to enable all the diverse applications to work 
in a synergistic fashion. 


8.9.3 Hybrid cloud Framework 


Many new services and applications will need to run 
on the compute-data platform of the smart city. Some 
will need to run on the edge, some in trusted enclaves, 
some on-prem and some on the cloud. Hybrid cloud 
framework should allow seamless deployment of such 
services across all these layers. 


8.10 IT and OT Operations and Management 


Information technology (IT) and operations technology 
(OT) operations and management plays a critical role 
as they are the foundational building blocks in building 
a smart city. While the IT operations and management 
function deals with all the backend IT systems of 
the various domain and infrastructure solutions that 
are implemented in a smart city, the OT operations 
and management function deals with the field level 
intelligent and non-intelligent devices, that is IoT and 
non-IoT devices. 


While IT and OT operations and management are 
categorised together under operations and management 
functionalities, they have distinct characteristics. While 
IT operations and management functionalities primarily 
deal with the backend IT solutions, OT operations and 
management functions primarily deal with field devices 
and their administration. 


Further details of the IT and OT operations and 
management (see Fig. 11) are detailed in this and next 
section with a brief about each functionality. The IT 
operations and management should follow the ITIL 
practices for IT services management that is focussed 
on aligning IT services with the needs of a smart city 
business requirements. Although ITIL underpins 
ISO/IEC 20000, the international service management 
standard for IT service management, there are some 
differences between the ISO 20000 standard and the 
ITIL framework. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Level 2 View - Service Functionality - IT O&M 


GE a e 
IT Helpdesk/ Knowledge 
IT Asset Management SLA Management 
Servicedesk Management | J IT Services 
pa — Management 
Performance Network 
Incident Management| (Problem Management 
Management Administration/NOC 
= d bs ii IT Infra life cycle 
f Gi a m A >) management 
EOE] | Application admin. & Security 
License Management User Management 
& Management Administration/SOC 
AA 

Management Automated testing 

(e N >) ( 

Contract BCP/DR 
Contact Management Operations Analytics 
Management Management 
TCE 


Physical Infra and 
Building Management 


IT Infra Operations Mgmt 
(On-prem and Cloud) 


Fic. 11 IT OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT 


Key functionalities of IT operations and management 
are explained in 8.10.1 to 8.10.9. 


8.10.1 /T Helpdesk/Service Desk 


An ITIL help desk brings established best practices to 
the way organisations manage incidents and service 
requests. Help desk is the face of IT support and it 
mostly handles tactical operations. 


Service desk is responsible for entire IT support and 
services which includes service request management, 
change management and asset management. Service 
desk is strategic and collaborates with other functional 
units to streamline support. 


This functionality involves: 
a) 
b) 
c) 


Incident logging, prioritising and ticketing; 
Service request logging, prioritising and ticketing; 
Case creation and workflow; 

Case escalation; 

Incident resolution; 

Case closure; and 

g) MIS reporting. 

An organisation can deliver helpdesk/service desk 
functionalities through call centre/IVR, chatbot, 
interactive chat agents, web portals, e-mail, mobile 
apps, text messaging and messenger apps, such as 
WhatsApp. 


8.10.2 IT Asset Management 


Asset management tracks IT asset configuration, asset 
state and asset owner. This improves governance and 


22 


helps during an asset audit. Asset lifecycle management 
ensures assets are tracked from installation till disposal 
stage along with the cost incurred at each stage. Asset 
ROI analysis and contract renewal become more 
efficient with asset management. 


Asset management can also be used for non-IT assets 
such as field devices, however, as these devices are 
installed city-wide, geographically widespread and are 
typically operated and managed separately, it is more 
natural to use a solution such as GIS for managing such 
assets. 


All physical equipment such as IT and non-IT 
hardware, IoT field devices and non-tangible entities 
like software, licenses, support subscriptions, etc. that 
are owned by a Smart city can be classified as assets 
that are to be managed. 


8.10.3 Incident Management 


Incident management aims for speedy recovery 
from any kind of service disruption. Incident 
management enables IT teams to resolve incidents 
quickly by configuring multiple channels and setting 
up automations to remove manual work. Incident 
management process flow includes incident logging, 
classification, prioritization, investigation, diagnosis, 
resolution and closure. 


The helpdesk or the service desk is the first point of 
contact for an incident where it gets recorded for 
further action, tracking, escalation and closure. Certain 
incidents may result in a Service request which in 
turn may be serviced and tracked separately from the 


incident. Once an incident is closed, it is generally 
archived in Knowledge Management System for future 
references. This is the post Incident activity. 


8.10.4 Application Administration and Management 


Smart cities implement both domain and IT 
infrastructure solutions that are quite complex and 
generally require careful administration to ensure 
they fulfill their functionality. The various application 
administration and management activities include: 


a) Day-to-day operational activities, such as 


health-checks and checking logs; 

b) Handling any application specific issues such 
as memory leaks, process/service hangs, 
unresponsive application, etc.; 


c) User management and authorisations; 
d) Applying application updates and patches; 
e) Installing new versions and functionalities; and 


f) Periodic business rule management and security 
management. 


8.10.4.1 Certain solutions require specific domain 
knowledge on the part of the user administering or 
managing the solution, for example, someone managing 
the solid waste management (SWM) solution should 
have thorough knowledge of the solid waste handling 
and operations of the entire city. In this context, 
domain knowledge refers to user management within 
the solution and the roles of such users in a municipal 
corporation who handle solid waste. Availability of 
such domain knowledge is not a challenge as generally 
the solution providers possess this knowledge. He/she 
needs to be knowledgeable in: 


a) Pickup schedules and dynamic changes to 


schedules; 
b) Pickup routes and dynamic changes to routes; 
c) Field staff availability, attendance, grievances and 
redressal; 
d) Citizen grievances and redressal related to SWM; 
e) Collection and dumping yards and related issues; 
f) Monitoring and tracking of on-road SWM vehicles 
and handling of any incidents; and 
g) Daily collection statistics and reporting. 
All operations mentioned above are domain application 
specific administrative activities. A comprehensive solid 
waste management solution provides functionalities to 
record and track the above said activities thus enabling 
the administrator to run the operations smoothly and 
efficiently. 


8.10.5 Contact Management 


Contacting key city resources/personnel as part 
of operational processes and standard operating 
procedures during normal and emergency situations is 


23 


IS 18000 : 2020 


a key aspect in a smart city. Maintaining and managing 
the lifecycle of such contacts and contact lists, is a key 
functionality required for the Smart city to perform 
the right operations at the right time by the right 
resource/person. 


For example, in a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) involving clearance of solid waste removal 
complaints from a citizen, a health Inspector may have 
to be contacted to handle the complaint and in turn, 
field level sanitary workers may have to be mobilised 
to complete the activity. Multiple resources have to 
be contacted in this SOP and maintaining up-to-date 
contact information of the right resources is important 
for the successful completion of the SOP. 


Especially in emergency situations and the 
corresponding SOPs, contacting the right resources is 
of extreme importance. 


8.10.6 License Management 


This functionality deals with the various licenses that a 
Smart city needs to manage, such as software licenses, 
solution licenses, support licenses, licenses to operate 
from a specific location, etc. 


8.10.7 Performance Management 


Maintaining the optimal performance of the IT systems 
and solutions is key to meeting the SLA requirements 
and the KPIs of the smart city. Performance management 
directly translates into how efficiently and effectively a 
smart city is functioning and thus helps it improve its 
ranking in various pan-India surveys, such as Swachh 
Bharat Mission, Sustainability Index, Liveability 
Index, etc. 


8.10.8 IT Infra Operations Management (On-prem and 
Cloud) 


A smart city may deploy IT solutions either 
on-premise in a CAPEX model (build, own, operate) or 
in an OPEX model by taking IT services from a Cloud 
Service Provider (CSP). This functionality deals with 
how a smart city should manage the IT infrastructure 
deployed on premises, the cloud, its operations 
and their lifecycle. On-premises IT infrastructure 
management is handled by own teams of the Smart city 
or by a contracted vendor and this team is responsible 
for designing the services they will render to the user 
community along with the turnaround time and SLAs. 


On the other hand, a CSP provides a bouquet of services 
with a varied level of facilities, turnaround time and 
SLA. Depending on the class of services that the smart 
city has opted for, the Smart city IT staff will have 
varied levels of access to the IT infrastructure. 


Premium class of CSP services may allow the Smart 
city to fully administer and manage the entire IT 
infrastructure as though it is deployed on-premise, such 
as dynamically increasing or decreasing resources like 


IS 18000 : 2020 


CPU cores, RAM, storage space, networking, etc., as 
required by the Smart city, with full administrative 
privileges. This enables the smart city complete control 
over the IT infrastructure as though it is deployed at 
their premises. The turnaround time for any service 
request will be in minutes to hours. 


Whereas a basic class of CSP services may not provide 
any dynamic resource changes and all resource 
increments or decrements required by the Smart city 
has to be performed by raising a service request with 
the CSP that has a higher turnaround time running of a 
few hours to days. 


Cloud orchestration is another critical component of 
cloud operations management which enables a Smart 
city to provision and distribute workloads across 
private, public cloud and on-premise ICT infrastructure, 
through well-defined workflows governed by security 
and placement policies. 


If a smart city organisation decides to use the services 
of a CSP instead of on-premise IT infrastructure, cloud 
operations management plays a very important role. 


8.10.9 Operations Analytics 


Operational analytics is the process of using data 
analysis and business intelligence to improve efficiency 
and to streamline daily operations in real time and is 
a subset of business analytics. As such, operational 
analytics is much better suited to large organizations 
than small businesses, at least for now. 


It helps in faster decision making, enhanced customer 
experience and increased productivity for Smart cities. 
Organisations can see the inefficiencies that exist in 
their workflows and accordingly, change their processes 
to streamline operations. 


For example, a smart city may run analytics and realise that 
an SOP related to handling solid waste management is too 
cumbersome and inefficient and may result in automating 
the entire SOP. Similarly, in city administration, it may 
help improve the operational processes of the city 
government or the municipal corporation thus bringing in 
efficiency and improved citizen satisfaction. 


8.11 OT Operations and Management 


Many of the functionalities in OT operations and 
management may not involve any IT solution at 
the backend and are more of an organisational 
process-oriented functionalities. The key OT operations 
and management functionalities depicted in Fig. 12 and 
are briefly explained in 8.11.1 to 8.11.6. 


8.11.1 Field Device Life Cycle Management 


Field devices that are installed across the city, may be 
smart IoT devices with various operational capabilities, 
non-IoT devices or even dumb devices. They are installed 
across the city and the sheer number of devices may be 
overwhelming for the Smart city organisation to manage 
and maintain them. Every field device is an important 
source of crucial data about some parameters of the city 
and so needs to be carefully administered. 


Field device lifecycle includes the following important 
sub functionalities: 


a) New device installation; 
b) Device configuration; 


c) Device calibration based on the geographical and 
other local conditions of the city; 


d) Replacement of faulty, broken or stolen devices; and 


e) Recycling of completely broken or obsolete 
devices in an environmentally safe manner. 


Level 2 View - Service Functionality - OT O&M 


Field device life cycle 
management 


1. New device installation 
2. Device configuration 

3. Device replacement 

4. Device recycling 


OT 


OT Asset 
Management 


1. Asset tagging 
(physical) 

2. Asset ownership 

3. Asset register 


Field Stakeholder 


Field Logistics 


Management Management 


1. Materials management 

2. Transport 

3. Civil, Mechanical and 
Electrical works 


1. Work permits 

2. Permissions/Approvals 
3. Inspection/Verification 
4. Certification 


Operations & 
Management 


Field device Security 


Management 


1. Authentication 

2. Authorisation 

3. Key management 
4. Device calibration 


Field network 


management 


1. Field LAN 
2. Field WAN drops 
3. City WAN/MAN 


Field vendor/staff 


management 


Fic. 12 OT OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT 


24 


Smart cities may implement sophisticated backend 
IT solutions for field device lifecycle management or 
may carry this out manually through a well-defined 
business process. To carry out field device lifecycle 
management, there are software tools available which 
can be employed. In either case, it is an important 
functionality that a Smart city organisation should 
focus on. 


8.11.2 OT Asset Management 


Every IT or non-IT field device is a public asset 
that should be protected and managed by the city 
administration. For easy management, every such 
device should be easily identifiable through a 
well-defined asset tagging mechanism. These assets 
should be maintained in an asset registry using the asset 
tag as the key. The sub functionalities are: 


a) Physical asset tagging; 
b) Identifying asset ownership and custodian; and 
c) Maintaining the assets in a register. 


Asmart city may maintain these assets in a sophisticated 
register such as a GIS solution or a different asset 
management solution, with the asset tag as the key. The 
asset register maintains the entire lifecycle of the asset 
right from its procurement, installation, maintenance to 
disposal of a device. The IoT Reference Architecture 
deals in detail with certain management components 
such as field device security management. Refer the 
IoT Reference Architecture for more information. 


8.11.3 Field Stakeholder Management 


Field device implementation in a smart city is a 
complicated process that may require involvement 
of multiple stakeholders right from city municipal 
corporation, state government entities and even 
central government entities for work permits, 
approvals or permissions to carry out the field work, 
inspection/verification for completed work and 
certification from relevant authorities. Involvement and 
managing the stakeholders at the right time will ensure 
that the field work activity and the implementation 
schedule is not impacted. As involving and 
obtaining necessary permissions from the relevant 
authorities is a time taking process, Smart city 


organisations should involve the stakeholders 
right at the start of the implementation and 
every stage where it is required. This is a 


process-oriented functionality and not a functionality 
that involves a backend IT solution. 


8.11.4 Field Logistics Management 


Field logistics management is another functionality that 
involves an organisational process more than a backend 
IT solution and is closely linked to the stakeholder 
management. Field device implementation is a 
complicated and a human resource intensive activity 
that requires skilled personnel. It involves: 


25 


IS 18000 : 2020 


a) Material management for field device installations; 


b) Transportation of materials required for field 
device installations; and 


c) Civil, mechanical and electrical works. 


Each of the above-mentioned activities require supply 
of various materials and managing the logistics for those 
materials. For some of the activities, smart city may 
have to supply and manage the required materials, such 
as construction materials, electrical cables, installation 
panels, switches, etc. and manage the logistics 
(storage and transportation) of such materials. 


Another important aspect of this functionality is 
availability and contracting of skilled resources for 
field work and installations which may require liaising 
with approved human resource service providers or 
contractors. 


Many of these activities also require involvement 
of right stakeholders for inspections, verifications 
and certification at various stages of the installation 
activity. For example, the city municipal corporation’s 
electrical department or the state electrical transmission 
and distribution company involvement is required to 
provide power supply to the field devices at the time 
of installation and the civil engineering department to 
supervise and certify the foundations laid and the civil 
works. 


8.11.5 Field Network Management 


Many of the field devices are sophisticated IoT devices 
that are capable of communicating using TCP/IP 
network protocol over standard Ethernet interfaces. 
Some even provide multiple such interfaces and 
dedicated management interfaces also. Today most 
devices, such as cameras and sensors are capable of 
web based interfaces for operations and management. 
Moreover, certain IoT devices provide edge computing 
capabilities for taking immediate action when an event 
occurs and report them to the backend IT solution at the 
data centre. For example, intelligent cameras can detect 
lost vehicles by reading the number plate and reporting 
when such vehicles come into view. Similarly, cameras 
can also detect unidentified objects. In all such cases, 
edge level computing capability is required and 
is provided as part of the IoT device itself. All such 
devices require interconnection and communication 
with the backend IT solution over the network. In a 
given city location, different types of smart devices 
with such capabilities are installed. This necessitates 
establishing a “min?” local area network (LAN) at that 
location connecting all these devices with an Ethernet 
switch cum router. 


Each such location in the city forms a mini-LAN and so 
requires proper IP address allocation, distribution and 
management. In addition, for the backend IT solution 
communication, these “mini” island LANs established 
across the city have to be connected over a Wide Area 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Network (WAN) through a Network Service Provider 
(NSP) or the city’s own fibre network. Thus, the field 
network management involves: 
a) 
b) 


Field LAN management; 


Field IP management (allocation, distribution and 
maintenance); 

c) City WAN through a network service provider; 
and 

d) City fibre network (fibre network across the entire 


city owned by the city). 


Those cities which do not have their own fibre network 
typically use the services of a network service provider 
for city-wide communication. 


8.11.6 Field Security Management 


As the field devices are smart IoT devices with 
edge computing capabilities that are capable of 
communicating over standard Internet protocols, 
they are also susceptible to cyber-attacks and hacks. 
Moreover, as these devices are installed in public 
places, they are also prone to theft, unauthorised 
replacement or tampering. One field IoT device in the 
hands of a cyber attacker is sufficient to create chaos or 
panic across the entire city. 


Ensuring that the devices installed are genuine running 
the intended firmware, not compromised and the data 
they transmit is correct and can be relied upon is 
extremely critical for city stakeholders. Citizen life 
changing decisions are taken based on that data and it 
has to be safely and securely handled. 


The field device security management involves 
the following [further details are available in IOT 
Reference Architecture (under preparation)|: 


a) Authentication of devices to ensure that they are 
genuine devices and not impersonated or replaced 
ones; 

b) Authorisation of who or what can utilise the data 

generated/transmitted; 

c) Management of security keys that are exchanged 

between the field IoT devices and the backend 

IT solution; 

d) Calibration of the device to suit the geographical 

and local conditions of the city and that it has not 


been compromised; 
Ensuring no rogue devices are in the network; 


Ensuring that the devices run authentic and secure 
firmware and not a compromised one; and 


Device firmware updates and upgrades are carried 
out in a secure manner. 


g) 


8.12 Data Governance and Management 


Data being smart city’s most valuable asset, the data 
governance and management architecture would need 
to be designed with “big data” in mind to be able to 
handle volume, velocity, variety, veracity and value of 
smart city data. IS 18002 (under development), would 
have the capabilities given in Table 4. 


Table 4 The Data Layer Reference Architecture Capabilities 
( Clause 8.12 ) 


Capability 


Functionality 


Functionality Description 


Data quality 


Data cleansing 


Maintenance of data to fit defined smart city data standard for enhanced interoperability and 
decision making. 


Data profiling 


Systematic analysis of data to gather actionable and measurable information about its quality. 


Data traceability 


Tracking of the lifecycle of data to determine and demonstrate all changes and access to the data. 


Data compliance 


Ongoing processes to ensure adherence of data to both enterprise business rules, and, especially, 
to legal and regulatory requirements. 


Data monitoring 


Routine checking and validation of data against quality control rules to ensure quality and format 
consistency. 


Data architecture 


Master data 
management 


Data pipelines Data movement and transformation automation through data driven workflows. 
Architecture Facilitation and optimization of future big data architecture decision making. 
patterns 


Data modelling 


Data taxonomy 


Creation of data models that capture business requirements and present them in a structured way. 


Classification of data within the smart city platform as defined in the smart city data standard. 


Reference data 


Setting of data values and naming standards for internal and external interoperability. 


management 
Metadata Definition, creation, update, migration, and dissemination of metadata throughout the smart city 
management platform. 


26 


Capability 


Data governance 


Functionality 


Data ownership 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Table 4 (Continued) 


Functionality Description 


Responsibility for the creation of the data, and the enforcement of rules as per the smart city 
requirements. 


Data stewardship 


Assignment of accountability for the management of data assets. 


Data policies 
management 


High-level and/or detailed rules and procedures that the smart city program utilizes to manage 
its data assets. 


Data standards 
management 


Criteria, specifications, and rules for the definition, creation, storage and usage of data within the 
Smart city platform. 


Big data 
management 


Citizen data 
aggregation 


Statistical models built using data processed from citizen smart city interactions. 


Big data storage 


Storage, management and retrieval of massive amounts of data, or big data. 


Resource Allocation system resources to specific running applications. 

scheduling and 

management 

Big data querying | Querying and scripting capabilities to simplify the use of big data. 

Data flow Development and execution of workflows and tasks to process data for both batch and real-time 
programming use-cases. 


Data matching 


Matching of data records from different data sources based on entity correlation. 


Data warehouse 


Data storage 


Central repository for all or significant parts of the data that the smart city platform’s systems 
will collect. 


Data marts 


Correlation of diverse data streams to provide insights and trigger complex events. 


Repetitive Queries 


Standardization of queries that are likely to be executed repeatedly in the future. 


Data Loading Support for the ingestion of streaming data as well as the ability to perform continuous updates 
for read optimization. 
Data processing | Batching Execution of a series of programs without manual intervention on a scheduled basis. 
Streaming Presentation of data that is being received continuously to analytics engines and dashboards. 
Data ETL/ELT Enablement of database management processes for both traditional data warehousing as well as 
transformation | management data lakes. 
Data aggregation | Allowing data coming from multiple sources to be filtered, correlated and aggregated before 
being stored. 
Parsing data Analysis of data to enable reading from structured and unstructured data sources. 
management 
Analytics Model building Analysis and generation of mathematical representations of the system and its services, including 
modelling the statistical models used to understand behaviours and patterns. 
Model deployment | Deployment of models in an automated fashion, without the need of a human intervention in 


moving code or operate the target machine where the code will run. 


Model validation 


Use of various measures of statistical validity to determine data or model problems. 


Big data 
algorithms 


Design and development of algorithms to access large amounts of data from large, cloud-based 
data centres through queries and derive streaming and real-time analysis from them. 


Machine learning 


Statistical learning 


Automatic development of models based on training data as well as back-propagation, or 
feedback loops enabling the ability to test and retrain the model while processing production 
data. 


Prediction of business metrics and variables for the future based on historic data. 


Data discovery 
and mining 


Exploratory data Analysis of data sets through visual and graphical methods to summarize their main characteristics. 
analysis 

Workflow Development and management of workflows to conduct analytics on data. 

automation 

Component Registry of information for reusable components of many types, which are used to build, 
registry document and test data mining tools. 

management 


27 


IS 18000 : 2020 


integration and 
interoperability 


Table 4 (Concluded) 
Capability Functionality Functionality Description 
Data Format translation | Translation of internal service and data formats for external platform compatibility and 


consumption. 


Protocol 
translation 


Translation of internal protocols for external platform compatibility and consumption 
(for example, SOAP to REST). 


Data exchange 


Open data 
management 


Management and accessibility of open datasets in useable formats and enablement of query 
generation on these datasets. 


Data visualization 


Manipulation and placement of data in a visual context such as infographics, dials and gauges, 
geographic maps and charts. 


Dashboarding 


Integration of information from multiple components into a unified display to facilitate 
development. 


Data sandbox 
environment 


Isolation of computing environment in which a program or file can be executed without affecting 
the production environment of the services. 


Data protection 


Data access 
control 


Selective restriction of access to data based on the classification of data or the authorization level 
of the subject trying to gain access. 


Data classification 


Categorization of data to ensure efficient and effective use in line with Smart city policy and 
standards. 


Data retention 


Ensuring availability of relevant information for a defined duration for its future reference or use. 


Additionally, city data governance processes for 
managing smart city data needs to be put in place. 
These tasks can be achieved using a variety of tools 
and applications and are built on key data principles 
discussed in [Data Layer Reference Architecture 
(under preparation). 


Whilst there are many new international standards under 
development for data management and governance in 
smart cities, following standards are suggested as a 
reference and can be enabled using a variety of tools 
and applications: 


a) ISO/TS 8000 Data Quality 


b) ISO/IEC DIS  20547-4(en) Oo Information 
technology — Big data reference architecture 


1) Partl: 
2) Part2: 
3) Part3: 
4) Part4: 
5) Part 5 : Standards roadmap 


ISO/IEC DIS 20546 : 2019 (en) Information 
technology — Big data Overview & Vocabulary 


ISO/IEC 11179 Information Technology — 
Metadata registries (MDR). 


ISO 15000 Electronic Business 
Markup Language (ebXML) 


ISO/IEC 20802-1 : 2016 Open Data Protocol 
(OData) 


1) ISO 20802-1 Part 1: Core 


2) ISO 20802-1 Part 2: URL Conventions Plus 
Errata 02 


Framework and application process 
Use cases and derived requirements 
Reference architecture 

Security and privacy 


c) 
d) 


Extensible 


28 


3) ISO 20802-1 Part 3: Common Schema 
Definition Language (CSDL) Plus Errata 02 


4) ISO 20802-2 Part 1: JSON File Format 
ISO/IEC 29161 Data structure 
identification for the Internet of Things 


ISO/IEC 30182 : 2017 Smart city concept model — 
Guidance for establishing a model for data 
interoperability 


ISO/IEC 30182 Smart City Concept Model — 
Guidance for establishing a model for data 
interoperability 


k) Linked Data from W3C 


g) — Unique 


h) 


)) 


8.13 Applications and Devices Connectivity and 
Communication 


Interconnectivity of applications, software services as 
well as IoT devices, in a way that they can exchange 
information as well as provide ICT services will be 
essential to allow for emergence of new capabilities. 
Solution providers will be able to compose new 
solutions and enrich the overall utility of the ICT 
systems. This interconnectivity should be governed 
by open standards, interfaces, protocols and 
common data models, so that it becomes easy for 
multi-vendor integration. At the same time, support for 
advanced security features, authentication mechanisms 
and authorization capabilities will allow multiple 
independent entities and departments to enable their 
ICT systems to participate in this collaboration, without 
fear of losing data or of getting hacked. 


Level 2 View - Infrastructure functionality - ICT Security 


IS 18000 : 2020 


* Cross referenced from OT 
Operations & Management 


Infrastructure | App, Data and Field and Key Compliance 
it workload 
H it App, API and Certificate IP protection and 
| | Network Security |; | . E T eni 
i į | | Workload security Management | | | Data loss prevention | ; : Threat 
bt Incident/Threat 
Management 


ICT Security l Host security i | Data security 


: | | confidential/Trusted | ! : 
Key Management : yi 


8.14 ICT Security and Authorization 


Information security and infrastructure security plays a 
very critical role in protecting the Smart city physical 
assets such as field IoT devices, IT infrastructure and 
logical assets, such as field data and citizen data. ICT 
security covers all layers, such as infrastructure, data, 
integration, services and applications. The second level 
functionalities of ICT security and authorisation are 
given in Fig. 13. 


Many International standards exist for covering the 
functionalities, such as ISO/IEC 27001 and 27002, 
NIST, ANSI/ISA 62443, etc. and numerous best 
practices exist ranging from infrastructure security to 
application security to data security. 


Computing 
ji Security Emergency ' 
i Management H 
| | il it | ride : EE Auditing and 
| | End point security |: ; | Identity and Access | ; | (Field device Security*| ; | KENA |) aa aan an anaaaa 
' i i io Compliance 
Fic. 13 ICT Security AND AUTHORISATION 
a) CERT Secure Coding 
b) ISO/IEC 27034-1 2011 Information 
technology — Security techniques — Application 
security — Part 1: Overview and concepts 
c) ISO/IEC TR 24772 2013 Information 
technology — Programming languages — 
Guidance to avoiding vulnerabilities in 
programming languages through language 
selection and use 
d) NIST Special Publication 800-53 
e) Open Web Application Security Project 
(https://owasp.org) 
f) PCI Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) 
8.14.2 Data Security 


Some of the key functionalities within ICT security and 
authorization are explained in 8.14.1 to 8.14.5 in brief. 


8.14.1 Application Security 


Application security encompasses measures taken to 
improve the security of an application often by finding, 
fixing and preventing security vulnerabilities. It deals 
with how an application provides secure functionalities, 
how securely it handles data and operations without 
giving rise to obvious vulnerabilities that a cyber 
attacker can exploit and use the application for 
malicious activities. 


Different techniques are used to expose such security 
vulnerabilities at different stages of an application’s 
lifecycle such as design, development, deployment, 
upgrade, maintenance. An always evolving but largely 
consistent set of common security flaws are seen across 
different applications. 


There are various application security standards that 
exist for application security and some of the important 
standards are listed below: 


29 


Smart cities deal with a large volume of data. A city with 
field IoT devices installed across its nook and cranny 
generates and processes voluminous amounts of data 
at a high velocity (date rate). Each and every datum is 
critically important piece in the information puzzle of 
a city and so needs to be secured and safely stored. It 
needs to be protected when it is being transmitted from 
the field IoT devices to the processing components 
(data in transit) as well as after it is processed and 
stored (data at rest). Smart cities handle varied types of 
data ranging from the ones that are publicly shareable, 
such as, temperature or humidity at a location to 
data items that need to be highly protected but still 
shareable, such as, citizen address, or mobile numbers 
to the ones that should never be revealed at any cost 
such as citizen credit card number, bank account no. or 
Aadhaar details. 


8.14.2.1 Data security is part of the larger area of 
data governance which specifies how data needs to be 
handled, what can and cannot be shared and what needs 


IS 18000 : 2020 


to be absolutely protected keeping privacy in mind, 
who owns the data, etc. There are regulations across 
the world that govern data security some of which are 
industry specific. 


Some of the data security standards and regulations are: 


a) Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) 


b) Payment Card Industry (PCI DSS) standards 
c) Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) 

d) GDPR (European Union) 

e) COBIT 

f) Personal Data Protection Bill of Govt. of India 


8.14.2.2 There are different methods and technologies 
to secure data in transit and for data at rest. Some 
examples are given below: 


a) Data at rest: 
1) Encrypted file systems, 
2) Storage encryption, or 
3) Database level encryption. 
b) Data in transit: 
1) SSL/TLS for end-to-end encryption; and 
2) Network link level encryption. 


8.14.3 API Security 


Applications are built module by module adding new 
functionalities and capabilities by building on top of or 
making use of existing functionalities and capabilities. 
Common functionalities are built in such a way that 
it can be used by multiple other functional modules 
through well-defined interfaces called Application 
Programming Interfaces (API). Typically, these are 
internal within the application or some of them are 
exposed for developing surround applications. With 
the advent of Smart devices and IoT devices computing 
power is embedded in everyday objects and they 
communicate using APIs. 


As field devices expose their functionalities and 
capabilities as APIs for integration with higher layer 
domain applications, security of who accesses those 
APIs and what they access becomes important. Today 
all field IoT smart devices have API capability and 
provide device control and data transmission over 
well-defined API interfaces. This ensures that even 
if the device is upgraded to a new hardware or a new 
firmware, as long as the API is maintained, the higher 
layer domain solutions can continue to access the data 
or provide device level management. 


If such APIs are not properly secured, unintended 
access can provide a wealth of information to a Cyber 
attacker and often give full control over the device, thus 
a Smart city cannot rely on the authenticity of the data 
that it transmits. 


30 


API security is the protection of the integrity 
of APIs — both the ones that are owned by the Smart city 
and the ones that are consumed by Smart city solutions. 
Broken, exposed, or hacked. APIs are behind major data 
breaches. They expose sensitive medical, financial, and 
personal data for public consumption. That said, not all 
data is the same nor should be protected in the same 
way. How API security is approached will depend on 
what kind of data is being transferred. 


Many of the application security standards such as 
OWASP are applicable for API security as well. 


8.14.4 Security Emergency Management 


Prevention is better than cure. While a smart city may 
take all preventive measures to protect its physical, 
logical and information assets, it should still be 
prepared to handle (cure) any emergencies arising out 
of a cyber-attack or major security impact-intentional or 
unintentional-to its ICT infrastructure and information 
assets. Threats and attacks can come from anywhere, 
both from inside and outside the organisation and it is 
best to be prepared for it than to be taken by surprise. 


It is the responsibility of the cyber security team, in 
consultation with the executive management team, to 
implement the following strategies, some of which are 
preventive measures: 


a) A team of professionals to enable communication, 
collaboration and cooperation in emergency 
management strategies, looking at the 
“big pictures” on identifying critical information; 

b) Mitigate the 
vulnerabilities; 


organization’s threats and 

c) Conduct organizational and environmental risks 
against benefits analysis; 

d) Monitor and screen employees’ responsibilities to 
prevent insider threats; 

e) Update the organization’s policy, regulations and 
employee agreements, along with the organization 
system, threats and vulnerabilities; 

f) Protect the organization’s information; 

g) Continue systems’ updates; 

h) Back up full system requirements off-site; and 


j) Continuous user education on Cyber security. 


8.14.4.1 Emergency management function is more 
procedural in nature, process driven and involves 
a substantial number of manual interventions and 
decision-making processes, while the ICT solutions and 
tools deployed play the role of the front-end warriors 
preventing any further emergencies. 


This function typically involves the following activities: 


a) Assessing the damage and the extent of information 
loss; 


b) Identifying residual risks, vulnerabilities; 


c) 


Procedures for cleanup and restoration of services 
to a state prior to that of the attack; 


d) 
e) 


Procedures to prevent further attacks; and 


Appropriate communication to the internal and 
external users, the stakeholders, the press and the 
citizens. 


8.14.5 IP protection and Data Loss Prevention 


With the huge amount of data and compute processing 
power at its disposal, right from the field level, a smart 
city can create its own unique set of solutions for better 
citizen services and create statistical or analytical 
models to solve certain urban/city specific issues, 
in collaboration with local industries, academia and 
research institutions”. Such solutions are the intellectual 
property of the smart city and so need to be protected 
from infringement and unauthorised use. According to 
the world intellectual property organization intellectual 
property is creations of the mind; inventions, literary 
and artistic works, symbols, names, images, and 
designs used in commerce. For many organisations, 
intellectual property may be more valuable than its 
physical assets. As a result, establishing policies and 
mechanisms to guard against intellectual property loss 
or theft is critical. Leakage of such monetizable data 
and intellectual properties of a smart city should be 
prevented by formulating a strategy and measures to 
understand the sensitive models and data they hold, 
how it is controlled, and how to prevent it from being 
leaked. 


Data loss can be divided into leakage and disappearance 
or damage which are sometimes overlapping and key 
drivers for establishing data loss prevention mechanisms 
include regulatory compliance and intellectual property 
protection. An effective data loss prevention program 
should consist of the following essential components: 


a) Manage — Management functionalities should 
also include data loss reporting capability and 
incident remediation workflow management. 


b) Discover Discovering and inventorying 
unique solutions, models, sensitive data at rest 


2 “Data loss prevention,” https://tsapps.nist.gov/publications 


31 


IS 18000 : 2020 


in file servers, databases, document and records 
management, email repositories, and web content 
and applications; and scanning for sensitive data 
stored on the endpoint including laptops, desktops, 
and workstations at remote offices in order to 
inventory, secure, or relocate that data. 


c) Monitor — Monitor the use of sensitive data and 
models, understand sensitive data usage patterns 
and gain 360-degree visibility of their usage. 


d) Protect — Enforce security policies to proactively 
secure data and prevent sensitive data from 
leaving the organisation. Make sure a clear data 
classification and governance is in place. 


When properly integrated, these four essential 
components offer effective protection of enterprise 
valuable information assets. Best practices for data 
loss prevention is a serious challenge for organizations, 
as the number of incidents continues to increase. 
Identifying and blocking all sensitive data is neither 
possible as an outcome nor wise as a goal. However, 
with a more focused goal of preventing the most 
damaging leaks and establishing better ways for users 
to exchange information securely, data loss prevention 
can be effective, practical, and successful. 


8.15 Geo-Spatial Enablement 


A city administrator needs a map to understand the 
city, it’s assets and properties. In other words, Maps are 
communication language between city administrators 
and city. Geographical Information Systems (GIS) as 
depicted in figure 14 provide a layered information 
about every aspect of the geographical space of a 
city with locational, planning, development and 
construction, engineering, operation and maintenance 
and management related data and information. 


GIS converts the data with spatial dimension into 
thematic information, which offers a knowledge about 
the spatial entity through different spatial analytical and 
modelling techniques offered by GIS platform, which 
helps in better understanding of relation between spatial 
entities and finally enables decision support system 
through Spatially enabled 2D and 3D dashboards. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


City Functions 


Property Tax 
Water Supply 
Sewerage Management 
Drains 
Urban Road management 
Building Permissions 
Solid waste Management 
Town Planning 
Detecting Unauthorized 
Constructions 

. Health 

. Horticulture 

. Street Light 

. Civil Works 

. Licence/Tehbazari 

. Education 

. E-Governance 

. Fire and Emergency 

. Disaster Management 

. Complaint/ Grievance 

. Mobility planning 

. Smart enbalement 


WHONAUPWNE 


RR 
PO 


RNPRPRPRRPRPRP 
WOLE LOU BUN 


GIS is the foundation technology of any city as it 


Locational 


Intelligence 


GIS enabled 
Decision 
Support 

Dashboards 


Cognitive 
Visualization 


GIS Based 
Citizens 
Involvement 
initiatives 


GIS based 
Workflows 


GIS based Real 
time Data 
visualization 


Fic. 14 GEO-SPATIAL ENABLEMENT VIA GIS PLATFORM 


Standardization 
Collaboration 
Transparency 
Integration 
Specialization 
Design Thinking 
Governance 
Workflows & SLA's 
Quick Results 


Innovation 


provides the language of communication with the city. 
GIS provides a set of systems for the city as listed 


below: 


a) 


System of record: 


1) The GIS enables government agencies and 
departments to manage the authoritative and 
locational records of assets and resources 
across a city; and 

2) Many city departments may be already using 
GIS to do this: like, planning, land records, 
electricity and property tax and so on. 


1) GIS enables spatial design thinking by 
emphasizing the spatial aspects of city 
problems and needs ideating solutions 
incorporating different spatial alternatives and 


finally testing its impact on the area. 


8.15.1 Location information can be found in 
administrative departments and agencies across all 
cities. However, connecting this and the relevant 
departments via a common location platform, that 
enables the implementation of the systems listed above, 
is a step that many cities with a smart agenda now need 
to take. Once the location platform is in place, it enables 
a whole range of activities and benefits, including: 


1) Where best to target capital spending, ensuring 
that money spent has the best return on 


the impacts 


b) System of engagement: a) Better decision making: 
1) GIS provides the framework to share 
knowledge and understanding, through 
location-aware maps and apps that investment: and 
are available across different devices . : . 
(including mobile devices), anywhere, 2) Enabling GeoDesign, where 


anytime; and 

2) Organisations shall be able to easily engage 
with stakeholders, businesses and individuals; 
seek feedback on plans and initiatives; and 
share open data and apps on important topics. 


c) System of analytical insights: 

1) GIS shall enable detailed analysis and 
understanding to be sought and patterns to be 
identified, leading to insights on city systems 
and characteristics including congestion, crime, 
spending patterns and people movement. 

d) System of spatial design thinking: 


32 


on existing natural and built systems are 
considering during the planning process for 
new infrastructure. 

b) City efficiencies: 

1) Improved asset utilisation and management, 
and ensuring maintenance is performed where 
needed to maximize the useful life of assets; 
and 

2) Like optimising transport services by studying 
passenger demand and usage patterns, route 
optimisation of public vehicles and transit 
services and responsive junction signals 
that ensure traffic keeps flowing and keeps 
congestion to a minimum. 


c) Operations: 

1) Control centres that provide a common 
operating picture of the entire city, with all 
systems visualised holistically and in context 
with one another; and 


2) Scheduling of field activities and monitoring 
of field crews and assets. 


d) Communication: 


1) Engagement with the public on city initiatives 
and plans; 


2) Transparency into city operations and 
spending; and 

3) Sharing of city data with the wider community 
including developers, start-ups, NGOs and 
academia. 


Spatial information is pervasive and primary. When 
organized using the concepts of space and time, 
information about cities can be the basis for many 
powerful services, analytics and decision-making. As 
the GIS is a system of records, engagement and insight, 
it is the enabler of the objectives of smart cities. 


Application © 
Services and 
Components 


A 
Enables 


Works with Supports 


cr © 


Supports Infrastructure 


IS 18000 : 2020 


9 TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODELS 


9.1 Smart City’s Unified Digital Infrastructure 


There are four key components listed below that 
constitute a smart city’s digital infrastructure as shown 
in Fig. 15. 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


ICT infrastructure consists of compute, storage 
and communication networks that form the 
bedrock over which the digital infrastructure is 
built. 


IoT systems bring in data from various sources 
(people, processes, applications, physical world) 
and provide a major part of the fuel to build a 
smart infrastructure. 


Platforms, tools and services provide essential 
tools and services that can be shared across a host 
of applications, as well as help in management of 
the entire digital infrastructure. 

Application services and components make up the 
smart city applications which deliver the requisite 
value to all the important stakeholders. 


The components are explained in 9.2 to 9.5. 


Application © 
Services and 
Components 


K 
Enables 


Works with Supports 


ICT © 
Supports Infrastructure 


Fic. 15 TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODEL FOR SMART City’s DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE 


ICT Infrastructure 


Compute 
Cluster | =e 


Data Center 
Communication 


ComputeDataCenter|1..n) 


Storage 
Cluster 


Communication Infrastructure 


Fic. 16 ICT INFRASTRUCTURE TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODEL 


33 


IS 18000 : 2020 


9.2 ICT Infrastructure 


The backbone for any smart city will be the 
compute-data centres that provi de the substrate on 
which all the digital tools, services and storage will run 
and the communication networks that interconnect all 
the devices deployed as part of the UDI. There could 
be one or more such centres. These could be located 
on-premises or in the cloud. Multiple such centres could 
also be configured to provide redundancy to handle 
disaster management and recovery. ICT infrastructure 
technology reference model is depicted in Fig. 16. 


Three important functional requirements that are 
necessary to securely and effectively operationalize and 
manage this infrastructure are: 


a) Operations and Services Management — This is 
a collective of software tools and processes that 
allow the management of all the resources inside 
and across the compute data centres, and enable 
the effective utilization of the centres. 

b) Device and Network Management — This is a 
collective of software tools and processes that 
allow the management of all communication and 
field device related resources. 


c 


wa 


Security and Trust Management — This is a 
collective of software tools and processes that 
allow realization, configuration and enforcement 
of various security and trust related policies. 


9.2.1 Compute-data Centre 
The basic ingredients of this substrate are listed below: 


a) Compute cluster consists of compute nodes made 
of general-purpose processors (CPUs) and may 
have specialized processors (like GPUs and other 
customized processing units). These run all the 
software tools and applications for the UDI. 


b 


wm 


Storage cluster consists of nodes made of 
memories, hard disks, non-volatile memories 
as well as archival memories like tape etc., and 
are available as data clusters. These provide the 
physical medium to store all the data associated 
with UDI. 


Data center communications consists of all 
necessary equipment to interconnect the nodes 
of the compute and storage clusters securely and 
efficiently. These will typically consist of routers, 
switches, firewalls etc. 


Cc 


— 


The compute-data centres could be small and locally 
hosted on-premises of a city administration’s office. 


34 


Alternatively, they could also be obtained as a service 
from a cloud provider (as Infrastructure as a service). 


A city might also have combinations of both-called 
a hybrid cloud, as well as have the services obtained 
from multiple cloud providers (multi-cloud). 


The city might also have devices in the field, which 
could offer capabilities of local compute and storage, in 
which case, fog-edge cloud also becomes a part of this 
hybrid/multi-cloud framework. 


9.2.2 Communication Infrastructure 


9.2.2.1 Field communication 


A multitude of field devices provides the city’s digital 
infrastructure the capability to interact with the 
physical world. The communication network that ties 
them together with the city’s digital infrastructure has 
many possibilities and can be wired or wireless. Some 
of the common technologies are listed below. 


a) Wireless technologies: 
1) GSM/LTE as 3G/4G/5G which is the backbone 
of cellular service; 
2) WiFi, WiFi6, 6LoWPan, BLE etc.; and 
3) Sub-GHz like IEEE 802.15.4, NB-IoT, LoRA, 
etc. 
b) Wired technologies: 
1) Ethernet (over copper and optical fibre), 
2) GPON (over optical fibre), and 
3) Field device networks like Modbus, CANBus, 
ProfiBus etc. 
These networks will usually have a set of base 


stations/access points/gateways, that connect the field 
network to the internet (wide area network). 


9.2.2.2 Wide area network (WAN) communication 


Interconnection over the scale of a city or a district 
is achieved using WAN and usually is built on fibre 
optic technologies. The network layer will be based 
on IP (Internet Protocol) with other layers overlaid 
on top (like MPLS). Various advanced networking 
functions like SDN (Software Defined Networking), 
VPN (Virtual Private Networking), Network Slicing 
etc. could be used for large cities with advanced digital 
infrastructures to use more efficiently, provision, adapt 
to real-time needs and manage the network resources. 


9.3 IoT System 


A reference model for an IoT system is shown in 
Fig. 17. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


State/Corporate Consumer Governance 
Users 3 ; : 
Entity Entity Entity 
loT/M2M Data loT/M2M 
Services Management Service Entity 
Entity 
. M2M Area Captive 
Network Public Network 
| Sensors, loT Devices/ 
Physical : Actuators Gateways 


Fic. 17 IoT System TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODEL 


IoT field devices range from sensors (pollution, 
cameras, pressure, wind, rain, water flow, microphones, 
touch screens etc.) to actuators (valves, pumps, 
switches, streetlights, displays, speakers etc.). These 
will come in a variety of forms (smartphones, feature 
phones, IoT devices, etc.). 


The field devices are connected to the external networks 
through IoT gateways. The IoT gateways are usually 
the end points of a larger IP network that interconnects 
all the elements of the city’s digital infrastructure. 


IoT servers host the data being generated by the field 
devices. This data could be further processed or stored 
in raw form. The data (or its derivatives) will be made 
available to the city’s digital infrastructure from the IoT 
servers through standard protocols. 


The IoT servers might also expose additional 
services-especially when the field devices are capable 
of actuation. The services are also exposed through the 
IoT data and service sharing interfaces. 


IoT application software is specific to an application 
domain and helps to marshal the IoT data, transform it 
as well as extract additional insights and information 
from the data coming from the field devices. This 
software could have components that are distributed 
across the IoT system stack. 


IoT system management software is generally domain 
agnostic and is used for management of the various 
components (software, hardware, security etc.) of the 
IoT system. 


Many standards are available for IoT device 
management, like OMA-DM, OMA-LWM2M, 
TR-069, etc. 


35 


Many standards for communications are available like 
HTTP, AMQP, MQTT, COAP etc. 


9.4 Platforms, Tools and Services 


Platforms, Tools and services layer (see Fig. 18) is the glue 
that ties the ICT infrastructure and the IoT systems with 
the Application services and components by providing 
the required frameworks for data stores, message 
queues, application integration, data governance, data 
transformation, etc. On the one hand, these components 
ingress, aggregate and transform the various forms of 
data coming from different sources, both cyber-physical 
and application. On the other hand, they constitute 
the relevant tools and services to present meaningful 
information and interfaces to the Application Services for 
the stakeholders to view the information and enable them 
to make the right decisions at the right time. 


9.4.1 Application and Services Integration Platforms, 
Tools and Services 


Typical stakeholders and users of application and 
services integration platform tools (see Fig. 19) and 
components are the developer community, application 
development startups, application architects, owners 
and administrators and they use different discrete but 
interacting and interrelated set of components. 


App developers and the dvelopment community are 
more concerned with the developer ports, tools, API 
documentation, etc., for creating new applications based 
on the services provided by these components. Typically, 
these are external to the organisation though there can be 
a thriving internal developer community that uses these 
components and services. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Platforms, Tools & Services 


Data Governance => 
Platforms, Tools & 
Services 


Fic. 18 PLATFORMS, TOOLS AND SERVICES TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODEL 


Application Services © 
and Components 


J 


Applications 
Gn) 


Serves 


Fic. 19 APPLICATION AND SERVICES INTEGRATION PLATFORM 


App architects, owners and admins are generally internal 
to the organisation and are concerned with architecting, 
designing and managing these components that help 
the developer community in creating new applications 
for the Smart city. Thus, the App architects, owners and 
admins play an enabling role. 


An enterprise service bus (ESB) implements a 
communication system between mutually interacting 
software applications in a service-oriented architecture 
(SOA) or microservices. It represents a software 
architecture for distributed computing promoting 
agility and flexibility between applications. Its primary 


36 


use is in enterprise application integration (EAI) of 
heterogeneous and complex service landscapes. The 
ESB is implemented in software that operates between 
the applications and enables communication among 
them. Ideally, the ESB should be able to replace all 
direct application to application interactions so that all 
communication takes place via the ESB. The beauty 
of the ESB lies in its platform-agnostic nature and 
the ability to integrate with anything at any condition. 
Though no global standards exist for ESB concepts 
or implementations, the components that form part of 
the ESB are standards based such as message-oriented 
middleware. 


Extract, transform, and load (ETL) is the process 
by which large amounts of data are extracted from 
disparate data sources and consolidated into a single 
database. In the extraction phase, data is parsed and 
evaluated for suitability. During transformation, data is 
manipulated to achieve the format required for storage. 
Some common transformations include the elimination 
of unnecessary columns, calculation of computed 
values, and translation of values such as dates into a 
common format so that the data can be consolidated. 
The data is then loaded into the database at a frequency 
and scope consistent with the organization’s needs. 


Some of the standards that govern the components are: 


a) Platform Standards — W3C standards define an 
open web platform for application development 
that has the potential to enable developers to build 
rich interactive experiences, powered by vast data 
stores, that are available on any device. Although 
the boundaries of the platform continue to evolve, 
industry leaders speak nearly in unison about how 
HTMLS will be the cornerstone for this platform. 


b) Message Queue Standards — Advanced message 
queuing protocol (AMQP) is an approved OASIS 
and ISO standard that defines the protocol and 
formats used between participating application 
components, so implementations are interoperable. 


The MO Telemetry Transport (MOTT) — is an 
ISO standard (ISO/IEC PRF 20922) supported 
by the OASIS organization. It provides a 
lightweight publish/subscribe reliable messaging 
transport protocol on top of TCP/IP suitable for 
communication in M2M/IoT contexts. 


Open API Specification (OAS) defines a standard, 
language-agnostic interface for RESTful APIs 


c 


— 


d 


wm 


IS 18000 : 2020 


that are human as well as machine readable. 
This standard cover API Management and API 
gateway components. (source: https://www. 
w3.org/standards). 


9.4.2 Data Management Platforms, Tools and Services 


Technology architecture should be effectively designed 
(for example, ingestion, data storage, cleansing) to 
handle the variety, volumes and velocity of big data, 
allowing it to be easily understood and retrieved by 
different users. Data management platforms, tools and 
services is shown in Fig. 20: 


a) Data layer should persist data in real time and 
batch; 


b) Should support data models, data marts and cross 
functional, self-service BI and dashboards; and 


c) Should support persistence of semi and 
unstructured data and structured data sets beyond 
1 year for advanced analytics. 


Smart cities shall utilize tools such as Petabyte scale 
data warehouse, in-memory business warehouse and 
Hadoop based big data infrastructure to manage and 
store large data sets. Further, cities shall use ETL 
(extract, transform, load) tools for data integration and 
transformation. These tools help cities bring together 
data from multiple systems into a single place and 
transform it for better insights. 


9.4.3 Data Governance Process, Tools and Services 


A smart city shall utilize data governance tools to 
implement the functionality described in 8.12 and 
depicted in Fig. 21. These tools shall be enterprise 
grade to ensure availability across departments and 
functions in a smart city. 


Application Services and © 
Components 


—— 9) 


Ea Data warehouse | (ES 
Dİ ova) ttn} | p 


BEM Applications 
[1..n] 
| 


Serves 


F3 Archival & | 
(“Backup (1..n) 


E Data replicas | 
Æ On | 
l > | 


Accesses 


Accesses 


Accesses 


ICT Infrastructure 


Fic. 20 Data MANAGEMENT PLATFORMS 


37 


{1..n] 


IS 18000 : 2020 
— Application 2 
Owners 
Manages | | 


Data Owners © Data Owners È 


i = out 


Specifies 
P Man 


Master 1 


A Metadata > 
data 4 
Audits ` 


EM 


Stored in 


Classification 


Data bak > 


Audits 


Audits 


& 


Data Sanitisation > 


Data Quality, Provenance > 


Anonymisation Audits: and Audit | 


EAT Manages Maintained in 
MS intan in l 
eS “et 
Management 
Custodians | ESC 
Platforms [1...n] 


Data Governance Platforms, THE and Services 


Uses 


Data $ 


E 


Auditor 


Fic. 21 DATA GOVERNANCE PROCESS, TOOLS AND SERVICES 


9.4.4 Analytics Platforms, Tools and Services 


Extracting meaning and insights from data and then 
using them to drive the various business processes will 
be the true hallmark of a smart city. 


9.4.4.1 Tools and platforms 


Various tools and platforms exist to provide classical 
analytics capabilities and are built on top of structured 
data (which might be stored in relational databases). 
These tools could be standalone or be integrated with 
database engines. 


These are usually easy to use and targeted as business 
users so that they can easily extract operational insights. 


They support enterprise business intelligence, self 
service capabilities. Many tools have a low cost 
footprint and are open source. 


They also provide connectivity to data in cold and 
warm storage, allowing for both real time dashboarding 
for most current data and analysis of data beyond 1 year 
seamlessly. 


The platforms should be able to handle big data 
and allow for exploratory data analysis, workflow 
automation and component registry management 
features to support data discovery and mining. 


9.4.4.2 Machine learning and artificial intelligence 
(ML and Al) frameworks 


Handling unstructured data and creating deeper models 
from them require using techniques from Machine 
learning and artificial intelligence. 


38 


ML and AI frameworks usually work on unstructured 
data like text, speech, video as well as structured data. 


These frameworks allow: 


a) Development of new tools and services based on 
custom needs and new kinds of data; and 


b) Model building, model deployment, and model 
validation. 


9.4.4.3 Privacy preserving analytics 


Advent of new techniques has now made it possible to 
perform analytics on data, without sharing the raw data 
to untrusted users. 


These frameworks include distributed or federated 
machine learning, edge analytics, confidential 
computing etc. 


9.4.5 GIS Platforms, Tools and Services 


Geo-spatial enablement for smart cities can be provided 
by GIS platforms, tools and services. 


Interconnected GIS platforms from multiple 
departments/organizations will allow a complete 
geo-spatial map of the city to be constructed, with 
different platforms providing different layers. 


Besides providing basic services of serving geo-spatial 
data, GIS platforms can also provide value added 
services, like answering complex geo-spatial queries. 


Platform capabilities of geospatial hub is summarized 
in Table 5. 


Table 5 Platform Capabilities of Geospatial Hub 
( Clause 9.4.5 ) 


Enterprise GIS Properties 

a) COTS based configurable open standard platform 

b) It shall have Base map provisions with templatized urban 
management solutions to be easily used by Non-GIS 
experts. It may also include CAD tool set and 3D mapping. 

c) Ensure data storage and management around a GIS 
database 

d) Domain specific data model 

e) Should follow an open architecture 

f) Shall have open APIs 

g) Must be OGC certified for seamless integration. It shall 
support open geo-spatial consortium (OGC) and open web 
services, such as WMS, WFS, WCS, WMTS, WPS, KML, 
GeoJSON and 13S for 3D rendering 

h) Shall have integrated image processing capabilities 

» It shall be device independent and OS independent 

k) Shall incorporate the GIS ready format (2D and 3D) for 
drone images 

m) Shall be multiple RDBMS supported 

n) Shall provide seamless integration to IoT sensors 

9) Shall facilitate versioned editing 

r) Shall facilitate COTs based advanced locational analytics 

s) Shall facilitate advanced Geo-Processing, Geo-coding, 
Geo-fencing, Geo-tagging, Geo-triggering 

t) COTs based integrated content management, user 
management with single sign-on and enterprise log-in 
(Active Directory LDAP) 

v) Shall support system security architecture at application 
level, network level, OS level and RDBMS level. 

q) Support standard applications development tools in order 
to enable app developer ecosystem 

r) The system shall be big data ready with ability to ingest 
unstructured data and unlabelled data 

s) The system shall be cloud ready 

t) Promote enterprise data sharing at internal and external 
levels 

u) Facilitates workflow based configurable dynamic spatial 
dashboards 

v) Workflow based integrated web and mobile apps 
Use ML and AI to train and inference using tools designed 
to solve urban spatial problems 

w) A hub framework to combine data, visualization, analytics, 
and collaboration technology to enable governments and 
citizens to work together on real-world initiatives that 
tackle the most pressing issues in their communities. 


When implemented on the enterprise level, GIS 
leverages an organization’s existing resources in data, 
staff, and funds by eliminating redundancies and 
streamlining processes. It also provides qualitative 
improvements in operations by responding to issues of 
accountability and customer service. 


39 


IS 18000 : 2020 


9.4.5.1 Enterprise gis platform conceptual architecture 


Enterprise GIS platform connects maps, apps, data, 
and people in ways that help organizations make more 
informed and faster decisions. It accomplishes this 
by making it easy for everyone in an organization to 
discover, use, make, and share maps from any device, 
anywhere, anytime. Furthermore, it is designed to be 
flexible, offering these capabilities through multiple 
implementation patterns and approaches. Together, 
these capabilities and flexible approaches make it easier 
for you to extend the reach of GIS across the enterprise. 


The Apps section illustrates the components of the 
platform that most users interact with, including 
end-user applications such as field apps, dashboard 
apps, descriptive information storytelling apps etc. 
Apps connect people and their business workflows 
to the platform. Apps are typically used in workflows 
that follow one or more of the patterns of use 
(mapping and visualization, data management, field 
mobility, monitoring, analytics, design and planning, 
decision support, constituent engagement, and sharing 
and collaboration). For example, the sharing and 
collaboration pattern extends geospatial capabilities to 
everyone in the organization by providing a destination 
(website and simple apps) where knowledge workers, 
executives, and field workers can discover, use, make, 
and share maps. A person capturing data in the field 
with mobile apps is following the field mobility 
pattern. A decision-maker using operations Dashboard 
to observe the real-time information created by field 
workers is following the decision support pattern. 
The Portal component of the platform organizes users 
and connects them with the appropriate content and 
capabilities based on their role and privileges within 
the platform. The portal uses a person’s identity to 
deliver the right content to the right person at the right 
time. The portal provides access controls, content 
management capabilities, and a sharing model that 
enables users to share information products across the 
organization. 


The infrastructure component includes the hardware, 
software, services, and data repositories that are the 
core of the enterprise GISs System. Numerous best 
practices, including load balancing, high availability, 
workload separation, and publication strategies, 
are linked from and associated with the platform 
infrastructure. The external systems and Services 
components include other systems that either provide 
services to Enterprise GIS or consume GIS services 
to geospatially enable their capabilities. The ability to 
easily geo-enable other enterprise business systems is a 
key capability of enterprise GIS. 


9.4.6 Multimodal Interactions Platforms, Tools and 
Services 


Stakeholder interactions can span multiple modalities 
like text, voice and video. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


They can also span multiple languages. 


The interaction medium can be via messaging to 
smartphones, SMS, emails, phone calls, chatbots or other 
social media platforms or public media platforms like 
public displays, speakers, radio, TV, news media etc. 


Utilizing platforms and building messaging applications 
over that, will enable more efficient, cost effective and 
consistent ways to connect various stakeholders. 


9.4.7 IT Operations and Management Platforms, Tools 
and Services 


Platforms with standardized interfaces as well as many 
open-source platforms are available to manage various 
IT services. Use of automation tools will enable efficient 
handling of repetitive tasks and escalate only important 
events to human operators for their attention. 


9.4.8 Business Process Platforms, Tools and Services 


Business process design, documentation and 
implementation tools and platforms using standards like 
BPMN etc can be used to allow creation and management 
of various standard operating procedures. 


Various platforms provide integration with several 
well-known IT tools and workflows and have standard 
interfaces to allow integration into any IT environment. 
Use of automation tools will enable efficient handling 
of repetitive tasks and escalate only important events to 
human operators for their attention. 


Standards based documentation of business processes 
will allow easy sharing of processes across different 
cities and allow quick adoption of new processes via 
modification of existing processes. 


9.4.9 Security, Authorisation and Authentication 


Platforms, Tools and Services 


Diverse platforms based on open standards exist for 
identity management, single sign on authentication, 
multi-factor authentication, PKI infrastructure, 
Authorisation workflows and authorization policy 
creation and enforcement. 


9.4.10 OT Operations and Management Platforms, Tools 
and Services 


Platforms based on open standards to manage field 
devices and other assets. Any globally acceptable 
standard like OPC can be used as one of the standards for 
SCADA systems integration. 


9.4.11 Data and ICT Services Exchange and Sharing 
Interfaces 


Data exchange via standardized interfaces and data 
models will facilitate interconnection and interoperation 
of various IT systems. 


Catalogues for data and service discovery will allow 
data and ICT service providers to list their offerings. 
Standardized representation of this information will 
allow easy searching and indexing. 


40 


Data resources and ICT services exposed via self- 
described interfaces will allow automating the process 
of data and service consumption. Existing standards like 
JSON-LD, SOAP etc can be used for supporting this. 


Distributed authorization framework supporting creation 
of access control policies, and enforcement of policies to 
regulate access will support a market ecosystem. 


9.4.12 New ICT Services Platforms, Tools and Services 


The UDI needs to be able to continuously evolve with 
new functionalities and services, which get seamlessly 
integrated into the existing system. 


This can be achieved if standardized application, service 
and data integration methodologies and tools are adopted. 


9.5 Application Services and Components 


9.5.1 Digitalization and Data Capture Tools and 
Applications 


Tools for scanning, curating and managing documents; 
Forms for capturing data from people via smartphone 
apps, web apps, Chatbots, message boards, social media 
scraping to be used to get citizen/stakeholder feedback; 
IoT framework to capture data from devices; Application 
IoT to capture data from applications; tools/applications 
to digitally enable all business processes, to capture data 
into a digital form and share via APIs, so they can be used 
smartly. 


This data capture/digitalization needs to be governed by 
certain key properties like: 

a) Privacy preservation of PII; 

b) Ownership of data and ability of owner to control its 

sharing; 

c) Non-repudiability via signatures; 

d) Data provenance via signatures and other means; 

e) Data security via encryption in motion and rest; and 


f) Data governance for quality, normalization, access 
control, retention and archival. 


9.5.2 Multi-Modal Interaction Applications 


Information dissemination via broadcast messaging and 
one-to-one communication across multiple modalities 
and technologies will ensure various stakeholders are 
easily and efficiently connected together. 


Smartphone apps, kiosks, web-apps, SMS, chatbots, 
public displays devices and social media platforms 
are some of the current methods for interactions. 
Multi-modal interaction applications is depicted in 
Fig. 23. 


9.5.3 City Domain Applications 


Applications in verticals like healthcare, mobility, 
utility, education, retail, labour, trade, etc. allowing for 
connectivity and solutions to be provided by a broader 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Application Services and Components © 
M= Digitalization & Data |“ City Domain d ERP G2X o 
EB Capture Tools and Applications[1..n] _Applications[(1..n] Applications, 
Applications[1..n] Services and 
aT: Tools 
m ICT Services Multi-Modal Command and Analytics and 
~ Enablement Interaction —. Control Dashboard 
T a Application | Applications/1..n) | Application Applications (1..n) 
| 
Fic. 22 APPLICATION COMPONENTS AND SERVICES TECHNOLOGY REFERENCE MODEL 
Urban Lo cal K mart Cit 7% C g 
Body SPV y | 
© 
mo Dashboards [1...n] Mobile Apps Web Portals 
EN [1..n] [1..n] 
1 Reporting E Collabration Kiosks and 
CI systems [1...n] Service 


| 


Tools (1...nJ | 


services 
Sias dee 


Stakeholder Interactions 


| Centres 11...nl 


Fic. 23 MULTI-MODAL INTERACTION APPLICATIONS 


41 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ecosystem, that build on the UDI, will contribute to the 
richness and effectiveness of the UDI. 


9.5.4 ERP Applications 


ACOTS based standardized ERP application to manage, 
plan and operate all aspects of an enterprise, will allow 
for efficient implementation of administrative activities. 
Such applications can also be hosted and offered as 
services to various departments. The ERP application, 
while modular, should be capable of providing all the 
functionality described in section 8.5 out of the box as 
a single integrated platform. The application should be 
built to scale to handle an entire city’s load and should 
utilize latest technologies in Enterprise Information 
management such as in-memory computing and data 
governance and management. 


9.5.5 G2X Application Services and Tools 


Government to citizen, government to business and 
government to government services can be automated 
and digitally enabled via various applications and tools. 
These will also provide ability to manage the entire 
business process as well as track the fulfilment of these 
services. 


9.5.6 ICT Services Enablement Application 


The lifecycle management of ICT applications on the 
UDI covering their provisioning, resource allocation 
(in terms of computer, network and storage resources), 
access control and API provisioning for their 
interconnection, monitoring for their performance and 
service levels, will be enabled through this application. 
In addition, access to the source code repositories 
(where applicable), will be enabled. 


9.5.7 Command and Control Application 


Integrated command and control centre to oversee the 
entire operation of a city, will support all the command 
and control functionalities. 


9.5.8 Analytics and Dashboard Applications 


Insights and dashboards will be generated via these 
groups of applications. 


10 INFORMATION REFERENCE MODEL 


The information reference model as depicted in 
figure 24 consists of the following conceptual models: 


a) Data Reference Model: which models data; 


b) Data Access Model: which models the access to 
data; 


c) Information Extraction Model: which models the 
process of information extraction from data; and 


d) Insights Extraction Model: which models the 
process of insights extraction from data. 


These models can be extended/instantiated to create 
concrete models for any use case. 


10.1 Data Access Model 


Accessing data by any stakeholder involves interacting 
with a data exchange interface to connect with data sets 
and then access either the data set as a whole or get 
specific data items from the set through a selection, or 
querying process. The data access model is depicted in 
Fig. 26. 


The data set itself gets created by a data collection 
process, which could be entirely automated or could 
have human steps. 


Each data set has a clearly designated owner 
(data owner), who is responsible for the data set in 
terms of providing permissions for sharing/exchanging 
and sets the policies for the same. 


The process of managing the data collection, its 
curation, normalization/transformation, storage and 
any other aspects is called data governance and 
management and is performed by a data steward who is 
a specialist in these aspects. 


Information 
Reference Model 


Data Reference 
Model 


Insights Extraction | 
Model 


Information 
Extraction Model 


Fic. 24 INFORMATION REFERENCE MODEL 


42 


IS 18000 : 


Uses 


Kl 


MakesAvailable Impacts 


Produces Impacts 


Handles 


Participates In 


Supports 


=e 


MakesAvailable Impacts 


Produces Impacts Participates In 


Fic. 25 Data Access MoDEL 


Handles 


43 


2020 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Example 1: Fault in a circuit breaker triggers an alert for the field agent. 


Data Owner: Power distribution company. 


Data Collection Process: IOT enabled continuous monitoring of circuit breaker status. 


Data Set: Event stream of circuit breaker status. 


Stakeholder: Maintenance supervisor uses an application, which subscribes to the event stream Analytics of 
this stream will trigger an alert to the appropriate field agent. 


Data Steward: Will ensure that this event stream data is made available to the appropriate users. 


Data Governance: Will ensure that the power distribution company can set the access permissions appropriately 
for sharing of this event stream. 


Example 2: Sharing of current availability of ICU beds in various hospitals 


Data Owner: Individual hospital. 


Data Collection Process: Hourly updation via web form or API directly from the hospitals IT system. 


Data Set: Number of ICU beds and the support capabilities. 


Stakeholder: Citizens will access this data through their own app (developed by 3" party). Ambulance service 
providers and first responders can also use this data during emergencies. 


Data Steward: SPV will ensure that this data is made available to all health related applications/consumers. 


Data Governance: Periodic audits to ensure correctness/accuracy/timeliness/liveness/accessibility will be 
performed as part of this. 


— 4 — Describable and/ 

> | or Measurable 
Meta Data Has Data —Pertains to Thing and/or digitally 

— | representable 


DataSet 


Contains 


Anything 


MadeUpOf MadeUpOf HasValuesFor 3 
| Sed 
| Other Info Data Model | Attributes and 
| Madeupof-Dy their properties 
CapturesSemanticsOf 
OptionallyUses Uses OptionallyUses 
Taxonomy Vocabulary 


10.2 Data Reference Model 


Data is the digital representation about a Thing”. 


StructuredAs — OrganizedAs 


Fic. 26 Data REFERENCE MODEL 


Data is contained in a dataset, which is an asset and unit 
for management and governance”. 


Thing is a universal item anything that is measurable, Data can be structured (that is, organized into fields like 
describable or digitally representable, is the subject for in a excel file), unstructured (for example, text document) 


data. 


3 https://schema.org/Thing 


or semi-structured (for example, video streams). 


9 InDEA Framework and Federal Enterprise Architecture Data 
Reference Model v2.0. 


44 


Typically, structured data has names for the fields 
(commonly called attributes), and these attributes map 
to the attributes of the thing. In this document, we 
represent even unstructured data in this format, wherein 
the unstructured data has only one attribute (which we 
can call data value, for example, with the content of 
the data value field being the entire unstructured data). 


A Data Model as depicted in Fig. 25 describes these 
attributes and their properties (as far as pertaining to 
their digital values). A basic data model might stop at 
listing out the attribute names and the datatypes of the 
values of the attributes (for example, string, boolean, 
integer etc.). A data model is an essential ingredient of 
the meta data (data about the data)”. Various standard 
formats exist for describing meta-data. 


Amore extensive data model might draw or connect the 
attribute names to vocabularies which are commonly 
understood by practitioners in the domain. Further 
organization of parts of vocabularies as taxonomies 
(that is, hierarchical or structured arrangement of terms) 
could provide additional interpretability to the data. A 
vocabulary might also be organized or structured as an 
ontology, which captures the meaning (semantics) of 
the vocabulary in terms of the meaning of the actual 
Thing, its properties, and its relationships. 


The above is an abstract model and specific meta data 
models, vocabularies, taxonomies and ontologies should 
be developed for specific domains and standardized, to 
allow or easy sharing and interpretation of data across 
different stakeholders. 


10.3 Information Extraction Model 


Figure 27 depicts Information Extraction Model. 
“Information is defined as data that are endowed with 


Example: Understanding the spread of an epidemic 


IS 18000 : 2020 


meaning and purpose “9. Data needs to be rendered in 
an appropriate context, in a meaningful way, to make 
sense to the stakeholder. 


A part of the context is provided by the question being 
asked by the seeker. 


For example, to the question “When is bus 
276 scheduled to arrive at Mantri Mall stop?” and this 
provides the context as “The bus 276 will arrive at”. In 
data from the bus schedule, “10.30” is interpreted using 
the metadata (“description: time, format: UTC”), and 
is then rendered to provide useful information to the 
stakeholder. 


Data Context is itself data and can also be supplied 
with data in general. For example, the query “show me 
where the current accident is” is rendered by showing 
the accident spot (which is geolocation data), rendered 
on a map of the locality (which is GIS data). 


10.4 Insights Extraction Model 


Insights require deeper analysis of data and its context 
and will usually involve an interactive process of 
working with data, by a human expert. These also form 
the basis for creating new analytics as well as predictive 
models. Once the algorithms for prediction/analytics 
is finalized, it can be deployed as per the information 
extration model. Insights extraction model is depicted 
in Fig. 28. 


While the foundation of data, meta-data and data context 
remains the same, the process of extracting insights is 
more involved than that for extracting information. 


To be able to understand how an epidemic spread, one needs to analyse multiple datasets together. These 


include: 
a) symptoms data set as reported by health apps, 
b) test reports by testing labs, 


c) sales of specific medicines as reported by pharmacies 


d) patients admitted with specific symptoms as reported by hospitals; and 


e) mobility data as extracted from telecom operators and social media companies. 


A joint analysis of all these (and perhaps more) data sets is required to develop an understanding of the 
spatio-temporal spread of the epidemic. This is an iterative process requiring a continuous back and forth 
interaction between the human analysts and the data sets, until hypotheses are validated. Once the insights 
are obtained, these can be converted into predictive models, which can then be deployed to raise alerts 


about emerging hotspots. 


3 ISO: IEC 11179: Information Technology-MetaData Registries 
(MDR) 


© Wallace, Danny P. (2007). Knowledge Management: Historical 
and Cross-Disciplinary Themes. Libraries Unlimited. pp. 1-14. 
ISBN 978-1-59158-502-2. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Uses 


MakesAvailable Impacts 


Produces Impacts 


Handles 


Participates In 


€-— Enhances.-- 


Consumes 


--Resultsin---- 


Uses Uses 


> IsFramedBy 


Produces 


Initiates 


Provides 


Fic. 27 INFORMATION EXTRACTION MODEL 


46 


IS 18000 


Consumes 


-Has-- 


--Resultsin ----- 


Initiates 


IsDescribedBy 


Fic. 28 INSIGHTS EXTRACTION MODEL 


47 


:2020 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4 ) 
SYSTEM OF SYSTEMS EXAMPLE 


A-0 In any city, various departments will be in various 
stages of creating a digital infrastructure for their own 
departments. Usually these happen independently and 
hence leads to Silos. An Integrated Command and 
Control Centre (ICCC) can be setup to a) bring in 
relevant data from these various diverse systems into 
a single place for a holistic analysis and aid in better 
decision making by the city’s municipal corporation, 
b) better coordinate the actions between various 
stakeholders namely different public and private 
service providers, citizens and government bodies, to 
allow more effective and efficient outcomes of various 
initiatives and projects. 


The abstract architecture described in this standard, is 
realized as independent service components, but which 
are interconnected via the ICCC. 


A-1 CLASSES OF IT SERVICE COMPONENTS 


IT systems can be classified into four main classes, that 
can be converted into service components via the Data 
and ICT Sharing functionality of the ICTRA: 


a) City Digital Sensing System (CDSS); 
b) City E-Government System (CEGS); 


c) Citizen Government 
(CGCS); and 


d) City Geographical Information System (CGIS). 


Collaboration System 


A-2 CITY DIGITAL SENSING SYSTEM (CDSS) 


Cities are instrumenting their physical infrastructure 
with sensors and creating a city digital sensing system. 
CDSS is an IoT platform and the primary entities 
in this platform are the smart devices (sensing and 
actuator devices) and smart gateways. Each domain, 
like transportation, traffic, surveillance, street lighting, 
environmental monitoring, utility services monitoring 
etc, can have its own IoT platform, provided by an 
independent vendor. 


The data from these can then be integrated into the 
ICCC for better decision making, control, management 
and disaster response. In addition, through the ICCC, 
the data can be made available to other stakeholders 
(other departments, citizens etc). 


A Smart City Applications 


Kec Smart Transport 
© incidens ileri Mgmt. 
.“ 


Smart Education 
© targeted Learring 
* interactive Content 
0 NS © Demand kerecastng 
© Houle Upim * Kemere Mgmt $ 
© AMS LIM . Arimndanca Magen. 
© Pisening& scheduling e Online Frame 


A... A : An 


Smart Waste Mgmt. 
© Route Management 
* Route Oprimkaticn 


2 AVIS PK, ORL 
$ Trai Enlorcemeni 


. 
© Asal Manager 


© Fisis Force Artendance o» 

tracking e 5 

* Crowd Monitoring 

© Uiterng & Lotenng 
Mamt. 


Citizen App. Other Smart Elements 
Citizen Services 
Chy Spec UC 
Help dezk/ SUS 


‘Smart Utilities 


Notifications 
Mobility LTA 
Blogs/Polls 


.....u. 


t 

© LgulableOstrkuton © LOS 

© Demand Forecast © Parking Management 
© Sman Environment 


City Unified API and Data Exchange (Catalogue, Developer Portal, API Discovery) 


API Access, Authorization & Governance 


Fang | 
Survellance Camera DE 


City Digital Sensing 
System (CDSS) 


[PE : Service Providers] 


City E-Governance 
System (CEGS) 


Government 


[PE : Spaces, Overlays] 


City Geo Spatial 
System (CGSS) 


Security 


IT Operations & Deployment 


System Boundary | 


Interface Specification DE 


Data Exchange Format 


Fic. 29 SYSTEM OF SYSTEMS EXAMPLE 


48 


ICCC centres are also referred to as digital twins as they 
represent the digital state of the physical infrastructure. A 
summary of the key attributes of these systems are: 


a) Primary entity: Smart devices and assets; 
b) Specification: Device identity and asset identity; 


c) Primary data sources: IoT data sensed by the smart 
devices and non-IoT data sources; and 


d) Data Type: Time Series data, video data and device 
metadata. 


A-3 CITY E-GOVERNMENT SYSTEMS (CEGS) 


Traditionally cities are managed by municipal bodies 
through various service provider organizations. Service 
provider organizations define the workflow and the SLA’s 
to be adhered to in providing a government to citizen 
service (in general all G2G, G2B and G2C services). 


Primary entities in these systems are the service providers 
and service provider organizations. Through the 
e-government systems citizens and other stakeholders’ 
requests and services are managed, and tasks are tracked 
to their closure. 


All the service provider IT systems can be integrated with 
the ICCC via the applications and services connectivity 
functionality. In addition, the municipal corporation’s 
own IT system for ERP systems can be integrated to 
allow it to perform its operations more efficiently. 


This integration can be facilitated by having each service 
provider organization provided with a unique identifier. A 
summary of the key attributes of these systems are: 
a) Primary Entity: Service provider organization and 
service providers; 
b) Specification: Service provider identity, service 
requests 
c) Primary Data Source: Service request ID, event ID 


d) Data Type: Service request metadata and 
transactional data 
A-4 CITIZEN GOVERNMENT 


COLLABORATION SYSTEMS (CGCS) 


Primary function of the citizen government collaboration 
system is to manage the interaction between citizens (and 
other stakeholders like businesses) and the governments. 
Citizens are the primary entity in this system. 


City governments will use these platforms for notifying 
citizens of key events, developments and achievements 
in the city. Citizens shall be able to provide their 
inputs/feedback on the functioning of government in an 
anonymous way. 


This system also has integration hooks with external 
social networking platforms to pull in information: 


a) Primary Entity: Citizen; 

b) Specification: Citizen identifier; 

c) Primary Data Source: Citizen profile information, 
social messages; and 


49 


IS 18000 : 2020 


d) Data Type: Social messages (textual, images, 
videos). 


A-5 CITY GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (CGIS) 


Most government departments need a GIS system to 
capture their geographically distributed assets, specific 
to their domain, in a precise manner. For example, the 
water utilities board needs to have a precise map of all 
its piping, water treatment plants, valve locations, field 
agents, vehicles etc. Another example is the traffic police 
need precise information of all their stations, surveillance 
cameras, roads, junctions etc. 

The city’s ICCC can host a GIS system that provides the 
base maps including city boundary, municipal boundary, 
zone boundary, ward boundary, street maps, DEMs, 
satellite images, land use and all other overlays, like city 
properties and assets. 

All the other GIS systems can provide only additional 
layers of interest to their domain, while sourcing any 
other layers as needed from other systems (through the 
ICCC). This will enable: 


a) Better management and update of ground truth 
(a single entity will be responsible for any layer); 


b) Reduce costs via sharing of resources; and 


c) Allow better coordination between various entities 
(road cutting can avoid cutting optical fibre or water 
pipes). 

A summary of the key attributes of these systems are 
listed below: 


1) Primary Entity: GIS Layers; 
2) Specification: Asset and layer identifier; 


3) Primary Data Source: Base maps, map overlays 
and other layers; and 


4) Data Type: GIS. 


A-6 SYSTEM OF 
INTERACTIONS — EXAMPLE 


SYSTEMS 


This section describes the interaction between various 
systems for an example use case of Citizen Safety. The 
interaction diagrams describe the source of the request, 
the actor performing the request, the primary system of 
interaction by the actor and the message flow between 
different systems to complete the use case. 


Use Case Scenario: Let us assume that a citizen logs 
into a social networking platform and tweets that 
he/she is in danger. The outcome that the city would 
like to achieve is to identify the location of the citizen 
in danger, assign tickets to police personnel responsible 
for (or nearby) to that location to immediately reach 
out to resolve the issue. Also, the city would like to 
automatically brighten up the streetlights closer to the 
area and turn on the cameras to feed in information to 
the command centre for monitoring and coordination. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Social 


Networking CGCS CEGS CDSS CGIS 
Platform 


i 1 
I | 

I L] 

3 : : 
I ! 

I | 

i | 

Tweets: In Danger—B! ! 
| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 

| 


x 


1 1 
l l 
| | 
| l 
| | 
| | 
| l 
| I 
| I 
| I 
| | 
| I 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| I 
| I 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| l 
I | 
| | 
I 


i] 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| | 
-—(msg : 'Citizen in Danger pi 
| 


| (deviceType, lat, long, space ID) 
Query for list of cameras 

DeviceResponse : & street lights 
~ activation with feed URL 
ticketResponse 


(status, currentAct ion) © 


publishReponseTweet : 


| 
| 
| 
Tweet 
ntent ' 
Conte | 1 gueryRetrieveTweets : 
HashTag : City (hashtag[]) 7 
ID, Issue, | I 
Location, . Response : (tweet[])—P} 
Description | l 
1 createT icket : 
1 
| 1 \ P 
I I priority :'HIGH') Retrieves service provider map overlay 
t l based on location shared b 
l ! m ' 
| I ' 1 
i I assignT icketT oService Provider : i 
i | (serviceProviderld : police) ! 
I I | | 
| | + r | 
i | actuateLights : 
| l | (lat, long, cmd:brighten) 1 
| 1 l 1 
| l | 1 
| 1 | | 
I I | 1 
! I ı CameraFeedReguest : > 
! | (lat, long, serviceProvideriD) ` | 
l ! l listDevices : 
i l 
| 1 
| I 
| 1 
i | 
| I 
| 
| 
| 


1 
_(status, localizedLanguageTest) J 
i 
| 


I 
| 
I 
I 
l 
| 
I 
I 
I 
| 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Ci 
| 
I 
| 
I 
I 
| 
I 
; ~ performed by automated : 
i 


emine vk gi 


1 
1 
a | 
1 
| 
| 
| 
| 
chatbots ; 


Fic. 30 Use CASE OF CITIZEN SAFETY 


Besides this reactive and immediate usage of such locations and FIR reports, public transport locations, 
a system, further analysis on historical data can be etc., can be done in a holistic way, leading to a more 
done, leading to better urban planning and deployment comprehensive plan to improve citizen safety levels. 
of various city resources to make the city safer. This However, such analysis will be possible only if data 
analysis can look at geo-spatial and temporal hotspots from appropriate government and private systems are 
of complaints, streetlight lighting levels, citizen brought together. 

grievance reports from the localities, police station 


50 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4) 
REALIZING STAKE HOLDER’S EXPECTATIONS 


Fic. 31 REALIZING MUNICIPAL CORPORATION’S CONCERNS 


Each concern of the municipality is covered by a group of functionalities as described above. 


51 


IS 18000 : 2020 


A 
4 


==, 


it, 


— 


Functionalities © 


Command & Control © 


Geo-Spatial Enablement o 


Capabilities&Services 


ji New ICT > 
Enablement 


Government Services © 
Enablement and 
Tracking 


ERP Applications & © 
Services 


City Domain Services © 


IT Operations & © 
Management 


Data & ICT Services, © 
Sharing & Marketplace 


Data Governance & © 
Management 


Connectivity and 
Communication 


Stakeholder i 


Application & Device © 
Connectivity and 
Communication 


OT Operations & © 
Management 


Digitalization and Data © 
Capture 


ICT Security & © 
Authorization 


Fic. 32 REALIZING SMART City SPV’s CONCERNS 
Each concern of the smart city SPV is covered by a group of functionalities as described above. 


52 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ws 


a 


| | Vw... v, 


Fic. 33 REALIZING CITIZEN’ S CONCERNS 


Each concern of the citizen is covered by a group of functionalities as described above. 


53 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 4 ) 
REALIZING FUNCTIONALITIES 


Each functionality is realized by a combination of to not clutter the diagram, only primary dependencies 
underlying components, tools and services. However, are denoted. 


| 


imi 
= 


= 


Functionalities 


i 
able 
l 
ICT Infrastructure 


Fic. 34 REALIZING FUNCTIONALITIES 


‘Supports: 


© 


işi 
d- 


b o 


54 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 8.5 ) 
ERP APPLICATIONS AND SERVICES 


This section describes in detail the functionalities 
expected of an ERP system in a city/ULB. The 
city/ULB shall aim to implement a standard, COTS 
based solution(s) that works as a single integrated 
platform for expenditure management and perform 
day to day administrative functions. The below section 


describes the functionalities described in section 
8.5.1 to 8.5.5 in more detail: 
D-1 ACCOUNTS, BUDGET, INVESTMENTS 


AND PLANNING 


D-1.1 Budgeting 
Budgeting is a combination of 4 functions, namely: 
a) Budget maintenance; 
b) Budget execution; 
c) Grants management; and 
d) Budget closing and financial reporting. 


This module helps with maintenance, 
management, and monitoring of public funds, 
integrates operational and accounting processes 
with a maintained budget, help users manage 
grant information and provide status indicators of 
the grant process according to the administrative 
requirements of their sponsors and covers 
the planning, standardizing, scheduling, and 
monitoring of financial and budget close activities. 


Key features of this module include creation of budget 
structure, update and approve budgets, allow budget 
increases from revenue, budget release and reporting. 
It enables real-time and parallel budget controls that 
can operate on multiple levels, helping to monitor 
and control funds while reducing procurement and 
operating costs. Users can maintain master data 
components for managing, controlling, and reporting 
based on the sponsor’s administration requirements. 
Users can further reconcile budgetary accounting data 
with financial and managerial accounting. 


D-1.2 Financial Accounting 


An accrual based double entry accounting system 
covering functionalities like general ledger, accounts 
receivable and accounts payable. This module is used 
to record all financial transactions that occur on a 
day-to-day basis. All postings to accounting are 
triggered in response to operative transactions. 
In addition to above, this module covers various 
accounting flavours such as Asset Accounting, 
inventory accounting, Joint venture accounting, 
contract accounting as well as financial closing and 
reporting. 


55 


The system can run an integrated acquire-to-retire cycle 
for all assets including functions like depreciation, 
capitalization and post capitalization, value and 
monitor material and work-in-process inventories 
according to legal regulations and management 
accounting requirements and monitor the compliance 
status, due dates and generate the supported compliance 
reports. System can also generate and submit ad hoc or 
non-periodic reports. 


D-1.3 Investment and Treasury 


Investment and teasury module helps deliver functions 
like cash and liquidity management, payments and bank 
communications and debt and investment management. 
The cash and liquidity function helps monitor cash 
positions, make bank transfers, approve payments, 
create cash pools, liquidity planning and perform cash 
flow analysis and forecasting. The key feature of this 
module is to forecast the future liquidity trend and 
track the status and trace liquidity planning cycle to get 
an early warning indicator of liquidity shortages or to 
be used as a steering tool for medium-and long-term 
investment or borrowing. 


Further, this module helps streamline, control and gives 
better transparency into communications with banks. 
Automated payment workflows streamline routing 
and approval processes and ensures compliance by 
using rules-based approval workflows that guarantee 
proper payment approvals and documentation. Using 
this module, the system can portray the process for 
managing liabilities and capital investments, Manage 
Financial transactions (such as securities, money 
market, derivatives, securities lending, etc.), manage 
financial position, calculate NPVs, determine market 
risks of financial transactions, and so on. 


D-1.4 Financial Planning and Analysis 


Financial planning and analysis module is a central, 
integrated place for all financial planning data. It also 
provides real-time access to master data and actual data 
to compare with the plan data to determine the success 
of the financial units. This module captures costs by 
cost center and defines the output of the cost center in 
terms of activity types. It allows the city to determine 
the costs incurred by each product/services in order to 
successfully manage the portfolio. These costs can be 
broken down into each step of the value chain mapping 
the quantity flow with the values of Finance. Finally, it 
enables the city to analyze the profitability of various 
cost objects. It shows contribution margins in real time 
and offers detailed views for further analysis. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


D-2 ASSET, LAND AND REAL ESTATE 
MANAGEMENT 


D-2.1 Maintenance Operations 


Asset management process starts with mapping the 
operational structures to technical objects to create 
maintenance master data. This can efficiently manage 
and evaluate the technical assets and maintenance 
objects, monitor the costs involved and allow for a 
faster evaluation of the maintenance data. Maintenance 
Planning and Scheduling helps the system optimize 
the scope of work and effort required for inspection, 
maintenance, and planned repairs. Maintenance 
Execution allows the system to perform planned 
and unplanned maintenance tasks. It lets users carry 
out preliminary costing, work scheduling, material 
provisioning, and resource planning. 


D-2.2 Linear Asset Management 


Linear Asset Management is another key functionality 
in the asset management module that enables the 
management of the entire lifecycle of linear assets 
like roads, rails, pipelines, or electricity transmission 
lines. The process helps to optimize the reliability, 
availability, maintainability, and safety of the networks 
and infrastructure. It is a comprehensive, integrated 
process that facilitates and connects linear asset 
management activities with enterprise processes and 
data. In addition, the process helps to improve asset 
management effectiveness, efficiency, and strategy, 
thereby boosting asset reliability and return on 
investment. 


D-2.3 Resource Management 


Resource management provides insights into your 
maintenance workload and available capacities 
for current and upcoming maintenance activities. 
This module allows the system to check current and 
forecasted work centre utilization, build one or more 
schedules for a specific target week, and level work 
centre utilization before dispatching the scheduled 
work. The user can get an overview of KPIs related 
to maintenance planning, track utilization of work 
centres, create one or more schedule simulations for 
a target week and check the forecasted utilization at 
weekly and daily level. 


D-2.4 Real Estate Management 


Real Estate Management is a comprehensive software 
solution with the ability to boost revenues by managing 
the real estate portfolio. The module allows the system 
to create a real estate portfolio and integrate with CAD 
drawings to create a 3D visualization of the assets. The 
module allows management of vendor contracts and 
leases, service charge settlement, property revaluation 
and any other third party integration. Another important 
aspect of real estate management is land management. 
This feature integrates the internal view with the public 


56 


and legal view of land. The system can depict land 
registers, parcels and other public registers, link them 
to other master data objects, set up contracts, and run 
reports. 


D-3 PROJECT (WORKS) MANAGEMENT 


D-3.1 Portfolio and Project Management 


This module provides a comprehensive and up-to-date 
view of the entire portfolio of city’s projects to present 
the full extent of project risks and opportunities. It 
allows the user to overcome delays that can occur, as 
information is collected from disparate sources. This 
capability enables the user to define work breakdown 
structures as a basis for hierarchical project accounting. 
Users can plan costs and budgets and track actual 
costs that are tightly integrated with core Business 
processes including expenditure [financial accounting], 
maintenance operations, resource management. This 
provides users with better insight into the project 
progress and the project financial performance and 
enables the user to avoid cost overruns in time. The 
system can monitor purchase requisitions, purchase 
orders, and account assigned to work breakdown 
structures as well as monitor planned and actual project 
progress values. 


The system can create and maintain operative networks 
assigned to work breakdown structures (WBS) and 
determine the chronological sequence of activities 
in a network or a standard network. It can schedule 
activities within a network by determining the earliest 
and latest start and finish dates for each activity. It 
helps standardize and improve project execution and 
reduce associated administrative and system costs, by 
providing reliable project management functions that 
can be deployed independently or integrated into the, 
Human Resources or Financials back-end system. 


Portfolio and project management gathers diverse 
data into dashboards which act as a starting point for 
portfolio analysis. It lets users carry out financial and 
capacity planning for capital projects. Users can further 
evaluate projects based on a set of questionnaires and 
scoring models to assess the impact of each project as 
well the risk assessment associated with it. Users can 
perform What-if analysis by running simulations for 
budget assignment or capacity assignment. 


D-4 PROCUREMENT 
MANAGEMENT 


AND MATERIAL 


D-4.1 Inventory Management 


An inventory management system works on the 
accepted accounting principle of no posting without 
a document. According to the document principle, a 
document must be generated and stored in the system 
for every transaction/event that causes a change in 
stock. It supports the recording of actual stock levels 


(quantities) of materials: Performance of physical 
inventory (stocktaking) and stock adjustments both for 
own stock and for special stocks on periodical basis. It 
also provides stock room management capabilities such 
as material management on levels like storage bin, unit, 
batch, stock status, etc., inbound processing, outbound 
processing and internal warehouse movement. 


D-4.2 Procurement Management 


Procurement management is an amalgamation of 
multiple processes such as sourcing, requisitions, 
purchase order processing, purchase contracts and 
supplier management. Functions like Self-service 
requisitioning help to create, manage, and track 
orders efficiently. The system can create items from 
external catalogues and free-text items. Purchase order 
processing issues an instruction to an external supplier 
to deliver a specific quantity of material at a certain 
point in time, or to perform services within a specific 
period. In this module, the system can create purchase 
orders from existing requisitions, previous purchase 
orders or from scratch. 


Purchase contracts functionality maintains 
long-term agreements with suppliers regarding the 
supply of materials or the performance of services 
within a certain period as per predefined terms and 
conditions. This module lets the system create, 
change and display purchase contracts by type value 
contracts, quantity contracts and so on. Purchasing 
Analytics provides users with centralized analyses 
and the necessary capabilities to better understand the 
procurement areas-both on a holistic level and on a 
more fine-granular level relating to connected systems. 
The module enables users to analyse purchase contracts 
for consumption, analyse overall spend and analyse 
requisitions all by supplier, item or department. 


Finally, the supplier management module gives the 
system the ability to segment and classify suppliers 
based on their capability and operational area. The 
system can create a master data of all suppliers 
capturing details like tax registration, name, address, 
bank details etc. Invoice processing functionality lets 
the system create the supplier invoice with reference to 
a purchase order or without any reference. The invoice 
verification checks the supplier invoice for correctness. 
Before posting the document, the system can simulate 
the supplier invoice in order to display the account 
movements. 


57 


IS 18000 : 2020 


D-5 HR, PAYROLL AND SELF SERVICE 


D-5.1 Core HR and Payroll 


This module is where the system maintains the master 
data for all employees. The system can capture 
all personnel details like demographic, benefits, 
compensation, date of joining, and so on. It creates and 
manages the organization structure, creates, displays or 
assigns jobs, tasks, or staff assignments, manages funds 
and budget, and carries out personnel cost planning and 
analysis. The module provides self service capability 
to both managers and employees. For the managers, 
it provides support in planning, analysis, budgeting, 
recruitment, compensation, employee development, 
and cost management processes on any device. 
Employee Self-services gives employees personalized 
access to their own HR data, processes, and services. 


Further, this module enrols employees in benefits 
plans and terminates enrolments, monitor continuing 
eligibility for plans, monitor provision of evidence of 
insurability, administer retirement plans and manage 
the pension fund including calculation of employee 
contribution and calculation of total benefits. Payroll 
function processes and ensures accurate, on-time 
payrolls for all employees. 


D-5.2 Time and Attendance Management 


Time and attendance management enables recording 
and managing time data effectively and efficiently. 
It provides a comprehensive and effective business 
concept and related processes for manual and automatic 
recording of personnel times. It helps define and manage 
time elements for payroll schedules, and shifts. It further 
allows to define and manage working calendars and 
vacation allowances for your organization. Employees 
can enter absences, attendance, and breaks. Managers 
can approve attendances and absences. 


D-5.3 Skill Management 


Skill management helps to maximize employees’ 
utility within an organization. The system can plan and 
implement specific personnel and training measures to 
promote the professional development of employees. 
Two important functions that are a prerequisite to 
achieving this goal are skill assessment and goals 
and performance management. These functionalities 
help to consolidate employee skill profiles for full 
assessments in a structured and objective approach as 
well as to motivate the workforce by aligning them 
with organization goals. 


IS 18000 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Smart infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Amravati Smart City Development Corporation 
Limited, Mumbai 


ARM, Noida 


Centre for Development of Telematics, 
New Delhi 


Criterion Network Labs, Bengaluru 
Cyan Connode Private Limited, Bengaluru 


E-Goverments Foundation, Bengaluru 
Ericsson India Private Limited, Gurugram 
ESRI, Noida 


European Project SESEI 
Hawlett Packard Enterprise, 
IEEE India, Bengaluru 


India Smart Grid Forum, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Intel India Technology Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 

Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 

New Delhi 

MoHUA Smart Cities Handholding team 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Smart Grid Mission, Ministry of Power, 
Gurugram 


PHYTEC Embedded Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Pune Smart City, Pune 


Oualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Renesas Electronics, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


ProF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Chairman) 


SHRI SIDDHARTH GANESH 


SHRI KUMAAR GUHAN 


SHRI AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
SHRIMATI ANUPAMA CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYAPRAKASH KUMAR 
SHRI KRISHNA Kumar LoHarı (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NIMARE 
Suri MANISH WIDHANI (Alternate) 


SHRI KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN 
SHRI SENDIL KUMAR DEVAR 


Suri VIJAY KUMAR 
SHRIMATI SEEMA JosHi (Alternate I) 
Suri RupesH Kumar (Alternate II) 


SHRI DINESH CHAND SHARMA 
Suri R. DEVARAJAN 


SHRI SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 
Suri Munir MOHAMMED (Alternate) 


Suri REJI KUMAR PILLAI 
SHRIMATI PARUL (Alternate) 


SHRI VASANTH RAJARAMAN 


SHRI C. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI ANANTHA NARAYANAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI SIDHARTHA MOHANTY (Alternate Il) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 
SHRI PADAM VIJAY 
Suri N. KISHOR NARANG 


SHRI MR ARUN MISRA 
Suri GYAN PRAKASH (Alternate 1) 
SHRIMATI KUMUD WADHWA (Alternate ID 


Suri B. VALLAB Rao (Vasu) 


Suri MaNovit BOSE 


DR VINOSH BABU JAMES 
DR Punit Ratuop (Alternate) 


RAVINDRA CHATURVEDI 
SAURABH Goswami (A/ternate) 


58 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Schneider Electric’s industrial software Suri Gourav Kumar HADA 
business-AVEVA, Mumbai SHRIMATI SANGEETA GARG (Alternate) 
Secure Meters Limited, Gurugram Suri PUNEET KHURANA 


Suri KAUSTUBH Parıl (Alternate I) 
Suri UTTAM Komoiya (Alternate II) 
Suri ANIL Menta (Alternate IM) 


Shrama Technologies Private Limited SHRI AMARJEET KUMAR 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai SHRI PRADEEP Kapoor 
SHRI VIKRAM GANDOTRA (Alternate I) 
Suri MANOJ BELGAONKAR (Alternate II) 
Suri Ravi ManiranGa (Alternate III) 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification Surimati LIPIKA KAUSHIK 


(STQC) 
System Level Solutions (India) Private Limited, SHRI DIPEN PARMAR 

Anand Suri Foram Mont (Alternate) 
Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai Suri RAMESH BALAJI 

Suri DEBASHIS MITRA (Alternate) 

Tejas Networks Limited, Bengaluru Dr Kanwar Jit SINGH 
Telecommunication Engineering Center, SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR TYAGI 

Department of Telecommunications, SHRI SUSHIL Kumar (Alternate I) 

New Delhi Suri UTTAM CHAND (Alternate II) 
In Personal Capacity PROF SUPTENDRANATH SARBADHIKARI 
BIS Director General SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri MANIKANDAN K. 
Scientist ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


59 


IS 18000 : 2020 


Panel involved in the Finalization LITD 28/P6 ICT Reference Architecture 


Organization 
IISc 
Intel 
CDOT 
HP 
Shrama Technologies Pvt Ltd 
Egovernments.org 
IISc 
AECOM 


Arm Embedded Technologies Ltd 


L& TSWC 

ESRI 

Secure Meters Ltd 

Tejas Networks 

iDeCK 

iDeCK 

SID-IISc 

SID-IISc 

India Smart Grid Forum 
Egovernments.org 

SAP 

Bangalore Smart City Limited 
SAP 

HPE 

Pune Smart City 

Siemens 

Siemens 

ESRI 

L & T Infotech 

Tata Communications Limited 
Tata Communications Limited 
Tata Communications Limited 
IISc 

Secure Meters Ltd 

STQC 


Representative(s) 


BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Convener) 


SUBRAMANIAN C. 
AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
DEVARAJAN R. 
AMARJEET KUMAR 
KRISHNAKUMAR T. 
ARUN BABU 

P. Vuay KUMAR 
KUMAAR GUHAN 
OMKAR NATH 
VIJAY KUMAR 
UTTAM KOTDIYA 

K. J. SINGH 
Ramya V. P. 
SUSHMA NIRMAL 
SURESH KUMAR 
ABHAY SHARMA 
PARUL SHRIBATHAM 
GAUTHAM RAVICHANDAR 
TULSIDHARAN V. 
ManjunNatH D. 
Sunt PATHEJA 
MANUKUMAR NAIR 
Manorit Bose 
Ravi MADIPADAGA 
SABI SHAW 

RUMA CHAKRABARTY 
LAVANYA NUPUR 
RAKESH TRIVEDI 
ANAND NADAR 
PRAVEEN ARORA 
Poorna TEJASVI 
SANIT PANIKKAR 


Ms Lirika KAUSHIK 


60 


IS 18000 : 2020 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. https://www.opengroup.org/ 


. Maier, Mark W. Architecting Principles for Systems-of-Systems. 
. Lapalme, J., Three Schools of Thought on Enterprise Architecture, IT Professional, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 


37-43, Nov — Dec 2012, doi: 10.1109/MITP.2011.109 


. Service-Oriented Architecture, The Open Group https://www.opengroup.org/soa/source-book/soa/index. 


htm 


. InDEA Framework (India Enterprise Architecture Framework), Ministry of Electronics and 


Information Technology, Govt. of India, 2018 (http://egovstandards.gov.in/sites/default/files/IndEA%20 
Framework%201.0.pdf) 


. Archimate 3.1: https://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/archimate3-doc/toc.html 

. NIST publication “Data loss prevention” 

. Understanding Command and Control, Alberts, D.S., and Hayes, R. E., 2006, CCRP Publication Series 

. ISO/IEC 11179: Information Technology - Meta Data Meta Data Registries (MDR) (Series) 

. https://schema.org/Thing 

. Wallace, Danny P. (2007). Knowledge Management: Historical and Cross-Disciplinary Themes. Libraries 


Unlimited. pp. 1-14. ISBN 978-1-59158-502-2. 


. Open Web Application Security Project (https://owasp.org) 

. IES-City Framework https://pages.nist.gov/smartcitiesarchitecture/ 
. https://www.w3.org/standards 

. https://www.wikipedia.org/ 


61 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 28 (15990). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


