( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978

Indian Standard
CARE CODE OF PRACTlCE FOR AND MAINTENANCE OF BRUSHES
PART (
Brushware
Chairman SHKI SURHASH RANJAN ROY

I

PAN

SET BRUSHES

First Revision )
Sectional Committee, CDC 3I
Representing Prima Brushware, Calcutta

Members A~;RICULT~I~AL MAHEETINQ Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad ADVISER DR S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) Indian Paint Association, Calcutta Dn P. K. BHANDAHI CHEMISC & METALLURQIST-IT, Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) RDSO, LUCKNOW WORKS M A N ,4 o E n C&W ( COACHING), SHOPS, EASTERN RAILWAY, LILUAH ( Alternate ) Army Brush Factory, Delhi SHKI DHARAM BIR SHHI SIRI RAM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI U. B. KANCRAN Kewalraj & Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI KEWAL K. MALHOTRA Brushware Ltd, Kanpur SHRI D. D. MEHRA ~ SHKI 0. P. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. P. MULLICK SHRI P. K. PYNE ( Alfernate ) Raj Brush Industries, Bhopal SHRI S. N. PATEL Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHHI S. S.PURI New Delhi Brushwell & Co, Calcutta SHRI BHOQILALSHAH SHRI JAICHAND MERTA ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, SHRI G. G. SUTAONE New Delhi SHHI S. C. PANDEY ( Affernafr ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright STANDARDS 1978 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Co&rig/u Act ( XXV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978
( Confinucdfrom pugc

1)
Representing Ministry of Defcncc

Members
SHKI D. V. VARMA SHRI NIRMAL SIN~R (Al~cmuts ) Director DR G. M. SAXENA,

( DGI ) ( Ex-oJ%io Membrr )

General, IS1

Director ( Chem ) Sccrrtnrics 5511~1P. S. AROKA Deputy Director

( Chcm ), IS1
( Chem ), ISI

SHRI BHUPINDER SINQH Assistant Director

2

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1958

Indian Standard
CARE CODE OF PRACTICE FOR AND MAINTENANCE OF BRUSHES
PkRT I PAN SET BRUSHES

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 5 June 1978, after the draft finalized by the Brushware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 The life and serviceability of brushes are often reduced by neglect of which a user should know and some simple but important practices before, during and after use. The care and observe as a routine, maintenance are particularly of importance to painters as paint brushes The need, therefore, for supplying undergo maximum wear and tear. basic information on proper care and maintenance of brushes has often been impressed upon the manufacturers. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard, considerable information has been received from the British Brush Manufdcturers' Research Assothrough the courtesy of the British Standards Institution. ciation, Useful information has alsobeen received from the Carriage and Wagon Workshop, Eastern Railway, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, and also from some of the brush manufacturers in the country. 0.4 This standard was first published in 1966. In this revision guidance on the use of various types of brushes to get better performance and longer life has been added. which have been spoilt due to neglect in 0.5 Salvaging of brushes, This may not be exactly a part maintenance, is possible to some extent. of daily care which a brush requires. However, some suggestions for salvaging such damaged brushes have also been recommended in this standard to help the user. 3

IS : 3451 ( Part 1. SCOPE 1.1 This

I ) - 1978

standard lays down the practices to be followed in the care and maintenance of pan set brushes using bristles, animal hair, vegetable fibre and synthetic fibres like nylon monofilament, covered under the following Indian Standard specifications: IS : 384-1971 IS : 486-1973 revision ) IS : 487-1976 (ii) round, IS : 1103-1971 IS : 1104-1968 IS : 4208-1967 IS : 4580-1968 Brushes, Brushes, Brushes, ferrule Brushes, Brushes, Brushes, Brushes, paints sash paints bound artists lettering stencil shaving and tool, varnishes, for paints flat ( third revision ) and varnish ferrule ( second bound,

and varnishes, (i) oval, ( second revision ) ( second revision ) (jrst revision )

2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, 1969* and IS : 707-19687 shall apply.
3. CARE

the definitions

given

in IS : 5()60-

AND MAINTENANCE Due to Insects

OF BRUSHES

BEFORE

USE

3.1 Damage
attack

and Micro-organisms

3.1.1 Insect Damage filling
horse

New and unused brushes are more susceptible to from grubs of beetles, moths, etc, which immediately feed on the material when they hatch out. Other insects, like pig lice and lice, also do such damage.

3.1.2 Damage Due to Bacteria and Moulds - Certain forms of bacteria and moulds, such as mildew, attack the filling material and cause their discoloration, and also rotting. 3.1.3 To prevent insect attack, stored, wrapped in tissue paper or together with a naphthalene flakes brushes except pitch set and nylon suitable insect repellents, such as 19619 ) or p-dichlorobenzene. all types of pan set brushes should be cellophane paper in a closed container or balls ( see IS : 539-1965: ). The monofilament may also be dusted with DDT dusting powders ( see IS : 564

*Glossary of terms used in brushware industr,y. +GIossary of terms applicable to timber and timber products $Specification for naphthalcne ( rpuid ). sspecification for DDT dusting powders ( revid ).

(Jir~f reuj_&n ).

4

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 3.1.4 Pitch set brushes should not be dusted. They should be protected by spraying lightly with liquid emulsion of DDT or BHC and stored wrapped in tissue paper or cellophane paper. 3.1.4.1 In case of brushes made of synthetic fibres, insect attack is As such these brushes may be stored in a closed of little significance. container after being wrapped in tissue paper or cellophane paper. 3.1.5 Flag end of bristles is the most vulnerable point for insect attack. Soft hair brushes are more susceptible to such attack. Brushes should, therefore, be flirted periodically so that any eggs laid in the interval are dislodged. 3.1.6 The presence of water and of the particular organism is essential which is aided by warm conditions. for the development of mildew, Brushes shall, therefore, be High temperature kills such organisms. stored, as far as possible, in a dry atmosphere. 3.2 Soaking in Water

3.2.1 Brushes in which the filling materials are bound directly to the handle ( for example, string bound, leather bound and wire tied brushes ) shall be soaked in water upside down, or alternatively a little water may be poured into the throat each time before use. Expansion of handles and filling materials, when first wetted, stretch the binding so that it becomes It shall, therefore, be tightened again, loose when the brush dries out. Alternatively, a little water poured into the throat of before it is used. the brush may be equally effective. 3.2.2 Metal ferruled brushes filled with bristle or hair or both shall may cause the filling not be soaked in water before use. Such treatment materials to swell to such an extent that the cement and binding are ruptured. Water may cause the handle if made of timber to swell and it may then fit loosely when it subsequently dries out. 3.2.3 Normally for distempering, brushes with dyed filling materials In case brushes with dyed filling materials are to shall not be used. be used especially with a pale coloured distemper the filling materials of the brush shall be washed in several changes of water, if not in thinned distemper, till the washing fluid stands colourless. 3.3 Flirting surface, before loose. The brushes shall be worked with the hand or on a dry use, to ensure that none of the bristles, hairs, etc, is

bristles or hair should be 3.4 Oiling - New paint brushes containing 50 percent of raw linseed kept suspended in a bath containing oil and 50 percent of white spirit ( petroleum hydrocarbon solvent ) before using in oil paint for at least 24 hours, in such a way that the

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 tip ends of the filling material remain at least 12 mm above the bottom of the bath and the ferrule remains about 20 mm above the top level of the bath. Before such treatment the filling materials of the brush may be wrapped with paper to conserve the shape, in such a way that the oil The brush shall be kept suspended in may run inside the wrapping. this way till the same is required for use. It is advisable not to keep a new brush for too many davs in the bath. Just before use, the brush should be rinsed in white spirit and finally in the respective paint so as The use of turpentine oil ( vegetable to remove the last trace of oil. turpentine ) is not advisable as the traces of gum present in the turpentine may interfere with the behaviour of paint. 3.4.1 The wrapped in immediately It is of oil. practice of keepin.g, the brush in cool closed container fresh paper after ollmg, in case the same is not required after oiling is not advisable, as the process may cause drying better to keep it in the bath till required for use.

3.4.2 New shaving brushes whether made of bristle, hair or nylon monofilament should be sterilized properly in a solution of potassium permanganate ( warm ) or at least kept in boiling water for a few minutes before use. 4. CARE 4.1 Choice OF BRUSHES DURING USE

of Brush

4.1.0 Care should be taken in the selection of brushes depending on the natrure of work and the nature of material to be applied and standard of performance and economy. 4.1.1 A brush of the correct type and size should be used in the respective job; for instance in painting curved and roundedjob, corrugated sheets or rods and pipes an oval type of brush is preferable to a flat type Similarly for painting grooves or narrow channels a flat brush of brush. of slightly smaller size or alternatively a sash tool type of brush of requisite size should be used. In case of rough surface a brush with coarse filling materials should be used. 4.1.2 Cement - Cements based on shellac are satisfactory for use in some oil paints but they do not withstand denatured spirit or alkali. Glue which is rarely used as setting cement, is satisfactory for some varnish and denatured spirit, but may not be suitable for aqueous media. Pitch setting brushes should not be used with paints containing solvent like naphtha, oil of turpentine, petroleum hydrocarbon solvents. Vulcanized rubber setting is considered to be the best of all for all purposes as brushes with this type of setting can stand all types of solvent used in paints. Next best is cement based on epoxy resin. 6

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 4.1.3 Filling Material - Brushes filled with bristles or animal hair or both should not be used in alkali, incompletely slaked lime, hot lime For stripping or cleanwash, etc, or in tar, as alkali causes brittleness. ing old paint from the surface, the application of alkali, such as soap is then brush filled with vegetable fibre or nylon brush may be necessary; Alternatively, if the same is not readily available worn out stump used. of a condemned brush may be used.
is also to be paid for the proper use of a 4.1.4 Painting - Attention brush; for instance the use of flat brush edgeway should be avoided as far For stencilling purpose none other than stencil brush a4 practicable. should be used. 4.1.4.1 While in use, not more than half the length of the filling material from the tip end of the paint brush should be immersed in the All possible care should be taken to control the flow of paint into paint. the heel of the brush, since it is difficult to remove the paint from the heel and the paint that builds up there ultimately imparts a tendency to the brush from deform the shape of the brush. Th us after withdrawing the paint can, the major quantity of the paint should be dragged down to the lip end of the brush by the process of `press and pull' against the rounded edge of the paint can or against the round rod kept of the paint on diametrically over the paint can, before application In cases like painting the ceiling of a room the surface to be painted. or a carriage body, when it is not possible to check the running of paint down to the heel, a thorough rinsing of the brush by dipping solvent, immediately after painting beyond the heel in the respective ( before the paint at the heel gets a chance to set ) should be done. 4.1.4.2 At the time of application of paint the brush handle should make an angle with the surface of the job, varying from 45" to 90", with make an angle roughly of about a pressure, so that the filling materials In finishing stroke the handle angle will vary from 45" to 20' to 25". 90" while the angle made by the filling materials increase from 20"/25" to 90" as the brush moves towards the end of the stroke with the gradual This will help to get a better performance and release of pressure. longer life of the brush. Brushing should always be straight to and fro stroke and never rotary stroke as in the latter case damage may occur to filling materials due to twisting. 4.1.4.3 USC of brush, stencil - In this case the paint which is generally in the form of paste, should be taken just on the lip of the filling material and applied by straight vertical stroke. To avoid spreading of filling materials and to avoid the paint setting at the heel, bridling twine up to the middle of the protruded length of the filling material from the ferrule This bridling will however be removed gradually end is preferable. In this case also rotatory movement should be avoided to by wearing. guard against deformity offilling material due to twisting. 7

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 4.1.4.4 T;or the use of artist brush the procedure of IS : 1103-1971* is preferably to be followed
the paint from the palette. recommended at the time

in 9.2.2 drawing

of

of the brush manufacturers have started 4.1.5 Breaking-in - Most bevelling the filling materials of the brushes to provide the desired shape for direct use, yet it is advisable that a new brush should be used after proper oiling as described in 3.4 for 20 to 25 hours for application of heavy pigmented paint, primer, filler or undercoating paintin order tosmoothen ihe roughness of new bristles or hair. 4.1.5.1 Distemper brushes relatively rough surfaces. 4.1.6 Rough Surfaces - In out brushes are economical. case are best broken rough in by using them old, on worn

of painting

surfaces,

4.1.7 Brushes once used in any type of paint shall not be used in any other type of paint without cleaning thoroughly. In using the brush for application of paint of the same type but different shade or colour, the same restriction holds good. However, in emergent situations, a brush used in light colour paint may be allowed for use in deep colour of the same type or same group of paint and not the reverse. In such case also the brush should be thoroughly rinsed in the deep colour paint before application of paint on the surface. 5. CARE

AND

MAINTENANCE

OF BRUSHES

AFTER

USE

5.1 Cleaning 5.1.1 All types of pan set paint brushes shall be cleaned, right up to the heel immediately after uqe. NO time should be allowed for the paint to set in any part of the filling material including the heel. This is of prime importance in the case of quick drying paints like cellulose paint or synthetic paint or even stoving paint ( which are not quick drying in air ). This step should be followed even when a brush will not be required within 15 minutes after use ( specially in case of cellulose and stoving paints ).
5.1.2 Cleaning Liquid - Cleaning liquid for a used brush shall basically be the solvent or thinner present in the paint used with it, for example: a) In case of oil base paint hydrocarbon solvent ). paint varnish paint
artists

and -

enamel cellulose denatured water.

-

white

spirit

( petroleud

b) In case of cellulose
c) In case d) of shellac In case of emulsion
for brushes,

solvent. spirit.

+Sprcification

( second revision ).

8

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978
e) Coal tar paint ). f) solvent naphtha ( if this is the solvent present in the

The thinner used in the manufacture of the lacquer or varnish present in the paint ( such thinners should be obtained from the manufacturer ).
In case of coal tar solvent naphtha do not allow the brush to stand for a

NOTE long time.

5.1.2.1 If the type of solvent present in an oil paint, a varnish or an enamel is not known and if the paint manufacturer has not specified the type of solvent to be used for cleaning, then petroleum hydrocarbon solvent shall be first tried and if this fails, a light coal tar solvent naphtha or xylole ( see IS : 359-1965* ) should be used. 5.1.2.2 Brushes used in a water-based paint, oil-bound distemper, washable and non-washable distempers, whitewash, etc, shall be cleaned If bristle or hair filled brush has been used, it shall be washed in water. in luke warm soap water and rinsed in clean water in which a little A synthetic detergent may also be used in vinegar has been added. place of soap. 5.1.2.3 with them dried paint water when
NOTE -

Emulsion paints are a type of water paint. Brushes used shall be washed in water immediately after use, since the film is insoluble in water. Brushes shall be immersed in not in use during application.
be sought from the manufacturer brushes used in such paint. for the

cleaning

Recommendation should solvent to be used in cleaning

5.1.2.4 Care shall be taken, when a brush is kept immersed in water, to remove all water before using the brush. If the brushes are soaked then they should be suspended to avoid deformation. 5.1.3 Storing Ouernight - If the type of paint being applied is an oil base one and the brush will be required for use with the same paint on the following day, it should be kept suspended in a bath containing raw linseed oil and white spirit in the proportion of 50 : 50 in the manner stated in 3.4 after thorough rinsing in the respective thinner. Otherwise, it is advisable to wash the brush with soap water and thorough rmsing in water, after the removal paint by the respective thinner after work. Care should be taken to see that the last traces of paint have been removed from the filling materials of the brush. The brush shall then be dried, if possible, by a blast of hot air, and kept in dry place. ~___

of

*Specification

for xylolc,

industrial,

solvent

grade

( revised ).

9

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 5.1.4 Removing the Residue - The brush shaIl be cleaned right up to the ferrule using a stub of a worn out brush, a strip of wood or a steel comb While using the steel comb care should to remove most of the residue. be taken that mechanical damage to the filling material is avoided. The remainder of the residue shall be removed by working the filling material in luke warm water containing a neutral soap or a synthetic detergent. Several changes of washing liquid are required for cleaning. It shall be rinsed well in clean water and dried. 5.1.5 In case of artist brush or lettering brush, after thorough of paint by rinsing in the respective thinner, moisten the filling with liquid paraffin or tallow or grease and draw them to form indicated in Fig. 1 of IS : 1103-1971" or IS : 1104-19687 as Care may be and store it till the same is required for use. taken in removing the paraffin, etc, by washing thoroughly spirit before use. 5.1.6 In case of shaving water ( preferably in luke dry it and stor e for the This will help against any removal materials the shape the case should be in white

brush, wash the filling materials thoroughly in warm ) to remove last traces of shaving soap, next use, after rolling in a dry tissue paper. contamination as well as deformity.

5.2 Drying - If a brush has been washed in water, it is essential that it is thoroughly dried before it is put away or oiled or put into use in a Shake the brush well, wipe with a warm dry non-aqueous medium. cloth and hang it up to dry. Brushes shall not be allowed to stand on their filling material, but shall be supported either with some kind of clip or by a wire threaded through the handle. 5.3 Storing

5.3.1 General - If the filling material of a brush is in proper shape and alignment, wrap the same with oil paper and store. Otherwise moisten the filling material with a mixture of raw linseed oil and white spirit in the proportion of 50 : 50, comb them to bring to proper shape and alignment and store in a bath containing raw linseed oil and white spirit as In case this bath in not available, and there is deformity stated in 3.4. in the filling material, then it is preferable to moisten with some nondrying oil soluble in white spirit, comb them to bring in alignment and shape and wrap with oil paper before storing.
NOTE

which

Do not store pitch set brushes with naphthalene or with p-dichlorobenzenc destroy the setting.

*Specification tSpecification

for brushes, artists ( second reuision ), for brushes, lettering (first reoision ).

10

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 5.3.2

preserve

Stencil brushes their shape.

shall

be bound

with

thin

paper

and

string

to

5.3.3 Artist brushes indicated in 5.1.5.

and lettering

brushes

should

be stored after use as

5.4 Handles - After use the handle shall be cleaned as far as possible by using a suitable solvent which shall be wiped with a clean dry cloth. 6. RECONDITIONING 6.0 If ail the care as has been enumerated is observed However, the following necessary to salvage a brush. serve as a guide in case of necessity. it may never be information will

6.1 Use of Solvents - Solvents shall be tried before any other method. hydrocarbon solvent, Denatured spirit ( see IS : 324-1959* ), petroleum oil of turpentine or lacquer thinner shall be used for soaking according Carbon tetrato the medium present as a hard residue in the brush. chloride, benzole, toluene, coal tar, solvent naphtha and trichloroethylene A very quick wash shall not be used as these may attack the cement. If lacquer thinners have in methylene chloride is often quite effective. to be used because other solvents are ineffective, then the time of immersion shall not be longer than is necessary to soften the residue. Otherwise the brush shall be soaked in solvent for two days and the filling material worked with fingers from time to time to loosen the The residue shall be worked out with a strip of wood working residue. To remove hardened emulsion paints, acetone from heel to tip. A quick wash ( see IS : 170-19507 ), or denatured spirit may be used. followed by a quick rinse is sometimes effective. 6.1.1 The brush shall residue of the paint. 6.1.2 residue, be cold. residue rinsings not be left in the paint to remove a hardened

If any of the solvents discussed in 6.1 In such cases, the alkali may be used. The brush shall be soaked in weak softens and then worked out with a with cold water are necessary to remove
instruction shall be strictly followed.

fail to remove the hard alkali solution used shall alkali solution until the piece of wood. Several all traces of alkali.

manufacturer's

~VOTII: - A nllmber of products are available for this purpose; in each case the

*Specification for ordinary denatured spirit ( rcuisrd ). $Specification for acrtone.

11

IS : 3451 ( Part I ) - 1978 - When hardened residue has been removed or loosened the brush may be washed in warm ( not hot ) water containing a soap or a synthetic detergent. One hundred grams of soap powder in four An old wash board or other board standing litres of water is adequate. in a tub of water may be used. The brush is scrubbed edgeways along this board until the corners are softened and then with the fingers. Extra soap powder on the board may help with stubborn cases. 6.2 Cleaning

6.3 Drying - The brush shall to align and hung up to dry.

be rinsed

well

in cold

water,

combed

12

