NAT Alan IS 17232 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Renaa tte ate aad Whar 
AGAR CALA Waray — 
tifa atear 


Continuous Movement Bicable/ 
Tricable Ropeways with Detachable 
Grip — Code of Practice 


ICS 45.100 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 6 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a tensioned 
wire rope supported above the ground. In ropeways handling passengers, safety, reliability, and conformance to 
high-quality and good industry practices are paramount for securing the safety of the users. Aerial ropeways are 
particularly useful in regions where the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over 
railways or roads, both of which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradient. They are 
inexpensive to maintain, pollution free, environment friendly, does not affect aesthetics, their power demand is 
modest and they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are 
in force. 


Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ of MED 06 responsible for the formulation of this standard is 
given at Annex B. 


This standard proposes to cover Continuous Movement Bicable/Tricable Ropeways with Detachable Grip for 
which no applicable standard is available. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17232 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


CONTINUOUS MOVEMENT BICABLE/TRICABLE 
ROPEWAYS WITH DETACHABLE GRIP — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the design and construction of 
continuous movement bi-cable/tricable ropewayswith 
detachable grip meant for the transportation of 
passengers and goods in separate cabins. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex ‘A’ contain 
provisions which through reference in the text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties in 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 7649 shall apply, in addition to the following. 


3.1 Ropeway with Automatic Grip — A continuous 
movement bi-cable aerial ropeway with detachable 
grip consists of vehicles which are automatically 
coupled to the hauling rope on leaving the station and 
automatically detached on arrival at the station. 


3.1.1 In this type of ropeway there are two cables, 
one of which is stationery and supports the cabin 
(called track rope) and the other cable moves and 
serves the purpose of propulsion (called haulage 
rope). Hauling rope passes through drive unit and is 
an endless one. 


3.1.2 Sometimes two carrying or track ropes and one 
haul rope are used to enable use of heavier/larger 
capacity cabins giving substantial advantage with 
regards to its capacity. This is called Tri cable ropeway 
and is also covered in this Standard. 


3.1.3 Depending on the load and application 
requirements, number of carrying and/or hauling 
ropes may be more than two and general requirements 
given hereinafter for ropes would be applicable to 
these also. 


3.1.4 As with all continual movement ropeways, this 
system can also be either clockwise or anti-clockwise 
in movement when seen from above in plain view. 


3.2 Line is defined as a route alignment of the ropeway 
between two terminals. 


3.3 Inspecting Authority — Any competent authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect 
the aerial ropeways installation and determine 
its acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this 
standard and compliance to prevailing statutory rules 
and regulations. If required, competent Authority may 
hire external agencies, like engineering institutions/ 
independent experts for carrying out said inspection. 


4 GENERALREQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Guidelines for Design and Construction 


4.1.1 Each part of the ropeway equipment shall be 
designed and constructed in conformity with this 
Standard. The quality of the materials to be used for its 
construction shall be as per the design. 


4.1.2 On the request of the supervising authorities 
or the purchaser, acertificate from NABL accredited 
testing laboratory shall be supplied by the constructor 
as regards to the characteristics of material used and 
essential to the safety of the installation. 


4.2 Layout and Freeway 


4.2.1 The axis of the line in plan shall be straight. When 
it is not possible to obtain a straight line, the maximum 
deviation permitted shall be 0.3° per tower provided 
that the stability of the rope is maintained. 


4.2.2 The lateral clearance of the cabin on line shall be 
determined taking into account the cabin dimensions as 
well as its lateral oscillations of 12°. Obstacles which 
are not part of the installation shall have a minimum 
clearance of 0.5m beyond the permitted swing. 


4.2.3 All the towers shall be equipped with guides, 
which limit the transverse oscillations of the cabins 
towards the tower to 6° to 8°. For the maximum 
inclination permitted by a guide, no part of the 
vehicle shall touch the shoes or any other part of the 
trestle. 


4.2.4 The two paths of travel shall be so arranged that 
a minimum clearance of vehicles inclined towards each 
other at 12° is at least 1 m, when the span between 


IS 17232 : 2019 


towers is not greater than 300 m. As for longer spans, 
the clearance shall be increased by 0.2 m for each 
additional 100 m or part thereof. 


4.2.5 In the longitudinal direction, the vehicles shall be 
capable of free swinging by 19° with reference to the 
vertical. 


4.2.6 The minimum vertical clearance between the 
space occupied by vehicle and the terrain lying below 
with obstacles existing over it, such as trees, rocks, 
snow drifts, etc., referred to the lowest outline of the 
vehicle shape and determined taking into account the 
most unfavorable conditions shall be at least 1.5 m 
when the place over which the vehicle passes is not 
accessible to the public. Where public access is not 
restricted, this vertical clearance shall be at least 
2.5 m measured from the lowest part of the cabin after 
considering the longitudinal and transverse oscillation 
referred in 4.2.4 and 4.2.5. 


4.2.7 When there are crossings with other 
communication paths or with overhead electric lines, 
a minimum clearance shall exist in order to take into 
account the requirements of the Indian regulation for 
clearance from roadways, power-lines etc. 


4.3 Maximum Speed and Minimum Spacing 
Between Vehicles 


4.3.1 The maximum speed adopted for the system 
shall be consistent with safe working of all mechanical 
elements and shall not induce abnormal loads in the 
rope or any other part ofthe system. In no case shall the 
maximum speed exceed the values given below: 


a) System with closed / semi enclosed vehicle having 
locked doors — 6 m/sec; 


b) Chairlift with semi enclosed vehicle having 
adequate protection — 5 m/sec; and 


c) For tricable ropeway — 7.5 m/sec. 


4.3.2 The nominal average acceleration shall not 
exceed 0.5m/sec?. 


4.3.3 In case the stations are not provided with 
mechanism for regulating the release of vehicles on 
the line as per designed interval, it shall be ensured 
that under no circumstances, the distance separating 
two successive vehicles shall not be less than10m, 
considering 19° longitudinal swing of two vehicles 
towards each other under the conditions of emergency 


stopping. 


4.3.4 The maximum braking capacity should be 
determined based on the maximum speed selected. 
This speed shall be such that all the energy contained 
in the vehicle and the corresponding wire ropes can 
be transformed into heat without any reduction in the 
braking effort or any damage to the brake. 


4.4 Capacity of Vehicles 


4.4.1 The calculation of the various components shall 
be done, taking into account the weight of 70 kg per 
passenger. 

In the case of cabins with capacity of 15 passengers or 
more, 65 kg per passenger can be considered. 

In the case of ropeway transporting passengers for 
winter sports or climbing installations, these weights 
shall be increased by 10 kg per person to take into 
account supplementary equipment of the passengers. 


4.4.2 The vehicles may be of the following types: 


a) Closed/semi closed cabins with maximum ten 
seats; and 

b) For tricable ropeways, 
maximum 30 seats. 


closed Cabin with 


4.4.2.1 The area at the disposal of the each standing 
passenger shall be at least 0.22 m? up tol5 passengers 
and 0.18 m? for each person above 15 passengers. The 
minimum height inside the cabin shall be 2 m. 


4.4.3 In order to distinguish the vehicles on the 
line, theyshall be successively numbered. Also at a 
prominentposition in the cabin, a nameplate indicating 
maximumnumber of passengers and load is displayed. 


4.5 Rope Guiding 


4.5.1 The permanency of the carrying wire rope on the 
shoes shall be ensured even under the mostunfavourable 
conditions. The minimum load on the shoe shall be at 
least 50 percent greater than the force which would be 
necessary to unseat the rope takinginto account a gust 
of wind, as per IS 875. 


4.5.2 The moving wire ropes shall be protected by 
guides, or any other devices, that in the case of transverse 
wind, these wire ropes conserve their normal position 
in the sheaves on which they are resting. In addition, 
the sheave, guide, or other devices shall be of such 
shape that the rope is prevented from any displacement 
that may result in entanglement of the wire rope. 


4.5.2.1 The moving haul rope must be supported on 
rollers/line sheaves integrated into the track rope 
support saddles or located independently just below 
the saddle such that they are well above the passenger 
cabin. 


4.5.2.2 The permissible load for a roller without a soft 
material lining shall be 200 kgf and the maximum 
permissible angle of deflection shall be 2°30’. When 
the rollers are lined with soft lining, the value of the 
permissible load may be increased according to the 
quality of the material (for example, for good quality 
rubber lining, the maximum load, in kgf can reach the 
value of 4 x wire rope diameter x roller diameter where 


the diameters are expressed, in cm). But in no case, 
shall the angle of deflection exceed 4930”. 


4.6 Rescue of Passengers along the Line 


4.6.1 In favourable conditions and when the height of 
the vehicle over the ground is within 20m, it is sufficient 
to provide ladders or equipment, which permits descent 
by rope. This equipment for descent shall be readily 
available in the cabin when no other means of safety of 
passenger is provided. 


4.6.2 If the height of the vehicles over the ground is 
more than 60 m or if the aerial ropeway passes over 
inaccessible terrain which does not permit rescue of 
the passengers by direct descent by means of ladders 
or ropes, a relief cabin operated from a station shall be 
provided. 


4.6.3 Depending on the measures adopted and the 
circumstances, recovery of the carriers shall be carried 
out using the auxiliary or recovery drive system, or any 
other additional device. 


4.7 Crossings 


4.7.1 The crossing of roads, railways, waterways or 
other ropeways shall be avoided as far as possible. When 
it is not possible, the clearance shall be determined in 
such a manner that there is nodanger for any vehicle 
using the various ways enumerated. 


4.7.2 The crossings and paralleling with railways, 
highways, cableways or overhead electric lines shall 
be so done that no mutual discomfort results either 
in the course of normal operation or rescue operation 
or during installation operations. Wherever the local 
conditions are favourable and the characteristics of the 
electric lines permit it, the overhead electric lines shall 
be replaced by underground cables. 


4.7.3 Long paralleling with electric overhead lines or 
contact lines shall be avoided, as far as possible. The 
distance of separation shall be determined in such a 
way that the safety of both installations is ensured. Any 
phenomenon of induction shall not in any way affect 
the continuity or integrity of the telephonic or safety 
systems on either of the installations. 


4.8 Dangerous Areas 


4.8.1 In the proximity of airports or in areas where aero 
planes fly at low altitude or land frequently, the route of 
the ropeways shall be adequately marked, taking into 
account any restriction imposed by the authority having 
jurisdiction over the airports. 


4.8.2 The areas exposed to the dangers of natural forces 
(avalanches, landslides, falling rocks, etc.) shall be 
avoided as far as possible. 


IS 17232 : 2019 


4.8.3 If the dangers indicated in 4.8.2 exist, suitable 
protective arrangements shall be provided. 


4.9 Wind Action 


4.9.1 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) shall be taken into account when designing 
ropeways. The provisions mentioned in IS 875 (Part 3) 
and in IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


4.9.2 In the calculation of wind action on the cables, 
the surface area to be considered shall be the diametric 
surface of the cable multiplied by the factor (C,) given 
below: 


C,, = 1.1 for snow bound areas ; and 
C,, 5 0.7 for areas not affected by snow. 


4.9.3 The uplift caused by the breeze/wind on the 
wire rope and the carrier shall be considered with the 
conditions specified in 4.5.1 are fully met. 


5 WIRE ROPES 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 In the event wire ropes are put into commercial 
service after two years from date of manufacture, they 
shall be checked by a suitable non-destructive method, 
like magneto inductive test, to ensure conformance to 
the requirements of 5.9. Such tests shall be carried out 
periodically in twelve months interval after start of 
commercial run. 


5.1.2 Lubrication of the rope during service shall be 
done according to the specific requirements of the rope 
manufacturer. 


5.1.3 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or 
kinking of the rope during un-reeling the rope or in 
service. 


5.2 Carrying Wire Ropes 


5.2.1 Only full-locked coil ropes with minimum two 
layers of ‘Z’ wires shall be used. 


5.2.2 The nominal braking force of the wire rope 
at the time of putting into service shall not be less 
than 3.3 times the maximum axial pull met with in 
service calculated for the most unfavourable condition 
or circumstances. 


5.2.3 When the effect due to braking of the vehicle 
does not exceed 15 percent of the maximumtension, 
this load may be neglected. For calculation purposes, 
the coefficient of friction between the wire ropes and 
the shoe in bronze/aluminum or similar material can be 
taken equal to 0.10 for locked coil ropes and 0.15 for 
stranded wire ropes. For steel shoes, these coefficients 
shall be increased by 20 percent. For calculating the 


IS 17232 : 2019 


normal load to which the carrying wire ropes are 
subjected, the load on the rollers defined in 5.6.1 shall 
be taken into account in addition to the requirements 
of 5.3.2. 


5.3 Haulage Wire Ropes 


5.3.1 Stranded wire ropes of fiber or solid plastic core 
are suitable. 


5.3.2 The minimum breaking load of the haulage 
and ballast wire rope shall be at least 4.5 times the 
maximum tensile load met with in service. In the 
calculation of the maximum tensile load the most 
unfavourable combination of circumstances shall be 
taken into account. Loads due to atmospheric influence 
and due to wind may be neglected. 


5.4 Tensioning Ropes 


5.4.1 The tensioning ropes shall be of the ordinary lay 
type with a single layer of strands or have full locked 
coil type. Ropes of the Lang’s lay type may be used 
only, if the rotation of either the counter-weights or the 
coupling to the carrying traction rope is prevented. 


5.4.2 The minimum breaking strength of the tensioning 
or regulating ropes shall be at least 5.5 times the 
maximum axial load in the rope during operation. 


5.5 Telephonic and Signal Wire Ropes 


5.5.1 The telephonic and signal wire ropes shall be of 
the stranded type and protected against corrosion. 


Wire rope of any other construction is permissible 
provided the safety of operation is ensured. 


5.5.2 The minimum breaking force of the wire ropes 
shall be not less than 3.3 times the maximum axial pull 
met within service. 


5.5.3 Care shall be taken to ensure that the telephonic 
and signal cables do not come into contact either with 
the vehicles or with any of the ropeseven under the 
worst conditions of weather. 


5.6 Loads on Sheaves, Drums and Saddles 
5.6.1 Normal Load 


5.6.1.1 The number of carriage rollers shall be such 
that the maximum load on any one of them does 
not exceed one-eightieth of the minimum tension 
for the carrying cable at the point considered. It is 
recommended that a ratio between the normal load in 
the cable produced by the vehicle and the minimum 
tension of the carrying cable not exceeding one- 
twelfth is adopted. 


5.6.1.2 For normal loads in moving wire ropes, the 
requirements of 4.5.2.2 shall be taken into account. 


5.6.2 Sheaves, Drums and Shoe 


The fixed drum or bollard to which the Anchorage 
of carrying ropes are secured by friction shall have a 
diameter of not less than65 times that of the wire rope. 
The wire rope should at least make three rounds of the 
drum and it should be served at least by two fasteners at 
the outlet, of which one assures the proper fixation and 
the second serves to check the slip of the wire rope, if 
any, and functions as the safety device. 


5.6.2.1 The radius of curvature of the roller sets on 
roller chain to which carrying ropes are fixed directly to 
the counter weights shall be not less than three hundred 
times that of the diameter of track rope. 


5.6.2.2 The diameter of deflection pulleys of stranded 
wire rope shall be not less than 40 times that of the wire 
rope and at least 600 times that of the wire in the outer 
layer of the wire rope. These pulleys shall be provided 
with linings in leather, wood or any other relatively soft 
material. 


5.6.2.3 The diameter of the driving and return sheaves 
shall be not less than 80 times that of the hauling rope 
and at least 800 times that of the wires of the wire rope. 


5.6.2.4 The support saddles which support the carrying 
rope shall present such a profile that safe passing of 
carrier is ensured. They have to ensure the equilibrium 
tension in the wire rope and to permit free displacement 
of the wire rope in the longitudinal direction(by making 
use of the rollers if necessary). The radius of curvature 
of saddle supports shall be at least 300 times that of 
the wire rope diameter in addition to conformance to 
requirement of 5.6.2.5. 


5.6.2.5 The radius of curvature of the saddle supports 
shall be adapted to the speed at the passing of the 
trestles. To this end, the following requirements shall 
be satisfied: 
Vs< 2 m/s? 
R 
Where, 
Vs = the speed over the trestles, in m/s; and 
R= the radius of curvature of saddle support, in m. 


5.6.2.6 Oscillating saddles are not permitted for 
passenger ropeways and all saddles should be of fixed 


type. 


5.6.2.7 The length of the saddle should be, such as to 
provide a margin of at least 2 degree of arc on both entry 
and exit side of the saddle, taking into consideration the 
worst rope angle as the loaded cabin approaches and 
exits the saddle. 


5.6.2.8 A further arc of at least 10 degrees is to be 
provided at a radius of minimum 500 mm to ensure that 


the track rope is not ‘kinked’ if for any reason the rope 
ever bends more than the expected slope. 


5.7 Splices and Rope Termination 


5.7.1 The length of a splice shall not be less than 1 300 
times of the rope diameter. The distance between two 
contiguous splices shall not be less than 3 600 times the 
diameter of the rope. However, two additional splicing 
may be permitted in case of repair. 


5.7.2 Rope-socketing shall be done as per IS 3937. 


5.8 Testing and Acceptance of Ropes 


Testing and acceptance of ropes shall conform to 
IS 3973. 


5.9 Discarding Criteria for Ropes 


Generally a rope should be withdrawn from service 
when it is considered that: 


a) The loss of strength in the rope due to wear or 
corrosion or both is approaching one-sixth of the 
original strength; 


b) The loss of strength in the rope due to fatigue, 
Surface embrittlement or cracked and broken 
wires of any kind is approaching one-tenth of the 
original strength; 


c) The outer wires have lost about one-third of their 
depth as result of any kind of deterioration; 


d) The outer wires are becoming loose and displaced 
for any reason; 


e) The rope has become kinked, distorted or damaged 
and the damaged piece cannot be removed; 


f) Examination of the rope leaves any doubt as to its 
safety for reason whatsoever; and 


g) Number of wires rupture in the rope exceeds the 
limit specified in 8.1.6 of IS 3973. 


6 STATIONS 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 According to the climate of the area where the 
ropeways are situated, suitable shelters for passengers 
and personnel shall be provided, as agreed by the buyer 
and the manufacturer. Such shelters shall conform to 
the local statutory regulations. 


6.1.2 The station machinery, such as mechanical parts 
of the driving gear, electrical equipment, ropes and 
vehicles shall not be a source of danger to the passengers 
and ropeway personnel. The passenger entrance shall 
not cross the path of the travel of the vehicles without 
ensuring proper safety to avoid any possible accident 
to the passengers. 


6.1.3 The whole of the driving gear and of the return 
or deflection devices shall be protected against bad 


IS 17232 : 2019 


weather. Moreover, care shall be taken to prevent the 
entrance to the machine room of unauthorized persons 
to avoid any possible accident to them. 


6.1.4 Ropeway operator shall be located where operator 
shall have best possible view of the route. Controls 
and communicating devices shall be within their reach 
without them having to leave their position. 


6.1.4.1 The control panel shall be provided with the 
following: 

a) Speed indicator, and 

b) Fault indicator. 


6.1.5 For prevention and safety against fire in ropeways 
see IS 17236. 


6.2 Driving and Braking 


6.2.1 The driving gear shall be provided with an 
emergency system fed by auxiliary power which shall 
be used only for rescue/evacuation operation. 


6.2.2 The speed of the system shall be maintained 
constant irrespective of any load conditions. To 
this end, the speed shall be regulated to + 5 percent, 
whatever is the load. 


6.2.2.1 Starting of the system even under the most 
unfavourable conditions of load shall be guaranteed. 


6.2.2.2 In the event of power failure, passenger 
transportation shall be forbidden unless hundred 
percent power backup is provided. 


6.2.2.3 The prime mover along with the control system 
shall exert a continuous braking action as and when 
required. 


6.2.3 Travel with the main motor shall be stopped 
automatically when any brake is on or if any safety 
device operates. 


6.2.4 Rope Adhesion on the Driving Sheave 


6.2.4.1 The friction coefficient (u) between the rope 
and the surface of the groove of the driving sheave are 
as follows: 


a) Groove without lining, u = 0.07. 
(Cast iron or steel) 
b) Groove with leather lining, u = 0.15. 


c) Groove with rubber or similar material with high 
friction coefficient, u = 0.25. 


d) Groove with aluminum lining u = 0.20. 
6.2.4.2 The contact angle of the rope on the driving 
sheave shall be such as to ensure that in the most 


unfavourable combination of circumstances the 
required power is transmitted to the rope. 


6.2.5 Belts shall not be used for power transmission. 


IS 17232 : 2019 


6.2.6 Two different friction brakes with independent 
source of power shall be used in case of electric motor 
drive to cause both the normal stopping and emergency 
one. One of these brakes is called “service brake’ and it 
can be fitted on gearbox input shaft or on the bull-wheel 
rim. The other is ‘emergency brake’ and should be fitted 
directly on bull wheel rim. Each of such brakes shall 
be able to ensure the safe stopping of the installation’s 
motion under most unfavorable conditions of loading. 
In any case, the nominal average deceleration shall not 
exceed 0.5 m/s’. 


6.2.6.1 To avoid sudden braking with all the 
consequent and undesirable oscillation of vehicles, 
it is recommended that the braking effort should be 
proportionate to the load conditions of the line and 
applied in gradual manner. 


6.2.6.2 For both the brakes, springs shall induce its 
braking effort and its operation shall be carried out in a 
manner that its regular working can be automatically and 
constantly checked. This brake shall act automatically 
if the speed exceeds the permitted value by 15 percent. 
It shall also be capable of being released manually. 


6.2.6.3 The ‘service brake’, besides ensuring the 
holding of the driving gear when the installation is 
stopped, shall work when the feeding power fails or in 
case of overload of the ropeway. Moreover, it shall also 
work automatically when the remote control stops are 
activated or when any safety device is operated. 


6.2.6.4 The factor of safety of all parts forming the 
brakes shall not be less than 5. 


6.2.7 A suitable automatic device which prevents the 
reverse motion of the system in normal service shall be 
installed. The reversal in, the direction of the movement 
shall not be possible except by intentional manipulation. 
This device as well asemergencybrake is not obligatory 
when the installation is not self-acting even in case of a 
breakage of any element of transmission as also when 
one part of the rope is completely loaded and the other 
has no vehicle attached to it. 


6.3 Rope Tensioning and Anchorage Devices 


6.3.1 The spaces in which the counterweights travel 
(in pit or construction above the ground) shall be 
protected from water, snow, and ice and from any other 
material. It shall be ensured that the above elements do 
not accumulate inside these spaces. These spaces shall 
be provided with guard-rails in order to prevent the 
entrance of unauthorized persons. 


6.3.2 The mobility of the counterweights shall be 
ensured at all times. 


6.3.3 The travel of the counterweight shall be determined 
taking into account the maximum variation which 
may be due to the sag of each span, the surrounding 


temperature of the zone where the installation lies and 
the elastic stretch of the rope. 


6.3.4 Where several tensioning ropes are laid in parallel, 
all the necessary precautions shall be taken in order to 
ensure uniform distribution of the tension among such 
ropes. 


6.3.5 In place of tension ropes, chains can be used. 
The safety factor shall be at least 7 in this case. Other 
systems are permissible subject to agreement between 
the ropeway promoter and the inspecting authority. 


6.3.6 The foundations of either tensioning devices in 
these of the anchorage shall have a factor of safety of 
1.5 in respect of shifting and over turning. Such factor of 
safety is to be calculated on the basis of a conventional 
assumption that these foundations are free, that is, there 
is no lateral movement of the earth. 


6.3.7 For design and construction of Civil Engineering 
works for ropeways see IS 17237. 


6.3.8 In all above application hydraulic tensioning system 
may also be used. In adjustable hydraulic tensioning 
devices, the piston travel of tensioning cylinders shall 
be greater than or equal to the sum of the travel and 
minimum adjustment distance of the tensioning cylinder. 


6.3.9 Track ropes shall be anchored in such a way that 
they can be displaced several times on their supports. 
A reserve length of 6 times the length of the longest 
track rope shoe or roller chain saddle plus 5 m shall be 
provided. 


6.3.10 For safety requirements of drives used in 
ropeways see IS 17239. 


6.4 Other Requirements 


6.4.1 As regards the free travel of the vehicles in 
stations, the provisions of 4.2.5 shall be applied. 


6.4.2 In stations, the correct coupling of each vehicle to 
the hauling rope shall be ensured by a device combining 
two distinct systems of control. 


6.4.3 At the point where the grip gets attached to the 
hauling rope, the speed of the vehicle with respect to 
the haul rope speed shall not differ by more than 10 
percent that of the wire rope. 


6.4.4 A suitable device should be provided at the station 
which at the entrance of the vehicle automatically stops 
the movement of the system if the portion of decoupling 
is not functioning properly. 


6.4.5 Care shall be taken to ensure that there is no 
reversal of the vehicle after decoupling. The minimum 
required spacing between the vehicles shall always be 
ensured. Vehicles containing passengers shall not be 
allowed to pass on rail switches whose position is not 
maintained by a mechanical lock. 


6.4.6 The drive and return sheaves on which the ropes 
are wound shall be either cast or fabricated construction. 
They shall be mounted on rolling bearings. 


6.4.7 Provision shall be incorporated in the terminal 
design to retain the terminal sheaves in their 
approximate normal operating position in the event of 
failure of the bearings, shaft, or hub. 


6.4.8 The sheave assembly shall be designed to retain 
the haul rope in the event of a deropementfrom the 
sheave. A flange extension of | to 1.5 times the rope 
diameter (measured radially from the bottom of the 
rope groove) shall be deemed adequate for retention 


6.4.9 The stations shall be provided with a place for 
garaging the reserve vehicles ready for putting on 
line. In addition, suitable devices shall be provided 
as a part of the station structure itself for maintaining 
the tackle for easy maneuvering of wire ropes and 
other mechanical and electrical elements of the 
station. 


6.4.10 Platforms shall be provided with parapets 
wherever it is necessary to avoid accidents to persons. 


7 TRESTLES 


7.1 Loads 


In designing trestles, the following stress values shall 
be taken into account: 


a) The weight of the trestle and the pressure exerted 
by the ropes; 

b) The whole of the stresses due to friction met with 
during the motion of the moving ropes and during 
the displacement of a stationary rope; 


c) Weight of the vehicles travelling with maximum 
load (considered conventionally static load); 


d) Wind load or snow load; and 


e) Load imposed by communication cable if 
provided. 


7.1.2 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) should be taken into account when designing 
ropeways. The provisions mentioned in IS 875 (Part 3), 
IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


Further, loads due to snow in accordance with 
IS 875 (part 4) shall also be considered while designing 
ropeways. The ropeway design shall also consider 
seismic loads in accordance with IS 1893. In addition, 
other special loads in accordance with IS 875 (Part 5) 
shall also be considered while designing ropeway. 


7.2 Safety 


7.2.1 The metal parts of the trestle shall have a safety 
factor defined as the ratio of the ultimate strength of the 
metal to stress in the metal under the most unfavorable 


IS 17232 : 2019 


conditions of not less than 3.0 when the installation is 
in service. 


7.2.2 The trestle shall be analyzed and designed for 
various load combinations as per IS 802. The trestle 
foundation shall be either a shallow foundation or deep 
foundation or founded on rock anchors. 


These foundations shall be in accordance to 6.3.7. 


7.2.3 The elastic deformation of the trestles, in 
particular those due to torsion which happens during 
normal conditions of operation, shall not be such as 
to endanger the safety of the guides and the stability 
of the ropes. The maximum angle of deformation due 
to torsion shall be limited in such a manner that the 
ends of the shoes for supporting the carrying rope are 
not displaced by more than 20 percent of the wire rope 
diameter. 


7.3 Construction 


7.3.1The number of trestles, their position, their 
height and their construction are determined by the 
requirements of the route and the layout. Wooden 
trestles or trestles which are guyed shall not be used. 


7.3.2 In case the trestles have metallic framework, the 
thickness of the open profile shape shall not be less than 
5 mm while in the case of closed profile; it shall not 
be less than 2.5 mm. The interior of the latter shall be 
adequately protected against corrosion. 


7.3.3 The anchorage of the trestles on the concrete 
foundations or on the rock shall be carefully made. The 
top of concrete foundations shall be at least 300mm 
above natural ground level. 


8 VEHICLES/CABINS 


8.1 For all components constituting the vehicles, the 
factor of safety shall be at least 5 under both static and 
dynamic conditions. 


8.2 The width of the seat per person shall be at least 
0.5 m for one or two people side by side and 0.45 m for 
more than two people side by side. 


8.3 Construction 


8.3.1 The vehicle shall be suspended in such a manner 
that whatever be the slope of the track, the cabin 
remains suspended in the vertical position. 


8.3.2 The vehicle shall be so designed that even when 
it is empty and under the wind pressure for which it is 
designed to be operational, the transversal inclination 
of the vehicle with the reference to the vertical does not 
exceed limit specified in 4.2.2. 


8.3.3 Finished thickness for manufacture of cabins 
shall be 2 mm for aluminum and 4 mm for fibre. 


IS 17232 : 2019 


All transparent panes used in the vehicle shall be of 
minimum 3mm thickness and made of safety glass or 
polycarbonate sheet. 


8.3.4 It shall be ensured that the cabin door remains 
closed during travel and cannot be opened from inside 
by the passengers. 


8.3.5 Carriages shall have at least 4 rollers. They shall 
be designed such that there is a uniform distribution of 
pressure onalltherollers and also meetthe requirements 
of 5.6.1.1. The roller shall be lined with soft materials 
such as rubber/neoprene rubber/nylon and mounted on 
bearings. 


8.3.5.1 Carriages shall have guides extended on the 
track rope sides so as to prevent derailment of the 
carriages. These guides should be extended to a point 
beyond the diameter of the track rope. 


8.3.6 The vehicles shall be provided with devices which 
prevent the falling overboard of passengers. The chairs 
especially, shall be provided with closing bars and 
footrests. In the case of cabins provided with windows, 
they shall be suitably protected. 


8.4 Hangers 


8.4.1 The hangers shall be of sufficient length as to 
guarantee conformity to the requirements of 4.2.4 to 
4.2.6 and also ensure that roller guides, etc, areal ways 
outside the reach of the hand of the passengers. 


8.4.2 Tubes used in the hangers shall be seamless. Their 
interior shall be protected against corrosion. 


8.4.3 Random testing of welds by ultrasonic means 
shall be done for hangars. 


8.5 Couplings/Grips 


8.5.1 The form of the grip and the profile of the grooves 
of the roller shall match to one another, taking into 
account specially the maximum lateral swing permitted 
for the vehicles. 


8.5.2 If only one grip is used for attaching the vehicle to 
the hauling rope, it shall be capable of offering resistance 
to sliding at least equal to twice the component of the 
loaded vehicle weighed along the axis of the wire rope 
and the maximum slope and in no case,thisresistance to 
sliding be less than the weight of the loaded vehicle. In 
case of vehicle with double grip, it shall be ensured that 
when the action of the one grip accidentally becomes 
deficient, the other ensures the safety factor of at least 
1.5 times that of the sliding force. 


8.5.3 Jaws shall be made of steel having strength as per 
design requirement. 


8.5.4 The springs shall have an endurance limit of at 
least 5 00 000 load cycles [closing and opening]. The 


maximum compression of the springs in operation shall 
be limited to80 percent of their compression limit. 


8.5.5 Grip shall be capable of clamping a rope diameter 
of+ 10 percent. 


8.5.6 The slip test consists of subjecting a grip clamped 
on a rope to an increasing tensile force until it starts 
to slip, while recording the change in its resistance to 
slipping: 
a) The rope shall be subjected to a tensile force 
corresponding to 1/6" of its breaking load; 


b) The grip shall be attached according to the 
conditions specified by the manufacturer; 


c) A longitudinal pull shall be applied on the grip 
along a line parallel to the rope. This pull shall be 
increased progressively till the designed slipping 
resistance is achieved. Suitable marking made on 
the rope are used to check that no slippage has 
occurred at this pull force; and 


d) The test shall be carried out 5 times. 


8.6 Numbering 


In order to distinguish the vehicles on the line, they 
shall be successively numbered. 


8.6.1 At a prominent position in the cabin, a nameplate 
indicating maximum number of passengers and load 
allowable shall be displayed. 


9 COMMUNICATIONS, SAFETY CIRCUIT 
AND EAR THING OF METALLIC PARTS 


9.1 Communications 


The stations shall be linked to each other by telephone. 
At least one of the stations shall be linked up with the 
public network, wherever the latter exists. 


9.2 Safety Circuit 


9.2.1 All the safety devices along the length of line and 
in the stations shall be incorporated in the continuous 
circuit energized permanently so that when any 
one device fails or the signal line fails, the system 
automatically comes to a halt. 


9.2.2 Suitable sensing devices or limit switches may be 
incorporated in the haul rope support arrangement such 
that any haul rope derailment or adverse positioning of 
the haul rope causes such sensors or limit switches to 
be activated and a stop signal generated to bring the 
system to a halt. 


9.2.3 Safety functions and emergency stop devices 
on the line shall act directly on the line safety circuits 
causing tripping of the system. 


9.2.4 Tripping of an emergency stop may be delayed by 
up to 500 millisecond to avoid spurious disconnections 


as long as safety is not impaired in any impermissible 
way. 


9.2.5 In line safety circuits whose conductors are 
normally protected from direct contact but are not 
protected from direct contact during maintenance, 
voltages of not more than 60 V shall be used. 


9.3 Earthing 


9.3.1 All the metallic portions of the installation with 
an exception of auxiliary ropes, signal ropes, ballast 
and haulage ropes shall be directly earthed. 


9.3.2 The entire ropeways system shall be provided 
with suitable protection against lightning. 


10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


a) The cabins must be provided with door lock (for 
manual door), which cannot be opened by the 
passengers; 

b) Thebrakesmust come in to operation automatically 
when: 


1) Normal stop/emergency stop push button is 
pressed; 

2) The ropeway speed exceeds by Spercent of the 
set speed; 


IS 17232 : 2019 


3) The tripping of drive motor due to actuation of 
line and station security devices; and 
4) In case of power failure. 
c) Arrangement should be made so that the brakes 
can be released during emergency running of the 
system. 


d 


— 


Standby prime mover is required to run ropeway 
at slow speed, to rescue passengers from line in 
case of failure of main motor or power failure or 
DG set failure. 

Line safety devices must be installed on each 
trestle and must immediately stop the ropeway in 
the event of rope derailment. 


e 


== 


f) Emergency push buttons must be provided at all 
stations to stop the ropeway. 


Suitable devices in the station need to be installed 
so that a cabin is stopped without any risk to the 
passengers if a detachment fault is detected when 
entering the station or an attachment fault when 
leaving the station. The effectiveness of this 
device shall be verified by means of tests carried 
out in the installation. 


= 


8 


h 


wm 


For prevention and safety against fire in ropeways 
see IS 17236. 


IS 17232 : 2019 


IS No 
456 : 2000 


802 (Partl) : 2015 


(Sec 1) : 1995 
(Sec 2) : 1992 
875 : 1987 


(Part 3) : 1987 
(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 


1080 : 1985 


1089 


Part 2 : 1986 
1804 : 2004 


1893 : 1984 


1904 : 1986 


2911 (Part1) 


(Sec 1) : 1979 


(Sec 2) : 1979 
(Sec 3) : 1979 
(Sec 4) : 1984 


2911 (Part 3): 
1980 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice 


Code of practice for use of 
structural steel in overhead 
transmission line towers: Part 1 
Materials, loads and permissible 
stresses 


Materials and loads 
Permissible stress 


Code of practice for design 
loads (other than earthquake) 
for buildings and structures 


Wind loads 
Snow loads 


Special loads and load 


combinations 


Code of practice for design 
and construction of shallow 
foundations in soils (other than 
raft, ring and shell) 


Steel wire ropes for aerial 
ropeways — Specification 


Track ropes 


Steel wire ropes — Fiber main 
cores — Specification 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures 


Code Codeofpractlce for design 
and construction of foundations 
in soils — General requirements 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, 


Driven cast in-situ concrete 


piles 

Bored cast-in-situ piles 
Driven precast concrete piles 
Bored precast concrete piles 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 3 Under-reamed piles 


10 


IS No 
2950 (Partl) : 
1981 


3973 : 1984 


4091 : 1979 


7649 : 1975 


9456 : 1980 


10270 : 1982 


11089 : 1984 


IS 10891 
(Part 1) : 2001 


(Part 2) : 1986 
2062 : 201 
1030 : 1998 
14329 : 1995 


17236 : 2019 


17237 : 2019 


17239 : 2019 


Title 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of raft foundations: 
Partl Design 


Code of practice for the 
selection, installation and 
maintenance of wire 


ropes 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundation for 
transmission towers and poles 


Glossary of terms used in 
connection with aerial ropeways 
and cableways 


Code of practice for design 
and construction of conical and 
hyperbolic paraboloidal types 
of shell foundations 


Guidelines for design and 
construction of prestressed rock 
anchors 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of ring foundation 


Steel wire ropes for aerial 
ropeways: Part 1 Haulage ropes 


Steel wire ropes for aerial 
ropeways: Part 2 Track ropes 


Hot rolled medium and high 
tensile structural steel 


Carbon steel castings for 
general engineering purposes 


Malleable iron castings 


Prevention and safety against 
fire in ropeways — Code of 
practice 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of civil engineering 
works for ropeways — General 
requirements 


Safety Requirements for drives 
used for ropeway installation 
for passenger transportation 


IS 17232 : 2019 


ANNEXB 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ MED 06 


Organizations Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity SHRI A. BHADRA, CONVENER 
In Personal Capacity Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 
in Personal Capacity, Kolkata SHRI DWIJENDRA LAL Das (Invitee) 
CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr DeBASISH BASAK 
CRS, Pvt Ltd, Kolkata SHRI K. Bose 
Damodar Ropeways & Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 
Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 

Member Secretary 


SHRI A. K. MOHINDROO 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (13065). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


