IAA Wit IS 16184 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2018) 


arit Wart — afta 
araci 


Technology Management — 
Glossary of Terms 


ICS 03.100.40 


© BIS 2014 


qma AM À 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF FT, 9 egee WEL ATT, ae fereit-110002 
Si MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2014 Price Group 4 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Management 
and Productivity Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. 


In this era of heightened competitiveness, the need to understand both business and technology, and the ability to 
manage the various aspects concerned with technology, has become very important. Technology management is 
the set of policies and practices that enable entities to manage their technologies and technology related processes 
to create competitive advantage. Technology management encompasses the following several aspects inclusive 
of, 


a) technology strategy (a logic or role of technology in an organization); 

b) technology forecasting (identification of possible future relevant technologies); 

c) technology road mapping (mapping technologies to business and market needs by assimilating existing 
technologies into the business and anticipating the impact of emerging new technologies); 

d) project portfolio (selection of a set of projects for development); 

e) technology portfolio (a set of technologies in use), product and process development (including research 
and development); 

f) technology transfer and acquisition (depending upon the technology needs); and 

g) technology protection (safeguarding the intellectual property and other intangibles). 


In a more general context, Technology Management can be defined as the integrated planning, design, optimization, 
operation, and control of technological products, processes and services, resulting in management of the use of 
technology for human advantage. Quite often, research and development forms an integral part of technology 
management. It is hence an integration of science, engineering and management disciplines for planning, 
developing, financing, marketing and implementing technological capabilities to strategize and achieve targeted 
goals that are in fusion with set objectives. 


This standard has been formulated to bring about uniformity in the terms used generally in the area of technology 
management and thus do not pertain to any specific technology domain per se. In this standard, certain common 
words have been used. For instance, the word ‘entity’ refers to an organization that could be either an industrial, 
academic, government, research, Non-governmental, consultancy, etc. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 16184 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT — GLOSSARY 
OF TERMS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard gives definitions of terms relating to 
technology management. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Acquisition — It is taking over of one entity by 
another entity. 


NOTE — This is in the context of merger and acquisition of 
entities. (see 2.65 and 2.99). 


2.2 Applied Research — For specific application, or 
problem solving (see 2.81). 


2.3 Appropriate Technology — The technology that 
is suitable to the environment and for the intended 
purpose. 


2.4 Assembled Technology — The technology which 
produces goods that can be disassembled back into 
original components. 


2.5 Assessment of Technology — see 2.101. 


2.6 Basic Research — Research that advances science 
and/or technology (see 2.81). 


NOTE — It is also sometimes refer to as fundamental research 
(see 2.43) or pure research. 


2.7 Bench Scale Unit — It is process model set up on 
a laboratory table/bench. 


NOTE — As an example, the purpose could be to study 
variables such as input material, flow rate, pressure, temperature 
and the like, in a process set up. It usually refers to the stage, 
which is in between a laboratory scale unit and a pilot plant. 


2.8 Break-through Technology — It is that 
technology which differs fundamentally from the 
previous generations resulting in significant change 
from the existing contemporary technology. 


NOTE — For example, conventional camera and digital 
camera, where the digital camera is breakthrough technology. 


2.9 Business Environment — It is the aggregate of 
external and internal influences, including economic, 
environmental, legal, political, social, cultural and 
technological factors, in which entities operate. 


2.10 Channels of Technology Flow — It refers to the 
various methods through which technology is 
transferred. 


NOTE — There are several channels of technology flow that 
can be classified into three broad groups, namely, (a) General 
channels inclusive of education, conferences, training and 
publications, (b) Reverse Engineering Channels, and (c) 
Planned channels such as joint ventures, franchising and 
licensing of technology through Technology Transfer 
Agreements. 


2.11 Collaborative Development — Entities and/or 
individual(s) working together for achieving specific 
development targets. 


NOTE — It could also cover public private partnerships (PPP). 


2.12 Commercially Proven Technology — 
Technologies that have been used successfully for 
commercial production. 


NOTE — The technology has been technically and 
economically viable as well as marketed successfully after 
having undergone a series of tests, updates and improvements. 


2.13 Communication Technology (CT) — A 
technology associated with; dissemination and transfer 
of information encompassing telephony, broadcast, audio 
and video processing and transmission and network based 
control and monitoring functions. 


2.14 Compatible Technology — A technology that 
supports and works efficiently in unison with other 
technology/system. 


2.15 Competing Technology — A technology having 
some comparable features of a reference technology 
that is viewed as its alternative. 


2.16 Competitive Advantage — It is the strategic 
advantage of a technology or business entity over its 
competing entities within its competitive industry. 


2.17 Competitiveness — It is a comparative concept 
of the ability and performance of an organization, 
sector or country to produce and/or sell and/or supply 
goods and/or services in a given market. 


2.18 Completely Knocked Down (CKD) — It is a 
complete kit of totally disassembled parts needed to 
assemble a product. 


2.19 Contemporary Technologies — Technologies 
which are available during the same time period. 


2.20 Contract Research and Development — 
Outsourcing (see 2.73) of research (see 2.81) and 
development under specific contractual agreement. 


2.21 Copyright — It is a legal right granted to a creator 


IS 16184 : 2014 


of, literary or dramatic or musical or artistic work 
including software, to protect it from being copied by 
another entity(ies). 


NOTE — Copyright is one of the forms of Intellectual property 
rights (IPR) (see 2.57). 
2.22 Core Competence — It is the distinct capability 
and key area of expertize that are critical to an entity 
for achieving long-term growth. 


2.23 Core Technology — The key elements of the 
technological features, skills and knowledge base of a 
technological solution. 


2.24 Corporate Strategy — It refers to the overall 
scope and direction of an organization and the way in 
which its various business operations work together to 
achieve desired goals that meet the expectations of 
stakeholders. 


2.25 Cost Effective Technology — A technology that 
provides value in relation to its cost. 


2.26 Cross Licensing — An arrangement whereby 
two or more individual(s)/organization(s) grant right 
of use of specific intellectual property, owned by each, 
in return for a similar right from the other. 


2.27 Demonstration Unit — A working prototype or 
an arrangement, to showcase the performance, output 
or other parameters of a product or a process. 


NOTE — This is useful for inculcating confidence in potential 
customers or investors. 


2.28 Design — A plan for the construction or 
execution of an object or a system for achieving the 
intended objective. 


2.29 Development — A process of bringing out a 
new product, process, service or improvement over the 
existing ones. 


2.30 Discovery — A finding or an observation not 
generally known before. 


2.31 Disruptive Technology — It is one that, when 
introduced, either radically transforms markets, creates 
wholly new markets or displaces existing markets of 
the prevalent technology. 


NOTE — It is generally significantly cheaper than the prevalent 
technology, and/or is much higher performing, and/or has 
greater functionality, and/or is more convenient to use. For 
example, floppy versus pen-drive. 


2.32 Drawings — It is a pictorial representation of an 
engineering design. 


2.33 Economically Viable Technology — The 
technology that generates economic returns 
commensurate with the input cost. 


2.34 Emerging Technology — It refers to progressive 
developments arising from new knowledge creation. 


NOTE — These may result in a field of technology which is 
projected to substantially alter the business and social 
environments. 


2.35 Enabling Technology — The technology that 
spurs development of subsequent derivative 
technologies. 


NOTE — Derivative technology is an off-shoot of the existing 
technology. For example, nano-technology pervades many 
diverse fields. 


2.36 Environment Friendly Technology — The 
technology that improves/conserves the natural 
environment and resources or causes minimal harm to 
the environment. 


2.37 Evolving Technology — Technology that would 
progressively develop over a comparatively long time 
horizon leading to substantial improvements over 
contemporary technology. 


2.38 Extension of Technology — Use of an existing 
technology in new applications. 


NOTE — For example, a stationary bicycle used for exercising. 


2.39 Factory Acceptance Test (FAT) — The process 
of testing material, equipment, hardware and software 
at supplier’s site to determine its parameters vis-d-vis 
the required specifications. 


NOTE — The test could be carried out at the site of the 
manufacturer, supplier or buyer. 


2.40 Feasibility Report — A document outlining the 
strengths and weaknesses of the existing or proposed 
venture, opportunities and threats presented by 
the environment, the resources required to carry 
through, and ultimately the prospects for success. 


2.41 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) — An 
investment of foreign funds by an investor(s) into an 
organization that operates in a country different from 
that of the investor(s). 


2.42 Foreign Technology Agreement (FTA) — An 
agreement between a technology receiver and a foreign 
technology supplier. 


2.43 Fundamental Research — It refer to ‘Basic 
research’ (see 2.6). 


2.44 Futuristic Technology — A technology that is 
likely to be developed or used in future. 


2.45 Generic Technology — A generic technology is 
one that can be used in several applications. 


NOTE — For example, Electric traction used for trams, metro, 
railways, etc. 


2.46 Globalization — The process by which regional/ 
national economies, societies, and cultures have 
become integrated through communication, 
transportation, and trade driven by a combination of 


economic, technological, socio-cultural, political, and 
biological factors. 
NOTE — As an example, economic globalization is the 
increasing unification of the world’s economic order through 


reduction of such barriers to international trade as tariffs, export 
fees, and import quotas. 


2.47 Green Field Technology — A technology on 
which no prior work has been done. 


2.48 Imported Technology — A technology that is 
acquired from a source outside the country of the acquirer. 


2.49 Incremental Innovation — A small and/or 
marginal changes/improvements in the existing 
products, processes, services or systems. 


2.50 Indigenous Technology — A technology that 
has been developed within a country. 


2.51 Industrial Design — It refers to the legal rights 
protecting the features of shapes, configuration, pattern, 
ornament, or composition of lines or colours, applied 
to any article. 


NOTE — This is one of the forms of intellectual property 
(see 2.56). 


2.52 Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) — An integration of information technology 
(see 2.53) and communication technology (see 2.13). 


2.53 Information Technology (IT) — A technology 
associated with acquisition (see 2.1), processing, 
storage and analysis of vocal, pictorial, textual and 
numerical information by a network of processing 
devices. 


2.54 In-house Technology — A technology that has 
been developed and owned by the organization. 


2.55 Innovation — A new or better product, process, 
service or system that adds value. 


2.56 Intellectual Property — A property created by 
the human mind/intellect. 


2.57 Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) — It is a 
legal right granted by the Government to an 
individual(s)/organization(s) or a body for exclusive 
ownership of an intellectual property (see 2.56) for a 
specific term. 


NOTE — It has various forms like patents (see 2.74), copyrights 
(see 2.21), trade mark, industrial design (see 2.51) and others. 
2.58 Invention — A new product or a new process 
that is novel, non-obvious, and industrially applicable. 


2.59 Joint R&D — A research (see 2.81) and 
development (see 2.29) undertaken jointly by two or 
more individuals or organizations. 


2.60 Joint Venture (JV) — A venture wherein two or 
more entities work together and share resources and/ 


IS 16184 : 2014 


or experiences and revenues to achieve common 
objectives. 


2.61 Laboratory Scale — An initial model set up in a 
laboratory to validate the results of experiments. 


2.62 Lump Sum Payment — A fixed amount of 
payment to be paid in one or more installments by a 
technology buyer to a technology seller. 


2.63 Mature Technology — It is one that has been in 
use long enough that improvements have taken place 
and most of its initial faults and inherent problems have 
been removed or reduced by further development. 


2.64 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) — A 
formal document drawn up between two or more 
entities indicating an agreed line of action to meet an 
intended common objective. 


2.65 Merger — Joining of two or more entities to 
form a single new entity. 


NOTE — This is in the context of merger and acquisition of 
entities. May also refer to acquisition (see 2.1). 


2.66 Milestone Payment — A lumpsum payment 
(see 2.62) paid in parts against achievement of pre-set 
bench marks. 


2.67 Nascent Technology — A technology that is at 
its initial stages of development. 


2.68 New Product Development — A multi-stage 
process commencing from conceptualization leading 
to commercialization of a new product. 


NOTE — The various stages may involve designs of the 
product, detailed engineering, market analysis and diffusion 
in the market. 


2.69 Obsolescent Technology — It refer to ‘Obsolete 
Technology’ (see 2.70). 


2.70 Obsolete Technology — A state in a life cycle 
of a technology which is outdated in a given 
environmental context. 


2.71 Open-art Technology — That technology which 
is not proprietary of any entity. 


2.72 Optimum Parameters — The combination of 
technological factors which help to achieve the best 
possible yield in a given operating context. 


2.73 Outsourcing — The process of contracting out 
an activity(ies), fully or partly, to another organization. 


2.74 Patent — A legal right granted by Government 
to an individual(s)/organization(s) or a body for 
exclusive ownership of an invention for a specific term. 


2.75 Pilot Plant — A working process unit built to 
generate information about the behaviour of a system 
for use in design of full/large scale plant. 


IS 16184 : 2014 


2.76 Product Life Cycle — The process of managing 
the entire lifecycle of a product from its conception, 
through design, manufacture and logistics to service 
and disposal. 


2.77 Product Portfolio — The collection of products 
offered by an organization that fits its business strategy. 


2.78 Proprietary Technology — A technology that 
is owned by an entity and its use is controlled by the 
owner. 


2.79 Prototype — A full scale working model initially 
built to assess the performance of the product as per 
the design. 


2.80 Radical Innovation — An exploration of new 
technology which is fundamentally different from the 
existing technology. 


NOTE — It is distinct from incremental innovation (see 2.49). 


2.81 Research — An analysis and/or creation of 
knowledge. 


2.82 Research and Development — A creative work 
undertaken on a systematic basis in order to enhance 
the knowledge domain. 


2.83 Research and Development Cess — A cess 
levied by the Government of India under the R&D Cess 
Act, 1986, on all payments made towards technology 
imports. 


2.84 Research, Design and Development (RDD) — 
Integration of all elements including design, for 
culmination of research idea into development of a 
product, process, service or system. 


2.85 Residual Engineering — Steps that are usually 
taken for implementation after the basic engineering 
has been established. 


NOTE — An indicative list of such steps during residual 
engineering includes, 


a) preparation of process flow diagrams and 
piping and instrumentation diagrams. 

b) part simulation if situation demands. 

c) mechanical code calculations. 

d) thermal calculations. 

e) hydraulic calculations. 


f) sizing of pressure safety valves, control 
valves, etc. 


g) control philosophy and logic developments. 
h) instruction and startup manuals. 


2.86 Retrofitting — The addition of new technology 
or features to older system. 


2.87 Royalty Payment — An amount to be paid by a 
technology buyer/user to a technology owner/seller 


over a specified period of time based on percentage of 
output measured in terms of production or sales. 


2.88 Semi Knocked Down (SKD) — A complete kit 
of partial assembled parts needed to assemble a 
product. 


NOTE — See also Completely knocked down (CKD) 
(see 2.18). 


2.89 Site Acceptance Test (SAT) — It is a process of 
testing material, equipment, hardware and software at 
the customer’s site to determine its parameters vis-d- 
vis the required specifications. 


2.90 Spin off Technology — A technology that gets 
generated while working on another technology. 


2.91 State of the Art Technology — The highest level 
of technological development reached at a particular 
point of time. 


2.92 Sustainable Technology — A technology which 
continues to be in use over a long period of time. 


NOTE — The factors which contribute to its longevity could 
be economic, social and ecological compliance. 


2.93 Technical Bid — An offer containing technical 
features of the technology (as distinct from 
commercial) made by a potential supplier of 
technology to a potential buyer of technology. 


2.94 Technological Edge — It refers to a position of 
advantage in respect of technological advancement. 


2.95 Technological Evolution — It is the advancement 
of a particular technology in terms of deeper 
understanding of its features and better utilization. 


2.96 Technology — A system of knowledge, 
techniques, skills, expertise and organization used to 
solve a problem, produce goods or services, or serve 
some purpose. 


2.97 Technology Absorption — The process of 
understanding of the acquired technology by the 
receiver, which may result in development of capability 
to further optimize, customize and upgrade the 
technology. 


2.98 Technology Acquisition — The process of 
acquiring technology from a technology supplier. 


2.99 Technology Adaptation — The process wherein 
technology that is being acquired is modified by its 
receiver to suit local conditions and operating 
environment. 


2.100 Technology Adoption — The process wherein 
technology that is being transferred is suitably modified 
by the supplier of technology to suit specific needs of 
the technology receiver. 


2.101 Technology Assessment — It is the study of 
the characteristics, applications, outcomes and 
consequences of a technology. 

NOTE — This is more particularly useful in case of new and 


emerging technologies. This is also known as assessment of 
technology (see 2.5). 


2.102 Technology Assimilation — The state when 
the technology is fully absorbed. 


2.103 Technology Audit — It is the systematic 
procedure for evaluating the operational technological 
systems, procedures and processes in an organization 
with reference to set norms. 


2.104 Technology Benchmarking — A method for 
comparing the performance of the technologies of an 
organization with the technologies of another 
organization. 


2.105 Technology Choice — It is an outcome of 
assessment of technical, socio-economic, 
environmental and market factors leading to 
identification of technology option for development 
(see 2.29) or acquisition (see 2.1). 


2.106 Technology Collaboration/or/Partnership — 
Where two or more entities work together on/for a 
technology, to attain the common objectives. 


2.107 Technology Commercialization — It is the 
process of carrying out research (see 2.81) and 
development (see 2.82) that can lead to the introduction 
of new/improved products and/or services, and/or new/ 
more efficient processes of production, and has been 
marketed successfully. 


2.108 Technology Custodian — An entity that has 
the legal responsibility for management as well as 
safekeeping of technology. 


2.109 Technology Diffusion — The process by which 
the technology is accepted by the consumer, leading 
to its wider use. 


2.110 Technology Diplomacy — It is dialogue/ 
collaboration amongst nations on technology issues for 
seeking solutions to common problems. 


2.111 Technology Documentation — A set of 
documents that may comprise material and other 
specifications, flow charts, operational procedures, 
manual, intellectual property rights (IPR) (see 2.57), 
assembly and usage instructions, maintenance 
schedules and other details relating to a particular 
technology. 


2.112 Technology Evaluation — The analysis of a 
technology to assess its suitability for use in a particular 
environment in terms of its efficiency, resource 
availability and other local operating conditions. 


IS 16184 : 2014 


2.113 Technology Export — The transfer of 
technology from home country to another country. 


2.114 Technology Follower — An entity which 
implements a technology subsequent to the technology 
leader with respect to a particular context. 


2.115 Technology Forecasting — The process of 
predicting the technologies that are likely to be 
prevalent in future. 


2.116 Technology Foresight — A systematic process 
of identifying the evolving technologies (see 2.37) with 
a view towards attaining quantum social, economic and 
ecological benefits. 


2.117 Technology Import — The transfer of 
technology from another country to home country. 


2.118 Technology Intensive — The extent of 
complexity of a technology in a product, process or 
system. 


2.119 Technology Know-how — It refers to 
knowledge including skills, required to be implement 
a technology. 
NOTE — It may include tangibles like blueprints, software, 
hardware, formulas, instruction, patterns, specifications, and 
trade-secrets; or intangibles like manufacturing practices, 


marketing concepts, quality control, and testing techniques, 
which are not common knowledge. 


2.120 Technology Know-what — All the information 
needed to implement a technology (see 2.96). 


NOTE — The levels of knowledge-how and Know-why are 
progressively higher. 
2.121 Technology Know-why — It refers to scientific 
principles, technological knowledge and reasoning, 
justifying the process of the implementation of the 
technology (see 2.96). 


NOTE — It may include explanations as to why a particular 
material, process or design has been used. 


2.122 Technology Laggard — An entity which 
implements the technology far later than the technology 
follower with respect to a particular context. 


2.123 Technology Leader — An entity which 
implements a technology that is considered to be state 
of the art with respect to a particular context. 


2.124 Technology Licensee — An entity that has been 
granted the right to use a specific technology(ies) under 
an agreement. 


2.125 Technology Licensing — It is granting the right 
to use a specific technology(ies) under an agreement. 


2.126 Technology Licensor — An entity that grants 
the right to a technology licensee to use a specific 
technology under an agreement. 


IS 16184 : 2014 


2.127 Technology Life Cycle — It is a graphic display 
of the rate of advancements in the technology versus 
time. 


NOTE — It describes the dynamics of product, service, and/or 
process innovation. It depicts the various stages of development 
of technology, and is also referred to as Technology S-curve. 


2.128 Technology Management — The integrated 
planning, design, optimization, operation and control 
of technological products, processes and services. 


2.129 Technology Mapping — Collection and 
synthesis of information, which describes the time-lines 
and development patterns of a particular technology. 


2.130 Technology Market — It is a platform where 
stakeholders engage in technology transfer (see 2.148). 


NOTE — Stakeholders would include knowledge generators, 
researchers and investors. 


2.131 Technology Marketing — It is the effort to 
efficiently showcase and transfer technology. 
NOTE — It covers aspects such as valuation of the technology, 
analysis of the technology customer, analysis of the technology 


market, planning of technology pricing/distribution/promotion 
and its execution. 


2.132 Technology Package — In the context of 
technology transfer (see 2.148), it refers to several 
components that are offered by the technology seller 
and may include drawings and designs, operation 
process parameters, specifications, maintenance and 
operation schedules, training material, intellectual 
property rights (see 2.57) and software. 


2.133 Technology Policy — A plan or course of action 
followed, generally by Government, in respect of 
technology. 


2.134 Technology Policy Statement — A statement, 
generally made by Government, laying down a plan 
or course of action to be followed in the country, in 
respect of technology. 


2.135 Technology Portfolio — A collection of selected 
technologies, which is in line with the overall 
organizational strategy. 


2.136 Technology Price — The price at which a 
technology seller is sold. 


2.137 Technology Protection — The measures taken 
or methods employed to safeguard technology from 
unauthorized use or access. 


NOTE — Measures could include protection through 
intellectual property rights (see 2.57), trade secrets, trademarks, 
copyright (see 2.21), patents (see 2.74), geographical 
indicators, etc. to safeguard the intangibles in a technology. 


2.138 Technology Pull — It refers to technology 
which is developed in response to an identified market 
need (pull). 


2.139 Technology Push — It is a new technology 
that is developed and offered (pushed) to the market to 
satisfy a perceived demand. 


2.140 Technology Risk — The predictability and the 
uncertainties associated with the outcomes of 
technology development and/or acquisition (see 2.1). 


2.141 Technology Roadmap — A plan laid down in 
respect of various aspects of technology. 


2.142 Technology Selection — It is making a choice 
from amongst available technology, after due analysis. 


2.143 Technology Sharing — It is two or more entities 
or nations sharing a technology for mutual benefit. 


2.144 Technology Source — An owner or an 
authorized seller of a technology. 


2.145 Technology Specifications — An explicit set 
of parameters specifying a technology. 


2.146 Technology Strategy — The activities of an 
organization directed towards building, maintaining 
and generating value from its technological assets. 


2.147 Technology Synergy — The ‘Working together’ 
of two or more technologies in unison, resulting in far 
higher output as compared to the sum of their individual 
outputs. 


2.148 Technology Transfer — A process that involves 
flow of technology from a seller to an acquirer. 


2.149 Technology Transfer Agreement — An 
agreement between technology seller and technology 
acquirer covering various aspects of technology 
transfer (see 2.148). 


2.150 Technology Transfer Negotiations — It is the 
negotiations between technology seller and acquirer 
for technology transfer (see 2.148) with an intention 
to arrive at an agreement for price and other various 
aspects of technology package (see 2.132). 


2.151 Technology Upgradation — It is a process of 
improving an existing technology. 


2.152 Technology Validation — A process for 
confirming that technology would operate successfully 
in a given environment and in a given set of conditions. 


2.153 Technology Valuation — The process of 
estimating the value of a technology (see 2.96). 


2.154 Technology Vetting — An evaluation by a 
technology by another entity with objective of its 
validation. 


2.155 Venture Capital Financing — The infusion of 
equity capital that is provided at an early-stage to high 
potential and growth oriented organizations. 


NOTE — This fund is normally given to technology intensive 
organizations. 


IS 16184 : 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Management and Productivity Sectional Committee, MSD 4 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 
Additional Directorate General of Financial Planning, New Delhi 


Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Ltd, New Delhi 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, Bangalore 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Kanpur 


DRDO, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FICCI, New Delhi 

HCL Technologies, Noida 

Indian Institute of Management, Indore 

Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Finance, Delhi & Noida 


Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi 


Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Vadodara 


Management Development Institute (MDI), Gurgaon 
Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


National Informatic Centre, New Delhi 


Naval Headquarters, New Delhi 


Northern Railway, New Delhi 
NITIE, Mumbai 
Ordnance Factory Board, Kolkata 


Punj Lloyds Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) 


Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh 

The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India, New Delhi 
WIPRO Technologies, Gurgaon 

In personal capacity (D-27, Panchsheel Enclave New Delhi 110017) 


Representative(s) 
Suri V.K. Jarn (Chairman) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


PROF AMAN AGARWAL 


SHRI BALRAJ SETH 


Suri K. K. SETH 
Suri JAGDISH PRASAD (Alternate) 


Dr Sarita NAGPAL 
Suri C. V. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI DEvKI NANDAN 
Suri M. V. KUMBHALKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SINGH 
Suri S. S. Kirar (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH MurGal 
Suri M. K. JAIN (Alternate) 


Dr S. Basas 
REPRESENTATIVE 

Pror V. K. Gupta 
Suri M. K. BHARDWAJ 


PROF SAURABH AGARWAL 
ProF Maniu AGaRwaL (Alternate) 


Ms Vusaya KATTI 
Dr Biswasit Nac (Alternate) 


Ms RINA CHAKRAVORTY 


SHRI K. RAVINDRANATH 
SHRI MoHAMMED HABIBULLA (Alternate) 


Dr B. METRI 


SHRI A. K. TOMER 
Suri S. Bose (Alternate) 


DR V. SIVARAMAKRISHNAIAH 


Carr D. K. SINGH 
Lr Cpr S. SREEKANTH (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri S. K. YADAV 
SHRI SANJAY SRIVASTAV (Alternate) 


SHRI ADARSH SONI 
SHRI MUKESH Arora (Alternate) 


Dr MARIA CHRISTINE NIRMALA 
Ms Dyna Ganapatuy (Alternate) 


Pror. P. RAJASEKHARA REDDY 
Suri J. P. SINGH 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Pror R. K. SACHDEVA 


IS 16184 : 2014 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (804, Chelsea Tower, Omxe Heights Vibhuti Pror S. CHAKRABORTY 
Khand, Gomtinagar, Lucknow 226010) 
BIS Directorate General Suri N. K. PAL, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MSD), 


[Representing Director General (Ex- officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Surimati RENU GUPTA 
Scientist ‘E’ (Management and Systems), BIS 


Panel on Technology Management, MSD 4/P-25 


Organization Representative(s) 
Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IFT), New Delhi SHRI DEEPAK BHATNAGAR (Convener) 
Engineers India Ltd, Gurgaon SHRI SHEO Ras SINGH 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi Dr (Surmati) Jyoti S. A. BHAT 
In personal capacity (B-4, 129, Safdarjung Enclave, Dr Vinay Kumar 


New Delhi 110029) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 04 (0454). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


