WATT re IS 11671 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


aaa wrer A Hafa urfvenura» 
STeaTacit 
(TEA FRAT) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to Boiler 
Water 


(First Revision) 


ICS 01.040 


© BIS 2022 


Wmwdhr AAS Sl 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP Yor, 9 TIGR MMe THX AMT, Ag facet - 110002 
—————A-/ = MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110 002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 10 


Water Quality for Industrial Purposes, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


‘This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Water Quality for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Chemical Division Council’. 


This standard has been formulated with a view to eliminate ambiguity and confusion arising 
from different interpretation of terms relating to treatment of water for low, medium and high 
pressure boilers and chemical conditioning of boiler feed water and boiler water. 


This standard was originally published in 1985. Due to advances in technology and 
instruments for treatment of water for low, medium and high pressure boilers, it has become 
necessary to review and update the existing glossary of terms. Consequently, this revision has 
been taken up by incorporating few additional terms and deleting some terms depending on 
their usage and meaning in the present context. 


Should any difference exist between the definitions in this standard and those in individual 
standards, the latter shall prevail. 


This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical definitions of terms, and it may not 
necessarily include all the legal interpretations nor achieve academic precision. Although 
many terms defined in the standard are of general applicability, these have been defined with 
specific reference to boiler water. 


The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
Annex A. 


IS 11671: 2022 


Indian Standard 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO BOILER WATER 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines the terms commonly 
used in the field of treatment of water for 
low, medium and high pressure boilers and 
chemical conditioning of boiler feed water 
and boiler water. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
A 
ABS — Alkyl Benzene Sulphonate- 


common class of detergents. It also 
denotes acrylonitrile butadiene styrene 
which is used for chemical pipe work and 
other purposes. 


Acid — A compound which dissociates in 
aqueous solution to furnish hydrogen ions. 


Acid Cleaning — A method of cleaning 
pipe work, boilers, condensers, etc. Acid is 
used with proper inhibitor (to prevent 
corrosion of bare metal) to remove mill 
scale or other deposits. 


Activated Carbon — An amorphous form 
of carbon having porous internal structure 
and characterized by high adsorptivity for 
many gases, vapors, colloids, organics and 
higher molecular weight compounds. 


Activated Silica — A form of colloidal 
solution (silica sol) prepared immediately 
before use by partial neutralization of 
sodium silicate. It is a good coagulant aid. 


Active Groups or Sites — Ions and 
radicals affixed to the matrix of an ion 
exchanger, each associated with a counter 
ion of opposite charge and replaceable in 
the exchange process. Anodic sites 


developed on a metal surface leading to 
corrosion are also referred to active sites. 


Adsorption — A surface process through 
which molecules of gases, liquids or 
dissolved substances adhere to the surface 
of solids through physical forces or 
chemical bonds. 


Air Mix — Process of passing large 
quantities of air through mixed bed 
columns, causing the resin to turn over and 
mix intimately. 


Air Scour — Air agitation done before 
backwashing in filter beds and ion 
exchanger beds to improve backwash 
efficiency. This produces more shear and 
agitation of bed, breaking up the 
accumulated dirt. 


Algae — Chlorophyll bearing primitive 
plants, unicellular or multicellular 
organisms capable of synthesizing their 
food by photosynthesis and occurring as 
contaminants in water. 


Alkali — Substances which dissociate and 
release hydroxyl ions into the solution. 


Alkali Boil Out—4A method of cleaning 
boiler system. Alkaline solution is fed to 
the system and heated to desired pressure 
and temperature to remove oil, grease and 
other debris from inside surface by 
loosening, emulsifying and dispersing. 


Alkaline Rinsing — Rinsing of anion 
resin bed after alkali injection with either 
the service water for the particular anion 
bed or with anion bed outlet water stored 


IS 11671: 2022 


previously during the service run of the 
anion bed. 


Alkalinity — The quantitative capacity of 
aqueous media to react with hydrogen 
ions. It indicates amount of bicarbonates, 
hydroxides and carbonates in water. 


Anion — A negatively charged ion. 


Anion Exchange — Exchanging the 
anions present in water with the 
exchangeable anions of an anion exchange 
resin. 


Anion Exchange Resins — An ion 
exchange resin capable of reversible 
exchange of negative charged ions. 


Anode — The positive electrode of an 
electrolytic cell, to which negatively 
charged ions travel when an electric 
current is passed through the cell. 


Anodic Protection — Method of reducing 
corrosion of a material capable of forming 
a passive film on it by applying a suitable 
potential after making the material anodic 
to the reference electrode. Aluminium, 
magnesium, titanium, austinitic steel using 
electrolytic chloride solution or sulphuric 
acid give very heavy stable films of oxides 
on their surfaces with only small current 
density, providing excellent resistance to 
corrosion. Such anodic coatings are hard 
and have good electrical insulating 
properties. 


Anthracite — Class of coal having 86-98 
percent fixed carbon and used as filter 
media for water under a bed of different 
sizes. 


Antircalants — Chemicals used to 
prevent deposits on metallic surfaces in 
contact with water (mainly 


polyphosphates, organic polymers, etc). 


Attrition  — Size reduction or 
disintegration of particles in a packed bed 
due to hydraulic stress, frictional wear and 
osmotic shock. 


B 


Back Wash — Process by which beds of 
filter or ion exchanger beds are lifted and 
loosened by up-flow with the bed free to 
rise into the rising space. It reclassifies the 
bed and is used to wash out dirt and resin 
fines. 


Base Exchange — A cation exchange 
softening process in which the hardness 
forming calcium and magnesium ions are 
exchanged for sodium. 


Base Loaded Boiler — A steam generator 
operating continuously at a constant 
steaming rate. 


Bead — Modern ion exchangers are made 
in the form of tiny spheres which are 
called beads. 


Bed — Settled filtering or ion exchange 
material in compact form in a suitable 
vessel, through which water passes from 
one end to the other. 


Bed Depth — The height of the material 
in a packed column. 


Bed Expansion — Loosening and 
expansion of the particles in packed bed 
columns due to backwashing, causing 
increased space between resinparticles. It 
can be controlled by regulating backwash 
flow. It is expressed as a percent of the 
original bed height taking into 
consideration the ionic form while 
computing the bed height. 


Bed Volume — Gross volume of the ion 
exchange bed or filter bed. 


Bicarbonate Alkalinity — The presence 
in a solution of hydroxyl (OH) ion 


resulting from the hydrolysis of 
bicarbonates. When these salts react with 
water a strong base and a weak acid are 
produced, and the solution is alkaline. 


Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) — 
The quantity of oxygen required for the 
oxidation of biodegradable organic matter 
by microbiological action in the presence 
of oxygen. It is a measure of the strength 
of organic matter in terms of its ability to 
deplete oxygen in water. Generally, the 
standard test consists of measuring the 
oxygen depletion at 20°C for 5 days or 
27°C for 3 days. 


Biological Deposits/Biological Fouling 
— Water formed deposits of organisms or 
the products of their life processes, usually 
found in the form of slimes, barnacles, or 
mussels and gelatinous or filamentous in 
nature. 


Blow Down  — Lowering the 
concentration of contaminants or dissolved 
salts from boiler water, cooling tower 
water, etc, by draining some of the water 
to waste for a predetermined period, an 
equal quantity of fresh water being taken 
up for makeup. 


Boiler Boxing Up — Shut down of boiler 
by extinguishing fire, reducing pressure, 
closing down all inlet and outlet valves, 
drains and vents, so that it can be lighted 
up again after some period when required 
for use. Idle boilers are also boxed up for 
preservation purpose to avoid air entry to 
corrode internal surface of the system. 


Boiler Drum — A part of boiler in the 
form of vessel providing a reserve of water 
for circulation and a space in which steam 
and water are separated. 


Boiler in Banking Condition — Boiler 
under fired condition, but without any use 
of processed steam. This is being done to 


IS 11671: 2022 


avoid the loss of initial heat in heating up 
the brick work and other materials of 
construction and avoid delay in bring up 
the boiler without setting up stresses by 
unequal expansion. 


Boiler in Floating Condition — Boiler 
remaining lighted up but steam only 
partially utilized to support the short fall 
from the other boiler running in parallel. 


Boiler Water — Water present in a boiler 
when steaming is, or has been taking 
place. 


Boiling Out — See Alkali Boil Out. 


Brackish Water — Water having salinity 
more than that of potable water (usually 1 
000 ppm) but less saline than seawater 
(usually 35 000 ppm). 


Break Point Chlorination — The 
appearance of free chlorine, after 
satisfying the chlorine demand of water. 


Break Through —The first appearance in 
the solution, flowing from an ion exchange 
unit, of unadsorbed and desorbed ions is 
an indication that regeneration of the resin 
is necessary. 


Brine — Concentrated aqueous solution of 
chloride. 


Brine Wash — A process to restore the 
effectiveness of anion resins which have 
been fouled by organic matter. It is usually 
done by soaking the resins with two bed 
volume mixture of 10 percent sodium 
chloride and 2 percent sodium hydroxide 
for few hours (usually more than 12 h) and 
draining. Heating may be required, 
depending on type of resin. 


C 


Carry Over — Passing of undesirable 
soluble or insoluble particles from one 
treatment process to the other or from one 


IS 11671: 2022 


phase to the other. For example, in clarifier 
some flocs which do not settle are carried 
over to the clarifier water storage tank and 
similarly some soluble salts of boiler water 
are carried over to the steam phase. 


Cartridge Filter — A filtering unit 
having pressure shells containing a number 
of cotton, nylon or polypropylene 
cartridges mounted on stainless steel 
perforated cores. Each cartridge is made of 
continuously wrapped, single cotton, nylon 
or polypropylene thread, like a bobbin, and 
is so thick that even fine particles cannot 
pass through. It is usually used for 
trapping the resin leak through the de- 
mineralized water and trapping rust and 
other corrosion products from boiler feed 
water. 


Cascading — The inter-connection of the 
feed heater drains so that the flash steam 
from one heater can be used as heating 
steam in another heater at lower pressure. 
This term is also used for an arrangement 
for flow of water into different stages in 
such a manner as to facilitate, exposing a 
large surface by making them droplets and 
come in contact with air, so as to remove 
gaseous impurities from water or to 
oxidize some impurities, such as iron. 


Cathode — The negative electrode of an 
electrolytic cell, to which positively 
charged ions migrate when a current is 
passed through the cell. 


Cathodic Protection — Most important 
approach to corrosion control, where an 
auxiliary anode (either electrolytic or 
galvanic) acts as a substitute for the anode 
on the metal surface to be protected. In 
either case the electrical energy supplied 
by the auxiliary anodes forms a fence that 
prevents flow of current in the local cells 
on the protected surface. With current flow 
stopped, metallic ions cannot escape from 
the area to be protected and corrosion is 


virtually nil. Under these conditions a 
metal can be maintained in a corrosive 
environment for an indefinite time. 


Cation Exchange — An ion exchange 
resin, capable of the reversible exchange 
of positively charged ions. 


Cation Exchange Resins — Resins which 
exchange cationic portion of ionisable salts 
present in water with Na* or H* ions. 


Caustic Cracking — Cracking in steel 
under severe stress in the presence of high 
concentration of caustic soda. 


Caustic Embrittlement — Hardening of 
mild steel surface, resulting in less of 
strength and impairment of other physical 
properties and causing inter-crystalline 
cracking, due to presence of corrosive 
medium (caustic soda) on the metallic 
surface under tensile stress. This 
phenomena commonly occurs in boilers 
and boiler tubes. 


Caustic Ganging — Thinning of steel 
surface caused by caustic attack, when 
caustic soda solution concentrates below 
deposits at high heat input areas. This is 
due to the result of the caustic dissolving 
the protective film of magnetic oxide. This 
is also known as ductile gauging. 


Cavitation — The formation, as a result 
of local pressure drop of vapour bubbles 
and their subsequent collapse in a moving 
body of liquid, for example contained 
within the impeller of a feed pump. The 
sudden collapse of the vapour bubbles 
resulting from cavitation frequently 
damages the metal surfaces adjacent to the 
cavitation zone. 


Channeling — Cleavage and furrowing of 
the bed due to faulty operational 
procedures in which the solution being 
treated follows the path of least resistance 
and runs through these furrows and fails to 


contact active groups in other parts of the 
bed. This happens usually in packed beds 
which have non-uniform pressure drop or 
no surface velocity. 


Chelant — An organic compound which 
has more than one binding site for a metal 
ion. Chelants form stable coordination 
complexes with metal ions. 


Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) — 
The amount of oxygen, expressed in mg/l 
consumed under specified conditions in 
the oxidation of the oxidisable organic and 
inorganic matter contained in water, by an 
oxidizing chemical corrected for the 
influence of chlorides. 


Chemical Stability — Resistance to 
chemical action which ion exchange resins 
should possess to withstand contact with 
aggressive solutions. 


Chlorination — The application of 
chlorine to water generally for the purpose 
of disinfection, but frequently for 
accomplishing other biological or 
chemical results. 


Chlorine Demand — The difference 
between the amount of chlorine added to 
water and the amount of free chlorine 
remaining at the end of a specified contact 
period. The demand for any given water 
varies with time of contact and 
temperature. 


Chlorine Residual — The total amount of 
chlorine (combined and free available 
chlorine) remaining in water at the end of 
a specified contact period following 
chlorination. 


Circulating Water — Water passed 
through the condenser and other auxiliary 
cooling tubes to condense the turbine 
exhaust steam or to reduce the temperature 
of vapour and fluids. 


IS 11671: 2022 


Clarifiers — Tanks where turbid water 
treated with chemicals is allowed to pass 
through with a certain retention time 
during which the particles causing 
turbidity settle out in the form of a sludge, 
which is latter removed by a suitable 
arrangement. 


Clariflocculators — A system combining 
flocculation and clarification in separate 
compartments within the system with an 
arrangement for discharging accumulated 
sludges. 


Coagulant — A material which removes 
suspended as well as colloidal matter 
present in water by reducing surface 
electrical charge so as to enable them to 
coagulate in the form of precipitates 
comprising flocparticles more or less 
gelatinous in character. Normally a salt of 
iron or aluminum is introduced into water 
in conditions in which iron or aluminum 
hydroxide will precipitate and join with 
colloidal particles, which cause turbidity in 
water, to form floes. 


Coagulant Aid — Organic macro-ions 
whose charge helps small floe particles to 
adhere together to form large floes to settle 
easily. 


Coagulation — 


a) The process of converting colloidal 
or finely divided suspended matter 
into particles of such sizes as can 
be settled reasonably rapidly by the 
addition of an appropriate chemical 
coagulant, by biological processes 
or by other means. 


b) The process of adding a coagulant 
and other necessary reacting 
chemicals. 


Cocurrent Regeneration — Regeneration 
process in which the regenerant flows in 


IS 11671: 2022 


the same direction as the inlet service 
water to the exchanger bed. 


Collector — An assembly located inside a 
filter or an ion-exchanger vessel for 
uniform collection of an outgoing liquid 
(such as treated water spent regenerant, 
rinse effluent, etc) from the vessel, with a 
controlled size of openings to prevent any 
carryover of filter media or ion-exchange 
resin into the outgoing liquid stream. 


Colloids — Finely divided solids (particle 
size varying from 10^" to 10? m) which 
will not settle but may be removed by 
coagulation or biochemical action. 


Colloidal Silica — Silica in the insoluble 
or colloidal form (present in the form of 
clay, polymeric silicic acid and 
magnesium silicates). It cannot be 
measured by the standard ammonium 
molybdate reagent method and if not 
arrested in the boiler feed make-up water 
plant, it is converted to soluble and 
reactive silica under alkaline and high 
temperature-pressure boiler water 
conditions. Silica concentration in the 
boiler water will therefore be higher than 
expected resulting in significant carryover 
of silica in steam (see Non-reactive silica). 


Condensate — 


a) Condensed steam from steam using 
equipment; it normally forms the 
greater part of the boiler feed 
water. 


b) Water obtained by evaporation and 
subsequent condensation of steam; 
usually water of high purity, 
unmixed with any other water. 


Condensate Polishing — Filtration and/or 
demineralization by ion exchange of 
contaminated condensate to remove 
insoluble and ionic impurities. 


Condenser Leakage — Ingress of 
condenser cooling water into condensate 
through condenser tube leakages. 


Condenser Tube Fouling — The 
deposition of foreign matter on condenser 
tube surface on (cooling) water side due to 
impurities in water. 


Conditioning of Feed Water and Boiler 
Water — Addition of small quantities of 
chemicals to the final feed water (like 
hydrazine and ammonium hydroxide) or 
into the boiler drum (like sodium 
phosphate) to attain desired conditions in 
the water/steam circuit of preboiler system 
and boiler. 


Conductivity — A measurement of the 
ability of an aqueous solution to conduct 
an electric current. It gives a measure of 
ionic impurities in water. The unit of 
measurement of | conductivity in 
international unit is now 
microsiemens/centimetre (denoted as 
uS/cm). 


Conductivity Comparator — Instrument 
which measures the conductivity of two 
samples taken simultaneously by two 
probes set at different heights and 
compares them on a bridge circuit. Device 
for uniform collection of treated water or 
regenerant across the resin belt. 


Congruent Control — A method to 
eliminate free caustic alkalinity in boiler 
water to avoid caustic cracking by 
maintaining sodium to phosphate molar 
ratio in boiler water at or just below 2.6:1. 


Cooling Tower — A tower for cooling of 
circulating cooling water by evaporation 
by spraying it from the top of the tower. 
Heat lost by evaporation of water cools 
down the circulating water. The working 
principle is evaporative cooling by natural 


draught or forced draught or induced 
draught. 


Coordinated Phosphate pH Control — 
A method to eliminate free caustic 
alkalinity in boiler water to avoid caustic 
cracking by maintaining sodium to 
phosphate molar ratio at 3:1. 


Corrosion — Tendency of a metal to 
attain its natural state by reacting with its 
environment through chemical or 
electrochemical means. 


Corrosion Fatigue — The occurrence of 
trans-granular cracks in structural material 
such as steam pipes, boiler drums, 
receivers and other parts, because of 
repeated thermal or mechanical stress in 
the presence of a corrosive environment. 


Corrosion Products — A result of 
chemical or electrochemical reaction 
between a metal and its environment, 
usually water and electrolyte, present in it. 
These are usually insoluble salts of the 
metal found near the corroded area or 
transported elsewhere in the cycle. Rust 
(iron oxides and hydroxide) are common 
corrosion products. 


Counter Current Regeneration — 
Regeneration process in which the 
regenerant flows in the direction opposite 
to the service flow in the exchanger bed. 


Critical Pressure — The pressure at 
which phases in a fluid do not separate. 
Critical pressure for water (as fluid) is 
217.9 kg/cm”. 


Cross Linking — The degree of bonding 
between the long chain polymer molecules 
present in the ion exchange resin matrix to 
form an insoluble tridimensional resin 
matrix. This increases the strength of the 
matrix and controls the size and volume of 
the pores which take up water. Cross- 
linking reduces the swelling and prevents 


IS 11671: 2022 


the resins from swelling and becoming 
soft. This is usually accomplished by 
Divinyl Benzene (DVB). 


Crud — Transported solid product of 
corrosion of the surfaces in the steam 
water cycle of boilers. This may include 
other suspended and colloidal impurities. 
It occurs as surface deposit on system 
surfaces and as sediment in areas of low 
velocity. It consists mostly of metal oxides 
and normally appears as brown to black 
powder. 


Cycle — 


a) A complete course of ion-exchange 
operation starting with back wash 
and regeneration and service 
ending with exhaustion of the 
exchanger bed. 


b) The flow path of boiler feed water 
completing one full circuit, that is, 
feed water, steam in boiler, 
condensate and back again as feed 
water. 


D 


Deaerator — Equipment for removing the 
dissolved gases (especially oxygen) from 
boiler water, normally involving injection 
of steam at saturation temperature in 
vacuum or under pressure. 


Dealkalination — Process by which 
alkalinity is reduced. Normally used for 
total dissolved solid reduction when 
alkalinity is very high and water is to be 
used for low pressure boilers or in 
circulating water system. 


Degasser/De-gasifier — Equipment for 
removing a particular gas (usually carbon 
dioxide in water demineralization process) 
from water usually without heating. Water 
is allowed to fall through a tower packed 
to make water droplets and air is blown 


IS 11671: 2022 


from opposite direction. Water leaves such 
tower saturated with dissolved oxygen and 
nitrogen. Vacuum degasser needs vacuum 
pumps to extract carbondioxide in which 
some dissolved oxygen is also removed. 


Decarburization — Leaching of carbon 
from ferritic phase of carbon steel. 


Delignification — Chemical deterioration 
of wood, particularly encountered in 
cooling tower structures, when the lignin 
component of the wood is removed 
leaving the resulting residue to be rich 
only in cellulose with surface becoming 
bleached and fibrillated. High sodium 
carbonate, oxidizing agents and alkaline 
materials present in circulating cooling 
water generally cause this problem. 


Dezincification — Type of attack 
occurring with zinc alloys where zinc 
corrodes preferentially, leaving a porous 
residue of copper and corrosion products. 
The alloy so corroded often retains its 
original shape and may appear undamaged 
except for surface tarnish, but its tensile 
strength and ductility are reduced. 
Environmental factors that favor 
dezincification are (a) high temperature, 
(b) stagnant solutions, and (c) porous 
inorganic scale formation. Dezincified 
brass pipes may retain sufficient strength 
to resist internal water pressure until an 
attempt is made to uncouple the pipe or a 
water hammer occurs causing the pipe to 
split open. 


Dialysis — A process using natural 
diffusion of ions and solutes through 
suitable membrane. In electro-dialysis ions 
are moved under the influence of an 
applied electromotive force. 


Dispersant — A chemical which increases 
the suspension of insoluble particles. 


Displacement — A process taking place 
in ion exchange units, when water is 
expelled by regenerant or vice-versa, from 
the rising space and from the void volume. 


Distributor — A device to distribute the 
inlet water/regenerant evenly across the 
resin bed. The distributor will have 
single/two/multiple arms depending upon 
the diameter of the unit. 


Downcomer — A bunch of boiler tubes 
helping recirculation of boiler drum water 
through which boiler water comes down 
and then goes again to boiler drum through 
different tubes called *OSA". 


Down Flow — Conventional direction of 
solution to be processed in ion-exchange 
column operation, that is, inlet at the top 
and outlet at the bottom of the column. 
The operation is usually undertaken to 
keep the resin bed in compact from during 
regeneration. 


Drum Internals — Arrangement done by 
some equipment fixed on upper part of the 
boiler drum to facilitate easy separation of 
water and steam phase in the drum 
efficiently. 


Dry Preservation — Method of 
protecting boiler surface from corrosion 
during idle period. Usually the boiler is 
drained under hot condition and nitrogen is 
passed under pressure to remove any 
moisture and oxygen. The boiler is capped 
with nitrogen for some time and then left 
out to remain idle. Alternatively, activated 
silica or quicklime are placed inside boiler 
drum for dry preservation. 


E 


Economiser — Part of the boiler used for 
transferring heat from the flue gases to the 
feed water. 


Effective Size — Sieve aperture (in mm) 
which retains 90 percent of the sample of 
filtering material of resin. 


Effluent — The wastewater which 
emerges from an ion-exchange column 
during regeneration or from other 
equipment such as boiler blowdown and 
cooling tower blowdown or from an 
industry. This is also used to mean treated 
water coming out of an ion-exchange 
column during service. 


Ejector — Apparatus for extracting air 
and other incondensable gases from a 
closed system or for sucking slurry. A 
throat and nozzle arrangement through 
which motive (power) fluid flows under 
pressure creating vacuum which can be 
used for evacuating or sucking of gases, 
liquid or slurries. 


Electrolyte — A chemical compound 
which dissociates or ionizes in water to 
produce positive and negative ions, which 
will conduct an electric current. 


Elution — The stripping of adsorbed ions 
from anion exchange material by the use 
of solutions containing other ions in 
relatively high concentration. It is rather 
carefully controlled regeneration, probably 
to recover some valuable or otherwise 
important ions which have been adsorbed 
by the resins. 


Equivalent Mineral Acidity — Sum of 
chloride, sulphate, nitrate and other anions 
of mineral acid origin actually present in 
it. 


Equivalent Per Million (epm) — Unit of 
equivalent concentration calculated as 
parts per million divided by the equivalent 
weight. For water analysis it is equivalent 
to meg/l (milliequivalent per litre). 


Erosion — Material loss associated with 
high velocity of water, steam, fine 


IS 11671: 2022 


particles, etc, and consists of two sub- 
classes, impingement and cavitation. 


Evaporative Capacity — The normal 
maximum quantity of steam produced by a 
boiler expressed in kg/h. 


Evaporator — Auxiliary equipment for 
evaporating raw or softened water 
producing distillate, free from impurities, 
for use as make up water as it is through 
mixed bed exchanger. 


Exchange Capacity — The term used to 
quantitatively denote the capacity of an ion 
exchange material to remove ions from 
aqueous solutions. 


Exchange Zone — Band of resin in an ion 
exchange column in which exchange is 
actually taking place. 


Exfoliation — Special type of oxidative 
corrosion, resulting in spalling off metallic 
surfaces. 


Exhaustion — Term used to denote that 
the exchanger will not perform any more 
useful work. It does not mean that all the 
capacity in an column has been used. 


External Regeneration — Method for 
regenerating the cation and anion 
exchange resins outside the surface unit 
and again putting it back in the surface 
unit. 


External Treatment — Treatment of raw 
water done externally before it enters the 
boiler circuit, which has been found more 
effective and essential for high pressure 
boilers. 


F 


Feed Water Heater — A heat exchanger 
for preheating feed water before it passes 
to the boiler, mainly by means of steam 
bled from the turbine or by means of boiler 
blowdown waters. 


IS 11671: 2022 


Filming Amines — An amine 
(nitrogenous material) added to boiler feed 
water so as to obtain an uniform micro- 
film in the condensate system in order to 
protect the system from corrosion. 


Filtration — The process of passing a 
liquid through a filtering medium (which 
may consist of granular material, such as 
sand, magnetite or diatomaceous earth, 
finely woven cloth, unglazed porcelain or 
specially prepared paper of synthetic 
media) for the removal of suspended or 
colloidal matter usually of type that cannot 
be removed by sedimentation. 


Fines — Small uneven particles of ions 
exchange  materials/filter media which 
cause excess pressure drop. 


Flash Mixer (Flash Mixing Tank) — In 
precipitation process, it is a small tank 
with stirring gear in which chemicals are 
thoroughly mixed with the water, before it 
is allowed to go to the settling tanks or 
clariflocculator. 


Flash Steam — Steam produced from 
pressurized hot water when the pressure is 
suddenly reduced. 


Floe — Small gelatinous masses, formed 
in a liquid by the addition of coagulants or 
through biochemical processes by 
aggregation of microscopic and 
ultramicroscopic particles. 


Flocculation — A process, mechanical or 
chemical or both, by which small particles 
of solids in a liquid are aggregated into 
larger masses, thus making it easier for the 
removal of solids by sedimentation. 


Flux — The quantity of water flowing 
through a membrane per unit area of cross- 
section for a given membrane in a reverse 
osmosis process. 


10 


Fouling — Result of allowing material 
harmful to the performance of an 
exchanger to remain on it, for example, 
organic matter fouls the anion and cation 
exchanger resins by retaining into the resin 
matrix causing poor effluent quality and 
reduction in exchange capacity. In heat 
exchanger, on cooling water side, fouling 
may occur due to slimes, marine growth 
and corrosion products. 


Foaming — It is a phenomenon which 
occurs in boilers under certain conditions 
like presence of oil or excessive suspended 
matter or excessive caustic alkalinity in 
boiler water, when bubbles of boiler water 
fill up the steam disengaging space and are 
carried over along with steam resulting in 
impure steam production. 


Free Board — The space provided above 
the resin bed in an ion exchange column or 
filter column, for expansion of the bed 
during back washing. 


Free Mineral Acidity — The quantitative 
capacity of aqueous media to react with 
hydroxyl ions to pH 4.3. In the 
decationized water it is equal to the sum of 
free anions, such as Cl, SO4, NO; and 
other mineral acids. At the outlet of cation 
exchanger the free mineral acidity is 
equivalent to equivalent mineral acidity 
(EMA) minus ( — ) sodium slip. 


FRP — Fibre glass reinforced plastic 
material used in acid pipe, acid tank 
works, etc. 


G 


Galvanic Corrosion — Corrosion of 
metallic surface due to formation of 
galvanic cell because of the presence of 
two dissimilar metals side by side in an 
electrolyte. The damage incurred by 
coupling two metals depends on how far 
apart they are in the galvanic series of 


metals, the potential difference between 
the two electrodes and conductivity of the 
corrosive environment. Weld junctions are 
ideal locations for this type of corrosion to 
occur since the metals form a perfect 
galvanic cell. 


Gauge Pressure — The net pressure 
above atmospheric pressure. 


Gel Resins — Ion exchange resins in 
which the resin absorbs water which 
swells it and so creates channels, through 
which ions can travel. These pores 
disappear if the resin is dried. 


Grading — See effective size. 


Gram Mill Equivalents — The 


equivalent weight in milligrams. 


Graphatization — Cast iron experiencing 
selective loss of iron, leaving the metal 
with a weak structure of graphite and iron 
oxides, caused by low pH, high dissolved 
solids and acid contaminants. Carbon 
particles left behind due to graphitization 
are eaten away by hydrogen, giving out 
methane, resulting in a porous metal 
surface. 


Gravels — These are coarser than coarse 
sand used as an even support for the 
filtering media (fine sand) and also to 
assist in liquid distribution. Filling of 
gravels into filter vessel and ion exchange 
vessel is also called as subfill or underfill. 


H 


Hardness — Bicarbonates of calcium and 
magnesium give carbonate hardness 
(temporary hardness) while sulphates, 
nitrates and chlorides impart 
carbonate hardness (permanent hardness). 


non- 


Head Loss — The reduction in liquid 
pressure associated with resistance in the 
passage of a solution through a bed of 


11 


IS 11671: 2022 


filter or exchange materials. More head 
loss indicates a dirty bed or presence of 
too much of fines. 


Heat Exchanger — An equipment 


designed to transfer heat across a 
separating surface. 
Hideout — Phenomenon of temporary 


undetectability of a contaminant or 
additive in water. In boiler water, due to 
low solubility of trisodium phosphate at 
temperatures particularly above 25°C, 
phosphate ions concentrations are 
decreased while boiler is steaming at high 
loads only to reappear when load is 
decreased. This phenomenon is termed as 
‘chemical hides out’ of phosphates. In 
addition, there is also possibility of 
physical hide out of phosphates beneath 
the corrosion product (crude) deposits, 
transported into the boiler tubes from the 
feed train. Both chemical and physical 
hideout of phosphates usually result in 
their concentration directly on boiler tubes 
surface and in turn in the increased 
corrosion rates (general wastage). 


Hold Down — An operation undertaken 
during regenerating an ion-exchange resin 
bed by counter current fashion in order to 
prevent the floating of resin. Air, water or 
regenerant chemical pressure is used to 
keep the resin bed in compact form. 


Humic Acid and Fulvic Acid — Generic 
terms for a vast number of organic 
compounds which are the products of 
decay of vegetable matter such as peat. 
They make water acidic and frothy and 
impart colour varying from light yellow to 
dark brown. Some of them foul ion 
exchange resins. 


Hydraulic Classification — 
Rearrangement of particles in packed 
column by means of water flow. During 
backwashing process the particles are 


IS 11671: 2022 


placed in mobile condition during which 
larger particles settle at bottom while 
smaller particles rise at top. Fines are 
however removed from bed to drain. 


Hydraulic Test — Mechanical test 
conducted before commissioning pressure 
vessels, piping and assemblies to see 
whether these can stand the pressure 1.5 to 
2 times of the working pressure. It is 
usually done by filling water and raising 
the pressure gradually. 


Hydrogen Embrittlement — A type of 
corrosion occurring in the high pressure 
boilers on load. This usually occurs 
beneath relatively dense deposits on the 
boiler tube, when a low pH boiler water 
environment is produced as a result of 
condenser leakage or some other type of 
system contamination. Hydrogen produced 
in the corrosion reaction, diffuses through 
the underlying metal, producing de- 
carbonization (by reacting with carbon 
producing methane) and _ inter-granular 


microfusion of the structure. Brittle 
fracture occurs along the partially 
separated boundaries resulting in the 


explosive in-service failure of a boiler tube 
from which a considerable area of the wall 
gets ejected because of loss of ductility 
and strength. 


Impingement — Water, particularly 
having high concentration of suspended 
matter gases, etc is abrasive and physically 
tears metal away in the form of horse shoe 
shaped pits. A form of localised corrosion. 


Indicator — 


a) A device which receives a signal 
from a sensing element consequent 
upon a change and translates this 
signal into a movement on a scale 
or a chart. 


12 


b) Substance which gives a visible 
change, usually of colour, at a 
desired point in a chemical 
reaction. 


c) A device which indicates the state 
of an operation, for example, an 
on/off light indicator. 


Inert Resin — Resin which does not take 
any part in the exchange reaction of the 
resin bed in the exchanger. Used as (after 
density matching) separator in mixed bed 
exchanger to facilitate better separation of 
cation and anion exchange resin or used on 
top layer of any exchanger bed having 
counter current regeneration operation. It 
is also used in powder form as coating on 
cartridge filters. 


Inhibitor — Chemical substance which 
prevents or retards specific chemical 
reactions, for example, one of the 
inhibitors ‘Rhodine? is added to 


hydrochloric acid to prevent reaction of 
the acid with the bare metal during acid 
cleaning of boilers, in which only rust or 
mill scale of iron reacts. 


Injection — Stage in which regenerating 
chemicals are added to the exchanger bed 
either through injection or pump. 


Interface — The level at which the cation 
and anion resin components of a mixed 
bed separate, after classification by 
backwash and settling. 


Internal Treatment — Process of dosing 
of chemicals into a boiler circuit to control 
the quality of water in the boiler and 
steam. 


Ion — An atom or radical in solution 
carrying an integral electrical charge either 
positive (cation) or negative (anion). 


Ion Exchange — A reversible process by 
which ions are interchanged between a 


solid capable of exchanging ions and a 
liquid with no substantial structural 
changes of the solid, for example, a cation 
resin takes up cations from the water 
(solution) reversibly and gives up 
hydrogen ions in the solution. 


Ionization — The dissociation of 
molecules into charged particles. In natural 
water, the dissolved salts present in it are 
supposed to be fully ionized. 


J 


Jackson Candle Turbidity — An 
empirical measure of turbidity in special 
apparatus, based on the measurement of 
the depth of a column of water sample that 
is just sufficient to extinguish the image of 
a burning standard candle observed 
vertically through the sample. 


Jet Condenser — A condenser where 
cooling and steam condensation is 
achieved by mixing the steam with a spray 
of water. 


L 


Langelier's Index — An expression to 
indicate the hydrogen ion concentration 
that a water should have to be in 
equilibrium with its content of calcium 
carbonate. It is a technique of predicting 
whether water will tend to dissolve 
(corrosive tendency) or precipitate (scale 
formation tendency) calcium carbonate. To 
calculate langelier index pH value of water 
saturated with CaCOs (without increasing 
alkalinity), calculated pH is subtracted 
from pH value of water as observed. If the 
result is positive, scale forming tendency is 


expected and if negative, corrosive 
tendency. 
Leaching — Separation of one or more 


components of any mixture or metallic 
alloy when exposed to the action of a 
solvent or water in which the component 


13 


IS 11671: 2022 


to be removed is soluble. In a corrosive 
environment, certain elements in an alloy 
are removed leaving behind the other 
components. This type of corrosive like 
dezincification or graphitic corrosion is 
identified as selective leaching. 


Leakage — The phenomenon in which 
some of the influent ions are not adsorbed 
or exchanged and appear in the effluent, 
when a solution is passed through an 
under-regenerated exchange resin bed or 
because of malfunctioning of bed. 


Lime Softening/Lime Soda Softening — 
Precipitation processes for removing most 
of the temporary and total hardness 
respectively. At around the boiling point 
(when some silica removal can also be 
obtained), the process is often called hot 
process. In lime softening only lime is 
mixed with water and allowed to settle but 
in lime-soda softening both lime and soda 
ash are added. 


M 


Macro-reticular Macroporous — A term 
used to describe resins that have a rigid 
polymer porous network in which there 
exists a pore structure even after drying. 
The pores are larger than atomic distances 
and are not likely to become clogged by 
macro-ions. These resins are mechanically 
stronger and more resistant to osmotic 
shock. 


Magnetite — A passivated oxide state of 
ion (Fe3O4) the layer of which makes the 
metal beneath it corrosion-free and hence 
called protective layer. 


Make-up Water — Purified water 
(distilled, demineralized or chemically 
treated) for replacing losses from a steam 
and water system. 


Master and Regulating Valve — An 
arrangement of valves used for draining a 


IS 11671: 2022 


system. The master valve can be opened 
fully, and draining is controlled by 
regulating valve. 


Matrix—A frame work in ion exchange 
resins commonly used in demineralisation 
plant, the matrix is frequently of cross 
linked polystyrene, which is itself quite 
inert but has active groups put on it in 
course of resin manufacture. 


Membrane — A thin sheet with suitable 
micropores used in a separation process. In 
electrodialysis, the membrane is 
effectively an ion exchange resin in sheet 
form. In reverse osmosis, the membrane is 
semi permeable, often made of cellulose 
acetate. 


Micromhos/em — A unit of specific 
electrical conductivity (equivalent unit 
microsiemens/cm). 


Mill Scale — A thin layer consisting 
chiefly of Fe3O4 formed on iron or steel 
surface during manufacture when the 
material is hot in an atmosphere containing 
oxygen. 


Mixed Bed — A unit in which cation and 


anion exchange processes proceed 
simultaneously and comprises of a 
physical mixture of anion exchange 


material and cation exchange material. The 
bed is usually employed for treating water 
having low ionic load as in condensate 
polishing or polishing the small impurities 
left through de-ionisation plant comprising 
of cation and anion exchanger bed. 


Mud Balling — Clumping of clayey or 
sticky impurities on a filter or ion 
exchange bed in the form of a large ball 
heavier than the rest of the bed and sinking 
in it. It is difficult to break up by 
backwashing. It is formed when back wash 
duration is prolonged. 


14 


Multimedia Filters — A process in which 
water is passed first through coarse filter 
media of lower density (anthracite) and 
then progressively through finer and of 
higher density (sand). The bottom layer 
further may be of even finer and heavier 
garnet; all these layers being properly 
supported in the filtering vessel. This type 
of arrangement facilitates more flow rate 
and more length of filter run. 


N 


Naked Mixed Bed — The use of a mixed 
bed both as filter and polisher as in 
condensate polishing. The crud of the 
condensate is accumulated in this manner 
‘in depth’ rather than on top of the bed and 
hence regeneration operations are done in 
separate vessels by transferring and 
cleaning. 


Natural Circulation — The natural path 
of water circulation in a boiler induced by 
changes in density of the water due to 
heating. Thus heated water and steam rise 
in the furnace tubes to the drum, from 
which cooler feed water falls through 
external tubes to the bottom of the furnace 
tubes. Also known as thermal circulation. 


Nephelometric Turbidity — An 
empirical measure of turbidity based on a 
measurement of the light scattering 
characteristics (tyndall effect) of the 
particulate matter in the water. 


Nentralising Amine — A volatile 
chemical injected into boiler feed water to 
neutralize the carbondioxide in boiler feed 
water and condensate, for example, 
smorphoiine, cyciohexylamine, etc. 


Neutral Effluent — Neutralization of 
effluents before disposal, for example, in 
demineralization plants spent acid and 
alkali during cation/anion regeneration are 
mixed together and neutralized by further 


addition of acid/ lime, if necessary before 
discharging to plant drains. 


Non-Reactive Silica — See Colloidal 


Silica. 


Non-Regenerable — Ion exchange units 
in laboratories where the scale of 
operations does not justify the trouble of 
regenerating, or in condensate polishing 
where highly regenerated powdered resins 
are used as precoat on cartridge. These are 
thrown away when exhausted. 


Nozzle — A piping branch on a tank. This 
term is also used for ‘strainer nozzle’ 
which is a small element, usually of plastic 
and provided with fine slots, used to retain 
sand or resin while permitting water to 
pass. Nozzle plates are false bottoms in 
tanks which are fitted with evenly 
distributed nozzles on which a sand or ion 
exchange bed rests. Basically a small 
tapered piece of pipe to increase the 
velocity of the fluid. 


O 


Off-Load Corrosion — The corrosion 
encountered during idle period of the 
boiler system due to the reaction of 
metallic tubes with water or moisture in 
combination with dissolved oxygen and 
chemicals or dissolved salts associated 
with water in the system. Corrosion 
products are mainly ferric hydroxide and 
ferric oxide. Rusting and pitting are the 
common phenomenon. 


Once-Through Boiler — A boiler in 
which the feed water is converted into a 
steam without any water circulation. 


On-Load Corrosion — Corrosion of the 
boiler system metal surfaces in contact 
with water or steam while the boiler is on- 
load. It is due to increased concentration of 
acidic or alkaline solution in certain 
section of the boiler system and 


15 


IS 11671: 2022 


aggravated by dissolved oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, ammonia, etc. Corrosion products 
are mainly Fe3O4 and Fe2O3, cuproamines, 
etc caustic embrittlement, hydrogen 
embrittlement and stress corrosion are the 
common phenomenon. 


Orifice Plate — A thin metal annulus 
mounted on a carrier plate between flanges 
in a pipe line. It restricts the flow of steam 
or water causing a pressure drop which is 
used to measure the flow rate of the fluid. 


Organic Trap — A unit containing a 
special type of resin (called scavenger 
resin) or activated carbon, which removes 
organic fouling matter. Sometimes 
activated carbon particles or sawdust is 
mixed in clariflocculator and scrapped 
while floating from the upper surface, 
trapping the organic matter. 


Osmotic Shock — Ion exchange resins 
change to different volumes when 
solutions of different ionic concentration 
are passed over them, an ion exchange 
resin is switched successively from its 
expanded ionic form to its contracted 
form, an internal stress to resin bead 
known as ‘Osmotic shock’ is caused due to 
which the resin beads may deteriorate or 
crack or even burst. 


Outage — The duration for which a unit is 
shut down because of grid and unit faults 
or for service, maintenance, etc. 


Oxygen Scavenging — An internal 
treatment of boiler feed water in which 
reducing agents such as sodium sulphite or 
hydrazine are dosed into the water in order 
to consume up any oxygen present in it. 


P 


Packaged Boiler — A boiler fully 
assembled (along with ancillaries) at 
works so that it is ready for use. 


IS 11671: 2022 


Passivation — A process of completely 
polarising the corrosion reactions. When 
the boiler surface is chemically cleaned 
and the bare metal clean surface is 
available, it is oxidized with water again 
having ferric hydroxide coating on it. This 
at a particular temperature with suitably 
hydrazine dosed water is converted to 
Fe304 layer, which serves as protective 
layer for the rest of the metal surfaces for 


further corrosion. This process, 
afterchemical cleaning, is called 
passivation. 


Peaking Boiler — A boiler operated only 
to meet the peak demand for electricity 
and steam. 


Permanent Hardness — Hardness 
present in water due to the presence of 
chlorides, nitrates and sulphates of calcium 
and magnesium, which is not removed by 
precipitation by boiling. 


Permanganate Number — An acid 
method using potassium permanganate at 
specified temperature and for specified 
time for determination of organic matter 
(oxidizability). Expressed as  mg/litre 
oxygen consumed. Time and temperature 
at which test is performed is to be stated. 


pH — A numerical scale designated to 
show the degree of acidity or alkalinity of 
a solution. The pH value of an aqueous 
solution is the logarithm of the reciprocal 
of the hydrogen ion concentration 
(expressed in g/l) of the solution, pH value 
of neutral water is 7.0. Below 7 water is 
called acidic and above 7 alkaline. 


Physical Stability — Resistance of 
materials like ion exchange resins to 
changes that might be caused by attrition, 
high temperatures and other physical 
condition. 


16 


Piston Flow — Flow condition when 
liquid flowing through a column has the 
same velocity at every point of its cross- 
section so that the liquid front marks like a 
piston. The bigger the column diameter, 
the more difficult this is to achieve. 


Pitting — A type of localised attack 
commonly found in water bearing 
equipment at points of metallurgical 
defects or at cuts, stretches or the crevices 
on the metal surface particularly at higher 
temperature zones. This is caused by the 
formation of highly active local anodic 
sites resulting from unequal ionic 
concentration or oxygen differentiate. The 
depth of the pit is in direct proportion to 
the ratio of the large cathodic area to the 
small active anodic site. 


Polishing — An advanced stage of 
treatment used where a specially high 
quality of water is necessary. 


Polyelectrolytes — Organic 
macromolecules (polymers) having 
ionized groups and capable of coagulating 
or flocculating or dispersing suspended 
solids in water coagulant aids are usually 
polyelectrolytes. 


Polystyrene — An inert plastic which 
forms the matrix of most ion exchangers 
(called monomers) formed by 
polymerisation of styrene by free radicals 
with peroxide initiator. The molecular 
weight depends on degree of 
polymerisation. Formula (CcHs5CHCH»)s. 


Porosity — The degree of permeability in 
ion exchange resins to liquids and large 
organic molecules. Gel resins have less 
porosity than the macroporous resins. 


Post Commissioning Cleaning — 
Cleaning done after the boiler has been in 
service for a certain period of time. 


Post Precipitation — . When the 
coagulants are not mixed properly or 
heavily dosed or retention of water in 
clariflocculator is less, there is likelihood 
that the alum floes are precipitated either 
in clear water storage tank or on ion 
exchanger bed. This is called post 
precipitation and is undesirable for 
operation of demineralisation plant. 


Precipitation — Occurs when a chemical 
reaction in water throws a solid product of 
the reaction out of solution. 


Precoat Filter — When coarse aperture of 
any cartridge is coated with any filter 
medium on an extended surface, it can 
retain even fine particles during filtration. 
This is called precoat filter and filter 
medium is used as candles, leaves, plates 
or even powdered exhausted resin. The 
medium is applied evenly before the start 
of a run and washed to drain or thrown 
away when it is clogged. 


Precommisioning Cleaning — Chemical 
cleaning of new boilers, its parts before 
commissioning to remove deposits found 
in the boiler system. 


Preservation of Boiler — When the 
boiler is taken out of service and kept idle 
there is likelihood of corrosion of the 
internal surfaces of the food, boiler and 
steam system and hence boiler system has 
to undergo some form of treatment before 
steaming which is called preservation. 
Filling the boiler with suitably hydrazine 
dosed water with pH 10 is the common 
practice for wet preservation of boiler. 


Priming and Carry Over — The 
entrainment of water droplets or foam in 
the steam leaving a boiler drum or 
evaporator, due to which dissolved salts of 
boiler water find place in steam for 
unworthy operation. Carryover of some 
salt to the steam is also affected due to 


17 


IS 11671: 2022 


volatility of some compound like silica at 
high pressure and temperature, provided 
silica is found in excess in the boiler water. 


Probes — Device for taking samples of 
water for continuous monitoring for 
specific items, or for sensing monitoring 
parameters. 


Protection — A means of safeguarding or 
disconnecting apparatus in the event of a 
fault. 


Purge — Discharging of water from a 
closed system to bring down the 
concentration level of water, for example, 
from recirculating cooling water systems, 
some water is discharged to take up equal 
amount of fresh water. 


Pyrogens — Organic impurities which 
make water unfit for many pharmaceutical 
uses. Sterile water is not necessarily 
pyrogen free. 


Q 


Quaternary Ammonium — A specific 
basic group [—N(CH3)4] on which 
depends the exchange activity of certain 
anion exchange resins. 


R 


Raschig Rings — Packing material for 
degassifying tower, generally in the form 
of small rings so as to present the 
maximum contact area between water and 
injected air, when the tower is filled with 
sufficient number of such rings usually 
made of ceramic or plastic. Other shapes 
such as pall rings are also used. 


Raw Water — Untreated water generally 
from source. 


Reactive Silica — Soluble form of silica 
present in water detected by ammonium 
molybdate reaction in chemical test. 


IS 11671: 2022 


Regenerant — The solution used to 
restore the activity of an ion exchanger. 
Acids are employed to restore a cation 
exchanger to its hydrogen form and brine 
solution to its sodium form. Similarly 
anion exchanger is regenerated with an 
alkaline solution, for example, sodium 
hydroxide. 


Regeneration — _ Restoration of the 
activity of an ion exchanger by replacing 
the ions adsorbed from the treated solution 
by ions that were adsorbed initially in the 
resin. The term is also used for that part of 
the operating cycle of an ion-exchange 
process in which a specific chemical 
solution is passed through the ion- 
exchange bed to prepare it for service run. 


Regeneration Level — Amount of 
regenerant used, generally expressed as 
kg/m*of resin. 


Regeneration Ratio — Ratio of chemicals 
used over the equivalent ion exchange 
capacity obtained. Also known as 
regeneration efficiency. 


Rejection — Proportion of the salt content 
which a reverse tot Osmosis membrane 
will retain while allowing water to pass. 
Membranes show quite different rejections 
for different salts. 


Resin — An organic macromolecule made 
for exchanging ions from water, 
containing active groups embedded in their 
matrix of polystyrene base, usually 
sulphonic, carboxylic, phenol or 
substituted amino groups. 


Resin Trap — A device containing 
strainers to catch useful resin which has 
accidently come out of the vessel due to 
some reasons. Fines are however allowed 
to pass to drain. 


Reverse Osmosis — A process for 
converting brackish water to potable 


18 


strength. Water is forced through a semi- 
permeable membrane which rejects the 
dissolved salts. 


Rinse — The operation which follows 
regeneration for flushing out of excess 
regenerant. When rinse starts the exchange 
bed is full of regenerant and this is still 
reacting with the resin. For maximum 
efficiency, therefore the process is often 
started with a ‘Slow Rinse’ until most of 
the regenerant has been displaced and then 
a ‘Fast Rinse’ is given in order to save 
outage time. 


Rinse Rate — The vertical water velocity 
in that part of a clarifier tank from which 
the flock is to settle out. 


Rising Space — Space allowed above 
packed beds for backwashing. Its volume 
is normally between 0.5 to 15 times the 
bed volumes. 


Ryznar Stability Index — An empirical 
method for predicting scaling and 
corrosive tendencies of water based on a 
study of operating results with water of 
various saturation indices. 


Stability Index = 2pHs — pH 

where 
pHs = Langelier's saturation pH. 
NOTE — The Tendency of water based 
on Ryznar Stability Index as specified in 


Table 1. 


Table 1 Tendency of Water based on 
Ryznar Stability Index 


Sl Ryznar 
No. | Stability Index 


(1) (2) (3) 


Tendency of 
Water 


1) 4.0—5.0 Heavy scale 


ii) 5.0—6.0 Light scale 


Sl Ryznar Tendency of 

No. | Stability Index Water 

(1) (2) (3) 

iii) 6.0—7.0 Little scale 
or corrosion 

iv) 7.0—7.5 Corrosion 
significant 

v) 7.5—9.0 Heavy 
corrosion 

vi) 9.0 and above | Corrosion in 
tolerable 

S 
Salinometer — A hydrometer used to 


determine the concentration of dissolved 
salts in boiler water. 


Salt Splitting — The conversion of 
neutral salts to their corresponding acids 
by cation exchange resins or to 
corresponding alkali by anion exchange 
resins. 


Saturated Steam — Steam at temperature 
equal to the saturation temperature 
corresponding to its pressure and which 
contains no liquid phase. 


Saturated Temperature — Boiling point 
of water at a given pressure. 


Scale — A deposit formed from solution 
directly in place upon a confining surface. 


NOTE — Scale is a deposit that will 
usually retain its physical shape when 
mechanical means are used to remove it 
from the surface on which it is deposited. 
Scale, which may or may not adhere to the 
underlying surface, is usually crystalline 
and dense, frequently laminated and 
occasionally columnar in structure. 


19 


IS 11671: 2022 


Scale, Boiler — An incrustation varying 
from a porous, friable crust to a dense, 
very hard coating deposited on boiler 
heating surfaces due to precipitation of 
minerals from the water used. 


Scrapping — A process for removing the 
unwanted material from the upper portion 
of layers or bed. When used in relation to 
ion-exchange beds it implies the removal 
of the top few inches of the resin bed after 
a careful backwash, which is usually the 
last step from removal of all the fines. 


Screen — A device with openings, 
generally of uniform size, used to retain or 
remove suspended or floating solids in 
flowing water and to prevent them from 
entering an intake or passing a given point 
in a conduit. The screening element may 
consist of parallel bars, rods, wires, 
grating, wire mesh or perforated plate and 
the openings may be of any shape although 
they are generally circular or rectangular. 
The device may also be used to segregate 
granular material, into various sizes. 


Seeding — Suitable particulate matter 
added from outside source as ‘seed’ to 
hasten the process of settling. 


NOTE — Good floc formation in 
clarifloceulator often occurs more easily 
when water contains suspended particles 
on which precipitate formed by coagulant 
can settle. 


Selectivity — The preference of 
adsorption of the resin for one ion to other 
for example trivalent ion will be 
exchanged first by the resin in comparison 
to divalent ion and the latter first in 
comparison to monovalent ion. Chelating 
resins can however be made to have 
special selectivities for particular ions. 


Semi-Permeable — Term used to 
describe membranes with minute pores 
through which water can only diffuse very 


IS 11671: 2022 


slowly and through which salts pass with 
difficulty or not at all. 


Service Water — The net useful output of 
a plant, allowance having been made for 
treated or semi treated water, which may 
be used in bringing up the plant. 


Shock — A sudden change of 
environment leading to dimensional 
changes of ion exchange resins. Change of 
temperature (thermal shock) and change of 
concentration of a solution (osmotic 
shock) have this effect and cause physical 
break down of resin particles. 


Shock Chlorination — Slug feed of 
chlorine applied for a short interval of time 
to raw water particularly to the 
recirculating cooling system, to provide 
maximum benefit for the ‘kill’ effect on 
microbiological growth in the water. 


Silica vs Pressure Graph — Graph which 
shows different concentrations of silica, in 
boiler water at different boiler pressure, to 
be maintained. 


NOTE — Silica at high pressure and 
temperature when present in alkaline 
condition, volatilises in steam through a 
definite distribution ratio between water 
and steam phase. Since silica forms a very 
hard and adherent scale on turbine 
difficult to remove and which brings down 
the efficiency of machine, it is 
recommended to limit the concentration of 
silica in boiler water so as to limit the 
silica concentration in steam as 0.02 mg/l 
as silica. 


Slime — Slippery organic growth on hot 
surfaces in cooling water systems due to 
certain types of bacteria like sulphate and 
iron bacteria present in cooling water. 


Slip — See Leakage. 


Sludge — A water-formed sedimentary 
deposit including that of suspended solids 


20 


carried by the water and the settled floes 
formed by coagulants. 


Sludge Blanket — A horizontal layer of 
solids hydro dynamically suspended 
within an enclosed body of water. 


Sludge Conditioners — Chemicals 
(natural or synthetic) added to boiler water 
that condition sludge to be of free flowing 
type which can be removed through blow 
down. 


Sludge Recirculation — Pumping some 
old sludge back into the process, to act as a 
seeding material. 


Softening — Any process which reduces 
or removes the hardness, that is mainly 
calcium and magnesium content, from the 
water. 


Split Stream — When water flow is 
divided into two parts to undergo two 
different processes and finally treated for 
the third process after combining the 
effluents from the former two processes, it 
is called split stream. For example, water 
flow is split to pass through strongly acidic 
cation exchanger bed and a base exchanger 
bed simultaneously before being united to 
pass through the anion exchanger bed or 
through a degaser. 


Spray Eliminators — Inclined battens or 
packing in a cooling tower to prevent 
spray being carried to atmosphere by the 
drought through the tower. 


Stator Cooling Water — Water used for 
cooling the stator part of an alternator (or 
motor). Good quality water is used to 
avoid short circuiting due to salts present 
in it or the corrosion products of the 
system of water corroding the metallic 
portion of the system in contact. 


Steam Trap — A device fitted at the 
lowest point of a steam pipe work system, 
to provide automatic drainage of water. 


Stratified Bed — The use of strongly and 
weakly acidic or basic ion exchangers in a 
single vessel; the weak component lying in 
a separate layer immediately on top of the 
strong component. 


Stress Corrosion — A combined effect of 
stress and corrosion which causes brittle 
failure of a metal at the point of stresses. 
Chlorides, hydroxides and sulphides are 
contributors to stress corrosion. Austentic 
steel surfaces are more prone to this type 
of corrosion. 


Super Critical Boiler — A boiler which 
is operated at a pressure higher than the 
critical pressure of fluid(for water critical 
pressure is 217.9 kg/cm’). 


Superheater — Heat added to steam to 
raise its temperature above the saturation 
temperature is called super heat and the 
part of the boiler used for adding superheat 
to saturated steam is called superheater. 


Surface Condenser — A condenser 
where cooling water flows through tubes 
but does not mix with the steam 
condensing on the outer surfaces of the 
tubes. 


Suspended Matter — All particles bigger 
than colloids, which are being carried in 
water. 


Sweating (Condenser) — Minute seepage 
of cooling water in the form of small 
droplets through the tubes of condenser 
due to inside and outside pressure 
difference across the tubes; difficult to 
detect as condenser leak. 


Swelling — The expansion of an ion- 
exchange bed which occurs when the 


21 


IS 11671: 2022 


reactive groups on the resin are converted 
into certain forms. 


T 


Thoroughfare — If the same regenerant 
is required for two different ion exchanger 
vessels for regeneration, but at different 
concentrations, for example, for strongly 
acidic/basic and weakly acidic/basic ion 
exchangers, the regenerant solution for the 
two units is passed in series; the first 
getting higher concentrated dose and the 


next lower, the operation is called 
thoroughfare regeneration. 
Tower — An equipment for contacting 


liquid and gas in large contact area packed 
with ceramic or plastic rings or saddles in 
sufficient amount. Water flows downward 
and there is upward injection of air, so that 
water is broken into droplets and gases 
having less solubility in water, like carbon 
dioxide, escape through the tower. 


Turbidity — Reduction of transparency of 
water due to the presence of particulate 
matter in it. The property of scattering 
light can be used to measure the amount of 
particulate matter present. 


Type I and Type II Resins (Anion 
Exchange Resins) — Two types of 
strongly basic exchangers Type I has 
trimethylquarternary ammonium 
functional group (-N*(CH3)3) and Type II 
has modified quarternary ammonium 
functional group(one of the methyl group 
replaced with an ethanol group [- 
N*(CH3)2(C2H4OH)]. Type I has 
somewhat less exchange capacity but more 
stability than Type II. 


U 


Upflow — The operation of an ion 
exchange unit or in a filler in which 
solutions are let in at the bottom and 
collected at the top of the container. In 


IS 11671: 2022 


mixed bed while regenerating anion 
exchange resin, a slight upflow of water is 
also kept so that the caustic soda solution 
does not come in contact with cation resin 
and passes easily through the middle 
distributor header. 


V 


Venturi Tube — A tube which narrows to 
a throat and then gradually increases to the 
original diameter of the pipework. It is 
used to measure the flow of gas or liquid. 


Void —The space between the resinous 
particles in an ion exchange bed. 


Void Volume — Volume between resin 
particles, which is between 40 and 50 
percent of the gross bed volume. 


Volatile Treatment — Treatment of 
boiler feed water and boiler water, to 
prevent free hydroxide (caustic alkalinity) 
without use of any solid chemicals which 
may remain in the system as dissolved 
salts. Neutralizing amines, particularly 
morpholine and cyclohexylamine are used 
to provide volatile alkalinity in boiler 
water. The reduced volatility of these 
amines compared with that of ammonia is 
advantageous in giving corrosion 
protection where condensation occurs, for 
example, in turbine exhaust region and the 
steam side of the food heaters. As such 
points the amines dissolve in the 
condensing steam more completely than 
ammonia and consequently the condensate 
has a higher pH value and is less corrosive. 


W 
Wastewater — 


a) Water that is actually wasted or not 
needed by party wasting the water, 
or that which, after it has served 
the purpose for which it was 
utilized, has been premitted to run 


22 


to waste or escape; or which, from 
unavoidable causes, escapes from 
ditches, canals or other conduits or 
from reservoirs of the lawful 
owners of such structures. 


b) Water which contains 
contaminating waste products. 


c) The total amount of water wasted, 
including that used in diluting 


regeneration chemicals and 
processes such as rinsing and 
backwashing. 


Water Box — The dished end of a tubular 
heat-exchanger for entry and exit of 
cooling water. 


Water Hold Down — See also Hold 
Down. When the operation of hold down 
is done with water pressure, it is called 
water hold down. 


Water Regain — The amount of water 
present in the resin matrix expressed as 
percentage of the dry mass of the resin. 
Decrosslinking of gel type of resins 
generally increases water regain. 


Water Walls — Walls of water tubes 
surrounding the combustion chamber. To 
save the wastage of heat, boiler 
combustion chambers are now so designed 
that water tubes themselves take place of 
the firebrick walls used in early type of 
boilers. 


Wet Preservation — Process to store 
boiler system during its idle period to 
avoid corrosion on its metallic surfaces 
and protect magnetite layer intact. Usually 
done by a solution of hydrazine and 
attaining a pH of 10 with ammonia dose. 
For long term storage, however, a higher 
dose of hydrazine, usually 200 mg/l is 
given. 


Z 


Zeolite — Naturally occurring hydrous 
silicates exhibiting limited base exchange 
but able to remove hardness from water. 


Zero Solids Treatment — All volatile 
treatment of boiler feed water in 
conjunction with the provision of full flow 
condensate polishing. 


Zeta Potential — The potential across the 
diffuse layer of ions surrounding charged 
colloidal particle is called electrokinetic or 
zeta potential and is largely responsible for 
colloidal stability. When this potential is 
discharged by addition of polyvalent ions 
of opposite charge in the water, 


23 


IS 11671: 2022 


coagulation takes place and colloidal 
particles settle down. Zeta potential also 
has a role in deposition, release and 
transport of corrosion products. 


Zwitter Ions — Compounds that carry 
equal number of positive and negative 
charges. The polarities of these dipolar 
ions change with the change of pH. At a 
definite pH called iso-electric point, they 
exhibit neutral or non-ionic character. In 
water they originate from decomposition 
of vegetative protein. Because of their dual 
nature their removal by coagulation or by 
deionization is difficult. 


IS 11671: 2022 


ANNEX A 


(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Water Quality for industrial purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


Organization(s) 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, 
Thiruchirapali 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, 
Sharanpur 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 
Institute, Bhavnagar 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Consumer education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd,Chennai 


CECRI, Karaikudi 


Department of Science and Technology, 
New Delhi 


Davey Products 


24 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. P. BHATTACHARYA (Chairman) 
SHRI T. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 


SHRI K. ANANDA BABU (Alternate) 


DR NEELAM NIGAM 


SHRIMATI POOJA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


DR C. MURALIDHARAN 


DR K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 


SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


DR NITIN ENDLAY 


DR SANJAY TYAGI (Alternate) 


DR SOUMYA HALDAR 


DR D. N. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 
SHRI D. S. CHADHA 


MS ANINDITA MEHTA 


Ms DOLLY JAIN (Alternate) 
NOMINATION AWAITED 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 


DR R. MALINI (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA ALAM 


DR SANJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Organization(s) 
Delhi Jal Board 


Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda 


Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative 
Limited, Allahabad 


Indian Chemical Council 


Ton Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Maharashtra State Electricity Board, 
Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty 
Alleviation, New Delhi 


National Environment Engineering Research 
Institute, Nagpur 


NLC Nalco India Limited, Kolkata 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


Reliance Industries, Mumbai 
Rochem India, Mumbai 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New 
Delhi 


25 


IS 11671: 2022 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


SHRI S. N. SASTRY 


SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI GORAKH SINGH 


SHRI K. S. S. MOORTHY (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 


SHRI KEDAR OKE (Alternate) 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 


DR RENU SARAPH (Alternate) 


SHRI V. P. GHODMARE 


SHRI RAJESH DATTATRAYA CHIVANE (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJASEKHAR 


SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 


Ms CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. KHADSE 


DR V. ATUL MALDHURE (Alternate) 


Dr ASHISH KUMAR SAMADDAR 


SHRI NADAN CHATTERJI (Alternate) 


SHRI L. K. NAYAK 


SHRI ANKIT VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNEESH CHADDA 


SHRI MAHON MANOHAR KHANDEKAR (Alternate) 
NOMINATION AWAITED 
NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 


DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


IS 11671: 2022 


Organization(s) Representative(s) 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 


Delhi SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


Water and steam Chemistry Division, BARC DR B. ANUPKUMAR DIRECTOR 
facilities, Kalpakkam 


CII-Triveni Water Institute DR KAPIL K NARULA 


DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


In personal capacity SHRI D. K. JAIN 

In personal capacity DR A. LAWRENCE 

In personal capacity SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 

BIS Directorate General SHRI A. K. LAL, Scientist ‘E’ AND Head (CHD) 


[Representing Director General(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
MS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 


Scientist *B' (CHD), BIS 


26 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 13 (18513). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


