INATA HTAR IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


FU saa HT aa — aa 
ATT 3 uea ANa TES (PERA) 


(TETI JAQ ) 


Fumigation of Agricultural Produce 
— Code of Practice 
Part 3 Aluminium Phosphide (Phosphine) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.040.20 


© BIS 2023 


ARA HAR ST 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 TE ME S AMT, 78 Reet - 110002 
MA MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2023 Price Group 5 


Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


Use of fumigants becomes necessary for pest control in various commodities including agricultural produce. 
Fumigants are, however, effective only under airtight conditions and, therefore, airtight condition is a pre-requisite 
for carrying out the fumigation. Further, it is necessary to choose the fumigant taking into consideration the likely 
reaction of the fumigant with the material to be fumigated, possible hazards to the operators, the area where the 
fumigation is to be carried out, and the time available for effecting fumigation. 


Aluminium phosphide (ALP) is a solid fumigant and a highly toxic pesticide which is commonly used for 
fumigation. Phosphine is very toxic to all forms of animal life and exposure of human beings even to small 
amounts should be avoided. Therefore, use of Aluminium phosphide tablets is restricted. Aluminium phosphide 
fumigation operation may be carried out either by government experts or commercial pest control operators whose 
expertise is approved by the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India as mentioned in NSPM 22 
‘Guidelines for Assessment, Audit and Accreditation of Fumigation Agencies for Undertaking Aluminium 
Phosphide Fumigation’ published by Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage. 


This standard (Part 3) is one of the series of Indian Standards on code of practice for fumigation of agricultural 
produce. This standard covers aluminium phosphide. It is hoped that adoption of these standards by storage units 
and export inspection agencies, both in the public and private sectors, will promote efficiency, economy and 
safety. The other parts published in this series are: 


Part 1 Methyl bromide 

Part 2 Ethylene Dibromide [Withdrawn, as the fumigant has been banned vide S.O. 682 (E) dated 17th July 
2001] 

Part 4 Ethylene dichloride and carbon tetrachloride mixture 

Part 5 General Requirements 


This standard was first published in 1974. The standard is being revised to incorporate latest technological 
developments in the field of fumigation of agricultural products and the major changes include: 


a) Physical characteristics of aluminium phosphide have been detailed; 

b) Minimum recommended dosage of aluminium phosphide has been reduced for optimum application; 
c) Factors affecting dosage of aluminium phosphide has been included; and 

d) Method of fumigation has been modified. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is 
to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values 
(second revision)’. 


IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
FUMIGATION OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE — CODE OF 


PRACTICE 
PART 3 ALUMINIUM PHOSPHIDE (PHOSPHINE) 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 3) describes general properties, 
dosage, duration of exposure, precautions in 
handling and method of fumigation with aluminium 
phosphide preparations or formulation for pest 
control in stored agricultural produce and inputs. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 

IS 6151 Storage management code: Part 1 

(Part 1) Terminology (first revision) 

: 2020 

IS 6438 : Specification for aluminium 

1980 phosphide formulations (first 
revision) 

IS 9503 : Specification for aluminium bottles 

1988 for liquid pesticides (first revision) 


IS 14611:  Multilayered cross laminated 
2016 sheets/tarpaulins/covers/agricultural 
films — Specification 


IS 15219: Aluminium phosphide powder 
2002 formulation 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in 
IS 6151 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 GENERAL DESCRIPTION AND 
PROPERTIES OF THE FUMIGANT 


4.1 Aluminium phosphide are available in the form 
of tablets, pellets or sachets. All these formulations 
slowly release phosphine, a hazardous inflammable 
fumigant by reaction with the moisture in the 


surrounding atmosphere. The tablets release above 
33 percent by mass of phosphine gas. It contains 
aluminium phosphide and ammonium carbamate or 
any other base safe for foodgrains and human life. 


4.2 Properties of Phosphine Gas 


Chemical formula PH; 
IUPAC Name Phosphane 
Boiling point -87.4 °C 
Freezing point - 133.5 °C 
Molecular weight 34.04 
Specific gravity: 

Gas (air 1) 1.214 
Liquid (water 1) 0.746 


Latent heat of 102.6 Cal/g 
vaporization 


26 ml/100 ml at 17 
ye 


1.79 % v/v or 17900 
ppm or 26.1 gm/m? 


Solubility in water 


LEP (Lowest 
Explosive Point) 


Method of evolution as From the 

fumigant preparations of 
aluminium 
phosphide 

Odour Pure phosphine is 


odourless. However, 
garlic or carbide 
odour is detectable 
due to impurities 
such as diphosphines 
and arsine 


5 DOSAGE AND EXPOSURE 
5.1 Minimum Recommended Dosage 


The minimum recommended dosage of aluminium 
phosphide is 2 g to 3 g phosphine cubic meter (two 


IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 


to three tablets per cubic meter) for agricultural 
produce. For fumigation of empty RCC roof 
warehouses or godowns, the recommended dosage 
is 1.5 g phosphine per cubic meter (1.5 tablets per 
cubic meter or 4.5 g aluminium phosphide per cubic 
or 450 g of aluminium phosphide tablets per 100 per 
cubic meter). 


5.2 Factors Affecting Dosage of Aluminium 
Phosphide 


Fumigant dosage given on volume basis differs 
depending on commodity type (exceptionally 
sorptive commodities such as paddy and pulses, 
require higher dosages), pest factor (higher dosages 
and longer exposure period needed when 
Trogoderma granarium, khapra larvae or groundnut 
bruchid, Caryedon serratus are the target insects), 
temperature conditions (lower the temperature, 
longer is the exposure period as insect development 
1.e., from egg to larval stage, is highly influenced by 
temperature), and pest status (normal or phosphine- 
resistant). 


NOTE — Refer label and applicator’s manual before 

aluminium phosphide (phosphine) application. 
5.3 Decomposition of a tablet takes 2 days to 3 days 
depending on temperature and humidity conditions 
(and grain moisture content is 10 percent or more). 
When the temperature and humidity conditions are 
lower than 15 °C and 30 percent respectively, 
complete decomposition may take more than 3 days. 
The recommended minimum exposure period is 7 
days at 25 °C and above. For fumigations carried out 
at lower temperatures i.e., below 25 °C, the exposure 
period has to be extended to 10 days to 14 days. 


6 MATERIAL TO BE FUMIGATED 


6.1 Aluminium phosphide may be employed with 
advantage for fumigation of cereals, pulses, spices, 
oilseeds, dried fruits, tree nuts, coffee beans, cocoa 
beans, oilseeds, oilcakes, rice bran, seeds, tobacco 
and other agricultural commodities. 


6.2 Aluminium phosphide may also be employed for 
fumigation of RCC roofed warehouse, 
godown/sheds (where sealing can be properly done) 
and rat burrows. 


7 AVAILABILITY 


7.1 Tablets (3 g each) conforming to IS 6438 and 
pellets (0.6 g each) are packed in a leak-proof, air- 
tight, seamless extruded aluminium bottle 
conforming to IS 9503. In the case of powder 
formulation, the active ingredient is enclosed in a 


permeable sachet (paper bag, 34 g each) conforming 
to IS 15219. 


8 METHOD OF FUMIGATION 
8.1 Equipment 


8.1.1 Gas-Mask with Suitable Canister Containing 
Specially Treated Activated Carbon 


8.1.2 Fumigation Covers with Pulley and Strings 
8.1.3 Sand Snakes 

8.1.4 First-Aid Kit 

8.1.5 Rubber Gloves 

8.1.6 Phosphine Leak Checker 

8.1.7 Phosphine Gas Monitor 

8.2 Fumigation in Stacks 


8.2.1 Make the stacks to uniform height. Measure 
the dimensions (length, width and height) of stacks 
preferably after sheeting/covering with fumigation 
sheet (see IS 14611), calculate the volume and apply 
as g of phosphine/volume in m3. While dosing, the 
tablet should not be heaped. Tablet should be spread 
out evenly on a tray/kraft paper/enamel tray, so that 
residual material can be collected at the end of the 
fumigation for proper disposal after deactivation. 
When the stack has been built on wooden pallets, the 
tray containing the tablets can be placed at the base 
of the stack. In absence of wooden pallets as 
dunnage, the tablets held in thin cloth bags (about 10 
tablets per bag) may be distributed along the four 
sides of the stack. Aluminium phosphide sachet or 
powder formulation (34 g sachet releases 11 g 
phosphine) provides ease of application and 
convenient to dispose after the treatment. The major 
advantage with sachet formulation is that the 
residual/unspent powder is retained in the pouch 
itself and therefore, there is no product 
contamination. The operators should wear the gas- 
mask and hand gloves before handling the tablets or 
sachet. After dispensing the fumigant, cover the 
stack with the fumigation cover immediately and 
make it airtight by pressing the sheet/cover all 
around with sand snakes of 1 m length and 15 cm 
diameter filled with about 80 percent dry sand. The 
operation should be completed within half-an-hour 
of the placement or exposure of the tablets/sachet. 
Check for any leakage of the fumigant around the 
stack using an electronic phosphine leak checker and 
rectify the leakage. 


8.2.2 Whenever aluminium phosphide fumigation is 
carried out, immediately after dosing, a placard or 
warning sign board with details of fumigant used, 
name of fumigation agency, contact number etc. 
should be displayed in such a way it is clearly visible 
to everyone. Preferably the fumigated area be also 
cordoned with ribbon barricades. 


8.2.3 During the fumigation period it is important to 
measure phosphine gas concentration inside the 
enclosure at 24 or 48 hr intervals using high range (1 
ppm to 2 000 ppm) phosphine monitor. The target 
terminal/seventh day phosphine concentration must 
be 500 ppm or more. However, in case of 
Trogoderma or other pests which are tolerant, the 
terminal concentration must be 1 000 ppm or more. 
For longer exposure period of 10 days to 14 days, a 
reduced target concentration of about 300 ppm is 
adequate for a successful treatment. 


8.2.4 After the exposure period of 7 days (see 5.2), 
lift the cover partially and allow the aeration for at 
least once in three hours after which remove the 
cover completely. Allow the stocks aeration till 
phosphine gas concentration around the stack drops 
to 0.3 ppm or less. Aeration should be done wearing 
appropriate breathing apparatus 1.e., a gas-mask 
fitted with right type of canister or self-contained 
breathing apparatus (SCBA). 


8.3 Fumigation in Godowns 


8.3.1 Empty storage areas (RCC roofed warehouses) 
and empty silos can be fumigated with aluminium 
phosphide tablets or sachet. Close the doors and 
ventilators of the godown and make the structure 
airtight by fixing polyethylene sheets cut to the sizes 
of doors and ventilators on them. Lock from outside 
all the doors except the exit door. After sealing 
sources of gas loss/leakage, required quantity of 
tablets/ pouches based on dosage arrived on total 
volume basis are dispensed at various points on 
suitable substrates (trays/kraft papers/cardboard 
sheets) held on floor. All lights and electrical motors 
within the treated area must be turned off. Doors 
leading to the fumigated space must be closed, 
sealed and post warning placards/ ribbon barricades. 
At the end of 7 days of exposure period open 
windows, vents etc. and fumigated structure allowed 
to aerate. The structures should not be entered 
without proper respiratory protective equipment or 
breathing apparatus until phosphine concentration 
inside is below the threshold limit value (0.3 ppm). 
Collect the spent residual dust and dispose it off after 
wet deactivation. Dispose used aluminium 
phosphide cans/flasks after crushing or puncturing. 


IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 


8.4 Fumigation in Bulk Storage Structures 


8.4.1 Make the bins or other bulk storage structures 
completely airtight. Dispense the aluminium 
phosphide tablet or sachet by surface application or 
insert the required number of tablets at various 
depths into the agricultural produce by means of a 
suitable applicator (perforated pipes or by a special 
probe of 5 ft to 15 ft length). If the grain depth is 
more than 30 ft, recirculation will be required 
following surface application or probed. After an 
exposure of 7 days, open the structure and allow 
aeration for about 6 hours. 


NOTE — In case of fumigation in silos, the tablets may be 
inserted in the storage bins by placement at regular 
intervals, on conveyor belts conveying grain into bins. 


8.5 Fumigation of Rat Burrows 


8.5.1 Carry out the survey of the place where burrow 
fumigation is to be undertaken. Close all the 
openings of rat burrows with earth, preferably in the 
evening. Next morning examine these burrows and 
find out the number of the burrows reopened. Mark 
all the reopened burrows as live burrows for 
fumigation. 


8.5.2 Carry out the fumigation of live burrows either 
in the morning or in the evening then the rats may be 
resting inside these burrows. Close firmly with earth 
all the openings except one opening of the live 
burrows. Insert two 0.6 g tablets deep into each 
burrow and close the same. Re-examine the burrows 
the following day. In case any of the burrows have 
been reopened, repeat the fumigation process. 


9 PRECAUTIONS 


9.1 The aluminium phosphide tablets on being 
exposed to atmosphere start releasing the phosphine 
gas. The fumigation work should, therefore, be 
planned in such a manner that the operation of 
placement of tablets, covering with fumigation 
covers, closing the doors and ventilators should be 
completed in about 30 minutes. To ensure uniform 
and speedy distribution of tablets, the points of 
application should be decided in advance. Ensure 
that no person is allowed in the premises within 
30 minutes from the beginning of the operation. 


9.2 The tablets start crumbling after about 
30 minutes of exposure to atmosphere. This should 
be taken as a warning and as the time limit of 
completion of the fumigation operation. 


9.3 Phosphine reacts with all metals, and specially 
with copper or copper - containing equipment; 


IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 


especially electrical apparatus may be severely 
damaged. Therefore, all copper-containing 
equipment and parts in the godowns or other 
structures should be protected before the treatment 
starts. 


9.4 The daily exposure to the fumigant of an 
operator should not exceed 0.3 ppm. Short-term 
exposure limit should not exceed 1 ppm. 


9.5 The operator undertaking the fumigation should 
invariably wear the gas-mask with a canister 
containing specially activated carbon for protection 
against gases. 


9.6 The operator should also wear gloves when 
dispensing tablets by hand. 


9.7 Odour of the fumigant should not be relied upon 
as an indication of poisonous concentration of the 
fumigant. 


9.8 Smoking or touching food at any time during the 
application of the fumigant should be strictly 
prohibited. 


9.9 The residual limit of phosphine in foodgrains 


should not be more than 0.1 ppm. 


10 SYMPTOMS OF POISONING AND FIRST- 
AID MEASURES 


10.1 Symptoms of Poisoning 


Nausea, pain in chest or intestines, diarrhoea, 
vomiting, fatigue, etc, which may be followed by 
dry cough, intense thirst, pain in limbs, enlarged 
pupils, etc. 


10.2 First-Aid 


Remove the operator out of the contaminated 
atmosphere into the open air. Make him sit or lie 
down. Keep him warm, if necessary, with blankets. 


10.3 Treatment 


Giving oxygen with oxygen breathing equipment is 
recommended. Administer a cardiac tonic and a drug 
to stimulate blood circulation. 


10.3.1 In case of pulmonary oedema, a hypertonic 
solution of glucose should be injected. 


IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


Organization 


Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of 
Agriculture, New Delhi 


All India Food Processors’ Association, New Delhi 

CSIR- Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 

Central Warehousing Corporation(CWC), New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry (CIFTD- 
FICCI, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), New Delhi 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training and 
Empowerment (CREATE) 


Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore 


Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad 


Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine & Storage, 
Faridabad 
Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAD), 
New Delhi 


G.B. Pant University, Food Science Division, 
Pant Nagar 


ICAR- Indian Institute of Pulses Research, Kanpur 


Representative(s) 


DR NACHIKET KOTWALIWALE (Chairperson) 


SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR JOSHI 
SHRIMATI KAMIA JUNEJA (Alternate) 


DR M. S. MEERA 
Dr V. B. SASHIKALA (Alternate) 


SHRI SIDHARTH RATH 
DR ANURAG TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN B. 
Ms RITIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI HIMALAYA KOUL 
Ms. NEHA AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SURESH KANNA 
SHRI R. PONNAMALAM (Alternate) 


DR PAL MURUGAN M. 
MS SAKSHI SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dy. AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR 
SMO (STANDARD) (Alternate) 


DR RAVI PRAKASH 
MS SUNITA PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI A.S. ARUNACHALAM 
SHRI RAVI KUMAR SINHA (Alternate) 


MS APRAJITA VERMA 


DR SATISH K. SHARMA 
DR SWETA RAI (Alternate) 


DR PRASOON VERMA 
DR UMA SAH (Alternate) 


IS 7247 (Part 3) : 2023 


Organization 


ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack 


ICAR-Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & 
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana 


ICAR- Centre of Excellence for Soybean Processing, 
CIAE, Bhopal 


ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute 


(CTCRJ),Thiruvananthapuram 


ICAR-National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad 


Indian Grain Storage Management and Research 


Institute, Hapur 


Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
& Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
& Management (NIFTEM), Thanjavur 


National Sugar Institute (NSI), Kanpur 


Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of 
India (PFNDAI) 


Roller Flour Millers Federation of India (RFMFI), 
New Delhi 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI), Pune 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (House number 183, Sector 16 A, 
Faridabad - 121002) 


In Personal Capacity (250 A, Pocket 1, Phase 1, 
Mayur Vihar, Delhi 110091) 


Representative(s) 


DR B.C. PATRA 
DR TORIT BARAN BAGCHI (Alternate I) 
DR SUTAPA SARKAR (Alternate II) 


DR D. N. YADAV 
DR MRIDULA DEVI (Alternate) 


DR PUNIT CHANDRA 
Dr S. K. GIRI (Alternate) 


DR KRISHNAKUMAR T. 
DR M. S. SANJEEV (Alternate) 


DR NAVEEN KUMARR. 


DR R.K. SHAHI 
DR R.K. BARALA (Alternate) 


SHRI MADHAB CHAKRABORTY 
DR NILAY KANTI PRAMANIK (Alternate) 


DR ANKUR OJHA 


DR LOGANANTHAN 
DR M. VENKATACHALPATHY (Alternate) 


DR V. P. SRIVASTAVA 


DR SHATADRU SENGUPTA 
DR JASVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI D. V. MALHAN 


DR RAJEEV V. DANI 
DR SANJEEV V. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIMESH SINGH 


DR S. C. KHURANA 


SHRI I.C. CHADDHA 


Oraganzation Representative (s) 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/ 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) 
(REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
Ms LAVIKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Panel on Storage of Foodgrains, FAD 16/Panel 2 


Organization Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity (250 A, Pocket 1, Phase 1, SHRI I. C. CHADDA 
Mayur Vihar Delhi — 110091) 
Central Warehousing Corporation, Delhi DR SIDDHARTH RATH 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, DEPUTY AMA (QC) 
Faridabad 
Food Corporation of India (FCD, SHRI A.S. ARUNACHALAM 
New Delhi SHRI RAVI KUMAR SINHA 
ICAR- Central Institute of Post-Harvest DR GURUP. 
Engineering and Technology, Ludhiana 
ICAR- Centre of Excellence for Soybean DR DEBABANDYA MOHAPATRA 
Processing, Bhopal DR ADINATH KATE 
Warehousing Development and Regulatory SHRI ANIMESH KUMAR 


Authority, New Delhi 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 16 (19764). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern :8® Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


