IS : 1963 - 1981 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR 
DETERMINATION OF THREADS PER UNIT 
LENGTH IN WOVEN FABRICS 


(Second Revision) 


Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee, TDC 1 


Chairman Representing 


Dr V, SUNDARAM Cotton Technological Research Laboratory 
( ICAR ), Bombay 


Members 


Dx V. G. Munsui ( Alternate to 
Dr V, Sundaram ) 
Sarı S, K. AGRAWAL Ministry of Defence (R&D) 
Sunt J. N. Misura ( Alternate ) 
AGRICULTURAL MARKETING Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of 
ADVISER TO THE Govt or INDIA Agriculture ), Faridabad 
Seri S. JAYARAMAN ( Alternate ) 
Dr B, L, BANERJEE Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, 
Calcutta 
Dr U. Mouxopapnaay ( Alternate ) 
Sart A. T. Basak Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 
( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
Suni D. K. Nandy ( Alternate ) 


Suri C. BHATTACHARYA Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, Vadodara 
Suri H, G, Banata ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. C. CHAKRAVARTY Jute Technological Research Laboratory ( ICAR ), 
Calcutta ` 
Sarı K. K, CHATTERJEE Office of the Jute Commissioner, Calcutta 
Sarr A. R, S. GoPALACHAR Central Silk Board, Bombay 
Mas A. N. GOSWAMI Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 
Sarı P, C. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Sarı S. B, HARDAS Wool Research Association, Bombay 
Dr V. G. KAMATH Nirlon Synthetic Fibres & Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 
De A. R, MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) 
Smr A. KAPLESH The Silk & Art Silk Mills’ Research Association, 
Bombay 


{ Continued on page 2 ) 


© Copyright 1981 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


( Continued from page 1) 


Members Representing 
Dr B, R, MANJUNATHA Textiles Committee, Bombay 
Suri J. MonED21 ( Alternate ) 
Suri D, S. NADKARNI The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay 
Dr M. G. NarsiaN The Raymond Woollen Mills Ltd, Bombay 


Suri K. P, RAMAKRISHNA PrLLAY The South India Textile Research Association, 
Coimbatore 


Sri M. RADHAKRISHNAN The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 
Suri T, R. Rao Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Snr S, P, GHosat ( Alternate ) 
Suri T. A. SUBRAMANIAN Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Rescarch Association, 

Ahmadabad 

PRor N, M. SwaNI Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 

Dr V. K. KOTRARI ( Alternate ) 
Sari M. G, THANAWALA M. Best Cotton Rope Manufacturing Co, Bombay 
Sunr S. M, CHAKRABORTY, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 


Director ( Tex ) 


Secretary 


Sarı G. S, ABHYANKAR 
Deputy Director ( Tex ), ISI 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR 
DETERMINATION OF THREADS PER UNIT 
LENGTH IN WOVEN FABRICS 


(Second Revision ) 


0. FOREWORD 


0.1 This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the 
Indian Standards Institution on 31 January 1981, after the draft 
finalized by the Physical Methods of Test Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Textile Division Council. 


0.2 This standard was first published in 1961 and revised in 1969. The 
standard has now been revised again to make provision of determining 
the number of threads per centimetre in addition to per decimetre. This 
has become necessary with the adoption of SI units and also adoption 
of practice of expressing threads per centimetre in India and abroad. 


0.3 Jute industry is an export oriented industry and the overseas con- 
sumers use the terms ‘porter’ and ‘shots’ for expressing warp and weft 
threads per unit length of jute fabrics. For the convenience of the 
overseas consumers conversion factors for converting values of warp 
threads per decimetre to ‘ porter’ and weft threads per decimetre to 
* shots per inch ' have been given in the standard. ( see Note under 5.3 ). 


0.4 Apart from the two methods given in this standard, method based 
on use of different types of line gratings is also followed. 


0.5 To familiarize the industry with International System of Units 
( SI Units ), the basic SI Units as well as the recommended SI Units for 
use in the textile industry are given in Appendix A. 


0.5.1 Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 also stipulates use 
of SI Units. 


0.6 In reporting the results or analysis of a test made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 


*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 


3 


IS : 1963 - 1981 
1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes two methods for determination of warp 
threads and weft threads per unit length ( per centimetre and per 
decimetre ) in woven fabrics. 


1.2 The methods are applicable to all textile fabrics irrespective of their 
composition ( that is, whether they are made of cotton, wool, silk, jute, 
man-made fibres or blends of two or more such fibres ), manufacturing 
processes and finishing treatments, 


2. TERMINOLOGY 


2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following terms, in addition to 
those given in IS : 232-1967* shall apply. 


2.1 Warp Threads — The threads which lie along the length of a 
fabric as woven. 


2.2 Weft Threads — The weft or filling threads which lie across the 
length of the fabric. 


2.3 Porter — The value obtained by counting in jute fabric the number 
of warp threads per gauge length of 47 mm ( or 37/20 in ) and dividing 
it by the number of threads per split ( 2 for hessian, 3 for single warp 
twill cloth, 4 for double warp plain fabric and 6 for double warp twill 
cloth ). 

Nore — This definition of * porter’ based on the Indian practice refers to the 


finished fabric, and has to be distinguished from the Dundee practice according to 
which * porter’ is evaluated in terms of loom reed used in weaving the cloth. 


2.4 Shot — Single thread of weft yarn in jute fabrics running from 
selvedge to selvedge. It is inserted in one passage of the shuttle across 
the loom. 


3. ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONING AND 
TESTING 


3.1 Prior to test, the fabric shall be conditioned to moisture equilibrium 
from dry side, in the standard atmosphere of 65 + 2 percent relative 
humidity and 27 = 2°C temperature as prescribed in IS : 6359-19711. 


3.2 The test shall be carried out in a standard atmosphere ( see 3.1 ). 


3.3 The conditioning and testing may also be carried out in prevailing 
atmosphere, if agreed between the parties. 


*Glossary of textile terms — natural fibres ( first revision ). 
+Method for conditioning of textiles, . . 


4., 


IS : 1963 - 1981 
4. GENERAL INFORMATION 


4.1 Choice of Method 


Method A (see 5) — This method is suitable for fabrics, the 
individual threads of which can be easily identified with a thread 
counting glass. 


Method B ( see 6 ) — This method is suitable for fabrics, the in- 
dividual threads of which cannot be easily identified with a thread 
counting glass. 


Nore — It may be noted that none of these methods may be applicable to certain 
special type of fabrics, such as Moleskin, Lappet, Butta, Leno weaves, etc. 


4.2 Determination shall not be made (a) within 50 mm from the selve- 
dges, or (b) within two metres from either end of a piece, roll or bolt. 
In case of fabrics having width from 10 cm to 20 cm the selvedge ends 
shall be excluded while counting. 


Norz — This is not applicable to narrow fabrics, 


4.3 Narrow Fabrics — In case of narrow fabrics having width of 
10 cm or less, all warp threads including selvedge ends shall be counted 
and expressed as threads per full width. 


4.4 Design Fabrics — For design fabrics, it is convenient (a) to deter- 
mine the number of units in a weave repeat from a point paper diagram, 
and (b) to count (i) the number of whole repeats, and (ii) remaining 
units, in the distance across which the threads are to be counted; and 
calculate from the data so obtained, the number of threads per centi- 
metre or decimetre, warpway or weftway as required. 


4.5 For the purpose of determining the distance across which the number 
of threads is to be counted, assume the fabric to have the number of 
warp and weft threads per centimetre or decimetre as in the material 
specification, as specified in an agreement between the buyer and the 
seller, or by actual determination of thread count in one or two places. 


5. METHOD A — BY TRAVERSING THREAD COUNTER 


5.1 Apparatus — A thread counter, equipped with a low power micro- 
scope of suitable magnification and a pointer which traverses along a 
graduated base, shall be used. However, in the absence of such a thread 
counter, an ordinary counting glass with an aperture satisfying the 
requirements of 5.2 may be used. 


Note -— It is recommended that a table with a ground glass top illuminated from 
below should be used, Such a table greatly facilitates the work involved, 


5 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


5.2 Warp and Weft Threads per Centimetre or Decimetre 


5.2.1 Lay on a flat table a portion of one of the pieces constituting the 
test sample and smoothen it out. Place the counting glass with the 
pointer at zero on the piece in such a way that (a) on turning the screw 
the pointer moves in a direction parallel or perpendicular to warp 
threads, depending upon which set of threads ( warp or weft ) is being 
counted, and (b) the pointer shall coincide either with the right hand or 
the left-hand edge of a thread, depending on whether the counting is 
started from right to left or from left to right direction. Find the 
number of warp or weft threads by counting the number of units 
( normally comprising one thread and one space ) and including as a 
fraction, any part of such unit in a distance L ( see 4.5 ), which shall be: 


i) 50 mm, if the number of threads are 20 per centimetre ( 200 per 
decimetre ) or less; 

ii) 20 mm, if the number of threads are more than 20 per centi- 
metre ( 200 per decimetre ), but less than or equal to 100 per 
centimetre ( 1 000 per decimetre ); and 

iii) 10 mm, if the number of threads are more than 100 per centi- 
metre ( 1 000 per decimetre ). 


Notre — Counting edge of the thread counter should be placed always either 
parallel to the warp threads or perpendicular to the warp threads as the case 


may be. 


5.2.2 Following the procedure prescribed in 5.2.1 determine the 
number of warp and weft threads per centimetre or decimetre as requir- 
ed, in at least four more places evenly distributed along the width and 
length of the piece. Avoid counting same set of warp or weft threads 
more than once. Average all the observed values and note the value so 
obtained as the number of warp and weft threads per centimetre or 
decimetre in the piece as the case may be. 

Nore — In case of weft threads, it is preferable to have at least 10 readings, if the 
size of the sample permits, 

5.2.3 Calculate the number of warp and weft threads per centimetre 
or decimetre as the case may be by the following formula: 


n= A x 10 ( or 160 )* 
where 
n — number of threads per cm ( or dm )*; 
N = observed number of threads in the distance L; and 


L — distance, expressed in mm, across which the threads are 
counted; 50 or 20 or 10 mm, as the case may be. 


6 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


5.3 Determine in a similar manner ( see 5.2) warp threads and weft 
threads per centimetre or decimetre as required of the remaining pieces 
in the sample and find the mean of the value for warp threads per centi- 
metre or decimetre as required and the mean of the value for weft 
threads per centimetre or decimetre, respectively. 


Nots — For converting ‘warp threads per cm or dm’ to * porter’ and ‘ weft 
threads per cm or dm’ to * shots per inch’ in case of jute fabrics, the following 
conversion factors may be used: i 


Multiply 
i) Porter: rer eeM Ameni 
~ Threads/cm by Threads/dm by 

a) For hessian ( plain = 2:349 0:234 9 
weave ) cloth 

b) For double warp plain = 1:175 0:117 5 
weave cloth 

c) For single warp 2/1 = 1:566 0:1566 
twill cloth 

d) For double warp 2/1 = 0°783 0:078 3 
twill cloth 


ii) Shots/inch = 2°54 0:254 0 
6. METHOD B — BY DISSECTION OF FABRIC . 
6.1 Apparatus 
6.1.1 Clamps — Use any of the following clamps ( see also Table 1 ): 
a) Type‘ A’ Clamp — A clamp with two parallel pins with their points 


50 mm apart, 

b) Type * B' Clamp — A clamp with two parallel pins with their 
points 20 mm apart, and 

c) Type ‘C? Clamp — A clamp with two parallel pins with their 
points 10 mm apart. 


Nore — An outline of the clamp is shown in Fig. 1. 
6.1.2 Forceps — One pair of pointed forceps for removing threads. 


6.2 Warp and Weft Threads per Centimetre or Decimetre 


6.2.1 Take one of the pieces constituting the sample and cut out from 
it a specimen of the width and length as specified in Table 1. The length 
of the specimen shall be along the weft threads for determining number 
of warp threads per centimetre or decimetre and along the warp threads 
for determining number of weft threads per centimetre or decimetre. 
Lay the specimen on table with the length running from left to right. 


7 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


Take an appropriate type of clamp ( see Table 1 ) and position it central- 
ly over the specimen. Then pass the pins on the clamp through the 
specimen. Remove using forceps, the threads remaining outside of cloth 
pins, leaving only the gauge length of specimen between them, and such 
threads through which the pins pass. From this gauge length of the 
specimen remove the threads one by one and count the number of threads 
within the gauge length. 


TABLE 1 NUMBER OF THREADS, LENGTH OF SPECIMEN, WIDTH 
OF SPECIMEN, GAUGE LENGTH AND TYPE OF CLAMP 


( Clauses 6.1 and 6,2.1) 


All dimensions in millimetres, 


No. or TzBREADS LenerH or  WiprH or GavuaE Typror 
( see 4.5 ) SPECIMEN SPECIMEN LenetH CLAMP 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
20 per cm ( 200 perdm) or 80 15 50 A 
less 
More than 20 but less than 50 15 20 B 


or equal to 100 per cm 
(or more than 200 but 
less than or equal to 
1 000 per dm ) 


More than 100 per cm ( or 40 15 10 c 
more than 1 000 per dm ) 


I 


6.2.2 Following the procedure prescribed in 6.2.1, determine the 
number of warp and weft threads per centimetre or decimetre as 
required, in at least four more places equally distributed along the width 
and length respectively of the piece. Average all the observed values 
and note the value so obtained as the number of warp and weft threads 
per centimetre or decimetre in the pieces as the case may be. 


Nore — In case of weft threads, it is preferable to have at least 10 readings, if the 
size of the sample permits. 


6.2.3 Calculate the number of warp and weft threads per centimetre 


8 


IS: 1963 - 1981 


or decimetre by the following formula: 


n= x 10 ( or 100 )* 


where 


n = the number of threads per cm ( or dm )*; 
N = observed number of threads in the gauge length L; and 


L — gauge length, that is, the distance expressed in mm, 
between the pins on the clamp; 50 or 20 or 10 mm, as the 
case may be. 


6.3 Determine in a similar manner ( see 6.2) warp threads and weft 
threads per centimetre or decimetre as required of the remaining pieces 
in the sample and find the mean of the values for warp threads per 
centimetre or decimetre and the mean of the values for weft threads per 
centimetre or decimetre respectively ( see also Note under 5.3 ). 


7. REPORT 

7.1 The report shall include the following information: 
a) Description of the material tested; 
b) Method used; 


c) Atmospheric conditions: 
1) Standard atmosphere, or 


2) Prevailing atmosphere (give relative humidity and tem- 
perature ); and 


d) Results: 
1) Number of warp threads per cm or dm, and 
2) Number of weft threads per cm or dm. 


Notr — The value should be rounded off to first decimal place in the case 
when the results are reported for threads per centimetre, 


9 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


1 DIA 


ENLARGED VIEW 
OF PIN 
L = Gauge length = 50 mm ( Type A’ Clamp ) 
OR 
20 mm ( Type ‘B’ Clamp ) 
OR 
10 mm ( Type ‘C’ Clamp) 


All dimensions in millimetres, 


Fic. 1 Cramp 


10 


SL 


No, 


(1) 
1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


9) 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


APPENDIX A 


( Clause 0.5 ) 


^" RECOMMENDED SI UNITS FOR TEXTILES 


CHARACTERISTIO 
(2) 


Length 


Width 


Thickness 


Linear density 


Diameter 


Circumference 
Threads in fabric: 


a) Lengthwise 


b) Widthwise 


Warp threads in 
loom 


Stitches in knitted 
fabric: 


a) Lengthwise 


b) Widthwise 


SI Units APPLIOs TION 
——À 
Unit Abbreviation 
(3) (4) (5) 
Millimetre mm Fibres 
Millimetre, mm,cm Samples, test specimens 
centimetre ( as appropriate ) 
Metre m Yarns, ropes, cordages, 
fabrics 
Milimetre mm Narrow fabrics 
Centimetre cm Other fabrics 
Millimetre, mm, cm Samples, test specimens 
centimetre (as appropriate ) 


Centimetre, metre cm, m 

Micrometre um 
( micron ) 

Millimetre mm 

Tex tex 

Millitex mtex 

Decitex dtex 

Kilotex ktex 

Micrometre um 
( micron ) 

Millimetre mm 

Millimetre mm 

Number per ends/cm 
centimetre 

Number per ends/dm 
decimetre 

Number per picks/cm 
centimetre 

Number per picks/dm 
decimetre 

Number per ends/cm 
centimetre 

Courses per courses/cm 
centimetre 

Courses per courses/dm 
decimetre 

Wales per wales/cm 
centimetre 

Wales per wales/dm 
decimetre 


11 


Carpets, druggets, DURRIES 
( as appropriate ) 


Delicate fabrics 


Other fabrics, carpets, felts 


Yarns 
Fibres 
Filaments, filament yarns 
Slivers, ropes, cordage 
Fibres 


Yarns, ropes, cordages 
Ropes, cordages 


Woven fabrics (as 
appropriate ) 

Reeds 

Knitted fabrics ( as 


appropriate ) 


IS : 1963 - 1981 


SL CHARAOTERISTIO 

No. 

a) (2) 

10) Stitch length 

11) Mass per unit area 

12) Mass per unit length 

13) Twist 

14) Test or gauge length 

15) Breaking load 

16) Breaking length 

17) Tenacity 

18) Twistfactor or twist 
multiplier 

19) Bursting.strength 

20) Tear strength 

21) Pile height 

22) Pile density 

23) Elastic modulus 


APPLICATION 


(5) 


Knitted fabrics, made-up 
fabrics 


Fabrics 


Fabrics 


turns/cm ) Yarns, ropes ( as appro- 


SI Units 
—————— 
Unit Abbreviation 
(3) (4) 
Millimetre nom 
Grams per square g/m? 
metre 
Grams per metre g/m 
Turns per centi- 
metre 
Turns per metre turns/m 
Millimetre, centi- mm, cm 
metre 
Millinewton oN 
Newton N 
Kilometre km 
Millinewton per mN/tex 
tex 
Turns per centi- turns/em 
metre X square X 4/tex 
root of tex 
Turns per metre turns/m 
X square root X 4/tex 
of tex 
Newton per N/cm? 
square centi- 
metre 
Millinewton, mN, N 
newton 
Millimetre mm 
Mass of pile yarn. g/m?/mm 
in grams per pile 
square metre height 
per millimetre 
pile beight 
Millinewton per mN/tex/ 
tex per unit unit 
deformation deform- 
ation 


12 


priate ) 
Fibres, yarns.and fabric 
specimens (as appro- 
priate ) 
Fibres, delicate yarns 


( individual or skeins ) 
Strong yarns ( individual 

or skeins ), ropes, 

cordages, fabrics 


Yarns 


Fibres, yarns ( individual 
or skeins ) 


| Yarns ( as appropriate ) 


Fabrics 


Fabrics ( as appropriate ) 


Carpets 
Pile carpets 


Fibres, yarns, strands 


