**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8252-10 (1979) : Environmental tests for aircraft 
equipment. Part 10: Salt Mist [TED 14: Aircraft and Space 
Vehicles] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



uDC629'i3-05:620-i93'26 IS . 8252 ( Part X ) - 1979 




, ,. ^^ , , ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS FOR AIRORAFT EQUIPMENT 

PART X SALT MIST 



1. Scope 

1.1 This standard specifies tests to evaluate the ability of «n equipment to operate and resist 
corrosion when occasionally exposed to a salt-contaminated atmosphere. It is not intended for 
the testing of equipment which Is externally mounted or installed in zones at risk to heavy salt 
contaminations ( for example, under carriage bays and Intake ducts ), in aircraft operating in close 
proximity to the sea and inland areas having a high salinity. 

Note— The test requirements for equipment exposed to severe salt contamination conditions, for example, 
hovercraft, undercarriage bays, etc, shall be covered in a separate standard. 

1.2 Two alternative test methods are defined and, although they are basically two different 
procedures, the two tests may be cansidered to achieve the same objectives. Both methods are 
accelerated tests involving a humidity and a self concentration whose combined effect may result 
in conditions that are more severe than those normally found in service. One or both of these 
alternative tests may be adopted. 

2. Apparatus 

2-1 The chamber used for the test, and all accessories, shall be made of material that will not 
affect the corrosiveness of the mist. Parts that come in contact with the test items shall not be of 
metal and shall not cause electrolytic corrosion. There shall be no direct impingement of sprayed 
solution or dripping of condensate upon the test items, but a mist shall be developed within the 
upper part of the test chamber by means of one or more atomizers dipping into the salt solution 
and supplied with compressed air. The air pressure shall be as low as practicable consistent 
with the development of a fine mist The air shall be free from impurities and the atomizers them- 
selves shall be non-reactive to the salt solution. Liquid that has been in contact with the test 
items shall not be returned to the reservoir of solution. Relief of pressure shall be provided from 
the chamber, A fresh supply of salt solution shall be used for each exposure period, 

2.2 A suitable atomizer is shown in Fig. 1. 

3. Test Conditions 

3.1 The appropriate standard conditions stated in IS : 8252 ( Part I ) *1976 * Environmental tests for 
aircraft equipment: Part I General ' shall apply. 

3.2 The equipment shall be subjected to the test in its normal mounting attitude, unless otherwise 
specified in the relevant equipment specification. 

3.3 Unless otherwise required by the equipment specification, all connectors and covers shall be 
in position and all other seals made as for normal operation, ^ 

3.4 The equipment shall not be operated at any time during the test, unless this is specifically 
required by the equipment specification. 

3.5 The test item shall be given a minimum of handling and shall be prepared for test immediately 
before exposure. Unless otherwise specified, uncoated metallic and metallic coated devices shall 
be thoroughly cleaned of oil, dirt and grease. 

4. Test Methods 

4.1 Method 1 

4.1.1 Salt solution — The salt used shall be sodium chloride containing, on a dry basis, not 
more than O'l percent sodium iodide and not more than 0*5 percent of total impurities. Unless 
otherwise specified, the solution shall be a 5 ± 1 percent solution by mass, using distilled water. 



Adopted 13 June 1979 



December 1979, ISI 



.Mim 



Gt 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, ^ BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 




PIPE THREADS Rp 1 1S:B5 A-1975 







19 

i 

-X. 



10.5+10-5 



X 



t 



62 




3_HOLES,^0.75 
AT 120*' 



1 ,-, 



ENLARGED DETAIL A 



^-^\PiPE THREADS Rp j iS:554-1975 



Note — The atomizer should be manufactured from corrosion resistant materials, for example, transparent 
plastics material. 

Ail dimensions in millimetres. 

FIG. 1 DETAILS OF SUITABLE ATOMIZER 

The salt solution, atomized at 35 ± 2X and collected as specified in 4.1.2, shall be 
maintained in thepH range 6'5to 7'2. Only dilute chemically pure ( CP ) hydrochloric acid or CP 
sodium hydroxide shall be used to adjust the pH. The addition of sodium tetraborate (common 
borax ) may be made in a ratio not exceeding 0*7 g to 80 litres of salt solution as a pH stabilizing 
agent. 

4.1.2 Procedure — The equipment in the test chamber shall be conditioned to +35 ±3°C before 
spraying is commenced, and the temperature of the chamber and solution shall be maintained 
at +35 ±3^C throughout the spraying phase. 

A salt mist shall be produced in the chamber of such a density that the quanthty of precipitate, 
collected per hour in a clean receptacles placed in the test space, is equivalent to 2 ± 1 mi over 
80cm^of horizontal collecting area* averaged over at least 16 hf. A minimum of two receptacles 
shall be used, one placed close to a nozzle and the other farthest from all nozzles. The 
receptacles shall be so positioned that they are not shielded by the test items and no drops of 
solution from the test items or other sources will be collected. 

4,1,2.1 Unless otherwise specified, the equipment shall be subjected to the mist conditioning 
for a period of 48 h. 

4.1.3 Examination — On completion of the test the equipment shall be operated and its per- 
formance demonstrated as required by the relevant equipment specification. 

It shall be examined for corrosion, deterioration, etc, and to aid examination a gantle wash 
in running water, at a temperature not exceeding 38°C, may be used If necessary, followed by a 
drying procedure of 48 h in a standard laboratory atmosphere or as required by the relevant 
equipment specification. The equipment specification may specify if the performance test is 
required to be carried after 48 h drying period. 



♦Equivalent to a receptacle of 100 mm diameter. 

tThis concentration can be attained using a spray solution of approximately 121 (3 quarts) per I'D m' of chamt>«r 
volume per 24 h. 



IS : 8252 ( Part X ) - 1979 



4.2 Method 2 



4.2.1 So/uf/bn — A solution shall be prepared by dissolving the following salts in distilled water 
and making up to 1 litre: 

Sodium chloride Nad 26*5 g 
Magnesium chloride MgClg 2*4 g 
Magnesium sulphate MgSO^ 3'3 g 
Calcium chloride CaCl2 1'1 g 
Potassium chloride KCI 0'73 g 
Sodium bicarbonate NaHCOa 0*20 g 
Sodium bromide NaBr 0*28 5 

The proportions of the ingredients in this solution shall be within 10 percent of those stated. 

4.2.2 Procedure — The equipment shall be exposed to a salt mist for a period of 2 h at a chamber 
temperature of 20 ± S^'C , or as stated in the relevant equipment specification. The quantity of salt 
solution used during this period should be approximately 1 percent per hour of the test chamber 
volume, or as stated in the relevant equipment specification. 

The equipment shall be stored at a relative humidity of 90 to 95 percent at a temperature 
within the range 35 ± 3°C for a period of 22 h. 

The foregoing comprises a 24 h cycle. If a single chamber is used for this test a 3 h period 
at each change point of the cycle may be allowed for changing the temperature from that required 
for exposure to salt mist to that of storage, and vice versa. 

4.2.2.1 This procedure shall be repeated until three complete cycles of exposure and storage 
have been completed. 

4.2.3 Examination — On completion of the test the equipment shall be operated and its per- 
formance demonstrated as required by the relevant equipment specification. 

It shall be examined for corrosion, deterioration, etc, and to aid examination a gentle wash 
in running water, at a temperature not exceeding 38X, may be used if necessary, followed by a 
drying procedure of 48 h in a standard laboratory atmosphere or as required by the relevant 
equipment specification. The equipment specification may specify if the performance test Is 
required to be carried after 48 h drying period. 

Note — The relevant equipment specification shall require either of the above-mentioned two methods. 

5. Information to be Stated in Relevant Equipment Specification — When a salt mist test is 
specified in the relevant equipment specification the following information shall be stated, as far as 
applicable: > 

Relevant cfause 

a) Mounting attitude if other than normal 3.2 

b) Fitting of connectors, covers, etc, if other than 3.3 
normal 

c) Operation requirement during test 3.4 

d) Cleaning prior to test 3.5 

e) Test method ( either 1 or 2 ) 4,1 and 4.2 

f) Method 1 — composition of salt solution if 4.1.1 
other than 5 percent solution 

g) Method 1 — spray period if other than 48 h 4.1.2.1 

h) Method 2 — spray concentration if other than 4.2.2 

1 percent 

j) Examination and performance requirements 4.1,3 ( Method 1 ) and 

4.2.3 ( Method 2 ) 



IS :8252< Part X) -1979 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards relating to the enyironmenta! and 
operating conditions for aircraft equipment. The scope and applicability of these standards is 
outlined in IS : E252 ( Part I )- 1976 ' Environmental tests for aircraft equipment: Part I General '. 

This standard is based on ISO/DIS 2659 Environmental tests for aircraft equipment — 
Part 2,9 : Salt mist prepared by International Organization for Standardization. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi 110055 



