,"RE-A FFlIR,ti ED 199Y0
UDC 631'313'7 : 629'114'2'78 (631'3721 Indian Standard

IS:12239(Part3)-1988
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

GUIDE FOR SAFETY AND COMFORT OF OPERATOR OF AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS AND POWER TILLERS
PART 3 REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO POWER TILLERS

I, Scope - This standard ( Part 3 ) covers constructional and operational requirements the degree of personal safety and comfort of the operator of the power tiller. 2. Constructional Requirements

for

improving

2.1 Guards - All hot and dangerous parts [ see 5 of IS : 12239 ( Part 1 )-I988 Guide for' safety and comfort of operator of agricultural tractors and power tillers: Part 1 General requirements ] shall be guarded [see 7 of IS : 12239 ( Part 1 )-I9881 or so located that they are safe enough. 2.2 OperatorS Workplace and Controls 2.2.1 Location of operator's controls and support members of the power tillers are to be so designed during operation. shielded

that they do not pose a danger to the operator

2.2.2 Moving parts, pinching points or sharp edged control surfaces are to be effectively or covered with protective material to prevent injury to the operator.

2.2.3 Relative location of hand controls which determine the position of the operator, relative to the power tiller, and location of working parts of tiller shoul dbe so designed as to prevent accidental contact of operator with such dangerous parts. 2.2.4 All controls shall be identifiable. If symbols with IS : 6283-l 971 `Symbols for operators controls are used for controls, they shall be in accordance on agricultural tractors and farm machinery'. Table 2 of tractors and

2.2.5 Location and movement of operator controls shall be in accordance with IS : 8133-I 983 `Guidelines for location and operation of operator controls on agricultural machinery (first revision 1'.
2.2.6 It should be possible to actuate the Recommendation for actuating forces for controls

controls with on agricultural

reasonable tractors ).

force (see IS : 10703-1983

2.2.7 Provision shall be made to protect controls by means of locking device or by location, so as to prevent accidental operation which may cause dangerous movement. The rotary device shall not potate when the power tiller is operated in reverse gear to protect the operator's feet from injury. 2.2.8 Engine of the power tiller shall be provided with a device to enable it to stop immediately. 4 clutch device may be provided to disengage the rotary device instantaneously. This should be 3asily accessible to the operator in his working position. These shall be so designed that they do not jepend on sustained manual effort for their operation and that when they are in the stop position, the lower source can not be started unless the device is reset manually. The device shall contrast in colour Nith background and other controls. Method of operation shall be clearly indicated on the power tiller. 2.3 Working Stability 2.3.1 Power tillers are to be so designed that weight :he operator while using normal tillage equipment. balance of the machine is not unfavourable to

2.3.2 Adequate means of mounting counterweights are to be provided along with suitable weights ;o that the operator may adjust weight balance of the machine to suit the matching equipment. 4djustment of movement of engine may also be provided. 2.3.3 :urning nade. Adopted 20 December 1988 BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN.

A retractable ground stand shall be provided which could be easily deployed to arrest overwhen parking the power tiller. Provision to prevent accidental retraction of the stand shall be

Q OF
9 NEW

May

1989,

BIS I STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

Gr 2

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI 110002

IS : 12239 ( Part 3 ) - 1988
2.4 Lighting 2.4.1 For safe operation in the night and highway, effective lighting provision shall be made.

2.4.2 At least a single head-lamp shall be mounted on the front or above the engine of the machine. Lamp should provide a general flood pattern of light to provide adequate illumination close to the machine. 2.4.3 When the power tiller is attached to a trailer, at least two red reflectors are to be fitted to the trailer visible to the front and rear and mounted to indicate, as nearly as practicable the extreme left and extreme right of the vehicle. 2.4.4 A tail-lamp for the trailer attached to the power tiller rear end of the trailer. 2.5 Power TIsnsmission 2.5.1 Power take-off casing which covers the should not block access The casing should be of sheft - If provided, it shall be protected by means of a non-rotating cover or PTO completely and is attached to the body of the tiller. The protective casing to the PTO shaft and shall be adjustable for easy service of the PTO shaft. adequate strength to carry out its function. may also be provided on right extreme

2.5.2 Rotary tiller - When rotary tiller or other power attachment with the power tiller is provided, This should be so designed as to prevent accidental it should be enclosed in a non-rotating casing. contact of any part of the operator's body with rotating/cutting parts. Casing so provided should be adjustable so that access is provided for assembly and maintenance of rotary device. 2.5.3 Such protective casing shall be detached only by means of tools and shall on the machine. 2.6 Other Requirements 2.6.1 The operator should be protected from effects of tillage wherever possible, including mudguards on wheels. device on the soil by means of a shield, be firmly mounted

2.6.2 The outlet of the exhaust pipe shall be located and directed in such a way will not normally be exposed to harmful concentrations of noxious gases or fumes.

that

the

operator

2.6.3 Starting handle shall be of size and shape to allow easy starting by the operator. possible to disengage the handle automatically if the engine back starts to prevent operator.

It should be injury to the

2.6.4 The power tiller is to be equipped with brakes which can stop the tiller under all When power tiller is attached to a trailer, separate brake for stopping of trailer conditions. provided which can stop the trailer and tiller combination at maximum pay-load of trailer. 2.6.5 The trailer attached to the power tiller parking brake when trailer is stationary. is to be provided with arrangement for

operating is to be

locking

the

2.6.6 Belt pulleys and chain drives should be so located or guarded while in operation that if the belt or chain breaks or slips off, it cannot strike the operator and there is no risk of contact with any nip point. Guards should be strong enough to withstand functional loads. These should be capable of removal only with the use of tools. 2.6.7 Provision shall be made operation with trailer. to prevent accidental application of side clutch lever during the

2.6.8 Provision of the safety guard which shall not allow the operator's approach moving parts in normal working conditions, shall be made.

hand,

feet

and

clothing

to

2.6.9 Balancing weight to be added to achieve correct weight balance of the power various attachments should be recommended by the manufacturer in the operation manual. 2.6.10 Maximum safe operation speed with trailer shall be specified by the manufacturer.

tiller

with

2

IS:12239(Part3)-1988
2.6.11 The noise level at operator's ear shall be not more than 90 dB (A 1.

Note - This limit is to be achieved by the end of March 1992. 2.6.12 The maximum the body of the trailer. 3. Operational laden weight on level and slopy ground shall be stated by the manufacturer on

Requirements by the manufacturer, are to be clearly is given

3.1 All routine checks and maintenance schedules as indicated understood by the operator before operating the power tiller. 3.2 In the operation of the power tiller, certain norms should in Appendix A for guidance.

be observed.

Some information

APPENDIX ( Clause
INFORMATION A-l. General Operator should: ON SAFE

A
3.2 ) OF POWER TILLERS

OPERATION

a) be in good health, sound mind and be not under the influence 6) be adequately c)' obtain trained and, when required, properly licensed;

of any sort of intoxicants;

and read the operator's footwear -

manual before using the power tiller for the first time; and

d) wear suitable A-2. Starting

and snug clothing.

of Tiller

Operator should: in good working

a) inspect the machine and make certain that it is properly adjusted and condition; b) keep all controls in neutral before starting; and c) ensure that engaging surfaces of starting handle are in good condition, disengage without effort for safe starting. A-3. Field Operation Operator should:

and

handle

can

a) acheive weight balance of tiller by the adding the manufacturer's the attachment before starting operations; b) be careful not to overlift the rotary device during the operation

recommended

ballast

for

in wet fields;

c) ensure handles and grips are free of mud and grease before operation; d) not change gear or suddenly press one of the side clutches or brakes which can cause the tiller to swing to either side or lift upwards during operation. This may bring rotary device dangerously close to the operator's feet or cause him to loose control; e) maintain protective shield at rear of rotary in good condition stones and mud thrown up by rotary blades; as it protects the operator before from the may

f) see that rear float or depth wheel is in good condition and locked firmly in place start of the operation. Sudden lift of wheel can cause accident to the operator; g) take the tiller in reverse when going down throw the operator; a slope. Otherwise and control weight balance

of tiller

h) to ensurethat control linkages are in good condition before start of operation; and j) avoid using side clutch or crossing bunds. and ensure disengagement

levers are operating

smoothly slopes

of rotary when moving

up or down

3

IS : 12239 ( Part 3 ) - 1988
A-4. Travelling with Trailer Operator should:

a)

check if trailer brakes are operating in satisfactory condition before starting;

b) take care not to apply side clutch while driving up or down a slope with trailer. This will cause tiller to swing in the opposite direction; c) turn trailer at low speed as the application of side clutch at high speed can cause the tiller swing around and operator to loose control; to

d) ensure that no other person is allowed to sit with him on the driving seat as he requires space to maintain the tiller during turning. No person shall be allowed to move or stand dangerously during movement of the trailer; e) ensure that rated load of trailer is not exceeded; f) use rear view mirror to view traffic at rear and side of trailer during movement on the road; and g) use recognized hand signals to indicate movement of vehicle during on highways. movement of the trailer

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

With the increasing emphasis on enhancing agricultural production, the use of tractor and power tiller is increasing for mechanizing various agricultural operations. For ensuring efficiency and timeliness of agricultural operations, it would be desirable to improve the comfort of the operators. Moreover, along with the increasing use of these machines, the need on human safety and comfort has also attained importance. This standard is being published in three parts. This part ( Part 3 ) covers requirements relating to power tillers. Part 1 and Part 2 covers general requirements and requirements relating to agricultural tractors, respectively. In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived Bangalore. from VST Tillers Tractors Ltd'

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-l 960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 4
Printed at Printrade,

-.-.New Delhi, India

