**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1448-5 (1970) : Methods of test for petroleum and its 
products, Part 5: Burning quality [PCD 1: Methods of 
Measurement and Test for Petroleum, Petroleum Products and 
Lubricants] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i iw&*<m&a rsi>frgamsBP 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 1448[P:5]-1970 
(Reaffirmed200J) 

BURNING QUALITY 

| P : 5 | 

(First Revision) 

Fourth Reprint OCTOBER 2007 

(Incorporating Amendment No. I ) 

UIX/ 662.753.22 : 536.468 
Adapted from the Institute of Petroleum Standards No. IP 10\65 and IP U\63T 

[ In this revision, precision limits in Method A have been changed. 
The Method B prescribes the use of a different type of lamp and has been 
completely rewritten accordingly. ] 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 The method (Method A) prescribed is intended to evaluate the burning 
properties of kerosine that may be used as an illuminant and as a fuel fof space 
heaters, cookers, incubators, etc. 

1.2 This standard does not purport to address all of the safety problems 
associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to 
establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability 
of regulatory limitations prior to use. 

2. METHOD A 

2.1 Outline of the Method— The kerosine is burned for 24 hours in a 
specified lamp, the flame conformingto a specified size and shape. At the 
end of the test period, the consumption of kerosine and the amount of char 
formed on the wick are measured, and a qualitative assessment is made 
of the appearance of the glass chimney. 

2.2 Apparatus 

2.2.1 Lamp — conforming essentially to the shape and dimensions shown 
in Fig. 1. The tolerance wherever not specified on the dimensions of the 
chimney except on the glass shall be ± 1 mm. It is essential to ensure 



©Copyright |«W8 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDA R I) S 

MANAK BIIAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARCi 

Gt 2 NEW DELHI 110002 July 1971 



IS: 1448 [P: 5]- 1970 

that the burner fits vertically into the oil reservoir, and that the wick-guide 
has parallel sides and is centrally disposed in relation to the slot in the 
dome of the burner. Any distortion of the wick-guide or dome makes the 
production of the necessary flame shape difficult and renders subsequent 
char values unreliable. 



LAM TMCKNCIS 
M kPPM>% 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fio. 1 Lamp 



IS : 1448 [ P : 5 ] - 1970 

2.2.2 Wick — 19-mm paraffin flat wick containing approximately 43 
ends of three-ply yarn, woven double plain weave with stitching ends, one 
blue stripe on one face and one green stripe on the reverse face, woven 
with approximately 6 picks/cm and weighing 15 g/m. After weaving, the 
wick shall be boiled in distilled water and dried thoroughly. The wick 
shall then be made into rolls and left for seven days before it is cut into 
20-cm lengths. The lengths shall then be packed into suitable containers. 
The ash content of the wick shall not exceed 0*4 percent. 

2.3 Reagents 

2.3.1 Denatured Spirit — See IS : 324-1959*. 

2.3.2 Petroleum Hydrocarbon Solvent— Grade 60/80 of IS : 1745-1966f. 

2.4 Preparation of the Apparatus 

2.4.1 Glean the lamp burner thoroughly, removing completely the 
deposit from the wick-guide, air holes and ducts. Drain the oil reservoir 
completely of the previous sample. 

2.4.2 Soak new chimneys in dilute hydrochloric acid ( approximately 
6 N ) for 24 hours, clean them with a brush and rinse them with distilled 
water. Then subject them to three preliminary 24 hours burning periods. 
Clean all chimneys with soap and water, rinse them thoroughly with 
distilled water, and dry them before each test. 

2.4.3 Put a number of wicks into a well-lagged Soxhlet apparatus in 
such a manner as to prevent distortion and extract them with boiling water 
for 3 hours from the end of the first siphoning cycle. Remove the wicks from 
the apparatus, lay them flat between sheets of filter paper and press them 
gently to remove excess moisture. Extract them with denatured spirit for 
3 hours in an unlagged Soxhlet apparatus, drain the denatured spirit as 
completely as possible from the extractor and continue the extraction with 
petroleum hydrocarbon solvent for one hour. 

2.5 Procedure 

• 2.5.0 Make the test in a well-ventilated room. If necessary, surround 
the lamp by a screen of about 60 cm diameter and of sufficient height to 
protect it from all draughts. Ensure that the minimum temperature of 
the room and of the oil in the reservoir at the start of and during the test 
is 15*5°C. Place the lamps so that they are at least 30 cm from any wall 
or other lamp. 

2*5.1 Dry the wick in an oven at 105°C for one hour, soak it while it is 
still hot in the sample and fit it into the wick-guide. Rinse out the 

'Specification for ordinary denatured spirit ( rm*W ). 
fSpecification for petroleum hydrocarbon solvents {first mitim )• 



IS: 1448 [P: 5]- 1970 

reservoir two or three times with the sample. Filter the sample through a 
coarse-texture filter paper ( such as Whatman No. 4 ) to remove suspended 
matter, pour 900 ml into the reservoir and assemble the lamp. 

2.5.2 Hinge back the dome and chimney and trim the wick carefully 
with sharp scissors to produce a smooth and symmetrical flame of the 
dimensions shown in Fig. 2. Trim the wick as follows: 

a) Cut the wick level with the wick-guide; 

b) Raise the wick and cut off a triangular portion from each corner 
and round off the sharp corners slightly, as shown in the * front 
view ' in Fig. 3; and 

c) Remove any ragged projections from the top edges of the wick by 
bevelling them slightly as shown in the c side view ' in Fig. 3. 

2.5.3 Resaturate the wick with the sample and weigh the lamp. Light 
the lamp and adjust the flame to within 1*5 mm of the standard flame 
dimensions. 

Note — The measurements of the flame may be made with any suitable gauge 
capable of measuring vertical and horizontal dimensions with sufficient accuracy. The 
gauge should be placed about 1 5 cm from the flame. 

2.5.4 Allow the lamp to burn for one hour and then readjust the flame, 
if necessary, to the standard height. 

2.5.5 Allow the lamp to burn for a further 23 hours without adjustment 
of any kind. At the end of this period, extinguish the flame and weigh 
the lamp. The consumption of kerosine during the test is about 20 g/h. 




Fio. 2 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Shape and Sizb of the Flame 



3 mm APPROX 



nn 



Ti 



IS: I448[P :5]- 1970 

•SLIGHT BEVEL 



3mm 
APPROX 



FRONT VIEW SIDE VIEW 

Fio. 3 Views of Wick 

2.5.6 Turn up the wick and cut off approximately 13 mm of the charred 
end. Place this short length of wick, together with any pieces of char 
which have become detached in a small beaker, remove any char adhering 
to the wick-guide by gentle scraping with metal forceps and add it to the 
beaker. Wash the contents of the beaker free of kcrosine by decantation 
with petroleum hydrocarbon, and dry them in an oven at 105°C for 
30 minutes. Remove the char completely from the wick by breaking its 
structure and by scraping gently along and across the wick with the points 
of metal forceps. Transfer the mixture of char and fibre to a glass plate, 
remove any pieces of thread, and pick out coarse char and place it on a 
tared watch-glass. Remove the fine, fluffy fibre as completely as possible 
from the mixture by tapping it from one glass plate to another, and by 
collecting the fibre on a short stiff-bristled brush without removing the char. 
Finally, brush the remaining mixture of fine char and inseparable fibre on 
to the watch-glass. Weigh the watch-glass. 

2.5.7 Note the appearance and colour of the bloom on the chimney. 

2.6 Calculation and Reporting — Calculate and report the following 
results: 

a) Total consumption of sample in grams. 

b) Average consumption of sample in grams per hour. 

c) Weight of dry char in milligrams per kilogram of sample. 

d) Bloom on Chimney: 

1) Predominating colour — brown, greyish brown or grey, 

2) General appearance — normal or abnormal. 

e) The maximum and minimum temperature of the test room. 

f ) Atmospheric conditions — humid, foggy, etc. 



IS: 1448 [P:5]- 1970 

2.1 Precision — Results of duplicate tests shall not differ by more than the 
following amounts: 

Char Value Repeatability Reproducibility 

to 30 mg/kg 0-91 <s/AT 2-9 <JT 

where 

A » mean of two test results. 



Power Printers, Phones: 23272445, 23283911 



