**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4051 (1967): Code of practice for installation and 
maintenance of electrical equipment in mines [ETD 22: 
Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Atmosphere] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 4051 -1967 
(Reaffirmed 1996) 



Indian Standard 



CODH OF PRACTICE FOR 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

ELF^CTRICAL EQUIPMENT IN MINES 



Fourth Reprint JUNF 1999 

( Incorponling Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 621.3.003 ; 622.4 



© Co/>vT/^'/J/ 1^75 

lUIRKAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK MHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NHW DHLHi iiono: 



Gr 5 June 1967 



ISt«»Sl-19S7 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT IN MINES 

Flameproof Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee, ETDC 22 



Chaxftiujpfi 

SSLBI S. S. KUMAB 

Membifs 
Dr G. N. Badami 



Ripnsiniing 

In personal capacity ( 6, Parana Quila Road, New 
Delhi ) 



Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), 

Dhanbad 
Scientific Adviser, Research & Devclopmrni 

Organization ( Ministry of Defence ) 
Ma J J* P. Thapliyal ( AUimaU ) 



Maj V. Balarkishkan 



Shki a. G. Barve 
Shri p. K. Bharucha 

Shri a. C. Mox>y ( AUernati ) 
Shri S. R. Biiisis 



Shri S. Chandra 

Shri K. K. Ray ( AH$maU ) 
Shri N. Ghosh 

Shri R. E. Glover 

Shri P. Mohan ( AltitnaU ) 
Shri D. P. Gupta 



Shri K. V. Kuihunamurtby 
Shri S, N. Lahihi 

Shui S. C. Roy ( AltemaU ) 
Shri T. K. Mibra 



Esse Standard Kastern, Inr, Bombay 

The Insurance Association of India, Bombay 

Directorate General of Factory Advice Service 
& labour Institutes ( Ministry of Labour, 
Employment & Rehabilitation ), Bombay 

Kilburn & Go Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Chief Inspector of Mines ( Ministry of Labour, 

Employment & Rehabilitation)^ Dhanbad 
Indian Mining Association, Calcutta 

Directorate General of Technical Development 
( Ministry of Supply, Technical Development 
& Materials Plannmg), New Delhi 

Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal 

Chief Inspector of Explosives, Nagpur 



The Association of Mining, Electrical & Mechani- 
cal Engineers, UK, Indian Sub-Brancl\ 
Calcutta 
Shri J. Subramanyan ( AUemau ) 
Shri V. B. K. Mukthy National Coal Development Corporation Ltd, 

Ranchi 



( Continuid on f*ag€ 2 ) 



BUR E A I) OK INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BIIAVAN. ♦) BAHADUR SHAH ZAl AR MARC 
NJ-W ni-LHl 110002 



■►f 4191 - 1967 

( Cmtinmd/rom pag$ 1 ) 

Members IUpf$smti$^ 

Shkx O. p. Patvl Indian Electrical Manufacturcrt* Aitociatioo, 

Calcutta 

Smmx C. P. DusAD ( Atiifnai$ ) 
Shbx F. N. Pranoksll A. ReyroUe & Go Ltd» Calcutta 

Shkai H. S. Bhatia ( AUemaU ) 
Smmx S. G. Ramachandra Kirloikar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. Subramakyam ( AlUmati ) 
Shri p. N. Ramachandban Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay 

Ssmi V. D. Erandb ( AlUrnat$ ) 
Shw C. K. V. Rao Central Water & Power Commisiion ( Power 

Wing) 

Swmi L. C. Jain ( AlUrMi0 ) 
Sarmi V, M, Ru^bbaua Indian Colliery Owners* Association, Dhanbad 

Srbi Zauvkr NGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri T. Apfaswamy ( AliitnaU ) 
SnRi J. S. Zavsrx Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. Bhasrar Rao ( AlinnaU ) 
Shri Y. S. Vbn rates war an. Director General, ISI ( Ex^fficio Mimber ) 

Director ( Elec lech ) ( Secntary ) 



Panel for Code of Practice for Installation and 

Maintenance of Flameproof and Intrinsically Safe 

Electrical Equipment, ETDG 22 : P3 

CoiW$n€r 

Srri V. B. K. Mttrthy National Coal Development Corporation Ltd, 

Ranchi 

Mimbers 

Dr G. N. Badahi Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), 

Dtianbad 
Shri S. Ramanathan ( AlUmate ) 

SuRi N. GuosH Chier Inspector of Mines (Ministry of Labour, 

Employment & Rehabilitation ), Dhanbad 

Shri R. E. Glover Indian Mining Association^ Calcutta 

Shri T, K. Misra Bharat Bijirc Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C K. V. Rao Central Water & Power Commission ( Power 

Wing) 
Shri L. C. J aim ( AlUmaU ) 

Shri J. Subramanyak The Association of Mining Electrical & Mechani- 

cal Engineers, UK, Indian Sub-Branch, 
Calcutta 



IS I 4051 -1967 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT IN MINES 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 5 April 1967, after the draft finalized by the Flameproof 
Electrical Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotcchnical Division Council. 

©•2 With the extensive development of the mining industt7 in recent years 
with greater emphasis on mechanization leading to wider use of electricity, 
the need to establish a sound code of practice foi the installation and 
maintenance of electrical equipment in mines is strongly felt. Further, 
the continued safety of flameproof and intrinsically safe equipment in 
explosive atmosphere is as much dependent on installation and maintenance 
as it is on the design. 

0*3 The environment and conditions in mines, in general, demand special 
attention and care during the installation and maintenance of electrical 
equipment. Lack of proper working space, poor lighting conditions and 
the frequent shifting of efjuipment arc some of the factors which have to 
be taken into consideration while planning an installation and maintaining 
it inside a mine. This code details the general rules to be ado|)ted in all 
mines in addition to precautions to be exercised specially in gassy coal 
mines. 

0.4 This code deals essentially with the general aspects of installation and 
maintenance of electrical equipment in mines and does not cover details 
of any particular equipment. 

0.5 While preparing this code, considerable assistance has been derived 
from similar rules and cr>rlcs prepared in other countries. This code has 
particularly taken into consideration the recommendations of the Inter- 
national Labour Organization contained in the book Trevenlion of 
accident due to electricity tmderground in coal mines' and the codes laid 
down by the National Coal Board of the United Kingdom. 

0*6 The various Indian Standard codes listed on fourth cover page, 
provide in a convenient foim a record of those matters which experience 



1814051-1967 

has shown to be of importance in keeping electrical equipment, in 
general, in good working condition. The rclevatit codes should be 
consulted for general guidance in regard to particular electrical equips 
ment. This code details the additional precautions to be exercised in 
the maintenance of electrical equipment installed in mines. 

0^7 The essential principle of flameproof enclosure is that the hazardous 
atmosphere is not excluded from the electrical apparatus, and it is recog- 
nized that an explosion may occur inside the enclosure, but the enclosure 
is sufficiently strong to withstand an internal explosion and is so construct- 
ed that flame passing from inside to the outside is cooled to such an extent 
that it is incapable of igniting the surrounding hazardous atomosphcrc. 
This is achieved by controlling the lengths of the possible flamepaths 
and the clearance in them. 

0*8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
stafidard is complied wiih, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be ronnded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960*, The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
ofi* value should be the same as that of the specified value in this 
standard. 



1. SCOPE 

LI This code covcri minimum requirements for all electrical work and 
electrical equipment operating or intended to operate at all voltages in 
electrical installations in mines and quarries. 

1.2 The requirements of this code apply to all types of mines unless 
otherwise specified. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Electrical Equipment — Any accessories, appliance or fitting, cables, 
etc, used or intended for use as a part of or in conjunction with an elect- 
rical installation. 

2.2 Flameproof Enclosure — An enclosure for electrical machinery or 
apparatus that shall withstand, when the covers or other access doors arc 
properly secured, an internal explosion of the flammable gas or vapour 
which may enter or which may originate inside the enclosure, without 
suffering damage and without communicating the internal Hammation 

*Rulci for rounding off numerical value* ( nvisid ). 



( or explosion ) to the external flammable gas or vapour for use in which 
it is designed, through any joints or other structural openings in the 
enclosure ( see also 0.7 ). 

NoTK — The term • flameproof • as used here it synonyniout with the term 
exploiion-proof * as used in ilic USA or * pressure-proof type of protection * used in 
Germany for the class of apparatus covered. 

2*3 Intrmsically Safe Circuit — denotes that any sparking that may 
occur therein in normal working is incapable of causing an explosion of 
the prescribed flammable ^as or vapour. 

2A Intrinsically Safe Equipment — denotes that it is so constructed 
that when connected and used under prescribed conditions any sparking 
that may occur therein is incapable of causing an explosion of the 
prescribed flammable gas or vapour, 

3. EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION 

34 Before ordering the electrical equipment, information regarding the 
duties, location and installation conditions under which they would 
operate, should be gathered by the engineers responsible for theiir pro- 
curement, installation and maintenance so that the electrical equipment 
or apparatus is procured to suit these conditions. 

3*2 Further, before any electrical equipment is Introduced into an area 
Hkely to be dangerous, full consultation should take place between those 
persons familiar with the nature and extent of the anticipated risk, and 
the electrical engineer responsible for the proposed installation, so that the 
necessity for special measures may be decided. 

4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 All electrical equipment should be installed and maintained as to 
prevent, as far as possible, clcciiic shock and occurrence of fire and 
explosion. 

4*2 AH materials, appliances and components used in the installation 
should conform to the appropriate Indian Standards. Where there are 
no appropriate standards, the material shall be of such quality and type 
as not to impair the safely of the installation, 

4.3 All electrical installations shall comply with the requirements of the 
Indian Electricity Act, Indian Mines Act and Rules in general and 
Chapter X of the Indian Electricity R\dcs in particular and regulations 
made thereunder, that may be applicable. 

4.4 It is recommended that the authorities concerned with the adminis- 
tration of the rules and regulations in the matter of the layout of the 
installation of electrical equipment in mines, should be consulted in regard 



I8i4051-1967 

to the rules and regulations chat may be applicable. Attention is invited 
to the provision in Rule 111 of the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 ( as 
modified up-to-date ) wherein it has been made obligatory on the part of 
t|ie owner of a mine or his agent to give written notice of the 
installation of any mining electrical equipment to the authority having 
jurisdiction. 

4.5 Electrical installation and maintenance shall be carried out only by 
authorized persons competent to undertake such work under the rules and 
regulations that may be in force. 

5. DESIGN 

5.1 General 

5.L1 Only electrical equipment and instruments suitable for mine 
service should be used in mines. In locations in gassy mines where use of 
such equipment is mandatory, only flameproof and intrinsically safe 
equipment designed and approved for mine service shall be used. 

5,1.2 In this code, the governing assumption is that it is the responsi- 
bility of the user to assess the risk in any specific condition and to take 
the necei^sary precautions. 

5»1*3 Where a choice lies between electrical equipment containing 
flammable insulating oil and equipment of the oil-free type oi of a type 
containing non-flammable cooling fluid, it is preferable to adopt one of 
the latter types. 

5.1.4 Since flameproof equipment is normally designed for use in 
reasonably dry atmospheric conditions, special precautions should be 
taken to prevent any deleterious effects of moisture on the equipment 
where extremely damp and humid conditions prevail. 

5.2 Layout 

5.2.1 Due to the conditions of operation of electrical equipment inside 
mines, special care has to be taken to ensure that tlicy are placed well 
clear of roadway traffic, protected from dripping water and collapsing 
roof and sides. 

5.2*2 Adequate space should be provided around apparatus to allow 
proper facilities for maiiitcnance purposes. 

5.2.3 All rooms designed to accommodate electrical equipment, for 
example, sub-stations, haulage rooms, should be lined wiih fireproof 
mateiial. 

5.2.4 Meticulous care is required in the design of such housings in 
'o^ard to freedom from dampness and water penetration, projier ventila- 

i n, exits and passageways to suit the equipment position. 

6 



5.2«5 No flammable or explosive material shall be stored in any roam» 
compartment or box containing any electrical apparatus in a mine or 
below ground in the vicinity of any electrical apparatus. 

53 Electrical Protection of Gircuitt and Apparatus 

534 Gifural 

53JJ All circuits and equipment should be suitably protected 
against the effects of ovcrcurrcnt and short-circuit. Earth-leakage pro- 
tection should also be provided, wherever necessary. 

5.3.L2 It is recommended that the installation should be sectiona- 
lized to the utmost practicable extent to ensure selective clearance 
faults. 

5«3«L3 Where necessary electrical equipment shall be provided with 
devices which will cause the electrical circuit thereto to be disconnected 
in the event of failure of voltage in such circuits. 

5*3.2 Protection Against Overcurrents 

53.2^1 Every circuit should be provided with overcurrent protective 
devices so that when the current exceeds the permissible limits it shall be 
cut off automatically. 

5«3*2*2 Automatic Overload protection devices should be so designed 
as to follow sufficiently closely the permissible overload characteristics of 
the apparatus or circuit to be protected, to ensure that the supply of 
electricity is cut off before tlie parts reach a dangerous temperature. 

5«3.2.3 Particular care should be taken to ensure that the thermal 
overload protective device, where provided, does not itself get damaged 
by the action of the short-circuit. The manufacturers' recommendations 
for maximum permissible size of fuse or maximum setting of short-circuit 
release should be followed. 

5.3.2.4 In case of any short-circuit, the supply of electricity shall be 
cut off automatically by means of automatic circuit-brtaker or fuses of 
adequate rupturing capacity. 

5.3.2.5 Circuit-breakers provided with short-circuit protective devices 
shall preferably be of the locked-out type. This is, however, not 
necessary if the circuit-breaker is accessible to only authorized 
persons. 

5.3.3 Protection Against Earth-Leakage 

5.3.3.1 Earth-leakage protection is very essential to minimize the risk 
of fire, explosion and shock. 



ISi4051*1967 

S*3^.2 Earth-leakage protection shall be provided in all incoming 
circuits to portable and transportable machinery and also in other feeders 
wherever necessary. 

5«3.3.3 £arth*leakage protection shall disconnect a circuit instan* 
tancously before the leakage current exceeds 5 amperes unless otherwise 
agreed. 

NoT« — Presently, sensitive earth-leakage protection device has been developed 
which would permit tripping at much lower value of leakage current and it should be 
endeavoured to uae a setting as low as pottiblc. 

5.3.3.4 In an ungrounded system also, earthfault protection shall be 
applied as rigorously as in the grounded system. 

5^3*3^5 Earth -leakage protective device shall be such that its opera- 
tion may be tested periodically. 

5*3«3.6 Circuit-breakers employed for providing earth*leakage pro- 
taction should be provided with a locking device to prevent reclosing. In 
additior^ the resetting device should only be operated by means of a 
special key which should be with the authorised electrician. 

In the event of the circuit-hreaker tripping on account of a fault, the 
electrician should not reclose the breaker unless the fault causing the 
tripping has been repaired or isolated. 

6- PROTECTIVE MEASURES AGAINST RISK OF ELECTRIC 
SHOCK 

6.1 Precaution Against Contairt with Live Parts 

6*1.1 All exposed live parts, shall be suitably guarded against accidental 
contact, unless the nature of the work requires them to be bare» for 
example, trolley wires. 

6.1.2 Housing and protective enclosures shall be mechanically strong. 
F'rotective enriosures shall br of a type which need special tools for open- 
ing. Screens of close mesh type wiih reasonable clearance from the live 
parts where allowed to be used in apparatus shall be accesiiiblc only to 
authorised personnel. 

6.2 Insulation Resistance 

6-2.1 All live parts shall be adequately insulated in relation to 
the voltage stress to which they are liable to be exposed under f;mlt 
conditions. 

6.2.2 All insulating materials, which arc liable to deteriorate if exposed 
to the atmosjihere or by ingress of moisture, shall be effectively sealed so 
as to prevent diminution of insulating properties. 



18)4051*1967 

6.23 For recommendations regarding values of insulation resistance, 
reference shall be made to the relevant Indian Standard codes for various 
equipment ( see 4th cover page ) 

6.3 Protective Earthing 

6.3.1 All metallic parts not specially insulated from earth of the 
electrical equipment and not designed to carry current in normal operation 
shall be effectively and securely connected to the earth. 

6.3.2 Earthing shall be effected by one or more of the following: 

a) Conductive sheath where provided; 

b) Armour of cables; 

c) Conductive sheath and armour of cable when both arc 
provided; 

d) Special conductors forming parts of cables; 

e) External earthing conductor which shall be easily visible; and 

f ) Conduits, casing and pipes, 

6.3.3 The conductivity of the bonding conductor for earthing any 
particular apparatus shall be equivalent to at least 50 percent of that of 
the largest conductor used solely to supply the equipment subject to 
minimum of equivalent conductivity of copper section of 16 mm^ 

6.3.4 The connection of the earthing system to the earth shall be done 
at the surface of the mines. The design of the earthing system at the 
surf^ice shall conform to IS : 3043-1966* 

7. INTRINSICALLY SAFE APPARATUS AND CIRCUITS 

7.1 Intrinsically safe apparatus and circuits are so designed and construc- 
ted that for any sparking, that may occur under service condition in the 
apparatus or the circuit, is incapable of causing ignition of the prescribed 
flammable gas or vapour. Obviously intrinsic safety may only be achiev- 
ed in very low power circuits like telephones, signalling remote control 
and interlock circuits. 

7.2 An intrinsically safe circuit is characterised mainly by a low power 
low voltage ( usually up to 24 volts dc or 15 volts rms ac ) source with 
or without devices for absorbing the spark energy. These vary widely 
with different types and manufacturers and include copper sleeves, 
short-circuited secondary windings, non-inductive resistances, con- 
densers and rectifiers. It is essential that the cngincer-in-chargc of 
installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in mines should be 
thoroughly familiar with the type of apparatus and the devices used to 
secure its intrinsic safety. 

•Code of practice for earthing. 



014051-1967 

7*3 Intrinsically safe apparatus and circuits should be used in the form 
in which they arc certified, as any alteration may vitiate the property 
of intrinsic safety. Care should be taken when replacing parts 
that have been damaged or otherwise rendered unserviceable to ensure 
that the replacements arc of ratings identical to those approved. 

Note — Special attention is invittd to the possibility of nullification of intrinsic 
safety due to changes in design values of devices used to obtain intrinsic safety 
by coiling of external cables forming part of such circuits. Coiling 
may introduce hazards and, therefore, the cables should be laid out 
straight. 

7A Adequate precaution shall be taken to prevent contact between the 
conductors of intrinsically safe circuits and those of any other system, 
so as to avoid possibility of arcing occurring at the point of contact, or of 
invasion of the intrinsically safe circuits by currents arising from direct 
or indirrxt contact or induction. Care should be taken to prevent con- 
tact of conductors of intrinsically safe circuits with ground pipe lines and 
other objects like props, cogs, etc. 

7.5 Apparatus which is not intrinsically safe shall on no account be con- 
nected in the same circuit with intrinsically safr apparatus^ However, 
use of certified coupling devices for intercommunication between 
intrinsically safe telephone circuits and other non-intrinsically safe 
telephone systems is recognized. 

8. INSTALLATION 

8*1 A set of record plans and technical documentation covciing the 
information listed below shall be kept at each mine and it is necessary 
that such documents are kept up-to-date. The requirements of 
the Indian Electricity Rules under Rule 112 shall be taken care of when 
preparing such plans: 

a) Layout diagram; 

b) Type and position of all fixed electrical equipment; 

c) Routes, length and cross section of all fixed power feeders and 
branch feeder; 

d) Rating of all electrical plant and equipment; 

e) Setting of overload relay and rating of fuses; 

f ) Calculated short-circuit currents at various remote points; 

g) Method of installation of main earthing arrangements; and 
h) The direction of ventilation in underground workings. 

8.2 Location of Equipment witli Flammable Liquids 

8.2«1 Dry type electric equipment are preferred for use in mines. 
Wherever use of apparatus containincj Jarge quantity of flammable 

10 



IS : 4051 • 1967 

dielectric liquid cannot be avoided; means sliall be provided to 
minimize dani^er from fire in the event of ovrrllo\%r or Irakage of 
the liquid, and arrangements should be made to prevent uiv such 
flammable liquid gaining access to any other part ot the mine 
other than the room or compartment in whic h the equipment is located 
or to the soak pit specifically made for this purpose. 

8-2.2 Suitable fire-fighting equipment shall be kept immediately 
adjacent to the room or compartment. 

8.2.3 Soak pits and drainage channels of fireproof (onsi!U(tion 
of adequate capacity and filled with clean washed pebbles or balhist to 
collect any liquid which may leak or mav be released uuder fault ccm- 
ditions from the equipment shall be provided in or around su<li(om- 
partmcnts. The design of the floor and the drainage channel shall be 
such that the oil is able to run readily into the soak pit. 

8.3 Operating Temperatures ~ The equipment slK>uld be s(? installed, 
operated and maintained as to ensure tluit in no part the perniissibie 
maximum temperature is exceeded. 

8.4 Portable and Transportable Apparatus 

8.4.1 Portable and transj>ortable aj^paratus shall be roniiolled 
by an aj^proved protective switchgeai. Such e(|uipnicnt sliall be 
j)rovided with means wherebv they may be nuule dead at any time froni 
the ojjerator's ( attendarit's ) position. Tins clause does not, however, 
apj>Iy to hand-lamps. 

8.4.2 Connections to jjortable and tiansportable aj:)paratus shall 
be by bolted or restrained ty[>e plug and socket outlets. In (oal ininr^. 
for flamepioof portable and transportable apparatus, the plnt^ ami 
socket shall be of certified and ai)proved type. In the restrained type 
of cable coupler, the interlocking circuit shall be intrinsically safe 

Use of direct entry type terminations sliall not be adc^pted without 
the express approval of the competent authority. Where sucli termina- 
tions arc provided in portable or transportable apparatus due \o spat e 
considerations in design, sealing material used shall be of a type whieh 
shall not alter the flameproof properties of the encKisure, wST)ecitl 
attention shall be paid in the fitting of packing glands for compliance 
with the minimum length of llamepath with the packing material 
compressed. 

8.4.3 Portable electric hand-lamps shall, where practicable, be 
arranged foi operation at a voltage less than 30 volts, the sup[)ly being 
given by a double-wound transformer. Handdarnps shall l)e equipped 
with an insulated handle and strong cover uf glass or other transparent 
material and shall be piovided with a strong guard over the cover. 

II 



IS 14051 ^1967 

8.5 Gables 

8«5.1 Cables used for underground working in mines shall be of 
copper conductor and of the type suitable for the purpose and location. 

The preferred basic types of cables and their permissible range of 
application have been enumerated in Appendix A. The decision as 
regards the use of other cables and changes in their application rests 
with the inspecting authorities. The appendix does not include those 
conventional types of cables which will be installed on the surface, 

8.5.2 Cables laid in mines shall be suspended freely from metal 
or wooden supports with provision for normal sagging- They shall 
be so installed as to ensure maximum protection against mechanical 
damage from causes such as dangerous sagging due to their own weight, 
traffic and vibration. The run of cables shall be avoided in haulage 
roadways as far as possible. 

8.5.3 In mines, only in exceptional cases, cables shall be laid in ducts 
of fireproof constructions which provide effective protection against 
mechanical damage subject to the approval of the competent 
authority. 

8.5.4 Cables which pass through brick walls shall not be embedded 
or concreted at such points. 

8.5.5 At terminations and joints, conductors shall be firmly secured 
and terminated or connected together. At terminations only locked or 
bolted terminals shall be used. 

8.5.6 Terminals or jointing part shall be at least equivalent 
to the cables as regards conductivity and insulation. It shall not be 
possible for the conductor tc be damaged by terminal and jointing 

parts. 

8.5.7 All cable ends shall be effectively sealed to prevent diminution 

uf its insulating properties. 

8.5.8 Where paper insulated cables run vertically, for instance 
shaft cables, and where the temperature is likely to be high, precau- 
tions shall be taken to guard against the troubles which may arise due 
tfj bleeding of the oil compound from the cable ends. Gables for such 
liituations shall be specified in particular at the time of procurement. 

8.5.9 Provision shall be made so that the cores of the cable may be 
efiiriently sealed to prevent moisture percolatini? flown the strands 
ol the cable conductors. If the conductors arc taken direct through 
insulator:, to the outside of the sealing box or where separate 

12 



ISt4051-lM7 

bare stranded conductors are connected to the cable cores (x^^Fig. 1 ), 
the conductors should be sweated solid from a point well below 
the level of the compound in the scaling box to a p)oint at least 13 mm 
outside the insulator. 

NoTS — Where sweating is not permitted, some other mejmt of jointing should 
be adopted. 




SEALING BOX FILLED 
WITH COMPOUND 



Fio. I Method of Terminating Gable Tails 



8*6 Communication and Signalling Systems 

8.6.1 Voia Communication 

8.6.1.1 Telephone cornniunication shall be provided for all working 
districts, at uuun haulage stations, pit bottoms, underground sub-stations, 
ccniral sui fare substation and all other essential service facilities including 
the dispatching station. 

13 



I8t4051-19e7 

8*64*2 Circuits between stations of a communication system 
installed in a gassy mine, where flameproof equipment is require, shall 
be intrinsically safe and covered by a certificate from the appropriate 
authorities. 

8.6 J.3 No. communication system using a ground-return circuit 
shall be permitted in any mine. 

8.6«L4 Voice communication ( with the exception of radio and 
carrier system ) system voltage shall not exceed 50 volts in mines. 

8.6.1.5 Suitable surge arresting equipment, properly grounded, shall 
be provided at the points where telephone circuits enter the mine. 

8.6*1»6 No apparatus which is not of approved type shall be connected 
to a circuit in which apparatus of an approved type is required to be 
used, except that an underground telephone system of the intrinsically 
safe type may be connected at surface to another system which is not 
approved as intrinsically safe through the medium of a certified 
intrinsically coupling unit. 

8*6.2 Signalling System 

8.6.2.1 Where electrical signalling is used, the voltage used in any 
one circuit shall not exceed 30 V peak ac. 

8.6.2*2 Apparatus used for signal purposes in mines shall be of 
approved type designed for protection against moisture and mechanical 
injury. In gassy mines, the circuits adopted for the system shall be with 
features of intrinsic safety. 

8«6*2.3 The construction of contact-makers, such as signal switches 
shall be such as to prevent the accidental closing of the circuit. 

8.6.3 Conductors 

8.6*3>1 Cables for communication and signalling circuits underground 
shall be of the types outlined in Appendix A. Lead sheathed and wire or 
strip armoured cables with thermoplastic or paper insulated conductors 
are preferred for permanent installations. Rubber insulated pliable 
armoured cables are preferred to be used for the distribution circuit?, 
which are likely to be exposed to mechanical injury and also to be shifted 
occasionally. 

8.6.3.2 Bare conductors for signalling lijics may be used if the circuit 
employed is certified as intrinsically safe and the conductors arc installed 
at a safe distance ( 0*3 m ) from power cables. 

8.6.3.3 Where power cables or apparatus are installed, conductors 
and cablrs shall be installed on opposite sides of roadwj^ys or haulac^c 
roads, if piacticable. 

14 



ISi4051-1967 

9. COMMISSIONING 

9*1 Reference is invited to the various Indian Standard codes ( see 
4th cover page ) for different rierti ical equipment which set out the 
inspection and test schedules before commissioning. 

9.2 Before a flameproof apparatus is put into services, a close inspection 
shall be made for the presence of flaws or cracks and all joints shall be 
inspected for tightness; in the case of flanged joints, the gaps shall be 
checked to ascertain that they do not exceed the permitted gap 
dimensions- 

10. M/UMTENANCX 

10.1 General 

10.1.1 Only a regular and organized scheme of maintenance work, 
planned to cover all its details, may ensure continued satisfactory opera- 
tion of electrical equipment with a minimum of liability to faults or to the 
dangers resulting from general neglect. 

10.1.2 Proper and systematic organization of maintenance work, 
planned after completing a review of the entire electrical system and 
based upon time-tables intended to cover the required maintenance opera- 
tions, is an essential preliminary to a good maintenance scheme. 

10.2 Safety of Personnel 

10.24 All electrical equipment shall be regarded as capable of giving 
rise to danger. Access to parts which may be live should, therefore, 
normally be prevented preferably by physical means of protective 
enclosures- To avoid danger, such equipment shall be accessible only 
to authorized persons. 

10.2.2 Simple codc-of*safety rules such as the 'permit-to-work' system 
are essential vvhen undertaking maintenance work. 

Where such arrangements are not possible some other suitable 
measure shall be taken to prevent energizing the conductor by any person 
other than the man inchargc of the particular maintenance work. 

Note — Thr nccrssity for carrying out of maintenance work undrr a 'prrmit-to- 
work* system is now well established. Thr *pei mit-to-work' certificate from 
the rngmeer-in-rhai^r of the oprration to the supervisor mchaige of the men 
srlfcird to carry oat any pariicular work ensures that the portion of the 
installation on which the work is to be carried out is rendered dead %nd 
saftr lor working. 

10.2.3 To ensure that the equipment is dead before work commences 
and also they remain so eircctivcly, even if a circuit supplying them is 

15 



1814051-1967 

inadvertently restored the power conductors shall be first discharged 
and then connected to the earth till such time as the maintenance work is 
in progress. 

10*3 Safety of Equipment 

10.3*1 Many of the features, which contribute to the safety of electrical 
equipment, arc inherent in the original design. A clear appreciation of 
the various risks involved may enable the maintenance staff to initiate 
steps which might prove to be of great value in preventing the damage 
that a fault might cause. 

10.3^2 The presence of moisture also constitutes potential danger to 
electrical apparatus. If an equipment is damp or if normal temperature 
variation resuhs in condensation, steps should be taken to correct this 
condition. 

10.4 Maintenance of Electrical Equipment in Mines 

10«4«1 The equipment shall as far as possible be kept free from dirt 
and dust which, in course of time, aie likely to impair the safety of the 
equipment. 

10«4.2 Manufacturers' instruction books which detail the special 
attention required during maintenance of a particular equipment along 
with the Indian Standard codes for guidance in regard to maintenance 
of electrical equipment, in general should be available to maintenance 
staff in each mine. 

10.4»3 Every flexible cable attached to a portable or transportable 
machine shall be examined periodically by the person authorized to 
operate the machine. If such cable is used underground, it shall be 
examined at least once in each shift by the authorized person. A 
damaged or defective cable should be immediately replaced by a cable 
in good condition. Such periodic examinations by the operator shall 
be supplemented by thorough examination by the authorized mainte- 
nance staff at weekly intervals. These examinations shall he as detailed 
as practicable and cover all accessible parts of the cable, such as the 
plug and the socket assembly at switch and machine end, surface of the 
cable and any couplers used. 

10.5 Special Precautions for Maintenance of Flameproof Equipment 

10.5*1 Details of design considerations of such safe apparatus 
are given in IS : 2148-1962*. The supervisor-in-charge of maintenance 
of this apparatus shall have thorough knowledge about the basic 
principles of their design so as to have a clearer insight into the problem 

^Specification for flameproof enclosures of electrical apparatus* ( since revised ). 

16 



18:4051-1967 

of maintenance of such apparatus. For the purpose of guiding 
the maintenance personnel in the fundamental principles of construction 
of flameproof enclosures, 10.5«2 to 10«5.4 bring out some of the important 
features. 

10.5*1#1 Any alteration of a flameproof enclosure is prohibited. 

10.5.2 For air-filled apparatus the structural gaps between the joint 
surfaces and the diametral clearances for operating rods and spindles 
shall be as small as possible and shnll in no case be more than 0'5 mm for 
a length of flamcpath not less than 25 mm alonij the joint. Where the 
length of flamcpath for a joint is between 13 mm and 2b rnm, the struc- 
tural gap between the joint surfaces sliall not exceed 0'4 mm. 

For oil-filled apparatus the structural gii{)s between the joint surfaces 
and diametral clearance for operating rods and spindles shall in no case 
be more than 0'15 mm for a Icnti^th of (iamepath not less than 25 mm 
along the joint. 

10.5.3 Diametral clearance of shaft aiid plain or labyrinth j^dand for 
mot(.»is and other rotating machinery with a length of llanurpath along the 
joint not less than 25 mm shall not l)c more than 0'5 mm. 

Note — The flamrpaths and clearances mcniioncd in 10.5.2 and 10.5.3 arc 'iiilyrctrd 
to changes as and when IS : 2i48-I962* is rcvisrd. 

10.5.4 Painting shall, in general, be necessary to prerjurie ru jing and 
corrosion. Aluminium paint shall, however, not be used, Mncf- this may 
give rise to dangerous frictional sparking on impact. 

10.5.5 Great care should be exercised in the hiuidliriL; oi' parts 
of fl;uncproof electrical equipment as any damage to them would rUstroy 
the flameproofncss of the equipment. 

10.5.6 Before replacing a cover, the flanges shall be cleaned and 
lightly greased. 

10.5.7 The force used when tightening up bolts, nuts and screws shall 
not be more than is necessary, to ensure that no appreciable j^ap exists 
at the flanges. The heads of set-screws in bottomed holes shall not 
stand proud of the shroud due to accumulation of dirt in the ln.Vuin 
of the blind hole. 

10.5.8 Damaged or missing bolts and set-screws shall be replaced 
by others of correct diameter, thiead, length, type of head and quality 
of steel. 

10.5.9 The flameproof gap is the most important features of any 
flameproof eiiclosuics and greatest care and attention shall be paid when 
dismantling and reassembling cquij^ment. Further, no attempt shall be 
made to insert feelers when the circuit is live, 

♦Sprcificiiiion for llaiucproof cnclosurrs ofclrctrical apparatus. ( Since rcvisrd ). 

17 



IS : 4051 - 1967 

Since the cable scaling box and gland constitute a closure on 
the terminal box, tlir (lamcproofncss of the terminal box shall be ensured 
only when the sealing box is completely filled with compound as 
intendod- 

In general, the use of conduits and conduit stopper boxes in coal 
mines is permissible only for connection to two more pieces of apparatus 
mounted on tfie same baseplate, framework or foundation, or in conditions 
where distuibance of the conduit by relative movement of the parts is not 
to be expected. 

10.5.10 The bearings of switch spindles clearances of shaft glands of 
the fixed or labyrinth type shall be regularly inspected and lubricated. 

10*3J1 Cracked or broken glass windows or well-glasses shall be 
promptly replaced by fresh glasses complete with retaining rings supplied 
by the manufacturer. 

10«6 Special Precautions for Maintenance of Intrinsically Safe 
Equipment 

10.6.1 Intrinsically safe circuits shall, under no circumstances, come 
into direct or indirect electrical contact or induction with other circuits. 
Special care shall be "taken when examining wiring inside equipment to 
ensure that segregation of the circuits exist. 

10»6.2 The safety of the circuit is much dependant upon the inductance 
present and it would not be very easy to check at site the trustworthiness 
of the safety devices which absorb part of the energy. Any damaged 
electrical component shall be replaced by identical one obtained from the 
Imanufacturer. 



18 



ISt4051-1967 

APPENDIX A 

{Clauses S.5.] and 8. 6. 3 A } 
PERMISSIBLE TYPES OF CABLES ( PREFERRED ) 



Sl Type and Bhikv 




Range of 


Remake B 


No. Description 




Appltcation 




1 VR insulatrd and 


PCP 


For use with coal cutters 


Individually screened 


sheathrd copper 


con- 


and similar portable 


cables ( Types Fl'+, 


ductorrd flexible 


trail- 


machines ( working 


FT5 and FT6 ) shall 


ing cable to types 


FTl 


voltaRe not exceeding 


be preferred for col- 


to FT6 or IS : 


691- 


650 V to earth ) 


lectively screened 


1966^ 






types 



VR insulated, tough rub- 
ber sheithed, g,ilvaniz- 
cd steel strand armoured 
and overall PCP sheath- 
''d copper conductored 
pliable armoured 

flexible cable to types 
PI to P3 of IS: 691 • 
1966* 



For use with transport- 
able machines like con- 
vcyf>rs. luiders, etc, 
( working vohaje not 
exceeding 650 V to 
earth ) 



Any one of the types 
may be used depend- 
ing upon requirement 
of the equipment ( 3, 
4 or 5 cores ) 



VR insulated tough 

rubber sh-athed, galva- 
nited steel strand 

armoured and overall 
PCP sheathed copper 
conductored pliable 

armoured flexible cable 
to types PCI and PC2 
ofIS:69U1966* 



For remove control 
applications ( working 
voltage not exceedmg 
250 V to earth ) 



4 Similar type of construe^ 

tion as in Itrm 3 but to 

types PLl and PL2 of 
IS:69M966» 



For coal fare lighting 
( working voltage not 
exceeding 250 V to 
earth ) 



5 Pliable armoured flexible For use in quarries and Cables with cradle 



trailing cable with 

rubber insul.ifed copper 
conductor coids^ tough 
rubber sheathing, g.ilva- 
n»*zed steel 5!trand arm- 



meiallifcrous mmes 

( working voltage not 
exceeding 650 V to 
earth ) 



oured and 
sheathed to 
to PA4 of IS 



PCP curtail 
typrs PAlC 
: 1026-1966t 



separator and with 
canvas rein for ce-nent 
are preferable to those 
with a cradle centre 
and without canvas 
rt'inforcement. ( Pre- 
ferred types — PAIC 
and PA3C ) 



•Specification for rubbrr-insulnted flrxihJe ti^^iling cables for use in coal mines. 
fSpcciflcation for flexible trailing cables for use in quarries and metalliferous 
mines. 



19 



I8i4051-1967 

Sl Tm A»v Bbibf 

No, DsscRinioir 

6 Similar type of coDtintc- 

tion as in Item 5 but to 
typfs 3PA1C to 3PA2 
and 6PA1G to 6PA2 of 
IS : 1026-1%6* 

7 Armoured paper insulated 

lead sheathed cables 
wiih double wire arm- 
ouring with copper con- 
ductor cores to IS : 1027- 
1 968* , nuss impregnated 
non-draining type 



Ravos ov 

Afplicatioh 

For me in quarries and 
metallirerous mines 
( working voltage not 
exceeding 3 300 V and 
6600 V to earth 
respectively ) 

For all permanent instal-^ 
lations in all workings 
except working dis- 
tricts and development 
workings 



8 PVC insulated and arm- 

oured and PVC sheath- 
ed cables to IS : 1554 
( Part I )-1964t 

9 Mine telephone cables with 

rubber or thermo-plastic 
insulation and arm- 
ouring 



Same as for cables cover- 
ed by Item 7 but 
excluding shafts 

For all permanent instal- 
lations in all workings 
except working dis- 
tricts and develop- 
ment workings ( not 
exceeding 250 V to 
earth ) 

10 Mine signalling cables with do 

rubber or thermoplastic 
insulation and arm- 
ouring 

11 Cables for telecommunica- Permanent installation 

tion system for telecommunication 

system ( not exceeding 
250 volts to earth ) 



12 Flexible cables for miners* 

cap-lamps to IS : 2593- 
]964§ 

13 Shot firing cables confor- 

ming to IS : 5950- 1971 |l 



For use in miners^ safety 
electric cap-lamps 



RSMABXt 



Same as for Item 5 
(Preferred types — 
3PAICand6PAlG) 



Working voltage to suit 
type of cable 



^Specification for flexible trailing cables for use in quarries and metalliferous 
mines. 

fSpectfication for paper-insulated cables for use in mines. 

jSperification for PVC insulated ( heavy duiy ) electric cables: Part I For working 
voltages up to and including 1 100 voils ( revised ). 

§Spccincation for flexible cables for miners* cap-lamps* 

||Specification for shot firing cables. 



20 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

M^mk Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 1 10002 

Telephones: 323 01 31 , 323 3375, 323 9402 Fax : 4 91 11 3234062, 3239399, 3239382 

f mail : bisJnd @ del 2 vsni.net.in Internet http://wwwdel.vsnl.net.in/bis, org 

Central Laboratory . Telephone 

F'lol No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010 91-77 00 32 
Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 1 1 0002 323 76 17 

•fcastern ; 1 /1 4 CIT Scheme Vil. V.I.P. Road. Kankuryachi, CALCUTTA 700054 337 86 62 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus. IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

tWestern : Manakalaya, E9. MIDC, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, 
Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 



60 38 43 
235 23 15 
832 92 95 



Branch Offices: 

|=»ushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Kharipur, AHMEDABAD 380001 550 13 48 

iPeenya IndiiJ-trial Area. 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 839 49 55 

BANGALORE 560058 

Commercial-cum-Office Complex, Opp. Dushera Maidan, Arera Colony. 72 34 52 

Bittan Market, BHOPAL 4620160 

62,/63, Ganga Nagar, Unit VI, BHUBANESHWAR 751 001 40 36 27 

Kalai Kathir Building, 670 Avinashi Road, COiMBATORIi 641037 21 01 41 

Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 91-28 88 01 

Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 91-71 1998 

53/5 Ward No.29. R G, Barua Road, 5th By -lane, GUWAHATI 781003 56 65 08 

5-8-56C, L,N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 320 10 84 

E-52, Chitaranjan Marg. C- Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 37 38 79 

1 1 7,/4l 8 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 2 1 68 76 

Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 21 89 23 
LUCKNOW 226005 

NIT Building, Second Floor. Gokulpat Market, NAGPUR 440010 

Pntliputra Inoustrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

Institution of Engineers (India) Building 1332 Shiva|i Nagar. PUNE 41 1005 



Sahiajanand House 3rd Poor, Bhaktnagar Circle. 80 Feet Road, 
RAJKOT 360002 



52 51 71 
26 28 08 
32 36 Jb 
26 85 86 



T C No. 14.'1421. University P O. Palayam, THIRUVANANIHAPURAM 695034 32 72 15 



•Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, 
CALCUTTA 700072 

tSales Office is at Novelty Chambers. Grant Road. MUMBAI 400007 

tSales Office is at 'F' Block, Unity Building, Narashimaraja Square. 
BANGALORE 560002 



27 10 85 

309 65 28 
222 39 71 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press. New Delhi 2 



