1I 151
1.gcopo Term
Accessibility Accessory Accident Covers definitions L Terminology

hdian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR AIRLI,NE TECHNICAL OPERATIONS
for glossary of terms used for airline technical operations.

Definition
A design feature which affects the ease of admission to an area for the performance of visual and manipulative maintenance. A part, subassembly or assembly designed for use in conjunction with or to supplement another assembly or unit. An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft, which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight, until such time as all such persons have disembarked, in which: a) Any person suffers death or serious injury as a result of being in the aircraft, or by direct contact with the aircraft or anything attached thereto; or b) the aircraft receives substantial damage; or c) any damage is caused to the property of a third party.

Age, Threshold

The time before which inspection of the condition of an item is required, or beyond which inspection is considered to provide information on the condition of the item about its usefulness.
Note-Threshold age may ba specifled as an upper limit before whfch inspection must be performed, or may be rpeciffed as a lower limit below which an inspection is not considered to provide useful Information.
A~~tnmatic _I."...".." parameters.

indlinht . . . . ..-..-

racndlnn `---*"...W

anrfior -..-,-.

mnnitnrinn . .._ . . . . _ ,... I

Q!

~n~~lfkxi "##"".E.""

Aircraft

in SerViCG

The average number of aircraft used in aircraft normal maintenance during a reporting period.

operations

and

Note-The number of aircraft in service Is calculated from the alrcrafi days available for the period divided by the total number of days in ths period. Aircraft days available include days required for normal main. tenance and overhaul.

Aircraft on Ground (AOG)

The
spare

highest
part(s)

maintenance action. It also indicates that an aircraft is unable to continue or be returned to revenue service until the appropriate action is taken. The average
given fleet ).
,1.111_-*,-- -_._ -I-L_ _.._______. ._ YlllllllllVll mry WBP tJe expresselI l,

priority and/or

designation

to process

a requirement

ior

a

Aircraft Utilization ( Utilization )

daily

flying

hours

for one in-service

aircraft

(of

a

Note-It is computed by dividino the total flyin hours (airborne: accumulated by the fleet In a reportinp period by the number of in-service

. ~~~.. _--_ ___:__I awcratz deye iii tiie Sam18 perwo.
flying hours per year.

Alternate

(Alternative Item, Alternative Procedure, Alternate

1

3

meets the required functional and-structural either in overall external dimensions, connections, installations and/or mounting provisions and requires additional parts, rework, or modification to be installed in a specific application. Alternate procedures fully meet the required maintenance specifications, but may require additional documentation, training, manning, special tooling and/or test equipment.
specifications but differs

An item which fully

5 f

Adopted 10 November 1881

@ February 1983, ISI I
I STANDARDS BHAVAN,

Or a

INDIAN
YANAK

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 11000!?

IS:10041-1981
Term Alternative Analysis, Criticality . See ALTERNATE. An extension of failure degree of degradation.of effects is predicted. mode and effect analysis, wherein the aircraft operating safety due to failure Definition

Analysis, Failure and Effect

Mode

A systematic evaluation of a system or subsystem design, analyzed down to the component and/_or function level, to identify the possible modes of failure and determine their effect on the system or aircraft. The process of identifying required maintenance functions through analysis of a fixed or assumed design and determining the -most effective means of accomplishing these functions. The assessment of the performance level of an item, aircraft or fleet from performance data, nor measurements or statistical information. The assessment of probabilities item under specified conditions by means of statistical studies. ) An aircraft arrival after or suspected equipment of satisfactory performance of use over a given service arrival time, caused and/or defect. of an period

Analysis, Maintenance ( Study, Work) Analysis, Performance

Analysis,

Reliability

Arrival,

Late (Technical

scheduled malfunction

by a know~n

Assembly

A number of parts, sub-assemblies, or any combination thereof joined together to perform a specific function, which can be disassembled without impairing the designed use.
Note -The distinction between an assembly and a sub-assembly is not always -exact-an assembly in one instance may be -a sub-assembly in another where It forms a-portion of an assembly.

Assembly,

Next Higher

An assembly to which the ~particular item under attached or is a part of - either directly or through attaching parts. See Cost, Indirect See RUN-IN Maintenance ( IMC )

discussion is intermediate

Burden, Burn-in

Maintenance

Calibration

The application of a specifically known and accurately measured input to ensure that an item will produce a specifically known output which can be accurately~measured or indicated. Calibration includes adjustment or recording -of corrections, as appropriate. Determined to be no longer usable in a particular former application. ( See " DELETE" if the item is unnecessary and can be omitted without fhe need for future reference ). (Technical) Elimination malfunction of a scheduled and/or defect. trip because of a known or suspected
trip

Cancel

Cancellation

Note -Cancellation of any or all constitutes only one cancellation.

of the flight

legs of a mu!ti-leg

Card, Job

A card issued to the workman giving details of the work to be done. Usually contains provision for recording start and completion times and the estimated target or standard hours. See, Card, Job. The cause of a defect, failure tioning of an item when: a) Being operated and or damage which for which induced. results it was in malfuncdesigned,

Card, Work Cause, Basic

in a manner

b) the cause was not externally
2

IS:,10041 -1881
Term Check Check, Bench Definition An examination to determine integrity of an item. the functional capability or physical whether or it requires prescribed

A functional check of an item in the shop to determine not the item may be returned to service, or whether adjustment, repair or overhaul.

Check, Functional (Test, Functional Complaint ( Snag ) Complaints, Complaints,

)

A detail test of an item to determine if it operates limits of movement, flow, temperature, pressure, A known or suspected malfunction or maintenance personnel which maintenance action.

within etc.

or defect found is documented

by flight crew and requires person-

Maintenance Pilot

Reports of discrepancies which are found by maintenance nel and which require maintenance action.

Suspected or known malfunctions or unsatisfactory conditions entered by the flight crew into the aircraft log and which require maintenance action. Any self-contained part, combination of parts, sub-assemblies or units, which perform a distinctive function necessary to the operation of a system.

Component

Concept,

Maintenance

Generalized maintenance management ideas and general maintenance principles which are studied and then developed into a specific plan for application through a particular maintenance programme. See Maintenance, Condition Monitored costs directly expended in

Condition

Monitoring Maintenance

Cost, Direct (DMC)

Those maintenance labour and material maintaining an item or an aircraft.

maintenance labour and Note - This does not include those indirect material expenditures which contribute to the OVerall maintenance operations, line station servicing, administration, record keeping, supervision, tooling, test equipment, facilities, etc.

C$,&lirect Burden

Maintenance Maintenance

maintenance labour and material costs not considered to be direct maintenance costs, but which contribute to the overall maintenance programme costs through overhead operations, admirecord keeping, supervision, tooling, test equipment, nistration, facilities, etc. Those

Cycle, Aircraft Operating Cycle, Flight ( Landing

A completed )

take-off

and landing
landings

sequence,
are counted as Aircraft Operating

Note -Touch-and-go Cycles.

Cycle, Cycle, Cycle,

Engine Flight

Operating ( Landing )

A

completed engine take-off power.

thermal

cycle

including

the application

of

See Cycle, Aircraft

Operating. acceleration
one super-

Supersonic

A completed supersonic flight sequence comprising through Mach 1 and deceleration to subsonic flight,
sonic Note-One cycle. aircraft operating cycle can include

more than

Damage, (FDD)

Foreign

Object

Damage to any portion of the airplane caused tion of birds, stones, hail or other debris.

by impact or ingesobject such as

Damage, Ingestion ( Damage. Foreign (FOD)

Object)

Internal damage to an engine caused by an outside birds, stones, or other foreign objects.

3

Term Debugging Defect Deferability A process
operational

Definition to detect and remedy inadequacies
use.

preferably

prior

to this

Any confirmed abnormal condition could eventually result in a failure.

of an item, whether

or not

The~possiblity that an item can remain inoperable and/or defective within the terms of the Minimum Equipment List ( MEL) or Configuration Deviation List (CDL). Technical delays occur when the malfunctioning of an item, the checking of the same or necessary corrective action causing the final departure to be delayed by more than a specified time after the programmed departure time in any of the following instances: i) an originating flight departure time. ii) iii) departs later than the scheduled on the

Delay

(Technical)

a through service or turn - around flight ground longer than the allowable ground the aircraft is released

remains time.

late from maintenance.

Note - A cancellation supersedes a delay (that is,a flight which is cancelled after having been~delayed is considered to be a cancellation only
not a delay and a canceltation ).

Delete

Removal of an item from a specific application. " Delete " indicates the removal of a paragraph, Movement of an an intended flight. aircraft from the blocks for

For technical data, phrase, page, etc. the purposes of

Departure

Note 1 -There can be only one departure per flight (that is, only the final departure is counted as in cases where the aircraft returns to the block after initially departing . Note 2 -For convenience, some operators consider occur-each-time an aircraft leaves the ground fora flight. a departure to

Derating

The intentional reduction of the stress/strength ratio in the application of an item, usually for the purpose of reducing the occurrence of stress-related failures. (Technical ) The landing of an aircraft at an airport other than the airport of origin or destination, as a result of malfunction or suspected malfunction of any item on the aircraft. The time during which technical reasons. an aircraft during is not available which for flight for

Diversion

Downtime Downtime, Active Maintenance Downtime, Maintenance

The maintenance downtime item or an aircraft.

work is being done on an

The interval between the time an item or aircraft is made available for preventive or corrective maintenance until the item or aircraft is returned to or considered available for service use. The maintenance downtime the item or aircraft. The probability demand within conditions. during which no work is being done on

Downtime, Non-Active Maintenance Effectiveness, System

that a system can successfully meet an operational operated under specified a given time when of unscheduled maintenance

Effectiveness, Maintenance

Unscheduled

The percentage of the total number actions which were successful. 4

1s : i10041- 498%'
Term Effectivity Engine Engine, Basic OePnition Indicates the applicability of items, materials to a type, series, model or individual item. The basic engine assembly plus supplied by the engine manufacturer. its and/or technical accessories data as

essential

Those units and components which are used fuel air mixture into power; to transmit power if any, and accessory drives; to supplement defined systems external to the engine; and the-flow of internal lubrication. Neutral

to induce and convert to the propeller shaft, the function of other to control and direct type,

Engine,

Maximum

An engine plus those parts making it peculiar to an aircraft but not to any particular position on the aircraft.

Engineering,

Human

The determination of man's capabilities and limitations as they relate to the equipment or systems he will use, and the application of this knowledge to the planning, design, and testing of manmachine combinations to obtain optimum performance, operability, reliability, efficiency, safety, and maintainability. All equipment required on the aircraft to support the operationand maintenance of the aircraft and all its airborne equipment. See Equipment, Test Ground Support ( GSE).

Equipment, Support

Airborne (ASE)

Equipment, Aircraft Ground (AGE) Equipment, Automatic

Equipment which automatically carries out a predetermined programme of testing for possible malfunction with minimum' reliance on human intervention. Equipment required on the ground to support the operation maintenance of the aircraft and all its airborne equipment. and

Equipment, Ground Support (G-1 [Equipment, Aircraft Ground (AGE) 1 Equipment, Support

Equipment the aircraft

required to support the operation and all its airborne equipment.

and maintenance

of

Error, Build (Error, Production) Error, Maintenance

Those faulty functions which occur and are not rectified during the assembly and/or subsequent test of an item during manufacture, overhaul or repa~ir. An error on the part of maintenance personnel in operation maintenance on an item which results in subsequent failure or malfunction, or an error in published maintenance procedures which results in subsequent failure or malfunction. See ERROR , BUILD. An evaluation during normal The assessment of the airframe. of an item while performing operation of the aircraft. of any data which
of data that

terror, Production Evaluation, Service

its intended to the structural
are listed

function integrity
below:

Evaluation, Structural (Air-frame)

relates

Note -Examples
i) ii) iii) iv) v) vi) vii)

may be considered

Removal reports, Failure mode reports, Inspection write-ups, Flight hours, Pilot reports, Aircraft operatlng cycles, Time.

and

5

Term
Expendable Extra Section Factor, ( XSEC) Test Test ) Items for which no authorized cost of repair would normally

Definition
repair exceed procedure exists and that of replacement. whose

Any Right made to accommodate by the regular flight schedule. See Factor, Acceleration.

passengers

or cargo not handted

Accelerated

Factor, Acceleration ( Factor, Accelerated Factor, Factors, Derating Human

The ratio between the times necessary to obtain a stated proportion of failures for two different sets of stress conditions involving the same failure modes and/or mechanisms. The ratio of operating to design stress.

Human physiol-ogical, physical and psychological characteristics relative to complex systems and the development and application of principles and procedures for accomplishing optimum manmachine integration and utilization. The term is used in a broad sense to cover all ~biomedical and psycho-social considerations pertaining to a man in the system. ) The ratio of the operating hours of the in-service equipment under consideration to the number of flying hours incurred by the equipment. The inability I imits. of an item to perform within a previously specified

Factor, Operating ( In-Service Equipment -Failure Failure, Basic

A defect, failure or damage as a result of malfunctioning of a system, unit or part while being used in the manner for which it was designed and which was not externally induced. See Failure, See Failure, ) Secondary. Primary. without being caused with respect by the failure to time,

Failure, Failure,

Dependent Independent

Failure, Primary ( Failure, Independent Failure, Random )

Failure of an item which occurs of an associated item(s). Failure of an item which

is unpredictable is caused which

Failure, Secondary ( Failure, Dependent Failure, Failure Subsidiary Mode

Failure of an item which item(s). A failure found for removal. The way in which after

by the failure

of an associated to the reason

removal,

is -not related

the failure

of an item occurs. from total position. loss of

Flame-Out Flight Flight, Flight, Flight, Flight, Charter Ferry Ferry (Technical) Leg

The interruption of engine operation, resulting combustion while the fuel control is in the "On" A flight occurs each time an aircraft ( See cycle, aircraft operating ). A revenue flight that is not listed booked for a specific purpose. A non-revenue Right-made operating

cycle is completed. timetable, but is

in the published an aircraft an

lo position to

for any reason. because it

A non-revenue flight made requires maintenance action. All passages, of landing. block to block,

position

aircraft

from

one airport
flights,

to the next
the terminating

airport
airport

Note --In the case of test or training could be the same as the airport of origin.

Flight, Flight, Flight,

Nonrevenue Pilot Training Revenue

A flight

not intended

to generate

revenue. crew. or freight revenue

Any Aight made to train A flight intended ( or both ). 6

or check out the flight either passenger

to generate

18 t lQO41- 1981
Term Flight, Flight, Hours, Scheduled Test APU A flight which is listed Definition in the published . time-table.

Any flight

made to check an aircraft power unit operating

or any part of it. time from start-up to shut-

The auxiliary down. Flying

Hours, Block [ Hours, ( EloCk ) Time ]

The number of hours spent by an airplane from the moment-it first moves for a flight until it comes to rest at its intended blocks at the next point of landing, or returns to its departure point prior to take-off.
NotePush-out from lhe gate is considered as part of block hours.

Hours, Flying (Airborne ( Time, Flight ) Hours, Flying ~(Block ) Hours, Out of Service

)

The accumulated See Hours, Block.

time intervals

between

wheels-off

and wheels-on.

The number of elapsed hours that an aircraft operation when scheduled to be available.

is not available

for

Note -The out-of-service hours start when an aircraft is first declared to be unavailable for a flight, and end when available for service.

Hours, Unit Flying

The accumulated flying hours of all like units installed during a specified reporting period.

in aircraft

Not. -Unit flying hours are the product of total flying hours (airborne) of the aircraft in which units are Installed and the number of units installed in each aircraft. Incident, Technical Any event sigriificantly of a technical natlne which may be considered affect the potential airworthiness of an aircraft. to

Index, Maintainability Inspection, Sample

A quantitative figure of merit which an item to a standard reference. The monitoring and/or to permit determination ressive intervals. withdrawal of the3

relates the maintainability

of

of selected devices from service condition at predetermined prog-

Interchangeable
(Interchangeable

~_

___ _ An interchangeable

Two-Way)

-part, sub-assembly, _assembly _or unit which . ._ _. . meets or exceeds required_Wnctio+ and structural specifications It has the same mounting provisions. for a given application. Overall dimensions and connections may vary, provided that installation does not require-rework or modification. Introduces a new item and places restiiction on the use of the old item, The new item may be used in place of either the old or the new, but the~old item can only be used in an application where it The new item is considered to has previously been installed. supersede the old. See Interchangeable. A change from original flight plan due to a known malfunction and/or~defect during flight. or suspected

Interchangeable,

One-Way

Interchangeable,

Two-Way

Interruption, Air (Technical) -(Station, Return to Turn Back, A-IR ) Interruption, (Technical) (Turnback, Ground Ground )

A ground interruption occurs when an aircraft leaves the block and returns for a technical reason before becoming airborne, or when after landing experiences a technical problem prior to reaching the block. 7

-lS:10041-1981
Term
Interval, Item Item, Alternative Item, Bulk Material Confidence

DefiniJion The range between the upper and lower values of the confidence limits. Any level of hardware
accessory, component, See Alternate. A material used in random quantity such as liquid, paste, cloth, plastics, or of comparable composition. For example, oil, chemicals, paints, cleaners, solvents, abrasives, metals, fabrics, etc. Items having a specified threshold age. (see Age, threshold ) assembly ( that is, part;sub-system, unit, material, etc ). system,

Item, Disassembly Threshold Item, Insurance

Ann item held by either the manufacturer or an airline purely as a precaution in order to preclude undue scheduling problems and/or economic hardship which might otherwise occur should the part be -out of stock when a requirement occurs. Any item which can be readily maintenance operations. changed on an aircraft during line

Item, Line Maintenance ,ltem,Maintenance Significant ( MSI ) Hem, Structurally Significant ( SSI ) Landing, Touch-and-go

Maintenance items that are judged to be relatively the tant from a safety,, reliability or economic stand-point.

most impor-

Local areas of primary structure which are judged by the manufacturer to be relatively the most important from fatigue, corrosion vulnerability, or failure effects viewpoints. A landing in which an aircraft touches come to a full stop prior to commencing The probability A period that a given statement the Tunway and does an additional flight. is correct. of an item. overhaul becomes not

Level, Confidence Life Life, Achieved Fife, Declared Life, Limited Life, Maximum Permitted ( Life, Limited; Life, Declared; Life, Ultimate ) Life, Service Life, Shelf Life, Storage (Life, Shelf ) Life, Ultimate Life, Useful (Period, Constant Failure Rate ) Limits, Confidence Unit Deficiency Overhaul

of time which by

is related an item

to the usability before an

The life achieved necessary. See Life, Maximum See Life, Maximum

Permitted. Permitted. a parti-

The time specified by an appropriate authority after which cular item must be removed from service and replaced.

The life of an item at which it is no longer physically or economically feasible to repair or overhaul the~item to acceptable standards, See Life, Storage. The length of time an item can be stored conditions and still meet-specified requirements. See Life, Maximum Permitted. of items is expected to operate excludes any infant mortality and under specified

The length of time a population ~with a constant failure rate. This wearout periods.

The values, upper and lower, between which a true value can be expected to fall, with a pre-established level of confidence. A unit which can be readily maintenance operations. See-List: Minimum Equipment. changed on an aircraft during line

Line Replaceable (LRU) List, Allowable

IS:10041Term List, Configuration (CDL-I I List, Dispatch Equipment List, Go-no-go Deviation 5. Definition

1981

Those items, such as access panels, caps, .fairings, efc, normally forming part of the'exterior profile of the aircraft, the absence of which do not prevent dispatch. See List, Minimum See List, Minimum Equipment. Equipment. may be inoperative for flight under

Inoperative

An approved list of items which List, Minimum Equipment specified conditions, (MEL) (List, Allowable Deficiency; List, ,Dispatch Inoperative Equipment; List, Go-no-go ) Log Entries ( Log Report ) Log ~Report Maintainability All entries made by flight aircraft log. See Log Entries.

crew and maintenance

personnel

into the

The characteristic of material design and installation that determines the requirements for maintenance expenditures, ~including time, manpower, personnel skill, test equipment, technical data and facilities to accomplish operation objectives in the operational environment of the user. Quantitatively, maintainability is expressed as the period of time within which the maintenance action can be performed with a specified probability using defined resources and prescribed procedures. Those actions required for restoring or maintaining an item in serviceable condition, including servicing, repair, modification, overhaul, inspection and determination of condition. Condition Monitoring ) A primary maintenance process under which data on the whole population of specified items in service are analyzed to indicate whether some allocation of technical resources is required. Not a preventive maintenance process, condition monitored maintenance allows failures to occur, and relies upon analysis of operating experience information to Indicate the need for appropriate action.
Note-Failure modes of condition adverse effect on operating safety. monitored Hems do not have a direct

Maintenance

Maintenance, Monitored (Condition

Mainfenance, Maintenance,

Corrective Deferred

See Maintenance,

Unscheduled. any bearing time and/or

Maintenance associated with minor defects not having on flight safety, which is deferred to a convenient location for accomplishment. Routine en-route stop.

Maintenance, L'me ( Maintenance, Line Station ) Maintenance, -Maintenance, Line Station Non-Routine

check, inspection and malfunction rectification performed and at base stations during transit, turn-around or night Line Unscheduled

See Maintenance, See Maintenance,

Maintenance, On-Condition ( On Condition )

A primary maintenance process having repetitive inspections or tests to determine the condition of units, systems, or portions of structure with regard to continued serviceability (corrective action is taken when required by item condition ). See Maintenance, See Maintenance, Scheduled Scheduled -9

Maintenance, Maintenance,

Preventive Routine

lS:10041--1981
Term Maintenance, Scheduled (#aintenance,Prevenfive; Maintenance, Routine ) Maintenance, Unscheduled ( Maintenance, Corrective; Maintenance, Non-Routine) Malfunction Man-Function Man-hours, Man-hours, Man-hours Direct Maintenance Per Flying Hour Definition performed at defined intervats to retain an item That maintenance condition by systematic inspection, detection, in a serviceable .~ replacement of wear out items, adjustment, calibration, cleaning, etc. That maintenance performed to restore condition by providing correction of mal-function and/or defect. The occurrence of a condition outside of specified limits. The function Man-hours allocated whereby an item to a satisfactory a known or suspected the operation of an item is

to the human

component

of a system. or removed task. items.

of work spent directly required

on the aircraft

The man-hours

to complete

the maintenance

A performance figure calculated by dividing the DIRECT MANHOURS expended to maintain a particular aircraft fleet during a given period by the flying hours ( airborne ) during that period. A special term for data transmission to cover a forecast of mean cycles between unscheduled removals that is provided by a supplier for provisioning purposes only. Presented as a forecast of the average interval in operating cycles between unscheduled removals ( justified and unjustified ), this factor is expressed in terms of one unit per aircraft, and it, therefore, represents the operating cycles for the part number being provisioned.

Mean Time Between ( MTBF ) Mean Time

Failure

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total unit flying hours (airborne) accrued in a period by the number of unit failures that occurred during the same period. The arithmetic actions. mean of the time intervals between maintenance

to Maintenance

Mean Time Between Removals ( MTBR

)

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total unit flying hours accrued in a period by the number of unit removals (scheduled plus unscheduled) that occurred during the same -period. A performance figure calculated by dividing the total unit frying hours ( airborne) accured in a period by the number of unscheduled unit removals that occurred during'the same period. A performance figure calculated by dividing the summation of times to failure for a sample of failed items by the number of failed items in the sample.
Note - This is different from no allowance is given to experience MEAN TIME BETWEEN FAILURE of items which have not failed. since

Mean Time Between Unscheduled Removals (MTBUR) Mean Time ( MTTF) 10 Failure

Mean Time to Repair ( MTTR ) MTUR

A performance figure calculated by dividing the total active repair times accrued in a period on a number of designated items-by the number of these items repaired in the same period. A special term for data transmmission to cover a forecast of mean time between unscheduled removals that is provided -by a supplier for provisioning purposes only. Presented as a forecast of the average interval in unit flying hours between unscheduled removals (justified and unjustified 1, this factor is expressed in terms of one unit per aircraft, and it, therefore, represents the part hours for the part number being provisioned,

Mechanism,

Failure

The physical,

chemical

or other

process

which

results

in a failure,

IS : 10041-

1981

Term
Modification, Modification, Modify Module Mandatory Optional A modification authorities. A modification operator. To change or removal classified which

Definition
as compulsory by the local civil aviation at the discretion through of the

may be incorporated rework and/or

or alter through of an item.

the installation

A combination of assemblies, subassemblies in one package, or so arranged as to maintenance action. See Maintenance, Indicates Expedite a choice On-condition. of interchangeable items.

and parts, contained be installed in one

On-Condition Optional Order,

An order which specifies delivery in less than the supplier's quoted time or delayed delivery date, and is generated by a known requirement by a specified date. A document which authorizes work to be done and contains the necessary instructions and information regarding cost allocation. See Order, Job The restoration of an item in accordance defined in the relevant manual. with the instructions

Order, Job ( Order, Work ) Order, Work

Overhaul Overhaul, Partial

The overhaul of a subassembly of an item w_ith a time controlled overhaul to permit the item with longer life period to achieve its authorized OVERHAUL LIFE. See Overhaul, An overhaul of individual to schedule time limit. Time Controlled. in accordance with a plan under which time histories items are monitored. The monitoring system is used the removal of items before they exceed a specified

Overhaul,

Record Control

Overhaul, Time Controlled ( Overhaul, Record Control ) Part

One piece, or two or more pieces joined to~gether which are not normally subject to disassembly without destruction of designed use. Life, Used See Percent of Allowable Time Realized by an Item. it was as a

Percent

Percent of Allowable Time Realized by an Item ( Percent Life, Used ) Performance, Performance, Human Order Entry

The ratio of the actual time accumulated by the item since time limit-expressed last " zero-timed " to the specified percentage. A measure ment. of man-functions and actions in a specified

environ-

A measure expressed as a percentage which is in turn derived from the ratio of orders placed at under the supplier-quoted lead time to total orders placed during a given period. A measure of shipping performance expressed as a percentage which is in turn derived from the ratio of the number of orders shipped up to the supplier quoted lead time or the airline request date, whichever is greater, to total orders shipped in a given period. For purposes of computation, the order is considered as shipped if packed on dock available for shipment but held pending special airline instructions. A partial shipment is considered as a completed shipment when made in the month due, but delinquent if mabe the following month even though shipment against that order is completed that month. 11

Performance, Shipping

Supplier

IS': 10041- 1991
Term Period, Rate Period, Period, Period, Rate Pirep Plan, Maintenance ( Plan, Technical) Plan, Point, Technical Servicing Constant Infant Failure See Life;Useful. the Definition

Mortality

That early period, beginning at zero unit time, during which failure rate of a family of items can be expected to decrease. See Time Between Overhauls ( TBO ).

Overhaul Wear Out Failure

That period during which the failure rate of a family of the items can be expected to increase due to deterioration processes. See Complaints, Pilot. which specify the maintenance of desired performance of an

A document or set of documents required to assure the continuation item or the safety of an aircraft. See Plan, Maintenance.

An access specifically provided to permit servicing filling, draining, charging or cleaning ) of equipment installed position.

(lubrication, in the normal

Point,

Test

A means of safe access to permit a measurement that wifl facilitate maintenance, repair, calibration, alignment, or monitoring. Test -points may be accessible in the normally installed position or may require disassembly of equipment for accessibility. The former are called exposed test points, the latter internal test points. An arrangement whereby participants are entitled from the agreed stock held by any participant. Alternate Actuarial See Alternate. A statistical technique which uses historical expectancy of an item with respect to age. data to depict the life to withdraw items

Pool,

Parts

Procedure, Programme,

Programme, Block Maintenance Programme, Continuous Maintenance

A programme which divides major structural maintenance tasks into groups, or blocks, which economical and effective accomplishment.

inspections ~and/or permit convenient,

A type of complete maintenance programme which is expected to Under this system assure continuous availability of the airplane. the total maintenance effort is apportioned to each of the various and more frequent types of maintenance.
Note-A continuous complete maintenance overhaul plan. at one point of time is not a part of e

Programme, Equalized Maintenance

A maintenance programme whereby work packages are scheduled for accomplishment in such a manner that the required maintenance Portions of the heavier manpower will remain relatively constant. maintenance tasks are integrated into the lighter, or lesser, maintenance periods so that the work load fluctuations will be minimized. The planning, development and implementation of those organized set of tasks directly related to the specification, assessment/prediction and verification of an item's design characteristics which make it possible to meet operational objectives with a minimum expenditure of maintenance and support effort. A programme which defines a logical sequence of maintenance actions to be performed as events or pieces of a whole which,. when performed collectively, result in achievement of the desired maintenance standards. See Programme, Maintenance. 12

Programme,

Maintainability

Programme, ( Program,

Maintenance Work)

Programme,

Work

IS:10041-1881
Term Ql;i;&E;gine Quotation Change Unit Definition A maximum neutral engine plus those parts making particular position on an aircraft. it peculiar to a

A supplier's offer in response to a customer's request for a specific proposal to sell a specific item, quantity of items, or service, or document including price, delivery, applicableterms and conditions, and validity period for the quotation.
The performance figure calculated by dividing the number of failures by the total unit hours or cycles accumulated during the same period. It is usually expressed as failures per 1 000 unit hours or cycles.

Rate,

Failure

Note - Failure rate is the reciprocal of mean time between failure. Rate, Hazard Failure
See RATE,

INSTANTANEOUS

FAILURE. given I

Rate, Instantaneous (Rate, Hazard) Rate, Schedule

The conditional probability of failure in a small time interval, the item has survived to the beginning of that interval.

Interruption

The ratio of the number of technical delays ( normally greater than 15 minutes) plus the number of technical cance~llations to the number of revenue departures, ex~pressed as a rate per hundred departures. The number of items expressed as a quantity beyond the limits per unit~of time. of economical repair, a given need not operating

Rate,

Scrap

Redundancy

The existence of more than one means for accomplishing function. Each means of accomplishing the function necessarily be identical. Active Standby That redundancy wherein all redundant items are simultaneously rather than being activated when needed.

Redundancy, Redundancy,

That redundancy wherein the alternative means of performing the function is inoperative until needed and is activated upon failure of the primary means of performing 4he function. The probability under specified of time. that an conditions, item will without perform a required function, failure, for a specified period

Reliability

Reliability, Reliability, Reliability,

Assessed Dispatch En-Route

The reliability of an item determined within stated confidence limits from tests or failure data on nominally identical items. The percentage of flights ( technical ) or cancellation which depart without (technical j. incurring a delay

The probability of successfully completing a flight plan without incurring a failure that would cause deviation from the flight plan. The probability that man will accomplish functions under specified conditions. The rel~iability in accordance The reliability and from the of use. all required when human used

~Reliabili~ty, Human Performance Reliability, Reliability, Inherent Predicted

potential in a given design configuration with the design specification.

of an item estimated from its design considerations reliability of its parts in the intended conditions log made by the flight crew for

Remark, Removal,

Pilot Access

Those entries In the aircraft information purposes only.

The removal of an item for the sole purpose of allowing ease of approach to another component ( s) and where, due to the manner of installation, it is impossible or impractical to do so otherwise. See REMOVAL, SHOP CHECK. 13

Removal,

Bench Check

is :-100419`1881
Term Removal. Cannibalization ( Removal, Parts Shortage Robbery ) Removal, Removal, Removal, Condition Confirmed Deferred Suspect Analysis The removal items. The removal serviceability A removal the reason of an item Definition to satisfy the-needs of another aircraft or

of an item for the sole purpose state at a specified time. where a failure for removal. or defect is found

of determining which substantiates

its

The removal of an item wherein impending malfunction is suspected, but actual removal has been deferred to a convenient time and/or location for accomplishment. The removal purposes. of an item at the request of engineer for investigation of the hail or

Removal, Engineer's Examination Removal, Foreign Object Damage (FOD ) Removal, Hot Section inspection Removal, Removal, Removal, Item Problem Justified Life Limited

The removal of an item due to damage to any portion airplane caused by impact or ingestion of birds, stones, other debris.

The removal of an item for the purpose of inspection and restoratlon of hot section item(s) at a predetermined time/cycle limit. The removal of an item due to the inability within previously specified limits. of the item to perform or not the

A removal where a defect or failure is found, whether defect -or failure substantiates the reason for removal. See Removal, Restricted Parts.

Removal, Maintenance Convenience

A removal brought about for any reason other than as a result of the items' life having approached or achieved a previously defined limit or as a result of a known or suspected malfunction and/or defect. The removal of an item to accomplish an action classified compulsory by the appropriate civil aviation regulatory authority. The removal fication. of an item for the sole purpose required of embodying as

Removal, Mandatory Directive Removal, Removal, Removal, Removal, Removal, Removal, Modification On-Condition Parts Shortage

a modi-

The removal of an item inspection or test. See-Removal,

as the result

of an on-condition

Cannibalization.

Planned Pool Reason for

The removal of an item which is selectable for the time and place, without affecting the routine operation of the aircraft. The removal of an item for the purpose of returning it to a Spares Pool and/or other operator. The initially The removal that item. stated reasons for the removal in order for the of an item. a life-limited part of it with an life

Removal, Restricted Parts (Removal, Life Limited) Removal, Retrofit

of an item

to replace purpose

The removal of an item alternate item.

of replacing

Removal, Scheduled (Removal, Time ) Removal, Scheduled Maintenance

A removal of an item brought having approached or achieved

about as a result of the items's a previously defined limit.

The removal of an item to perform maintenance at defined intervals to retain an item in a serviceable condition by systematic inspection, detection, replacement of worn out items, adjustment, calibration, cleaning, etc. 14

IS:lOO41-1981
Term Removal, Section The removal assembly. The removal Definition of an item in conjunction of an item for the purpose with the removal of evaluation. check of that item of a higher

Removal, Service/Performance Evaluation Removal, Shop Check m(Removal, Bench Check) Removal, Removal, Time Trouble Shooting

The removal of an item for specific within a workshop. See Removal, Scheduled.

functional

A removal in which an item is removed item for the sole purpose of determining persists.

and replaced by another whether the malfunction is found which another defect

Removal,

Unconfirmed

The removal of an item where no defect or failure substantiates the reason for removal, even though or failure may be found.

Removal, Under Investigation Removal, Removal, Removal Unjustified Unscheduled Rate

The removal of an item brought about by symptoms of operational problems/performance where the cause has not been identified, The removal of an item where no defect or failure is found. of a~known or

The removal of an item brought about suspected malfunction and/or defect.

as a result

The number of removals of an item expressed in terms of a base period; usually per 1000 aircraft hours, 1 000 item hours, 1 000 engine hours, and sometimes per 100 or 1 000 departures. The restoration The potential in a specified of an item to a serviceable condition. to a serviceable item state is in-

Repair Repairability Rep-lace Reports, Pilot Maintainability

of a failed item to be restored time under stated conditions.

The action whereby an item is removed stalled in its place for any reason. See Complaints. Pilot.

and another

Requirement,

A comprehensive statement Of required maintenance characteristics, expressed in either qualitative or quantitative terms or both, to be satisfied by the design of an item. See Specification, IMaintenance.

Requirements,

Maintenance

Resources,

Maintenance

Facilities, ground support equipment, manpower, spares, consumables, and funds available to maintain and support an item in its operational environment. See Removal, An item tion and tated to the life Cannibalization.

Robbery Rotatable

that can be economically restored to a serviceable condiin the normal course of operations is repeatedly rehabilia fully serviceable condition over a period approximating of the flight equipment to which it is related. of an item to stabilize its characteristics.

Run-in ( Burn-in Servicing Shutdown

The operation )

The replenishment aircraft in operating

of consumables condition.

needed

to

keep

an

item

or or

Cessation of engine operation normal operating procedures. 15

for any reason other than training

1s : lW41Term Shutdown, Shutdown, Snag Spare,

1981
Definition Ground lnflight An engine airborne. An engine airborne. shutdown shutdown which which occurs occurs at any time at any an aircraft is not is

time

an aircraft

See Complaint. Ready An item which has been assembled to the point that it can be attached to an aircraft without further build-up or assembly other than that necessary to fit it to its unique position. The quantity of individual items held (additional to those i-nstalled on aircraft) for the purpose of providing replacements for those removed from aircraft for overhaul, repair or rectification. The total number of different items individually identified by part number or description. It excludes any reference to quantities of individual items. Definition of what tasks have to be performed, and when.

Spares

Float

Spares

Range

Specification, Maintenance ( Requirements, Maintenance ) Specification, Operations ( Aircraft Maintenance )

A document approved by the appropriate airworthiness authority which establishes an air carrier's maintenance programme and includes time control programmes for airframe, systems, engines and components as required. This document is initiated by an air carrier and is official only after it has been approved by the appropriate airworthiness authority. It must be approved prior to operation of each type of airplane in scheduled service and separately for each air carrier. See Interruption, See Analysis, Air ( Technical )

Station, Study,

Return Work

to

Maintenance. form a portion of an assembly ora but having a part or parts which unit are

Subassembly

Two or more parts which replaceable as a whole, individually replaceable. Equipment ) The assignment aircraft orginally problem.

Substitution, ( Technical

of an alternative assigned which

type of aircraft to replace the had encountered a technical
aircraft

Note-Some operators consider assignment of an alternative regardless of type to constitute an equipment substitution.

Subsystem Supersede

A major functional part of a system which completeness of the system.

contributes

to operational

A new item ` supersedes ' an old item when the latter will eventually be forced out of use. I with regard to technical data `superseded' indicates the removal of all or any part of the publication and the issuance of a revision. Indicates a specified quantity of an item which is over and above that required to meet the forecasted stock requirements in support of normal operations. A combination function. Abandoned ) 16 See Takeoff, A take-off of interralated items arranged to perform a specific

Surplus

System

Take-off,

Aborted has to be discontinued for any reason.

Take-off, Aborted ( Take-off, Abandoned

which

IS:10041 -1981

Term Test
Test, Accelerated

Definition
An examintition of an item in order to ensure the specified requirements. that the item meets

A test in which the applied stress level is chosen to exceed that stated in the reference conditions in order to shorten the time required to observe the stress -response of the item, or magnify the response in a given time. To be valid, an accelerated test must not alter the basic modes and/or mechanisms of failure or their relative prevalence. See Check Functional. A test which in no manner the item undergoing test. Any appropriate landings, etc. unit of life affects the function such or serviceability as hours, of

Test, Test Time Time, Time, Time, Time,

Functional Non-Destructive

measurement

cycles, work

Active Average Block Flight

Maintenance Trip

The time during which preventive and corrective:maintenance is actually being done on the item.

The ratio between the number of flying houis for a given period and the number of departures for the same given period. See Hours, See Hours, Block. Flying ( Airborne ).

Time, Job Standard (Time, Target ) Time, Lead

The time allowed

for a given task.

Specifies the maximum number of calendar days needed by the supplier on a re-order after receipt of a purchase order to make shipment to the customer of a~specif'ied quantity. Initial provisioning lead times are dual General Terms Agreements. normally established by indivi-

Time,

Mean Maintenance

The statistical mean of-the distribution of scheduled or un-scheduled (or both) maintenance times. The summation of the duration of scheduled or unscheduled ( or both) maintenance time during a given period divided by the total number of scheduled or unscheduled maintenance actions ( or both ) during the same time period is an estimate of Mean Scheduled Maintenance Time ( MS ), Mean Unscheduled Maintenance Time I Mu), [or Mean Maintenance Time (M ) I A representative task time, equal to the summation of all task times required to perform a specific task a number of different times divided by thenumber of times the task is performed. The time period intended function. during which the equipment is performing its

Time,

Mean Task

Time,

Operating

Time, Preventive Maintenance Time, Time, Time, Time, Target Task Total Turn Around Elapsed

That portion of maintenance tive maintenance. See Time, Job Standard.

time used in accomplishing

a preven-

The calendar defined task. The operating

time from the commencement time an item has accumulated

to the completion since new. an item or

of a

That time needed to repair, service or checkout for recommitment to operational service. 17

aircraft

IS : 10041-1981
Term Time Between Overhauls (TBO) ( Overhaul Period ) Time Since Check Installation The maximum overhauls. time that Definition an item is permitted to operate between

The time accumulated Time accumulated

since an item was last checked. a given item was last installed.

Time Since (=I) Time

since

Since Last Shop Visit Overhaul Capacity

Time accumulated

since a given

item last visited

a shop.

Tir;gA;"" Ton Miles,

The time accumulated

since a given

item was last overhauled.

The product of the assessed capacity of an aircraft (expressed in short tons of 2 000 pounds) and the number of m~iles flown on revenue flights ( expressed in Great Circle statute miles ) over a given period. The equivalent metric term is CAPAC~ITY TONNE KILOMETRES. A figure equivalent calculated ton miles by adding CAPACITY produced by non-revenue TON MILES flying, to the

Ton

Miles,

Production

Trade-off

The procedure of trading a degree of one attribute to gain a degree of another attribute, for example, a degree of reliability might be sacrificed to obtain a greater degree of performance under certai~n conditions, or a degree of performance mig-ht be sacrificed to obtain a greater capability for maintenance, or vice versa. The entire passage, consisting of one or more flight legs, from leaving the airport of origin to arrival at the airport of final destination. Any actual Shooting Air Ground or suspected malfunction and/or defect. in equipment

Trip

Trouble Trouble Turnback, Turnback, Unit Unit, Line Replaceable

Locating and diagnosing malfunctions or breakdowns by means of systematic checking or analysis. See Interruption, See Interruption, Air ( Technical ). ). mounted

Ground

( Technical

A part or any combination of parts, capable of independent operation. See Line Replaceable See Usage, Minimum The number is used. Unit Equipment List.

together,

normally

Usage, Dispatch Inoperative Equipment List Usage, Minimum Equipment List ( Usage, Dispatch Inoperative Equipment List)

of occasions

on which

the

Minimum

Equipment

List

Note -The MEL is used when an aircraft either inoperative or less than 100 percent is permitted by the operators' MEL The MEL is used more than once occurs with more than one item less than

is dispatched with some item operative, and such dispatch

per departure, if such departure
one hundred percent operative.

Utilization

See Aircraft

Utilization.

18

IS:10041-1981

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

The purpose of the World Airlines Technical Operations Glossary is to provide common definitions of terms that have a special significance to the airlines Technical Operations community. .The term "technical operations" as used in the title is intended to define a subiect area comprising those matters coming under the purview of the airlines' maintenance and engineering functional or~ganizations, including their interfaces with the manufacturer's engineering and ~product support functional organizations. The modifier "Technical" as used in glossary of terms is intended to restrict the meaning of-the terms to the Technical Operations subject area. In selecting terms to be included in the glossary, the sponsoring organizations have followed the convention that ~only those terms having a special significance in the Technical Operations subject area beyond commonly understood language usage would be included. Consistent with this Sconvention, and to avoid unnecessary volume of the glossary, terms which have acceptable dictionary definitions have been specifically excluded. Throughout the glossary the use of the words "Time" shall -be understood to have meaning as defined below: TIME ITEM Any appropriate unit of life measurement (that and "Item" in the text of definitions

such as is, part,

hours,

cycles,

landings,

etc.

Any level of hardware assembly component, unit, material, etc.).

sub-system,

system,

accessory,

19
PFlnted at New lndla Printing Peers Khurja, lndla

