HRA 977% IS 18447 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


secure — fates 


External Tooth Whitening/Bleaching 
Products — Specification 


ICS 71.100.70 


© BIS 2023 


UR AAG SRI 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Чач, 9 679 MWe VHX HPT, +š facet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 9 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cosmetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


External tooth whitening/bleaching products are used as aesthetic dental treatments for whitening of natural teeth 
towards a lighter or whiter shade. They are applied in the oral cavity directly on the outer surfaces of teeth. 


This standard includes requirements and test methods for products intended for external bleaching of natural teeth 
by chemical means. In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from International 
Standard, ISO 28399 : 2011 ‘Dentistry — Products for external tooth bleaching’. 


An informative test method for laboratory assessment of tooth bleaching efficacy is given in Annex J. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex K. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, thefinal value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


EXTERNAL TOOTH WHITENING/BLEACHING PRODUCTS — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This draft standard specifies requirements and 
test methods for external tooth whitening/bleaching 
products which are intended for use in the oral 
cavity directly on the outer surfaces of teeth, by 
professional application (in-office tooth bleaching 
products) or professional home use. 


1.2 This standard is not applicable for: 


a) oral care products including oral rinses, 
tooth pastes, tooth powders or tooth 
whitening/ bleaching products containing 
< 0.1 percent hydrogen peroxide (present 
or released); 


b 


wm 


products intended to change the colour 
perception of natural teeth by mechanical 
methods (for example, stain removal) or 
using restorative approaches, such as 
veneers or crowns; and 


С 


s 


Auxiliary or supplementary materials (for 
example, tray materials) and instruments 
or devices (for example, lights) that are 
used in conjunction with the bleaching 
products. 


1.3 This standard does not specify biological safety 
aspects of tooth whitenine/bleaching products. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex А contain provisions 
which, through reference in this standard, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Whitening/Bleaching (of Natural Teeth) — 
Removal of intrinsic or acquired discolourations of 
natural teeth through the use of chemicals 
sometimes in combination with the application of 
auxiliary means. 


3.2 Professional Home Use (of a Product) — Use 
prescribed by a professional and for use at home 
under the repeated supervision of the dental 
practitioner. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Ingredients 


4.1.1 Unless specified otherwise, all the raw 
materials used in the manufacture of external tooth 
whitening/bleaching products shall conform to the 
requirements prescribed in the relevant Indian 
Standards where such standards exist. 


4.1.2 All ingredients of external tooth whitening/ 
bleaching products shall comply with the provisions 
of IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 (Part 2) subject to 
the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940 and rules framed thereunder. 


4.1.3 For safety evaluation of novel ingredients 
used in formulation of external tooth whitening/ 
bleaching products; it shall comply to IS 4011. 


4.2 Stability 


The product shall not show any physical sign of 
deterioration during normal conditions of storage 
and use. The product shall meet the requirements of 
the standard when subjected to a temperature of 
45 °C + 2 °C for 28 days and 5 °C for 24 h, 
respectively. 


4.3 Concentration of Active Ingredients for 
Whitening/Bleaching 


The concentration of active ingredients for 
whitening/bleaching (equivalent to hydrogen 
peroxide) delivered by the unexpired product 
according to manufacturer's instructions for use shall 
be withinthe range of + 10 percent and - 30 percent 
of the original concentration stated by the 
manufacturer for the unopened product, when tested 
as per the procedure given in Annex B. 


4.4 Surface Micro Hardness (Type Test) 


The reduction in the Knoop hardness (KHN) or 
Vickers hardness (VHN) after the treatment shallbe 
not more than 10 percent, when tested as per the 
procedure given in Annex C. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


4.5 Surface Erosion (Type Test) 


Surface erosion of the teeth tested as per the 
procedure given in Annex D shall be no more than 
three times the level which is caused by the positive 
control (D-3.2). 


4.6 Directions for Use 


4.6.1 For each cycle of use, first use by dental 
practitioners or under their direct supervision if an 
equivalent level of safety is ensured. Afterwards it 
may be provided to the consumer to complete the 
cycle of use. 
NOTE — The term ‘dental practitioner’, wherever used in 
this standard, shall mean any person whose name is for the 
time being registered іп a register of dentists, dental 


hygienists or dental mechanics under Section 2(1 of 
The Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948), as amended. 


4.6.2 The product shall not be used on a person 
under 18 years of age. 


4.6.3 External tooth whitening/bleaching products 
shall only be sold to a dental practitioner. 


4.6.4 External tooth whitening/bleaching products 
shall claim cleaning and bleaching/whitening of 
teeth only by removing stains on the teeth and shall 
not claim prevention, treatment or mitigation of 
oral/dental infections and also not claim to change 
the natural colour of the teeth. 


The external tooth whitening/bleaching products 
shall also comply with the requirements given in 
Table 1 when tested according to the methods 
referenced in col (5) of Table 1. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


Table 1 Requirements for External Tooth Whitening/Bleach Products 


(Clause 4.6.4) 
SI No. Characteristic Requirement for Method of Test, Ref to 
Non-Fluoridated Fluoridated Annex IS No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Concentration of active | > 0.1 percent | > 0.1 percent B = 
ingredient(s) for | < 6 percent (more | < 6 percent (more 
bleaching (equivalent to | than 0.1 | than 0.1 percent 
hydrogen peroxide), | percent but less | but less ап/ 
percent than/equal to 6 | equal to 6 percent 
percent of | of hydrogen 
hydrogen peroxide | peroxide present 
present or released) | or released) 
ii) pH of aqueous 4.7 to 10 4.7 to 10 E = 
suspension 
iii) Heavy metals (as lead) 20 20 F IS 16913 or 
parts per million, Max IS 17495!» 
2) 
iv) Arsenic (as As203), 2 2 С IS 16913 ог 
parts per million, Мах IS 174953 
у) Mercury, parts рег 1 1 _ IS 16913 or 
million, Max IS 17495 
vi) Available Fluoride ion, 50 1 000 H = 
parts per million, Max (type test) ? 
Vii) Microbial limit: 
a) Total microbial < 1 000 cfu 
count, CFU/g, 
Max 
b) Yeast and mould < 100 cfu 
count, CFU/g, 
Max 
c) Escherichia coli, Absent 
per gram 
d) Pseudomonas Absent 
aeruginosa, рег 
gram 
e) Staphylococcus Absent 
aureus, per gram 
f) Candida albicans, Absent 


per gram 


1) In the event of any dispute, colorimetric method mentioned in Annex F would be treated as referee method. 

2) In products where tin (Sn) is used as a stabilizing agent for hydrogen peroxide, the tin may impart colour in the method described in 
Annex E without crossing the limit prescribed. In such cases, the finished product shall be tested by the AAS or ICP method for arsenic, 
cadmium, lead, mercury, and tin and the finished product shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this standard if it contains 
not more than 20 ppm of these heavy metals calculated as the total of the respective metals. 
3) In the event of any dispute, colorimetric method mentioned in Annex G would be treated as referee method. 
4) Type test is recommended to be done on the formulation only once to pass the above criteria. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


5 PACKING AND MARKING 


5.1 Packing 


The external tooth whitenine/bleaching products 
shall be packed in suitable dispensing systems. 
When packed in containers, the containers shall be 
properly sealed and have a leak-proof cap or 
closure. 


5.2 Marking 


The labelling and marking of external tooth 
bleaching products shall comply with the provisions 
of the Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, The Legal 
Metrology Rules and any other relevant statutory 
requirement. In addition, the packaging shall be 
legibly marked with the following information: 


a) Type of external tooth whitening/bleaching 
product (fluoridated or non-fluoridated); 


b 


wm 


Fluoride ion content in ppm for fluoridated 
external tooth whitening/bleaching product; 
с) Name and concentration of active 
ingredient(s) for whitening/bleaching 
(equivalent to hydrogen peroxide) in 
percentage; 


d) Instructions for use; 


wm 


e) Recommended conditions of storage; 


f) CAUTIONS: “Not to be used on a person 
under 18 years of age. To be sold only to 
dental practitioners. For each cycle of use, 
the first use to be done by dental 
practitioners or under their direct 
supervision if an equivalent level of safety 


is ensured. Afterwards to be provided to the 
consumer to complete the cycle of use”. 


g) Recommended auxiliary device(s), 
exposure times and any special instructions 
for use of the equipment (for the materials 
requiring an auxiliary device only), as 
necessary. 


5.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6 SAPMLING 


6.1 Representative samples of the product shall be 
drawn as prescribed in IS 3958. 


6.2 Test for all characteristics shall be carried out 
on the composite sample. 


6.3 The product shall be taken to have confined to 
the specification if the composite sample passes all 
the tests. 


7 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 
tests. 


NOTE — 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the result of analysis. 


15 Мо. 


IS 1070 : 2023 


IS 2088 : 2023 


IS 3958 : 2021 


IS 4011 : 2018 


IS 4707 


(Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 


(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 
Reagent grade water — 
Specification (fourth 
revision) 


Methods for determination 
of arsenic (third revision) 


Methods of sampling 
cosmetics (second revision) 


Methods of test for safety 
evaluation of cosmetics 
(third revision) 


Classification for cosmetic 
raw materials and adjuncts: 


Colourants (fourth revision) 


(Part 2): 2017 List of raw materials generally 


IS No. 


IS 14648 : 2011 


IS 16913 : 2018 


IS 17495 : 2021 


IS 18447 : 2023 


Title 


not recognized as safe for use in 
cosmetics (fourth revision) 


Microbiological examination of 
cosmetics and cosmetic raw 
materials — Methods of test 
(second revision) 


Methods of test for cosmetics — 
Determination of heavy metals 
(arsenic, cadmium, lead and 
mercury) by atomic absorption 
spectrometry (AAS) 


Cosmetics Analytical 
approach for screening and 
quantification methods for heavy 
metals in cosmetics 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX B 


[Clause 4.3 and Table 1, SI No. (i)] 
DETERMINATION OF HYDROGEN PEROXIDE CONCENTRATION 


B-1 METHOD A 
B-1.1 Principle 


The content of hydrogen peroxide (H202) in 
tooth bleaching products is determined using a 
modified thiosulfate titration method. 


B-1.2 Test Condition 
Perform the test at (27 + 2) °C. 
B-1.3 Procedure 


В-1.3.1 Use analytical grade of sulfuric acid, 
potassium iodide, ammonium molybdate, sodium 
thiosulfate, starch and hydrogen peroxide. Conduct 
a titration calibration curve using a series of freshly 
prepared H202 solutions at concentrations that 
include the highest possible H2O2 concentration in 
the test product. Add approximately 1.0 g (weighing 
precision to 0.001 g) of test product or an amount 
appropriate to the test with rapid stirring to 400 ml 
distilled water that contains 10 ml of sulfuric acid 
(25 percent), 25 ml potassium iodide (10 percent), 
and 4 drops of ammonium molybdate solution 
(5 percent). Use starch as the indicator, and perform 
the titration using 0.1 N (normality) sodium 
thiosulfate. 


B-1.3.2 Determine the H202 content using the 
titration calibration curve. 


В-1.3.3 When using standardized titrants, 
construction of calibration curve is not necessary. 
Calculate the mass concentration of late H202 from 
the following equation: 


С = (1.701 18 х=) х 100 


where 


С = mass concentration of H2O2, expressed as а 
percentage; 

V= titre, in ml, of 0.1 N sodium thiosulfate; and 

т = mass, in g, of the test product dispensed. 


B-1.3.4 Repeat the measurement five times (n = 5) 
and calculate the mean H202 concentration. 


B-2 METHOD B 

B-2.1 Principle 

Oxidizing agents react with potassium iodide in an 
acid media to liberate iodine. The liberated iodine 
is then titrated with standard sodium thiosulfate. 
B-2.2 Reagents 

B-2.2.1 Sodium Thiosulfate Solution — 0.1 N 
B-2.2.2 Glacial Acetic Acid — reagent grade 
B-2.2.3 Potassium Iodide — 20 percent (w/v) 


B-2.2.4 Starch Indicator Solution 


B-2.2.5 Ammonium Molybdate Tetrahydrate — 
4 percent (w/v) aqueous solution 


B-2.2.6 Ethanol/Water Solution (1 : 1 v/v) 
B-2.2.7 Chloroform — analytical reagent 

B-2.3 Apparatus 

B-2.3.1 Analytical Balance — accurate to 0.1 mg 


B-2.3.2 Burette — 25 ml with 0.1 ml divisions (for 
raw material testing), 10 ml with 0.02 ml divisions 
(class A) or automatic burette with an accuracy of 
0.01 ml. 


B-2.4 Procedure 


B-2.4.1 Dentifrice and PVP-hydrogen peroxide (raw 
material). 


B-2.4.1.1 Accurately weigh sample (to the nearest 
0.1 mg) into a 150 ml beaker for w/w analysis 
targeting approximately, but not limited to 8 ml of 
titrant. 


NOTE — For determining sample weight (g), Table 2 may 
be referred. 


B-2.4.1.2 Add 50 ml of ethanol/water solution 
(1: 1 v/)) to beaker. Mix until the sample is well 


dispersed in solution. Slowly add 25 ml of glacial 
acetic acid to the mixture followed immediately by 
5 ml of 20 percent potassium iodide solution. Then 
add 4 drops of 4 percent ammonium molybdate. Let 
solution mix for a few minutes. 


NOTE — А ventilating hood may be used to minimise 
acetic acid odour. 


B-2.4.1.3 To the well mixed solution, add 2 ml of 
starch indicator solution in which a dark blue-black 
colour will appear. The sample is then titrated with 
0.1 N sodium thiosulfate until dark blue- black 
colour has disappeared. Some residual colour from 
the sample may still be noticed. If so, take the 
volume reading (in ml) of titrant at that point, slowly 
continue with titration until the end point has been 
reached and no colour change has been observed. 
Record the final volume (ml) reading. 


B-2.4.2 Rinses 


B-2.4.2.1 Accurately weigh sample (to the nearest 
0.1 mg) into a 150 ml beaker for (w/w) analysis 
targeting approximately, but not limited to 8 ml of 
titrant. For volumetric analysis use a 1.0 ml 
volumetric pipette. 


NOTE — For determining sample weight (g), refer to 
equation | and/or Table 2. 


B-2.4.2.2 Add 50 ml of water to the beaker. Add stir 
bar and mix until the sample is well dispersed in 
solution. Slowly add 25 ml of glacial acetic acid to 
the mixture followed immediately by 5 ml of 
20 percent potassium iodide solution. Then add 
4 drops of 4 percent ammonium molybdate. Stir 
solution until well mixed. 


NOTE — A ventilating hood may be used to minimize acetic 
acid odour. 


B-2.4.2.3 To the well mixed solution, add 2 ml of 
starch indicator solution in which a dark blue-black 
colour will appear. Then titrate the sample with 0.1 
N sodium thiosulfate until dark blue-black colour 
has disappeared. Some residual colour from the 
sample may still be noticed. If so, take the volume 
(ml) reading of titrant at that point, slowly continue 
with titration until the end point has been reached 
and no colour change has been observed. Record 
the final volume (ml) reading. 


В-2.4.3 Hydrophobic (Polymer/Silicone Based) 
Products 


B-2.4.3.1 Accurately weigh sample (to the nearest 
0.1 mg) into a 250 ml disposable beaker for (w/v) 
analysis targeting approximately but not limited to 
8 ml of titrant. 


NOTE — For determining sample weight (g), refer 
to equation | and/or Table 2. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


B-2.4.3.2 Add approximately 30 ml of chloroform, 
or more if needed, to beaker. Then add stir bar and 
mix until the sample is well dispersed. Follow up by 
adding 50 ml of ethanol/water (1 : 1 v/’) to solution 
and let sample stir for a few minutes. Keep at a 
constant stir rate in which both the aqueous and 
chloroform layer are being well mixed. Slowly add 
25 ml of glacial acetic acid to thesolution followed 
immediately by 5 ml of 20 percent potassium iodide 
solution. Then add 4 drops of 4 percent ammonium 
molybdate. Mix solution for a few minutes. 


NOTE — A ventilating hood may be used to minimize 
acetic acid odour. 


В-2.4.3.3 To the well mixed solution, add 2 ml of 
starch indicator solution in which a dark blue-black 
colour will appear. The sample is then titrated with 
0.1 N sodium thiosulfate until dark blue- black 
colour has disappeared. Stop stirring and let sample 
stand for a few seconds. Two layers will appear, the 
top is aqueous layer, and the bottom is chloroform 
layer. The aqueous layer will appear to be colourless 
and the chloroform layer will appear to be yellow, 
orange or another colour depending on the product 
type. If some residual blue-black colour is noticed, 
take the volume (ml) reading of titrant at that point. 
Then stir up sample and proceed to titrate slowly 
until the end pointhas been reached and no colour 
change has been observed. Record the final volume 
(ml) reading. 


NOTE — May need to observe layer separation a few times 
during titration to help in determining endpoint. 


B-2.4.4 Hydrophobic (Polymer/Silicone Based) 
Products with Low Levels of Active Oxygen 


B-2.4.4.1. Accurately weigh 2.5 g to 3 g of sample 
(to the nearest 0.1 mg) into a 250 ml disposable 
beaker for (w/v) analysis. Add approximately 30 ml 
of chloroform, or more if needed, to beaker. Then 
add stir bar and mix until the sample is well 
dispersed. Follow up by adding 50 ml of 
ethanol/water (1 : 1 v/v) to solution and let sample 
stir for a few minutes. Keep at a constant stir rate in 
which both the aqueous and chloroform layer are 
being well mixed. Slowly add 25 ml of glacial acetic 
acid to the solution followed immediately by 5 ml 
of 20 percent potassium iodide solution.Then add 
4 drops of 4 percent ammonium molybdate. Mix 
solution for a few minutes. 


NOTE — A ventilating hood may be used to 
minimize acetic acid odour. 


B-2.4.4.2 To the well mixed solution, add 2 ml of 
starch indicator solution in which no dark 
blue-black colour will appear due to the low level of 
active oxygen present in the formula. The sample is 


IS 18447 : 2023 


then titrated with 0.1 N sodium thiosulfate. Stop 
stirring and let sample stand for a few seconds. Two 
layers will appear, the top is the aqueous layer, and 
the bottom is the chloroform layer. The aqueous 
layer will appear to be colourless апа the 
chloroform layer will appear to be yellow, orange or 
another colour depending on the product type. If 
some colour is noticed in aqueous layer, take the 
volume (ml) reading of titrant at that point. Then stir 
up sample and proceed to titrate slowly untilthe end 
point has been reached and no colour change has 
been observed. Record the final volume (ml) 
reading. 


NOTE — May need to observe layer separation a few times 
during titration to help in determining endpoint. 


B-2.5 Calculation 
Sample mass (g) = 


(8 ml sodium thiosulfate) x N x 0.01701 x 100 
Oxidising agent, present 


...(1) 


Oxidising agent, precent = 


(8 ml sodium thiosulfate) x N x 0.0170 1 x 100 


Sample mass (g) or sample volume (ml) 


(2) 


where 


N = normality of sodium thiosulfate solution. 


Table 2 Requirements of Hydrogen Peroxide in External Tooth Whitening/Bleaching Products 
(Clause B-2.4) 


SI No. Sample Type Weight Needed Volume 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Tooth whiteners >0.1 g Е 
ii) Rinses ~ 0.9 р 1.0 ml 
ili) Gel 0.5 g = 
iv) Dentifrice with low levels 8 gto 12 g _ 
of active oxygen 
ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.4) 


EVALUATION OF SURFACE MICROHARDNESS 


C-1 PREPARATION OF TOOTH SPECIMENS 


Prepare enamel and dentine specimens taken from a 
consistent location on extracted human or bovine 
teeth that have been stored in a 0.2 percent solution 
(mass concentration) of sodium azide or other 
solutions of equivalent efficacy for disinfection 
purpose. Grind the specimen surface using а 
sequence starting at P400 and sequentially to a 
minimum of P1200 silicon carbide paper in 
accordance with ISO 6344-1 under a constant flow 
of water and then polish the surface using a slurry 
or paste of 0.3 um mean particle size aluminium 
oxide. Ensure a minimum of | mm thickness of 
enamel or dentine tissue for the test specimen. 
Prevent dehydration of test specimens during the 
specimen preparation procedure. 


C-2 PREPARATION AND APPLICATION OF 
TOOTH BLEACHING PRODUCT 


The dispensing, processing and application of the 


tooth whitening/bleaching product used in tests shall 
follow manufacturer's instructions for use. The 
method of bleach application shall simulate the 
clinical procedure relative to quantity, frequency 
and duration of the application. Specimens shall be 
stored in a 37 °C artificial saliva solution between 
bleaching intervals and for 24 h after the last bleach 
application priorto testing. 


C-3 SURFACE MICROHARDNESS 


Evaluate enamel surface hardness before and after 
bleaching treatment. Determine the surface 
micro-hardness with the Knoop hardness (KHN) or 
Vickers hardness (VHN) by applying a load of 
0.49 N (equivalent to a 50 g load) for 15 s. Evaluate 
a minimum of 10 specimens for each group, with 
three indentations for each specimen. Prevent 
dehydration of test specimens during the specimen 
preparation procedure. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX D 


(Clause 4.5) 


DETERMINATION OF EROSION OF ENAMEL AND DENTINE CAUSED BYPRODUCTS FOR 
EXTERNAL TOOTH BLEACHING 


D-1 PRINCIPLE 


The depth of erosion of enamel and dentine caused 
by products for external tooth bleaching is 
determined using a profilometer. 


D-2 TEST CONDITION 


Perform the test at (27 + 2) °C. 


NOTE — When auxiliary devices, such as a light source 
specified as part of the application process of the product is 
used in the test, the temperature of both the material and the 
tooth can increase depending on the device. See D-6.2 for 
test conditions for control solutions. 


D-3 STANDARD REFERENCE EROSION 
CONTROLS 


D-3.1 Negative Control 


Use water of Grade 3 in accordance with ISO 1070 
as the negative control. 


D-3.2 Positive Control 


Use a 1.0 percent solution (mass concentration) of 
citric acid (pH 3.9) as the positive control. 


D-4 APPARATUS 


D-4.1 Contact profilometer ог non-contact 
profilometer, with sensitivity < 0.1 um. 


D-4.2 Lapping and Polishing Machine — with 
sequential silicon carbide discs up to P1200, as per 
ISO 6344-1. 


NOTE — Other methods of polishing enamel and dentine 
(for example, diamond powder) that conform to the baseline 
requirements for specimens may be used. 


D-5 SPECIMEN PREPARATION 


Use extracted human erupted ог _ unerupted 
permanent teeth with the possible exception of 
lower incisors because of their small size, or 
extracted bovine teeth. Remove soft tissue remnants 
by scraping with a suitable instrument (for example, 
curette, scalpel, etc) and store the specimens in a 
0.2 percent solution (mass concentration) of sodium 
azide or other solutions of equivalent efficacy for at 
least 24 h prior to the specimen preparation. Section 
the tooth at the amelocemental junction with a 
dental bur or disc; use the coronal portion for 


enamel specimens and the radicular portion for 
dentine specimens. In the case of molars, section the 
crown vertically in bucco-lingual or mesio-distal 
directions to obtain buccal, lingual, mesial and distal 
slices of enamel. Use a diamond-edged circular 
cutting instrument to facilitate the procedure for 
slicing molar teeth. Similarly, section the root 
portion vertically in half or quarters so that an outer 
portion of root surface is available for polishing. 


Place enamel and dentine portions outer face down 
in moulds measuring 25 mm x 25 mm x 3 mm and 
embed the specimen in epoxy resin for at least 24 h. 
Place specimens on the automatic lapping and 
polishing machine (D-4.2) with the outer face of 
enamel or dentine on the polishing discs. Initially 
expose the tissue surface with a coarse grit paper 
(for example, P180 paper) and then finalpolishing 
sequentially using up to P1200 paper, which shall 
produce a flat surface with no more than an average 
profile of + 0.3 um measured by a contacting or 
non-contacting profilometer (D-4.1). Prevent 
dehydration of test specimens during the specimen 
preparation procedure. 


Allocate at least six enamel and six dentine 
specimens to each product and the positive and 
negative control solutions. Prior to the erosion test, 
mask each specimen with two pieces of polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC) adhesive tape placed parallel to each 
other to expose a 2 mm to 3 mm wide window of 
enamel or dentine (see Fig. 1). 


D-6 EROSION OF ENAMEL AND DENTINE 
D-6.1 Application of Bleaching Products 


Apply the bleaching product to the specimens 
according to the manufacturer's instructions in terms 
of preparation of the formulation, application time 
and number of applications. If using an auxiliary 
device such as light/heat sources, follow the 
manufacturer's instructions. 


D-6.2 Control Treatments 
D-6.2.1 Positive Control Treatment 


Attach specimens to optically clear acrylic blocks 
using double-sided adhesive tape to prevent floating 
and then place the specimens in the 1.0 percent 
solution of citric acid (pH 3.9) (D-3.2). Treat the 
specimens in 300 ml of citric acid solution (D-3.2) 


IS 18447 : 2023 


in a beaker placed in a water bath at 35 °C for 
60 min. Stir the solution with the specimens by an 
overhead propelled stirrer at a constant speed of 
270 r/min. 


D-6.2.2 Negative Control Treatment 


Treat the specimens in water of Grade 3 in 
accordance with IS 1070 (see D-3.1) under the same 
conditions as for the positive control for 60 min. 


D-7 PROFILOMETER 
METHOD 


MEASUREMENT 


After treatments, remove the tape from specimens 
and measure the profile according to the operating 
method for the particular profilometer (see Fig. 1). 


D-7.1 General Measurement Method for 
Two-Dimensional Contact Profilometers 


Measure the profile along the X-axis (see Fig. 1) 


from just inside the previously taped zone of the 
specimen (for example, 1 mm) across the exposed 
zone, to just Inside the opposite previously taped 
zone. Record the mean from at least 100 z-values 
across the scan as calculated by software. Conduct 
three scans from different points along the exposed 
zone and calculate the mean of the three readings. 


D-7.2 General Measurement Method for 
Three-Dimensional Contact and Non-Contact 
Profilometers 


Measure the profile of the area containing both of 
the previously taped zones, such as | mm of length 
(in the X-axis) from each (left/right) edge of the 
exposed zone, and the treated zone of full length (in 
the X-axis, from the edge of the previously taped 
zone across the treated zone to the edge of the other 
previously taped zone). Record all readings from 
these instruments in microns to the nearest two 
decimal places. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


a) PROFILE MEASURING PROCEDURE b) PROFILE MEASURING PROCEDURE 
FOR TWO-DIMENSIONAL (2-D) FOR THREE-DIMENSIONAL (3-D) 
PROFILOMETER PROFILOMETER 


Key 


1 zone previously covered by tape during treatment. 

2 prepared tooth surface exposed to treatment. 

3 cured resin block, in which a tooth specimen is moulded. 

4 tooth specimen. 

5 prepared tooth surface previously covered by tape during treatment. 

6 profile zone to be excluded from the measurement of the prepared tooth surface (because of partial erosion due to seepage under the tape 
during treatment): 


a) Illustration of a profile measurement of the zone exposed to treatment. The specimen is scanned along the X-axis for a linear scan 
using a 2-D profilometer (viewed from the top of the specimen). The depth of the profile of the treated surface is shown above 
along the Z-axis. Any z-values obtained in the area indicated by item 6 are excluded; and 


b _ Illustration of a profile measurement of the zone exposed to treatment over an area (x, y) scanned using a 3-D profilometer (viewed 
from the top of the specimen). The depth of the profile of the treated surface is shown above along the Z-axis. Any z-values obtained 
in the area indicated by item 6 are excluded. 


All dimensions are in millimetres. 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC ILLUSTRATION OF SPECIMEN SURFACE FOR PROFILOMETER MEASUREMENT 


11 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX E 


[Table 1, SI No. (ü)] 
DETERMINATION OF pH 


E-1 APPARATUS 


E-1.1 pH Metre — preferably equipped with glass 
electrode 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


Dispense 10 g of the material from the container in 


a 50 ml beaker and add 10 ml of freshly boiled and 
cooled water (27 + 2) °C to make 50 percent 
aqueous suspension. Stir well to make a thorough 
suspension. Determine the pH of the suspension 
within 5 min, using a pH metre. 


ANNEX F 


[Table 1] 


TEST FOR HEAVY METALSE-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


F-1 The colour produced with hydrogen sulphide 
solution is matched against that obtained with 
standardlead solution. 


F-2 APPARATUS 
F-2.1 Nessler Cylinders — 50 ml capacity 
F-3 REAGENTS 


F-3.1 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — approximately 
5N 


F-3.2 Dilute Acetic Acid — approximately 1 N 
F-3.3 Hydrogen Sulphide Solution — standard 
F-3.4 Standard Lead Solution 

Dissolve 1.600 g of lead nitrate in water and make 
up the solution to 1 000 ml. Pipette out 10 ml of the 
solution and dilute again to 1 000 ml with water. One 


millilitre of this solution contain 0.01 mg of lead (as 
Pb). 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


F-4.1 Weigh about 2.000 g of material in a crucible 
and heat on a hot plate and then in a muffle furnace 
to ignite it at 600 °C to constant mass. Add 3 ml of 
dilute hydrochloric acid, warm (wait till no more 
dissolution occurs) and make up the volume to 
100 ml. Filter the solution. Transfer 25 ml of the 
filtrate into a Nessler’s cylinder. In the second 
Nessler’s cylinder, add 2 ml of dilute acetic acid, 
1.0 ml of standard lead solution and make up the 
volume with water to 25 ml. 


F-4.2 Add 10 ml of hydrogen sulphide solution to 
each Nessler cylinder and make up the volume with 
water to 50 ml. Mix and allow to stand for 10 min. 
Compare the colour produced in the two Nessler’s 
cylinders. Blank determination without samples are 
recommended to avoid errors arisingout of reagents. 


F-5 RESULTS 


The sample may be taken to have passed the test, if 
the colour developed in the sample solution isless 
than that of standard solution. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX G 


[Table 1| 


DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 


G-1 OUTLINE OF THE METHOD 


Arsenic present in a solution of the material is 
reduced to arsine, which is made to react with 
mercuric bromide paper. The stain produced is 
compared with a standard stain. 


G-2 REAGENTS 
G-2.1 Mixed Acid 
Dilute one volume of concentrated sulphuric acid 


with four volumes of water. Add 10 g of sodium 
chloride for each 100 ml of the solution. 


G-2.2 Ferric Ammonium Sulphate Solution 


Dissolve 64 g of ferric ammonium sulphate in 
water containing 10 ml of mixed acid and make 


up to one litre. 


G-2.3 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — 
see IS 265 


G-2.4 Stannous Chloride Solution 


Dissolve 80 g of stannous chloride (SnCl,, 2H,O) 
in 100 ml of water containing 5 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid. 


G-3 PROCEDURE 


Carry out the test as prescribed in IS 2088, adding 
into the Gutzeit bottle, 2 ml of ferric ammonium 
sulphate solution, 0.5 ml of stannous chloride 
solution and 25 ml of sample solution as prepared in 
F-4. For comparison, prepare a stain using 0.001 mg 
of arsenic trioxide. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX H 
[Table 1, SI No. (vi)] 
DETERMINATION OF FLUORIDE ION 


H-1 GENERAL 


H-1.1 This method is suitable for the determination 
of water soluble fluoride species in external tooth 
whitening/bleaching products, including free 
fluoride and hydrolyzable complexes, for example, 
sodium mono fluorophosphates. 


H-1.2 Principle 
Water soluble species are converted to fluoride ion 
by acid hydrolysis. The fluoride ion activity is then 


determined potentiometrically with the help of 
fluoride ion sensitive electrode. 


H-2 APPARATUS 


H-2.1 pH Meter (Potentiometer) — scale readable 
to + 0.5 mV or better 


H-2.2 Fluoride Ion Sensitive Electrode — orion 
94-09 or similar 


H-2.3 Single Junction Reference Electrode — 
orion 90-01, or similar, with filling solution 


H-2.4 Magnetic Stirrer 


H-2.5 Polythene/Polypropylene Beakers and 
Volumetric Flasks — 100 ml and 250 ml pipettes 


H-2.6 Semi-log Graph Papers — 2/3 cycles 

H-3 REAGENTS 

H-3.1 Sodium Fluoride — analytical grade 

H-3.2 Trisodium Citrate — analytical grade 
H-3.3 Sodium Chloride — analytical grade 

H-3.4 Hydrochloric Acid — analytical grade — 1M 
H-3.5 Sodium Hydroxide — 1 M 


H-3.6 Sodium Acetate Trihydrate — analytical 
grade 


H-3.7 Glacial Acetic Acid 


H-3.8 TISAB L (Total Ionic Strength Adjusting 
Buffer) Solution 


Dissolve 294 g trisodium citrate, 29 g sodium 


chloride and 68 g sodium acetate trihydrate in 
600 ml of hot water. Cool, adjust to pH 6.4 with 
glacial acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled 
water. 


H-3.9 TISAB LF (TISAB Containing Fluoride) 
Solution 


Prepare 100 ml of 1 mg F/100 ml solution as 
described in H-3.8. Dissolve 294 g trisodium citrate, 
29 g sodium chloride and 68 g sodium acetate 
trihydrate in 600 ml of hot water. Cool, pipette in 
10 ml of 1те F/100 ml solution and adjust to pH 6.4 
with glacial acetic acid. Dilute to 1 litre withdistilled 
water. Store in a polythene or polypropylene bottle. 


H-3.10 Fluoride Blank Solution — Take 100 ml 
hydrochloric acid (1 М) solution in 1 litre flask and 
then add 200 ml sodium hydroxide (1 M), by 
measuring cylinder. Dilute to 1 litre with distilled 
water and mix well. 


H-3.11 Standard Sodium Fluoride Solution 
(0.01 mg F` per ml) 


Dry the sodium fluoride at 110 °C for 4 h and 
transfer accurately 0.222 g to 100 ml volumetric 
flask. Add distilled water to dissolve the sodium 
fluoride and make up to the mark (Solution X). Each 
ml of Solution X contains | mg fluoride ion (F). 
Take 10 ml of this Solution X in 1 000 ml 
volumetric flask and make up this volume to the 
mark (Solution Y). Each ml of Solution Y contains 
0.01 mg fluoride (Е) ion. Transfer Solution X and 
Solution Y to polythene bottles for storing. 


H-3.12 Preparation of Standard Solutions of 
Sodium Fluoride 


0.25 Take 1 ml, 2 ml, 5 ml, 10 ml, 20 ml and 25 ml 
of Solution Y (see H-3.11) in 100 ml volumetric 
flask marked A, B, C, D, E and F respectively. To 
each add 50 ml of TISAB L buffer solution and 
10 ml of fluoride blank solution. Check that the pH 
is in the range of 6.4 + 0.1, and if necessary correct 
with 1 M NaOH or | M HCI. Transfer quantitatively 
to a 100 ml polypropylene volumetric flask and 
make up the volume to 100 ml with distilled water. 
Now the solutions A, В, С, Р, Е апа Fare containing 
0.01 mg, 0.02 mg, 0.05 mg, 0.1 mg, 0.2 mg and g of 
F per 100 ml respectively. Transfer the solutions to 
150 ml polythene beaker for mv measurement. 


Н-4 POTENTIOMETRIC MEASUREMENT 
OF STANDARD SOLUTIONS OF SODIUM 
FLUORIDE 


H-4.1 Preparation of Electrodes 


a) Remove protective cap and soak the 
fluoride electrode in TISAB LF solution for 
15 min. 


b) Fill the reference electrode with filling 
solution. 


c) Rinse the electrodes with de-ionized water 
and keep the tips immersed in TISAB LF 
solution until immediately before use. 


d) Check that the electrodes are correctly 
connected to the pH meter. 


e) Rinse the electrodes with deionized water 
before use and carefully blot dry with a 
paper tissue. 


f) Transfer the contents of Solution A from 
100 ml flask into a clean, dry 150 ml 
polypropylene beaker. 


g) Immerse the tips of the electrodes in the 
solution while stirring the solution with a 
magneticstirrer. Ensure that no air bubbles 
adhere to the electrode surfaces. 


h) Leave until the potential reading is 
constant. This should take approximately 
2 min or 3 min. 


j) Record the potential reading in mV and 
check the temperature of the solution. 


k) Rinse the electrodes with de-ionized water 
and blot dry with a paper tissue. 


m) Repeat the procedure prescribed in H-5.1 
to H-5.5 for solutions B, C, D, E and F to 
record mV of these solutions. 


n) Plot the calibration graph on semi log 
graph paper with the mini volt reading 
on-the linear ordinate and the final 
concentration of fluoride in the standard F 
solution on the logarithmic abscissa. The 
graph should be a straight line with a 
gradient of ~ 57 mV to 59 mV per decade 
change in concentration. 


H-5 TEST SOLUTION 


H-5.1 Weigh about 5 g of external tooth 
whitening/bleaching product to the nearest mg. 
Dilute with deionized water to 100 ml with 
deionized water in a polypropylene volumetric flask 
and mix well. 


H-5.2 Ensure that the dispersion is homogeneous 


IS 18447 : 2023 


and then centrifuge about 60 ml of the dispersionin a 
polypropylene centrifuge tube, closed with a cap to 
prevent evaporation, until clear. This will take about 
20 min at 4 000 rpm. 


H-5.3 Pipette 20 ml of the clear supernatant into a 
250 ml round-bottomed flask. 


H-5.4 Add a few anti-bumping granules then 
add 10 ml hydrochloric acid solution (1 M 
approximately) by measuring cylinder. Attach a 
reflux condenser and boil gently for 5 min. 


H-5.5 Add, almost immediately, 20 ml of 1 M 
sodium hydroxide via the condenser, rinsing down 
with approximate 20 ml of distilled water. Then 
transfer quantitatively to a 100 ml polypropylene 
volumetric flask and dilute to volume with distilled 
water. 


H-5.6 Pipette 25 ml of the clear solution prepared 
above into a 100 ml polypropylene beaker, add 
25 ml TISAB L (Solution L) and check pH. If 
necessary, adjust to pH 6.4 by addition of 
approximately 1 М hydrochloric acid or 1 M 
sodium hydroxide. Transfer quantitatively into a 
100 ml volumetric flask and dilute to volume. 


H-5.7 Transfer the contents of 100 ml flask to a 
clean, dry 100 ml polythene beaker, immerse the 
tips of the electrode in the solution while stirring 
the solution with a magnetic stirrer. Ensure that 
no air bubbles adhere to the electrode surfaces. 


H-5.8 Leave until the potential reading is constant 
(this should take two or three minutes). Record the 
potential reading in mV for the test solution. The 
reading for standard fluoride and test solutions 
should be taken simultaneously. 


H-6 CALCULATION 


A graph is plotted for concentration of F against 
potential mV on a semi-logarithmic paper for 
standard F’solutions, the potential mV is plotted on 
X-axis and mg of F- on Y-axis (on logarithmic 
scale). Read the F concentration in test solution for 
measured mV from this graph. 


Concentration of Е in external tooth 
whitening/bleaching product, parts per million: 


_ 2a x 10000 
= M 


where 
a = mg of F from calibration graph for test 


solution; and 
M =mass, in g, of sample. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX J 


(Foreword) 
TEST METHOD FOR LABORATORY ASSESSMENT OF TOOTH BLEACHINGEFFICACY 


J-1 PRINCIPLE 


Preliminary data is obtained on tooth bleaching 
efficacy of a product using a laboratory method. 

J-2 MATERIALS, EQUIPMENT AND 
EVALUATION CONDITION 


J-2.1 Extracted Human or Bovine Incisors 


Prepare incisors in accordance with J-3.1 using 
appropriate infection control procedures. 


J-2.2 Shade Guide 


Use an acceptable tooth shade guide under 
colour corrected lighting (for example, 5 500 K) 
for visual assessment of tooth shade (see J-3.3.2). 


J-2.3 Electronic Colour Measuring Instrument 


Use an acceptable instrument such as a colorimeter, 
spectrophotometer, or digital imaging device. 


J-3 PROCEDURE 
J-3.1 Specimen Preparation 


Select extracted human incisors or bovine teeth of 
proper tooth colour [for example, > A2 or > A3 of 
Vitapan classical shade” (J-2.2), depending on the 
expected bleaching efficacy] with no labial lesions 
or restorations. Store the teeth in appropriate media, 
such as a 0.2 percent solution (mass concentration) 
of sodium azide or other solutions of equivalent 
efficacy for disinfection purposes,ensuring that they 
have not been subject to any conditions that may 
alter their general properties. Clean the tooth surface 
of any stains and calculus. Assign a code number to 
each specimen, and assign the tooth specimens 
randomly into groups, with 6 to 10 specimens per 
group, depending on the baseline tooth colour and 
expected efficacy of the bleaching product. Prevent 
dehydration of test specimens during the specimen 
preparation procedure. 


J-3.2 Bleaching Treatment 


Follow the manufacturer's instructions for bleaching. 
Prevent dehydration of test specimens during all 


procedures. 
J-3.3 Bleaching Efficacy Assessment 
J-3.3.1 General 


The efficacy of such a bleaching product should be 
established by the determination of a clinically 
relevant tooth colour change towards a lighter or 
whiter direction, using appropriate methods such as 
shade guides or electronic instruments or both. The 
methods should be described adequately and be 
available for validation. In the case that clinical data 
on the efficacy of a tooth bleaching product is not 
available, users of this International Standard 
intending to assess the efficacy in vitro are advised to 
consider using a laboratory method such as that 
given in this Annex. 


Determine bleaching efficacy by the visual 
assessment of shade (see J-3.3.2) or the electronic 
measurement of tooth colour (see J-3.3.3) before 
and after the bleaching treatment. 


J-3.3.2 Visual Assessment with Shade Guide 


Arrange the shade guide according to the value 
from lightest to darkest. Calibrate the examiner's 
shade assessment prior to the evaluation. Perform 
the evaluation on coded specimens under colour- 
corrected lighting by the calibrated examiner. 


Example: 


The value-oriented arrangement of Vitapan 
classical shade is as follows: (lightest) ВІ, АІ, 
B2, D2, А2, СІ, C2, D4, A3, D3, ВЗ, A3.5, B4, 
C3, A4, C4 (darkest). 


Ј-3.3.3 Tooth Colour Measurement using an 
Electronic Instrument 


Perform the measurement on coded specimens 
using an electronic instrument (J-2.3) and obtain 
L*, а* and b* values. 


Calculate the colour change, AE}, using the 
following equation: 


ДЕаь = (А7)? + (Aa? + (АБУ? (3) 


D Vitapan classical shade guide (Vita Zahnfabrik, Bad Säckingen, Germany) is one of such shade guides. This information is given for 
the convenience of users of this International Standard and does not constitute an endorsement by BIS of this product. 


16 


where 


AL* = difference between the Г“ value of the 
untreated tooth and the treated tooth; 
Aa" = difference between the а“ value of the 

untreated tooth and the treated tooth; 
and 
= difference between the b° value of the 


untreated tooth and the treated tooth. 


Ab* 


J-4 ANALYSES OF DATA 


Ј-4.1 Data Obtained from Visual Assessment 
with a Shade Guide 


Analyze the shade using appropriate statistical 
methods for determination of the within-group and 
between-group effects at a 5 percent level of 
significance. 


Ј-4.2 Data Obtained from Electronic Instrument 


Analyze the I°, a’, Б* and AE, data using 
appropriate statistical methods for determination of 


IS 18447 : 2023 


the within-group and between-group effects at a 
5 percent level of significance. 


J-5 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 


J-5.1 Results of visual assessment with shade 
guide 


If the shade change towards the lighter direction 
after the bleaching treatment is two shades of 
Vitapan classical shade (or equivalent other shade 
guides used) or greater compared to that beforethe 
treatment, the bleaching efficacy of the product is 
deemed to be acceptable. 


J-5.2 Results of Tooth Colour Measurement 
using an Electronic Instrument 


If AE;,,, after the bleaching treatment, resulting from 
the increased ЛІ“ and decreased ЛЬ” is two or 
greater compared to that before the treatment, the 
bleaching efficacy of the product is deemed to be 
acceptable. 


IS 18447 : 2023 


ANNEX K 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19 


Organization 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, 
New Delhi 


All India Cosmetic Manufacturers Association, 
Gurugram 


Cavinkare Private Limited, Chennai 

Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, 
New Delhi 

Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chennai 


Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Mumbai 


Central Revenue Control Laboratory, New Delhi 


Chemstar Limited, Thane 


Colgate Palmolive India Limited, Mumbai 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow 


Dabur India Limited, Sahibabad 


Directorate of Drugs Control, Kolkata 


Directorate of Food and Drugs Administration, 
Bambolim 


Drugs Control Department, New Delhi 

Drugs Controller for the State of Karnataka, 
Bengaluru 

EnvisBE Solutions Private Limited, Mumbai 


Food and Drugs Administration, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


DR RAJEEV SINGH RAGHUVANSHI (Chairperson) 
MS КАТАТ, ANAND 
SHRI VIRENDRA V. CHAVAN (Alternate) 


DR T. KUMAR 
DR GIREESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASEEM SAHU 
MS SHRADDHA SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


MS C. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 


SHRIMATIS. U. WARDE 
SHRIMATI SUJATA S. KAISARE (Alternate) 


SHRI V. SURESH 

SHRI SHIVRAJ SINGH (Alternate I) 

SHRI MRITUNJOY MAITY (Alternate П) 
SHRI SUNIL JOSHI 
SHRI MANAS V. VYAS 

MS SHRUTI HARDIKAR (Alternate 1) 

SHRI PURUSHOTTAM JADHAV (Alternate II) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


SHRI H. WADHWA 


DRR. S. RAY 
DR A. B. PANT (Alternate) 


SHRI PRASUN BANDYOPADHYAY 
SHRI SONU PANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. R. CHAWLA 
SHRIMATI JYOTI J. SARDESSAI 
SHRI A. K. NASA 
SHRI K. R. CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. RAMESH 


SHRI BENEDICT M. MASCARENHAS 


SHRI O. S. SADHWANI 


Organization 


Food and Drugs Administration, Panchkula 


Food and Drugs Control Administration, 
Ahmedabad 


Food Safety and Drug Administration, Lucknow 


Galaxy Surfactants Limited, Mumbai 


Godrej Consumer Products Limited, Mumbai 


Himalaya Wellness Company, Bengaluru 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Hygienic Research Institute Private Limited, 


Mumbai 


Indian Beauty and Hygiene Association, Mumbai 


Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad 


ITC Life Sciences and Technology Centre, 
Bengaluru 


Johnson and Johnson Private Limited, Mumbai 


Kaya Limited, Mumbai 


Kelkar Education Trust's Scientific Research 


Centre, Mumbai 


Koel Colours Private Limited, Mumbai 


Loreal India Private Limited, Mumbai 


Marico Limited, Mumbai 


MSME Testing Center, New Delhi 


PETA India, Mumbai 


IS 18447 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MANMOHAN TANEJA 


SHRI H. G. KOSHIA 
SHRI V. R. SHAH (Alternate) 


DR ANITA BHATNAGAR JAIN 
SHRI DINESH KUMAR TIWARI (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. SINGH 
SHRI SAGAR TRAILOKYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRAMOD SABAT (Alternate ЇЇ) 


MS RUPINDER KAUR RAWAT 
DR MANOJ GAUR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUKUMARAN D. 
DR CHANDRIKA MAHENDRA (Alternate) 


MS VRINDA RAJWADE 
DR NIMISH SHAH (Alternate) 


MS JAYASHREE ANAND 
SHRI MANOJ SARKAR (Alternate) 


MS MALATHI NARAYANAN 


DR ANIL KUMAR TEOTIA 
DR MANOJ KUMAR PANDEY (Alternate) 


DR GURU PRASAD K. V. 
DR JOHN BOSCO STANISLAUS (Alternate I) 
DR JAMES BHASKAR (Alternate ЇЇ) 


DR DILIP TRIPATHI 
SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


MS RUCHI SUSHEEL MITTAL 
Ms MOHINI KUTE (Alternate) 


DRS. S. BARVE 
SHRI DHRUBHAI DESAI 
SHRI RISHABH D. DESAI (Alternate) 


SHRI DHIMOY ROY 
DR GURUBASAVARAJA K. M. (Alternate) 


DR SHILPA VORA 
SHRI PRABODH S. HALDE (Alternate I) 
SHRI ASHISH YEKHE (Alternate П) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR 
SHRI VIPUL GAIKWARD (Alternate) 


DR MANILAL V ALLIYATE 
DR ANKITA PANDEY (Alternate) 


IS 18447 : 2023 


Organization 


Procter and Gamble India, Mumbai 


Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (1098, 1 0" Cross, 7th Block, 
HMT Layout, Vidyaranyapura, Bengaluru - 
560097) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI GIRISH PARHATE 


SHRI M. A. U. KHAN 


DR SUNDARAM RAMACHANDRAN 


SHRIMATI MEENAL PASSI, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (PETROLEUM, COAL AND 
RELATED PRODUCTS) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SOURAV MONDAL 
SCIENTIST B/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(PETROLEUM, COAL AND RELATED PRODUCTS), BIS 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 19 (14703). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


