INATA Ah IS 19040 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


тет start (ÅA) A Fetes SATA HT 
aa — healer Tene — ARI wet 
сага гат 


Millet Dehusker — Centrifugal Туре 
— Specification and Test Code 


ICS 65.060 


© BIS 2023 


тй HA 5451 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ey uer чач, 9 aerer IWS AHL AMT, 4$ echt - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2023 Price Group 9 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Agriculture 
and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


Millets are exceptionally nutritious and were once a dietary staple. However, changing consumer preferences and 
a lack of millet processing resources led to a decline in their consumption. Millets require processing before 
consumption, and the government initiated efforts to promote millet consumption during the 2023 International 
Year of Millet (ТҮОМ - 2023). Equipment used in millet processing are very crucial for ensuring the quality of 
processed millets. Therefore, it is important to establish equipment standards to maintain the overall quality and 
promote the consumption of this valuable and nutritious grain, benefiting both health and the economy. 


With the increase in millet production and rapid modernization of millet processing at industry level, centrifugal 
type millet dehusker is extensively used throughout the country for dehusking millets. Thus, it becomes important 
to guide the manufacturers and end users through a standard on producing and procuring quality equipment. Millet 
dehusker is expected to have a simple and sturdy construction, suitable for various types of millets, requiring 
minimum pre-treatments, operated with less skills, etc. 


A need was felt to develop a standard to ensure the quality of the process and the produce as well as for third party 
testing and certification purpose. This standard will also serve as guidance to the manufacturers of these 
equipment. 


In the development of this standard, guidance was taken from the specification of centrifugal dehusker used in the 
dehusking of paddy as outlined in IS 12411 : 1988 ‘Specification for paddy dehusker, centrifugal type’. This standard, 
encompassing specifications and test codes, has been specifically developed for dehusking millets by appropriately 
modifying the centrifugal type of paddy dehusker. 


A series of Indian Standards are being developed on the equipment used in primary processing of millets. Apart 
from this standard, three other standards on millets processing equipment have been published which are as under: 


IS 19039 : 2023 Cleaner cum grader for millets with pre-cleaner — Specification and test code 
IS 19041 : 2023 Destoner for Millets — Specification and test code 
IS 19042 : 2023 Symbols and flow diagram for primary processing of millets 


Another standard covering the specification for pearler-cum-polisher for millets is IS ХХХХ : 20xx (under 
preparation). 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex K. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 19040 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


MILLET DEHUSKER — CENTRIFUGAL TYPE — 
SPECIFICATION AND TEST CODE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies material, performance, 
constructional and other requirements for millet 
dehusker of centrifugal type. It also prescribes 
method of testing to evaluate the performance and 
durability of this equipment. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
these standards: 


IS Мо. Title 


IS 210 : 2009 Grey iron castings — 
Specification (fifth revision) 


IS 816: 1969 Code of practice for use of 
metal arc welding for general 
construction in mild steel 


(first revision) 


IS 2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high 
tensile structural steel -- 
Specification (seventh 


revision) 
IS 4333 (Part 2) : 


2017/ISO 
712 : 2009 


Methods of analysis for 
foodgrains: Part 2 
Determination of moisture 
content (second revision) 


IS 6911 : 2017 Stainless steel plate, sheet and 
strip — Specification (second 


revision) 


IS 8132 : 2023/ Tractors machinery for 


ISO 3600 agriculture and forestry, 
2022 powered lawn and garden 
equipment —  Operator’s 
manuals — Content and 


Format (third revision) 


IS 8427 : 2023 Agricultural produce milling 
machinery — Rubber roll for 
paddy dehusker -- 
Specification (second 


revision) 
IS 12411:1988 Specification for paddy 


dehusker, centrifugal type 


3 TERMINOLOGY 
For this ard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 


3.1 Aspirator — The husk after dehusking is 
collected by suction, called aspirator. 


3.2 Commercial Test — The tests conducted for 
establishing performance characteristics of millet 
dehusker-centrifugal type, that are ready for 
commercial production or already in production. 


3.21 Initial Commercial Test — Тһе tests 
conducted on indigenous or imported prototype of 
millet dehusker-centrifugal type is ready for 
commercial production. 


3.2.2 Batch Test (Conformity of Production) — The 
tests conducted on millet dehusker-centrifugal type 
which have already undergone initial commercial 
test and are being manufactured/sold commercially 
in the country. 


3.2.3 Repeat Test — The tests conducted on 
centrifugal type millet dehusker, to validate the 
performance in case of not meeting the evaluative 
requirements of this standard or to ascertain the 
reoccurrence of breakdown/defects observed in 
earlier tests, for the same parameter and on the same 
sample under the test after rectifying the defects or 
after replacing the defected part/sub-assembly by 
new part of the same specifications. 


3.2.4 Evaluative Requirements — Requirements 
under this category are the ones which are 
mandatory for acceptance of the centrifugal type 
millet dehusker for the purpose of commercial 
production/availing subsidies/availing loans from 
financial institutions. The testing agency will assess 
the performance of the centrifugal type millet 
dehusker under test and release the report. 


3.3 Confidential Test — The test conducted for 
providing confidential information оп the 
performance of millet dehusker-centrifugal type, 
whether ready for commercial production or not, or 
to provide any special data that may be required by 
the manufacturer/processor. 


3.4 Cyclone — A separator used to collect/separate 
the finer/chaffy/husk from the dehusked millets 
during processing. 


IS 19040: 2023 


3.5 Dehusking Efficiency — Indicates Ше 
efficiency of the dehusker in removing the husk of 
the millets. It is the percentage of the dehusked 
grains over the millets fed. 


3.6 Impeller — The major component of the 
centrifugal dehusker which rotates inside the 
dehusking chamber at speed around 2 000 rpm to 
2 800 rpm and receives the mass of the millet grains 
at the centre and delivers at periphery through the 
vanes at higher impact velocity/force. 


3.7 Millet Dehusker — Centrifugal Type — 
Dehusking unit suitable to remove the husk from the 
millets with impact force due to centrifugal force 
when delivered at higher velocity from an impeller. 
Following terminologies related to this machine 
shall apply: 


3.7.1 Dehusked Millet Kernel — Millet grains from 
which the outer husk has been removed. 


3.7.2 Whole Millet — Dehusked millet grains either 
whole or broken and its major size is more than 
three-fourth of the original size. 


3.7.3 Broken Millet — Dehusked millet grains 
which are broken and its major size is less than 
three-fourth of the original size. 


3.7.4 Cleaned Millet — Mass of millet grains, 
physically clean and having foreign matter not 
exceeding 0.5 percent by mass. 


3.7.5 Feed Mechanism — A device to regulate the 
flow of millet into the dehusker to match with its 
capacity. 


3.7.6 Feed Rate — Mass of cleaned millet fed into 
the dehusker per unit time. 


3.7.7 Foreign Matter — The impurities present in 
the mass of  unhusked/dehusked millets. 


They include organic and inorganic matter. 
Inorganic matter shall include sand, gravel, 
dirt,pebbles stones, lumps of earth, mud, iron chips, 
etc. Organic matter includes, plant parts such as 
leaves, stems, etc, seeds/grains of other crops, etc. 


38 Non Evaluative Requirements — 
Requirements under this category are the ones 
which are not mandatory for acceptance of the millet 
dehusker-centrifugal type for the purpose of 
commercial production/availing subsidies/availing 
loans from financial institutions. However, the 
authorized testing agency may observe Ше 
performance for these requirements and record in 
the test report. 


3.9 Percent Broken — Breakage of millet grains 
during dehusking and expressed as percentage over 
the total dehusked grains (whole апа broken 
grains). 


3.10 Power Source — The power required to 
operate the centrifugal type millet dehusker. 


3.11 Sample — The quantity of millet taken from 
the feed/different outlets during the ongoing process 
of dehusking . 


4 TYPES OF MILLETS AND CENTRIFUGAL 
DEHUSKER 


4.1 Millet Grains 


Millets are the group of small grains and following 
are the crops classified under millets as given in 
Table 1, which can be processed by this equipment. 
Though they look similar in shape and size, they 
differ in the formation and hardness of the outer 
layer (husk) resulting varying levels of forces 
required for dehusking. 


Table 1 Common Names and Botanical Names of Millet Crops 


(Clause 4.1) 


51 No. Common Name of Millets 


(1) (2) 


Botanical Name 


(3) 


i) Sorghum/Jowar/Great millet 
ii) Pearl millet/Bajra 

iii) Finger millet/Ragi 

iv) Kodo millet 

v) Foxtail/Italian millet 

vi) Little/Kutki millet 

vii) Proso/Common millet 

viii) Barnyard millet 


ix) Browntop millet 


Sorghum bicolor 
Pennisetum glaucum 
Eleusine coracana 
Paspalum scrobiculatum 
Setaria italic 
Panicum sumatrense 
Panicum miliaceum 
Echinochloa esculenta 


Urochloa ramose 


4.2 Centrifugal Dehusker — Construction and 
Operation 


The grain to be dehusked is subjected to the impact 
force against a hard rubber surface. Thus the husk 
gets split and the dehusked grain/kernel is obtained. 
The centrifugal dehusker shall consists of a hopper, 
impeller, dehusking chamber, aspirator, husk outlet 
and grain/kernel outlet (see Fig.l, Fig. 2 and 
Fig. 3). The impeller is rotated at about 2 000 rpm 
to 2 800 rpm speed and receives grain to be 
dehusked from the feed regulated hopper and a 
feeding screw. From the centre of the impeller, the 
grain mass will be delivered radially with a higher 
centrifugal force. The discharged grains shall strike 
against a hard rubber surface with impact force and 
dehusking take place. The husk and the dehusked 
kernel will pass through the aspirator for separation 


IS 19040 : 2023 


of husk and delivered through the outlet. The 
dehusked kernel free from husk will be collected 
through its outlet. Initially the centrifugal 
dehusker is developed and used for dehusking of 
paddy and the specification requirements are 
governed vide IS 12411. With the centrifugal 
dehusker developed by modifying the centrifugal 
type paddy dehusker, this ѕ tandard inclusive of 
specifications and test code has been 
developed exclusively for dehusking millets. 


5 MATERIAL 


5.1 The material for the components (see also 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) shall be as given in 
col (3) and the material shall conform to the 
relevant Indian Standard given in col (4) of Table 2. 


Table 2 Material of Construction 


(Clause 5.1) 


51 No. Component Material Relevant Indian 
Standard 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Belt guard Mild steel IS 2062 
ii) Blower/aspirator Mild steel IS 2062 
iii) Crank gear Cast iron 15 210 
iv) Husk outlet/aspirator Mild steel IS 2062 
v) Impeller shaft Mild steel IS 2062 
vi) Dehusking chamber Cast iron 15 210 
vii) Dehusker frame Mild steel IS 2062 
viii) Dehusker impeller Stainless steel IS 6911 
(SS 304) 
Mild steel IS 2062 
ix) Dehusked millet outlet Stainless steel IS 6911 
(SS 304) 
x) Feed screw Cast iron IS 210 
Mild steel IS 2062 
xi) Feed hopper Mild steel IS 2062 
Stainless steel IS 6911 
(SS 304) 
xii) Lid Mild steel IS 2062 
xiii) Plummer block Cast iron 15 210 
ХІУ) Rubber ring/lining Food grade rubber sheet and - 


moulded rubber 


IS 19040 : 2023 


MILLET GRAINS 


IMPELLER 


FEED HOPPER 
DOOR 


ji 2222 FEED SCREW 


Ee EAR 


COLLAR 
CRANK GEAR 


RUBBER RING 


шини 


RUBBER LINING 


OUTLET FOR DEHUSKED 
MILLETS AND HUSK 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF CENTRIFUGAL DEHUSKER SOWING PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION 


FIG. 2 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF CENTRIFUGAL DEHUSKER 


1) Feed hopper 

3) Husk outlet 

5) Dehusker belt guard 
7) Dehusked millet outlet 
9) Belt guard 

11) Dehusker impeller 


IS 19040 : 2023 


2) Electric motor; 

4) Machine/Aspirator shaft 
6) Machine frame 

8) Dehusker frame 

10) Dehusker chamber 


FIG. 3 EXPLODED VIEW OF MILLET DEHUSKER — CENTRIFUGAL TYPE 


6 CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Aspirator/Blower 


Aspirator/blower shall be of adequate size and the 
impeller is balanced and mounted on self-aligned 
bearings to run without vibration and the casing will 
be strong enough. The shutter to adjust the air flow 
rate will be provided with a locking arrangement to 
hold the position and ensures noise/vibration free 
running. 


6.2 Dehusking Chamber 


The dehusking chamber shall be made of cast iron to 
the size as per the capacity. The chamber should be 
also provided with crank gear and provision to rotate 
the chamber to facilitate uniform wear of the rubber 
lining and to fix it rigidly after rotation. The 
dehusker may be provided with two numbers of 
dehusking chambers to facilitate passing the millets 
for second time to increase the dehusking efficiency. 


6.3 Feed Screw 


A feed screw will be placed appropriately to feed the 
millets uniformly into the impeller for dehusking. 


6.4 Frame 


The main frame shall be made of suitable size using 
mild steel with channels/angle sections and shall be 
covered wherever required with mild steel 
sheet/galvanised sheet/stainless steel sheet of 
adequate thickness depending on the requirements 
and with provision to open the covers for any 
adjustments/maintenance. 


6.5 Feed Hopper 


Hopper shall be made of mild steel/stainless steel (SS 
304) sheet and provided with a feed regulating 
device. The hopper should be provided with side 
slope (30° to 35°) for easy flow of the grains. The 
feed hopper will be located at appropriate height from 
ground level for easy filling manually. Alternatively 


IS 19040: 2023 


the unit may be provided with a bucket elevator 
for filling the hopper. 


6.6 Impeller 


Impeller shall be made of appropriate size and vanes 
as per the capacity of the dehusker. The impeller 
shall be made of mild steel or stainless steel 
(SS 304). The cnstruction will be sturdy to 
withstand the rotation at 2 000 rpm to 2 800 rpm. 


6.7 Outlet/Chute for the Grains/Kernels and 
Husk 


The outlet for the dehusked millet kernel will be 
placed at the suitable height from ground for easy 
collection/filling in gunny bags. The husk should be 
collected by the aspirator and delivered. 


6.8 Rubber Lining and Ring 


The rubber ring is provided on the crank gear and 
rubber lining on the inner side of the dehusking 
chamber. The lining and ring are made of 
natural/synthetic rubber using appropriate 
production technique with hardness of 85 A to 97 A 
and pasted using adhesive to fix in place. 


6.9 Shafts 


The shafts shall be made of mild steel as per the 
required/calculated size and shall be supported with 
suitable bearings and housings on the stable part of 
machine. 


6.10 Surface Finish 


All the joints and surfaces will be made smooth and 
protected from weather conditions. 


6.11 Transmission Drive 


The suitable drive system using V-belt pulley 
system for transmitting the power shall be provided 
in the dehusker. The drive will be provided with 
suitable guard/cover. 


7 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 The dehusker, after installation and running-in 
shall be operated for half-an-hour at no-load. During 
the no-load run, the visual observations shall not 
indicate the following: 


a) Presence of any marked vibration during 
operation; 


b) Presence of any undue noise in the dehusker; 
c) Unusual heating of any component; 


d) Any slippage of belts; 


e) Vibration in running of fan; 


D Non-smooth running of shafts in their 
respective bearings; and 


g) Any marked unusual wear or slackness in 
any components. 


7.2 When tested in accordance with the method 
given in 11.4.1.3, the rated capacity per kWh 
energy consumed shall be recorded. Various 
adjustments, clearances and speeds for the rated 
capacity shall be declared by the manufacturer. 


7.3 The dehusked millet shall not get any visible 
stain with color of rubber surface. 


7.4 During and after the capacity test, the visual 
observation shall not indicate the following: 


a) Observations given in 7.1 (a) to (g); and 
b) Spillage of grain/kernel from the dehusker. 


7.5 Dehusking unit shall be capable of dehusking 
atleast 50 percent of grains in case of raw millet and 
atleast 60 percent of the grains in case of parboiled 
millet, in the first pass and in the subsequent passes 
the efficiencies will be 70 percent and 80 percent, 
respectively. The maximum percent breakage will 
be 10 percent in raw millet and 5 percent in 
parboiled millet in one pass. 


7.6 Husk aspiration unit shall remove minimum of 
95 percent husk present. Not more than 5 percent of 
brokens/kernels/grains should go along with husk. 


8 OTHER REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 The sheet metal used in construction of various 
parts shall be of minimum | mm thickness. 


8.2 The shafts shall be finished to close tolerances at 
the bearings and other moving parts, and shall be 
properly aligned. 


8.3 Provision shall be made for lubrication of 
bearings and they shall be dust-proof. 


8.4 A feed regulating system shall be provided. 


8.5 Various controls shall be easily accessible and 
capable of being locked in a chosen position. 


8.6 In case of belt drive, provision shall be made for 
belt tightening. 


8.7 Transmission guards shall be provided to 
prevent accidental contact of persons on parts or 
clothing being caught in the transmission system 
unless the system is so constructed or placed as to be 
safe without guards. 


8.7.1 The guards shall be so designed as not to 
hinder in easy adjustment, servicing and operation 
of dehusker. 


8.7.2 It is preferable that all guards shall be either 
permanently attached or firmly secured to prevent 
their removal without the aid of the tools. The 
servicing and adjustments should be possible 
without complete removal of the guards. 


8.8 The impeller shall be statically and dynamically 
balanced. 


8.9 The rubber ring and lining shall be firmly fixed 
using appropriate adhesive/glue. 


8.10 The hardness of rubber ring and lining shall 
conform to the requirements given in 6.3 of 
IS 8427. Type and size shall be declared by the 
manufacture. Arrangement shall be made for easy 
replacement as well as locking of the impeller. 


8.11 The dehusker shall be provided with the 
operator's manual (see IS 8132). 


9 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


9.1 Welding used for joining different components 
shall not be porous and shall be smooth (see IS 816). 


9.2 Any sharp corners and protruding fasteners shall 
be avoided. 


9.3 Components of the dehusker shall be finished 
smooth and properly painted. 


10 MARKING AND PACKING 
10.1 Marking 


Each dehusker shall be marked with the following 
particulars: 


a) Manufacturer’s name, address and recognized 
trade-mark, if any; 
b) Model number; 
c) Batch, code or serial number; 
d) Power rating, kW; 
e) Rated input capacity; 
f) Direction of rotation of impeller; and 
g) Year of manufacture. 
A minimum cautionary notice worded as follows 


shall be written in vernacular language legibly and 
prominently on the main body of the dehusker: 


a) Do not wear loose dress, bangles, watch, etc, 
while working with dehusker; 


IS 19040 : 2023 


b) Do not work under the influence of 
intoxicants like liquor, opium, etc; 

c) Children and aged persons should be 
discouraged for working on deshusker; 


d) Do not cross over moving belts; 


e) Do not operate without guards and safety 
devices; 


f) Do not make adjustment when deshusker is 
working; and 


g) Do not put or take-off belt while pulley is 
running. 


10.2 Packing 


The dehusker or its components shall be packed as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier for 
safe handling in transit and storage. 


10.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed there under, and the 
products may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


11 METHODS OF TEST FOR MILLET 
DEHUSKER 


11.1 Selection and Specification of Centrifugal 
Dehusker for Type Tests 


11.1.1 Selection 


The centrifugal dehusker shall be taken from the 
series production by the testing authority with the 
agreement of the manufacturer. 


11.1.2 Specification 


The manufacturer shall supply specification sheet 
duly filled in as given in Annex A as well as any 
further information required to carry out the tests. 
The manufacturer shall also supply all literature, 
operational manual and schematic diagram of grain 
flow in the dehusker. The manufacturer shall also 
indicate the maximum input capacity and rated 
input capacity with the foreign matter at 5 percent 
and 10 percent. 


11.2 Test Material 


11.2.1 Sufficient quantity of the raw material, 
preferably the same variety shall be taken. The grain 
lot selected for testing the dehusker shall have purity 
of minimum 90 percent and will be completely 


IS 19040: 2023 


free from stones, metals, etc, to avoid damage to 
the rubber ring and rubber lining. 


11.2.2 The moisture content of test material shall be 
measured according to IS 4333 (Part 2) and shall be 
not more than 14 percent (wet basis) and the 
moisture content will be adjusted according to the 
type of millets. 


11.3. Running in and Preliminary Adjustments 


11.3.1 The dehusker shall be installed on a level and 
preferably on a hard surface with anti-vibration 
mount/ concrete foundation. All the adjustments 
shall be made in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
recommendation. 


11.3.2 The dehusker shall be attached with a suitable 
prime mover, preferably with an electric motor and 
auto-voltage stabilizer. An energy meter or some 
form of transmission dynamometer shall be fitted. 
The power delivered to the dehusker may be 
supplied in the following ways: 


a) Direct coupling the prime mover with the 
main shaft of the destoner; and 


b) Connecting the prime mover with the help 
of a flat or V-belt and pulleys with the 
dehusker’s main shaft. 


11.3.2.1 In the case of (a), the power delivered to the 
dehusker would be the power output of the prime 
mover, whereas, in the case of (b), the allowances 
for flat and V-belt drive losses may be taken at 6 
percent and 3 percent, respectively. 


11.3.3 The dehusker shall be run-in without load 
before commencing the tests. The running-in shall 
be carried out in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
recommendation. In the absence of any 
recommendation by the manufacturer, the dehusker 
shall be run-in for 30 minutes. During the period of 
the run-in, adjustments for various functional 
components may be done. All the adjustments done 
shall be in accordance with the instructions 
contained in the manual supplied by Ше 
manufacturer. 


11.4 Tests 


Tests as indicated in 11.4.1 and 11.4.1.2 shall 
be carried out on millet dehusker. 


11.4.1 Type Tests 
11.4.1.1 General 


a) Checking of specifications (Annex A); 


b) Checking of material (Annex B); and 


c) Visual observations and checking of provisions 
for adjustments (Annex С). 


11.4.1.2 Test at no load 


a) Power consumption (Annex D) shall be 
recorded from the start and closing reading 
of energy meter. 


b 


wm 


After running-in is over, the dehusker shall 
be run at no load for 10 minutes at the 
specified speed. During and after the no load 
run, the visual observation at the dehusker 
shall not show the following: 


1) Presence of any marked vibration 
during operation; 
2) Presence of undue knocking or rattling 
sound; 


3) Апу marked rise in bearing 
temperature; 

4) Any marked unusual wear or slackness 
in any component; and 


5) Any marked change in oscillation or 
slopes. 


c) Data shall be recorded in accordance 
with the proforma given in Annex D. 


11.4.1.3 Test at load 
a) Operation and collection of data 


The dehusker shall be operated for a period of 
30 minutes at its input capacity specified by the 
manufacturer for the particular millet grain and 
variety, incorporating best combination of 
adjustments. During the running period speed 
of impeller and blower, velocity of air, etc, 
shall be noted and recorded in Annex E. 


Three sets of samples at the dehusked 
grain/kernel outlet and husk outlet either 
manually after each 10 minutes or continuously 
by automatic flow samplers for the entire period 
shall be collected. If the dehusker is provided 
with more number of dehusking chambers in 
series, samples from all the chambers will be 
collected. 


b) Preparation and analysis of samples 


1) The samples drawn from each outlet 
shall be bulked and thoroughly mixed 
to form a composite sample; 


2) Each sample shall be further divided 
using a sample divider to get 100 g of 
representative sample; 


3) Each 100 g sample from dehusked 
kernel outlet shall be manually 
analyzed for dehusked millet kernel, 
un-dehusked millet grains, brokens 
and husk. Similarly, 100 g of the 
sample collected at the husk outlet 
shall be manually analyzed for husk 
and grains (including un-dehusked, 
dehusked and brokens) and recorded 
in Annex F; and 


4) Ifthe dehusker is provided with more 
number of chambers or dehusking is 
done through more number of passes, 
the results will be reported along with 
the number of passes. 


c) Determination of dehusking efficiency 
The dehusking efficiency of centrifugal 


dehusker shall be calculated by the 
following formula: 


D = [1 — (5) x 100 


where 


D = efficiency of dehusking, percent; 


f = total mass, in g, of sample taken from 
dehusked kernel outlet (u + b + s); 
u = mass, in g, of un-dehusked millet 


grain/kernel in the sample taken from 
dehusked kernel outlet; and 


s = mass, in g, of husk in the sample taken 
from dehusked kernel outlet; 


d) Determination of percent breakage 


The percent breakage in the centrifugal dehusker 
shall be calculated by the following 


formula: 
b 
В =— x 100 
f-—u-s 
where 
B = percent breakage of millet kernels, 
percent; 
f = total mass, in g, of sample taken from 


dehusked kernel outlet (и + b + s); 


IS 19040 : 2023 


и = mass, in g, of un-dehusked millet 
grain/kernel in the sample taken from 
dehusked kernel outlet; 

b = mass, in g, of broken millet 


grain/kernel in the sample taken from 
dehusked kernel outlet; and 


s = mass, іп р, of husk in the sample 
taken from dehusked kernel outlet. 


e) Percent husk in the dehusked millet kernel 


The percent husk in the dehusked millet kernel shall 
be calculated by the following formula: 


where 


Н = percent husk present in the dehusked 
millet kernel, percent; 


f = total mass, in g, of sample taken from 
dehusked kernel outlet (а + u + b + s); 
and 

s = mass, in g, of husk in the sample taken 


from dehusked kernel outlet. 


f) Determination of cleaning efficiency of the 
aspirator 


The cleaning efficiency of aspirator in the 


centrifugal dehusker shall be calculated by the 
following formula: 


C= [1 — (Ž)] x 100 


where 
C = cleaning efficiency ofthe aspirator in 
the centrifugal dehusker, percent; 
h = total mass, in g, of sample taken from 
husk outlet; and 
k = mass, in g, of millet kernel/grains in 


the sample taken from husk outlet. 


g) Power consumption 


The power requirement during the test run shall be 
calculated/measured in accordance with Ше 
following methods and record the data in 
accordance with Annex G. 


1) In case of prime mover fitted with an 
energy meter, the readings taken shall be 
the power consumption for 10 minutes. The 
power consumption per hour giving due 
allowance to the type of drive shall be 
calculated and reported. 


2) In case of prime mover fitted with the 


IS 19040: 2023 


dynamometer, the reading taken shall 
indicate the torque required. The power 
consumption per hour, giving due 
allowance to the type of drive, shall be 
calculated by the following formula: 


P= TxS х 100 
9 549.30 
where 
P = power, kW; 
T = torque, Nm; and 
5 = speed, rev/min. 


NOTE — For the Purpose of certification, the power 
consumption at the declared feed rate shall only be 
calculated. 


h) Determination of the rated input capacity 


From the quantity of millet (kg) taken for the test 
and the time taken (h) to dehusker this quantity, 
capacity is calculated and expressed as ton/h. The 
capacity in terms of the energy consumed shall be 
calculated by dividing the capacity by power 
consumed and shall be expressed in kg/kWh. 
Record the data in Annex G. 


NOTE — For the purpose of certification, since the 
dehusker has been operated only at declared capacity, it 
shall be seen whether the dehusking efficiency is met at the 
declared capacity or not. 


10 


11.4.1.4 Routine tests 


a) Visual observations and checking of 
provision for adjustments (see 11.4.1.1); 
and 


b) Test at no-load (see 11.4.1.2). 
11.4.1.5 Long run test 


The dehusker shall be operated for a minimum 
duration of 20 hours at no load which could be 
covered by continuous run of at least 5 hours. 
During and after the operation no breakdown or 
defects shall develop in the dehusker. Record the 
major breakdowns, defects developed and repairs 
made into the data sheet given in Annex H. 


11.5 Summary Report 


For the guidance of the user, compile a summary 
report on the proforma as given in Annex J. 


АМХЕХ А 
(Clause 11.1.2 and 11.4.1.1) 
SPECIFICATION SHEET 
A-1 General 
a) Name and address of manufacturer 
b) Make 
c) Model 
d) Serial number 
e) Year of manufacture 
f) Rated capacity 
g) Maximum capacity 


A-2 Power Unit 


a) 
b) 
с) 


Type of recommended prime mover 
Type of drive 


Recommended power rating 


A-3 Main Drive 


a) 
b) 


Type and number of bearings 

Size and number of belts 

Size of pulley on prime mover 

Size of pulley on dehusker, mm 

Type of belt tightening arrangement 

Details of gear system, if used 

Recommended speed of impeller, rpm 

Size of pulley (mm) and speed of blower/aspirator (rpm) 


A-4 Feeding Arrangement 


a) 
b) 


Type of feed mechanism 

Storage capacity of feed hopper, kg 

Type of drive for feed mechanism 
Arrangement for controlling feed 

Arrangement for uniform feeding of millet, 
Location of feed hopper from ground level, mm 
Provision of elevator 


A-5 Dehusking Chamber 


a) 
b) 


Diameter of the chamber, mm 
Width of the chamber, mm 
Diameter of the impeller, mm 
Width of the impeller, mm 
Number of vanes in the impeller 
Speed of impeller, rpm 

Type and number of bearings 
Provision of crank gear 
Diameter of the rubber ring, mm 
Hardness of rubber ring, Shore A 


IS 19040 : 2023 


IS 19040: 2023 


m) Thickness of the rubber lining, mm 
n) Hardness of rubber lining, Shore A 


A-6 Aspirator/Blower 


a) Type of blower/aspirator 

b) Diameter of the impeller, mm 
c) Width of the blower, mm 

d) Type and number of bearings 
e) Provision for adjusting airflow 
f) Speed of impeller/blade, rpm 
g) Provision of husk outlet 


A-7 Overall Dimensions 


a) Length, mm 

b) Width, mm 

c) Height, mm 

d) Ground clearance for discharge, mm 
e) Total mass, kg 


A-8 Tools, Accessories, Operation Manual and Spare Parts List Provided 


NOTES 


1 The item which is not applicable in a particular dehusker should be crossed while filling. 
2 If any other items are provided, their details should be given. 


Test Engineer 


АМХЕХ В 
[Clause 11.4.1.1 (b) 


DATA SHEET FOR MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION 


IS 19040 : 2023 


SI No. Component Material 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Belt guard 
ii) Blower/aspirator 
iii) Blower Impeller 
iv) Blower shaft 
v) Crank gear 
vi) Dehusked millet outlet 
vii) Dehusker impeller 
viii) Dehusker frame 
ix) Dehusking chamber 
х) Discharge hopper 
x1) Feed hopper 
xii) Feed screw 
xiii) Husk outlet/aspirator 
xiv) Impeller shaft 
xv) Inspection doors 
xvi) Plummer block 
xvii) Pulleys 
xviii) Rubber ring/lining 
xix) Any other 


Test Engineer 


IS 19040: 2023 


ANNEX C 
[Clause 11.4.1.1(c)] 


DATA SHEET FOR VISUAL OBSERVATIONS AND PROVISIONS FORADJUSTMENTS 


C-1 Observations: 


a) 
b) 


Provision for inspection window/cover 
Provision for rotating the dehusking chamber 
Adequacy of safety guards on moving parts 
Provision for belt tightening 

Provision for lubrication of moving parts 
Provision for lifting and transport 


Provision for easy changing of components requiring frequent replacement 


Adequacy of protection of bearings from dust 
Tightness of fasteners 

Welding of seams 

Provision for feed regulating and spreading system 
Other observations 


C-2 Provision for Adjustment of: 


a) 
b) 
с) 
d) 
e) 


Feed rate 

Speed of dehusking impeller 
Speed of blower/aspirator impeller 
Air displacement 


Air pressure in pneumatic system, if any 


ANNEX D 
[Clause 11.4.1.2 (а) апа (с)| 
DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT NO-LOAD 


D-1 Observations: 


a) 
b) 


Presence of any marked vibration during operation 
Presence of any undue noise in the dehusker 

Any unusual heating of any component 

Any slippage of belts 

Vibration in blower running 

Non smooth running of shafts in the irrespective bearings 


Any marked unusual wear or slackness in any components 


Test Engineer 


Test Engineer 


8) 


h) 


ANNEX E 


[Clause 11.4.1.3 (a)] 
DATA SHEET FOR TEST AT LOAD 


Details of power supply 

Power rating, kW 

Type of drive 

Type of millet 

Variety of millet 

Moisture content of millet, percent, Wet Basis (w.b) 
Air flow from the blower, m/min. 


Atmospheric conditions: 


1) Temperature, °C; 
2) Pressure, kPa; and 
3) Relative humidity, percent. 


IS 19040 : 2023 


IS 19040 : 2023 


j) Test Data 
51 Date | Starting Stopping Duration | Speed of | Feed Energy Meter Nos. and Quantity of Samples Dehusked Millet 
No. Time Time of Dehusking | Rate Reading in Kernel Output, 
Operation | Impeller Relation to Time 
(Rev/Min) | (kg/h) Time | Energy No. Quantity, kg 
Meter g 
Reading Dehusked | Husk Outlet 
Kernal 
Outlet 
D | © (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
5 1) 
10 ii) 
15 iii) 
20 
25 
30 


k) Observations: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 


Presence of any marked vibration during operation 


Presence of any undue noise in the dehusker 


Smooth running of shafts in their respective bearings 


Undue heating of any component 


Vibration free running of blower/aspirator 


Any marked rise in bearing temperature 


Frequent slippage of belts 


Rise in temperature in the dehusking chamber 


Any marked deformation, wear or breakdown 


10) Frequent loosening of fasteners 


11) Any other observations (if any) 


16 


Test Engineer 


SI No. Feed 
Rate, 
kg/h 
Dehusked Kernel 
(4) 
(1) (2) (4) 


ANNEX Е 


[Clause 11.4.1.3 (б) 
DATA SHEET FOR ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES 


IS 19040 : 2023 


Mass of Different Fractions, Remarks 
g 
| 
Dehusked Kernel Outlet Husk Outlet 
Un-Dehusked Brokens (5) Husk Total Husk Millet Total 
Millet (и) (s) (f) (A) grains 
(k) 
(5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 


17 


Test Engineer 


IS 19040: 2023 


ANNEX G 
[Clause 11.4.1.3 (g) and ()] 


DATA SHEET FOR EFFICIENCY, CAPACITY AND POWER REQUIREMENT 


SI No. Details Test No. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
1) Speed of impeller, rpm 
ii) Feed rate, kg/h 
iii) Dehusking efficiency, percent 
iv) Percentage of brokens, percent 
v) Percentage of husk in dehusked 
millet kernel, percent 
vi) Percentage of millet grain/kernel 
in husk, percent 
vii) Power required, kW 
viii) Rated capacity, kg/h 
ix) Specific power, kWh/tonne 
Test Engineer 
ANNEX H 
(Clause 11.4.1.5) 
DATA SHEET FOR LONG-RUN REST 
1) Total Running Time, h 


2) 


Continuous Running Time, h 


3) Any Major Breakdown 
4) Any Repairs Conducted 
5) Any Other Observations 


Test Engineer 


k) 


m) 


n) 
р) 
4) 
г) 
5) 
0 
ч) 
у) 


w) 


ANNEX J 
(Clause 11.5) 
SUMMARY REPORT 


Name of Testing Station 

Name and Address of Manufacturer 

Model Number 

Brief Description of the Dehusker 

Type of Millet Used 

Variety of Millet Tsed for Test 

Nature of Millet (Raw/Parboiled) 

Moisture Content of Millet, Wet Basis percent, (w.b) 
Adjustments: 


1) Feed rate, kg/h 

2) Speed of dehusking impeller, rpm 

3) Speed of blower/aspirator impeller, rpm 
4) Air displacement, m/min 


Power requirements: 


1) At no load, kW 
2) At load on rated capacity, kW 


Dehusking Efficiency, Percent 


Percentage of Brokens, Percent 

Percentage of Husk in Dehusked Millet Kernel, Percent 
Percentage of Millet Grain/Kernel in Husk Outlet, Percent 
Power Required, kW 

Rated Capacity, kg/h 

Specific Power, kWh/Tonne 

Any Marked Observation Affecting Performance 

Any Major Breakdowns During Test 

Other Observations, If Any 


IS 19040 : 2023 


Test Engineer 


IS 19040: 2023 


ANNEX K 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Agriculture Machinery Manufacturers Association, 
Pune 


CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar 


CSIR - Central Food Technological 
Institute, Mysuru 


Research 
Dr Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 
ICAR - Central Institute for Women in Agriculture, 


Bhubaneswar 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering 
and Technology, Ludhiana 


ICAR - Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, 
Bengaluru 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Indosaw Industrial Products Private 


Ambala 


Limited, 


Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri 


Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture, 
New Delhi 


National Committee on Precision Agriculture and 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


National Institute of | Food Technology, 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Thanjavur 


North Eastern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Biswanath Chariali 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training and 
Testing Institute, Hisar 


Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 


20 


Representative(s) 
DR SHYAM NARAYAN JHA (Chairperson) 


DR SURENDRA SINGH 
SHRI MITUL PANCHAL (Alternate) 


DR RAVI GUPTA 


DR UMESH HEBBAR 
DR NAVIN KUMAR RASTOGI (Alternate) 


DR SUCHITA V. GUPTA 
DR BHAGYASHREE N. PATIL (Alternate) 


DR SACHIDANANDA SWAIN 
ER CHAITRALI S. MHATRE (Alternate) 


Dr 5. К. GIRI 
DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Alternate) 


DR SANDEEP MANN 
DR SANDEEP P. DAWANGE (Alternate) 


DR A. CAROLINA RATHINA KUMARI 
DR S. BHUVANESWARI (Alternate) 


DR K. NARSAIAH 
DR KRISHNA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VINOD H. KALBANDE 


DR VIKRAM PARASHARAM KAD 


SHRIC. R. LOHI 
SHRI Y. К. КАО (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND ZAMBRE 


SHRI KRISHNA KUMAR KAUSHAL (Alternate) 


DR S. BHUVANA 


DR P. P. RAO 
SHRI S. G. PAWAR (Alternate) 


DR MUKESH JAIN 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANDHYA SINGH 
DR MANINDER KAUR (Alternate I) 
DR ROHIT SHARMA (Alternate ЇЇ) 


Organization 


Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


In Personal Capacity (CD 223, Ansal Golf Link 1, 
Greater Noida - 201315) 


In Personal Capacity (MIG - 154, E-7 Sector 
Aerea Colony, Bhopal - 462061) 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, A 


IS 19040 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR V. THIRUPATHI 
DR P. RAJKUMAR (Alternate I) 
DR Р. SUDHA (Alternate П) 


DR PITAM CHANDRA 


SHRIS. D. DESHPANDE 


DR К. VISVANATHAN 


Block Civil, Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 
641014) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE) [REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 
Member Secretary 
SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 


SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(FOOD AND AGRICULTURE), BIS 


Panel to Formulate New Standards on Equipment Used in Primary Processing of Millet, FAD20/P16 


Organization 


ICAR - Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering, 
Bhopal 


ICAR - Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Ludhiana 


Indian Institute of Millet Research, Hyderabad 
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore 


National Institute of Food Technology, Enterpreneurship 
and Management, Thanjavur 


University of Agricultural Sciences, Raichur 


In Personal Capacity (12/36 Sowbhagya Nagar, 
Aerodrome Post, Coimbatore - 641014) 


21 


Representative(s) 


DR RAVINDRA NAIK (Convenor) 
DR DEBABANDYA MOHAPATRA 


DR К. К. VISHWAKARMA 


DR B. DAYAKAR RAO 
DR P. SUDHA 


DR V. PALALNIMUTHU 


DR UDAY KUMAR NIDONI 


DR R. VISVANATHAN 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:FAD 20 (22779). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central ` ` 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 23670012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


