IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969

)

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Tentative Indian Standard
MEASUREMENT OF THE WINDING RESISTANCE OF AN ac MACHINE DURING OPERATION AT ALTERNATING VOLTAGE

UDC 621.313-3

:, 620.16

0 BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 7 ZAF'AR MARG

BHAVAN,

July 1991

IS 13107 T : $991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )

Tentative Indian Standard

MEASUREMENT OFTHEWINDING RESISTANCE OF AN ac MACHINE DURING OPERATION AT ALTERNATINGVOLTAGE
NATlONAL FOREWORD Th.is tentative standard is identica,l. to IEC Report--Publication
279 ( 1969 ) `Measurement of the winding resistance of an ac machine during operation at alternating voltage', issued by the International Elecof Rotating Machinery Sectional specified in the International Committee, trotechnical Commission and is being issued on the recommendations Committee, ETDC 15. The primary object is to apply and gain experience on the method Standard before adopting it as an Indian Standard.

This tentative standard will be reviewed by the Rotating Machinery Sectional aftertwo years for adoption as an Indian Standard or for the withdrawal.

ETDC 15

REFERENCE IEC Pub 34-1 ( 1983 ) `Rotating electrical machines : Part 1 Rating and performance `referred' in this tentative standard may be read as IS 4722 : 1968 `Rotating electrical machines' which is technically equivalent to the former standard.

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub -279 ( 1969 )

INTRODUCTION

This method, which allows the measurement of winding resistances to be made without interrupting the on-load test and, therefore, without having to make extrapolations, is applicable to low-voltage or highvoltage machines of any power rating. The methods of measurement contained in this Report are typical only, and the Report is intended solely for experimental use with a view to gaining experience. For this reason, it will be necessary to establish the accuracy and consistency of the various methods. The values of temperature obtained by the methods contained in this Report may in many cases be from 5 "C to 25 "C higher than those obtained by existing standard methods. It will, therefore, not be practicable to employ the methods of measurement contained in this Report in conjunction with IEC Publication 34-1, Rotating Electrical Machines, Part 1: Rating and Performance. During experimental use of this method of measuring temperature, it will also, therefore, be necessary to establish what temperature rises can be permitted.

1.

Principle of the method

By applying a d. c. voltage across the windings of an a. c. machine on load, a component of direct current is superimposed on the alternating current, and by passing this through a reactance the d. c. and a.~. components can be separated. Measurement of the wjnding resistance can be performed using direct current either in a bridge circuit or' by the volt-ampere method. The choice of the method of measurement, and the actual circuit used, depend on the size and voltage of the machine involved, the connections of its windings and the type of heat run being performed. For each of these methods, only the more commonly accepted diagrams have been retained in the interest of standardization, but it is obvious that a number of alternatives are possible. It is considered that the arrangements for special.machines, e. g., high-frequency a. c. generators, do not fall within the scope of this Report.
No&s 1. - The volt-ampere method is generally preferred for high-voltage machines on account of its simplicity, yet a higher accuracy may be obtained with the bridge method. 2. - The value of the superimposed direct current should be sufficiently low and its time of flowing sufficiently short to prevent any influence on the temperature rise of the windings. If not, the possible correction to be applied should be obtained by computation or by a test. Ir is assumed that, in practice, no correction is to be made if the superimposed direct current does not exceed 5 `A of the alternating load current and if it does not flow for more than 5 min. In fact, for measurements on high-voltage machines, the described method may be applied with much lower direct current, even lower than 1 `A of the lo,ad current, the minimum value of the d.c. voltage measured at the winding and shunt terminals being about 10 mV. 3. - The resistance measurements, when cold, and during the on-load test, should be made by the same method, and using the same apparatus.

3

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )
9
A.

Volt-ampere

method

A direct current, supplied e.g. from a storage battery, is superimposed on the load alternating current and the following values are measured: - the value of the superimposed d.c. flowing through the winding; - the voltage ~drop caused by the superimposed d.c. across the terminals of the windings. This method may be applied whatever the type of connection of the windings (star connection, with or without brought-out neutral; delta connection) but the test circuit to be used will vary accordingly. Three typical arrangements are described hereafter :. Figure 1, page 10, gives the details of the test arrangement for measuring, in the on-load test, the temperature-rise of a star-connected winding with brought-out neutral. Figure 2, page 10; shows the basic diagram to be used for the same machine for the short-circuit test. Figure 3, page 11, shows the basic diagram to be used for a star-connected winding with nonbrought-out neutral. The test arrangement for a delta-connected winding can be easily derived from this diagram. In the case of a star-connected winding with brought-out neutral, the direct current should be injected through the neutral. It is also necessary to provide a return neutral point which, for an onload test, may be that of the stator winding of another machine, or that of the parallel winding of the machine under test-if it has two parallel circuits. Alternatively, the return neutral point may be the neutral point of the main transformer or that of an auxiliary transformer or of zig-zag connected reactors. For a short-circuit test, the return neutral point may be the short-circuited connections of the line terminals. In the case of a winding with non-brought-out neutral, the direct current should be injected between a line and the related terminal of a three-phase inductor. As, in practice, the resistance of a network is much lower than that of the winding under test, it is necessary to prevent the direct current from flowing into the network. For this purpose, capacitors or resistors should be connected between the network and the points where the injection of direct current is made. The diagram (Figure 3) shows a resistor in each phase, but it will be sufficient to have one resistor in the phase under test. Its resistance should have a value approximating that of the winding resistance. These capacitors or resistors are normally short-circuited. them are only opened during the measurements. 2.1 The switches which short-circuit

Method of measurement

The description given hereafter is limited to the case of a star-connected winding with broughtout neutral (Figure 1). The direct current is measured at the terminals of a shunt inserted in the neutral connection: it thus represents three times the average value of the currents injected into each of the three phases. The average value of the d.c. voltage absorbed in the three phases of the winding will be obtained from the reading taken on a microammeter connected between the winding neutral and the neutral of three impedances having equal resistances ra. and star-connected at the output terminals of the windings. It is possible to use for this purpose the primary windings of voltage transformers with high reactance values which limit the flow of alternating currents through d. c. measuring circuits.

IS 13107T : Ml IEC Pub 279( 19@ ) If R/3 is the resistance equivalent to the three phases of the winding under test, ra the resistance of one of the equal impedances, Z the resistance of the microammeter circuit used for measuring the voltage; the injection current Ii and the current i in the microammeter are linked by therelationship:

i=
which gives the resistance:
R=

Rhl3
r + ra/3

t(3

r + ra)

Since the measurement deals with a temperature rise, i.e. a relative variation of resistance, it is not necessary to measure the actual values of R in off-load and on-load conditions, but values proportional to them. It is therefore sufficient that the measuring instruments have deflections in the measurement range which are proportional, in one case, to the d.c. voltage at the terminals of the winding under test, and in the other case, to the direct current which flows through this winding.

2.2 2.2.1

Measuring equipment Shunts

The shunt inserted in the neutral connections will have to carry an alternating current of very low value and it does not raise any design problem. In the case of a delta-connected or star-connected winding with non-brought-out neutral, the a.~. load current will flow through the shunt which should be so designed that its resistance will not be affected by the temperature rise resulting from that current. An isolating switch connected between its terminals will allow it to~be switched on at the time of measurements only. The filter transformer with unity voltage ratio which is connected across the shunt terminals should have a high resistance compared with that of the shunt in order that the d.c. component flowing through it may not affect its magnetic condition. 2.2.2
Microammeters and millivoltmeters

These instruments should be accurate and linear. Their accuracy class shall be 0.5 They should be provided with filgers to prevent a.c. interference with the measurements. The resistance r of the microammeter circuit should be higher than 10 $-. In order to reduce the variations of ra resulting from the temperature rise of the reactor, resistance
r should not be less than 100 ra.

Light spot instruments are generally used. 2.2.3
Voltage transformers used as impedances in the measuring circuit

These three transformers should have reactances as close as possible to each other so as to reduce the residual alternating component which is transmitted to the measuring circuit. If their resistances are not equal, they may be equalized by means of series resistors, or the ratio ra/3 may be replaced in the formula by the calculated value of the resistance equivalent to the three impedances parallel connected. If, as stated in Sub-clause 2.2.2, r is large in relation to ra, (r > 100 ra), this correction is unnecessary.

5

IS J310'7 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )

In order to reduce the influence of their temperature-rises on the value of their resistance, transformers should be chosen with a rated voltage higher than that of the machine. 2.2.4 Auxiliary transforiner

voltage

When, in the absence of a return neutral point in the supply circuit, an auxiliary transformer is used, it is necessary to make sure that the d.c. flow will not cause an undue temperature rise in this apparatus, harmonic). designed 2.2.5 a displacement of the neutral point, For these reasons, it will generally for these tests. or a significant distortion of the waveform (3rd be preferable to use zig-zag reactors especially

Insulation of measuring circuit Although in the case of a high-voltage machine with brought-out neutral,mthe current measuring circuit is at a voltage approximating that of earth, dangerous voltages may arise in the event of an earth fault on a high-voltage phase and it is therefore necessary to have all measuring circuits insulated for the working voltage of the machine, to take remote readings and to use pole-operated switches.

2.2.6

Direct current supply Any d.c. supply of steady voltage may be. used; but, for testing high-voltage machines where the supply source must be insulated, this insulation may be effected more easily by using a storage battery. Direct current can be adjusted by means of an adjustable series resistor, which also serves to limit the alternating current, especially that of the 3rd harmonic, flowing between the neutral points, or by inserting more or fewer cells.

2.2.1

Care to be taken for measurements Since one does not measure the actual direct current which associated voltages, but values which are proportional to them, factors should remain unchanged between measurements made This implies that no change will be made in any characteristic tests, especially in the sensitivity of the instruments, flows through it is important in off-load and of the circuit the winding, or the that proportionality on-load conditions. elements during the

Transient phenomena, especially changes in load, will give rise to d.c. components liable to affect measurements adversely. It is therefore recommended that readings be taken only after they have remained actually constant for about 10 s, and that voltage and current measurements be carried out simultaneously. Moreover, since the mechanical zero of the apparatus can slightly vary during the test, and since it cannot then be adjusted because of the danger of high voltage, the mechanical zero is displaced by a few divisions in order to deduce from the values of deflection read during the test, the value of the mechanical zero deflection checked after each measurement. Finally, it should be ensured that the measuring influence of the a.~. load without d.c. flowing. instruments for d.c. do not move under the

In certain special cases of machines with a high-current rating, i.e. with massive terminals, the differences of potential which may exist along the terminals are likely to influence the degree of accuracy in the measurement of the d.c. voltage drop in the winding under test. This cause of error can be removed by connecting the d.c. voltage measu&g circuit to the winding terminals through equalizing resistors of about 1!CIconnected in accordance with the following diagram.

6

Ei 13107 T : 1991 SEC Pub 279 ( 1969

Terminals

of the winding under test

To the t&t

circuit

3.

Methods using a measuring bridge These methods, which are applicable to the various methods of connecting windings (starconnection with brought-out or non-brought-out neutral, delta-connection), are mainly used for lowvoltage machines. However, Figure 8, page 14, shows a test circuit for a high-voltage machine where windings are star-connected with brought-out neutral. Single or double bridges may be used. It is recommended that a single bridge be used during measurement of resistances of a value higher than 1OsZ. The most usual circuits ~for either case are described hereafter :

3.1

Measurement

of winding temperature

rise on's low-voltage

machine using the double bridge method

According to the method of connection of the winding, thetest circuit shown in Figure 4, page 12~, (star-connection with brought-out neutral) or in Figure 5, page 12, (delta-connection) should be used where :
RI = resistance of a phase winding R2 = calibrated resistor of the measuring bridge Rs-R4 = adjustable resistors of the measuring bridge D = high-reactance a. c. limiting impedances RD = resistance of impedances D z = short-circuiting switch w = switch A = moving-coil ammeter F = filter

The calibrated resistor Rs should be capable of carrying the load current ZPand it is recommended to have : R210.1 RI Adjustable resistors Rs and R4 should have the usual accuracy of resistors for laboratory measuring bridges, i.e. about 0.02%. Impedances D should be wound with a wire having a low-temperature coefficient. The value of their resistance RD should be known with the same accuracy as for resistors Rs and R4. The measuring circuits should be connected by the switch W, with the short-circuiting switch Z open, and disconnected by opening the switch W and closing the short-circuiting switch Z.

7

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Yub 279 1 1969 )

The direct current reading on the ammeter should approximate: - 5% of ID for the circuit on Figure 4, page ,12 (star-connection) ; - 10% to 15% of ZPfor the circuit on Figure 5, page 12 (delta-connection), where ZPis the value of the alternating current flowing through each phase of the machine during the temperature-rise test. For double star-delta connected motors, a star-connection should be chosen for the test.

The resistance of a phase of the winding is given, with the bridge balanced, by the formula:
RI = Rs R3 + R.D

&

3.2

Measurement on a low-voltage machine using the single-bridge method

The basic diagram is shown on Figure 6, page 13. The voltage transformer TI with unity ratio serves to reduce to zero the a.c. voltage across the bridge terminals, whereas the capacitor is used for decouphng, for direct current, the test winding from the network. If this capacitor is not provided, the measured resistance would be that of the winding paralleled by the resistance of the network. It will be seen from this diagram, that the measured resistance is the sum of the resistances of the windings and of the secondary of the voltage transformer. The resistance of the winding is obtained by substracting from this measurement the resistance of the transformer. A double-throw switch placed as indicated in Figure 7, page I 3, and described below, prevents heating of the transformer and variation of its~resistance during the tests. Allowance should be made for the resistance of the auxiliary elements and for their temperature dependence, if any. Since it is necessary to use in this circuit capacitors capable of letting the a.~. load current of the machine flow through them with a voltage drop of low value, the application of the method will be limited to machines of rather low power (about 20 kW to 30 kW). Figure 7 shows the arrangements to be made to apply this method to a star-connected three-phase machine. The measured resistance is that of two phase-windings in series. With deltaconnected windings, the test circuit is the same, but the measured resistance is that of one phase paralleled by the resistance of the other two phases connected in series. If the neutral of the winding under test is connected to earth, a capacitor should be inserted in each phase of the supply.

The four-pole double-throw switch shown in Figure 7 has a number of purposes:

i) To connect the voltage transformer during resistance measurements only, so as to reduce its
temperature rise. It should also be noted that the purpose of this transformer is to supply a voltage in opposition to the a.~. voltage across the bridge terminals, but not to supply power. Under these conditions, the temperature rise liable to affect the resistance of its secondary winding is considerably lower.
ii)

To short-circuit the capacitor banks during the periods where no measurements are made. for a possible change before carrying out resistance measurements. It should be noted that two poles of the switch in parallel have been used to reduce contact resistance in this circuit and make it more stable.

iii) To allow the resistance of the secondary winding of the transformer to be checked periodically

8

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 .( 1969 )

If instead of measuring temperature-rises at intervals, it is desired to observe their continuous variation, it will be necessary to keep the voltage transformer switched on until steady state is attained before beginning the test, and measuring the resistance of the winding cold. The capacitor connected to the measuring bridge terminals is used for minimizing the effects of switching surges on the measuring circuit. 3.3
Measurement on a high-voltage machine using a bridge method

The connection diagram is shown at Figure 8, page 14, for a star-connected machine with broughtout neutral. The d.c. voltage supplying the bridge is applied between the neutral points of the machine and {of a transformer T. A reactor Li opposes the flow of third harmonic currents bet'ween the two neutral points. A.C. components in the measuring circuit are filtered by means of a voltage transformer Ti with a l/l ratio connected across the terminals of shunt R2, the resistance of the primary winding being large in relation to Rs, or by means of a reactor L2 in series with resistor Rs and a capacitor connected in parallel with the arm Rs R.4.of the bridge. The conditions necessary for the accuracy of measurements on reactors and shunt resistors and the safety precautions to be taken against high voltages are the same as for the volt-ampere method. If the neutral point of the machine is solidly earthed, the bridge circuit may simply be protected with a spark gap.

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )

A - VOLT-AMPERE

METHOD
Winding under test

0

T

3-phase supply

L c reactor which may be provided for limitation of 3rd harmonic current

T, - auxiliary transformer .FIG. 1. -

or zigzag reactor

On-load

test.

Winding

under test

aK
mV F F = filter Test arrangements for current and voltage filters and supply circuits

Q_
PA

are the same as for the on-load test (Figure 1).

FIG. 2. -

Short-circuit

test, basic diagram.

10

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )

Winding

under

test SUPPlY

F

= filter

Nore. - For machines with rather low power, resistors RI, RZ and R3 may be replaced by capacitors. Filters are of a design similar to those in Figure 1. The various switches necessary for the test are not shoun on the drawing.

FIG. 3. -

Star-connected

winding

without

brought-but

neutral,

basic diagram.

11

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )

3-phase

supply

under test

F

r filter

FIG.

4. -

Measurement

with

a double

bridge on a star-connected

low-voltage

winding.

Winding 3-phase supply

under test

F = filter

FIG. 5. -

Deita-connected

winding.

12

IS 131-07T : 1991 IEC Pub279 ( 1969 )

Winding SUPPlY

under

test

r-----

T,

=

voltage

transformer

FIG. 6. - -Basic diagram for the single-bridge

method.

r---0

II

- -

--

-7

1" I
3-phase supply 1 1 "enwinding

I
under test

t-_-l

I

I

-__+--_------/

P

1
I

I

Pont de mesure ' Measuring bridge

T, = voltage

transformer

l/l

S

= signalling

lamp

FIG. 7. -

Test arrangement a single-bridge

for measurements method.

on a star-connected

low-voltage

three-phase

winding

using

13

IS 13107 T : 1991 IEC Pub 279 ( 1969 )

r-

L ,
I

I
L__

Winding under test

1

;

Al
T

--_ .__*

--+

T

D.C. supply

L

= reactor which may be provided

for limitation

of 3rd harmonic

current

T

= transformer

FIG. 8. -

Measurement

on a star-connected

high-voltage

winding

using a bridge method.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certif?cation of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any from without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type of grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Revision of Indian St-duds Indian Standards arereviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent in BIS -giving the following reference : Dot : No. ETD 15 ( 3060 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters
:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Z&r Telephone : 331 _Ol31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches

Marg, New Delhi 110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all Offices) Telephone

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Z&r

Marg

t 331 331 01 13 75 31 37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

NEW DELHI 110001
: I/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola,

CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH 160036

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East )

BOMBAY 400093
: AJSMADAJUD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARlDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUA. PATNA. THIRWANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at the Central Electric Press, Delhi-7 India

