(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS:1324-1966 ( Superseding IS : 1325 - 1958 )

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS RELATING TO MAN-MADE FIBRE AND FABRIC INDUSTRY (
Man-Made
Chairman
SHRI D. N. SHROFF

First Revision )
and Fabric Sectional Committee, TDC 10
Representing
Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association Ltd, Bombey

Fibre

Members
The Trevencore Rayons Ltd. Reyonpurem SHRI S. ARUMU~AM SHRI P. S. HARIHARAKRISHNAN ( Alternate ) Nation81 Test House, Celcutte SHRI S. K. BOSE Government of Utter Predeah DR E. D. DARUVALA The Silk & Rayon Textiles Export Promotion SHRI 0. P. DAAWAN Council, Bombay Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay SHRI I. B. DUTT SHRI D. H. VORA ( Alternate ) The Sirsilk Lt.d, Sirpur-Kagheznager SHRI M. A. EKAMBARAX SHRI K. C. BHANDARI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development OR M. P. KHERA (Ministry of Supply & Technical Development) SHRI M. P. SIN~H ( Alter&e ) Textiles Committee, Bombay SHRI S. KRISHNAN Imperial Chemical Industries ( Indie ) Private SFIRIR. KUNJUR Ltd, Celoutte SHRI LAXMICHANDDUI,ABHJI The Silk Merchants' Association, Bombey Association of Men-Made Fibre Industry, Bombay SHRI S. P. MANDELIA SHRI K. hIANIVANNAN Shri Rem Institute for Industrial Reseerch,.Delhi SHRI I. H. PAREKE The Gwelior Reyon Silk Mfg ( Wvg ) Co Ltd, Negda SHRI A. S. MEHTA ( Alternate ) The National Rayon Corporation Limited, DEM. D. PAREKH Bombay The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Aasooietion, SHRI J. G. PARIKH Bombay SHHI M. R. RAO Ministry of Defenoe ( DGI ) Sum P. `I. PANDYA ( Alternate ) DR S. I. TARAPOREWALA The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay

( Continued on page 2 ) INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADLiR DELHI NEW

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 1324- 1966
( Continued from page 1 1 Members SHBI.J. K. TURAKHIA

Representing
Silk h Art Silk Mills' Association Ltd, Bombay The Millowners' Association, Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member )

SHBI 8. J. VALLADARES SHBI M. RAOHUPATAY, Deputy Director ( Tex )

Secretary Saar P. VENKATARAMAN
Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI

Man-Ma'de Fibres and Yarns
Convener
DE M. D. PABEKH

Subcommittee,

TDC

10: 1

The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay

Members
The Trevsncore Rayons Ltd, Rayonpuram SE P. 5. HAEIHARAKEISENAN ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SEE1 8.%. BOSE SEBI 8. P. MULLICK( Alternate ) The Netionel Art Silk Mills Private Ltd, Bombay SHRI I. D. DESAI The Indian Cotton Mills Federation, Bombay SHBI FL DORAI~WAMI The Sirsilk Ltd, Sirpur-Kagheznager SHBI M. A. EKAMBAEATU SEEI K; C. BEANDAIU ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development DB M. P. KEERA (Ministry of Supply & Technical Development) SEEKJASTINDERSINGH ( Alternate ) S~BI KEISHNAKUI~~EM. MEHTA The Ambike Silk Mills Co Ltd, Bombay The Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg ( Wvg ) Co Ltd. SEEM I, H. PABEKH Nagde SHBI A. S. MEETA ( Alternate ) The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, SBEI J. G. P4EIKH Bombay Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies SBBI I. L. PATEL & Disposals ( Ministry of Supply & Technical Development ) SHEI S. K. CHAUDWBY ( Alternate ) Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association Ltd, Bombay SEEI N. M. PATEL SHBI T. K. SAE~AEAVADIVELU South India Viscose Limited, Coimbrtore DE C. ROSSI ( Alternate ) Silk & Art Silk Mills: Association Ltd, Bombay SHBI SI7EESHA. SHAH The National Rayon Corporation Ltd, Bombay DB S. I. TAEAPOBEWALA The Rayon Mills Commercial Corporation Ltd, SBBI J. K. TUEAKHIA Bombay Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay SHBI D. H. VOEA

SEBI S. AEIJMU~AE

,

Man-Made
Convener
SHEI D. N. SHROVE

Fibre Fabrics

Subcommittee,

TDC

10 : 2

Silk and Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay ( Continued on page 28 )

2

IS:1324-l!M6

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS RELATING TO MAN-MADE FIBRE AND FABRIC INDUSTRY

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD 0.1This
Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 December 1966, after the draft finalized by the Man-Made Fibre and Fabric Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council.

0.2 The glossary of textile terms relating to man-made fibre and fabric industry was originally published as two separate Indian Standards; one covering the textile terms relating to man-made fibres or filaments ( IS : 13241958* ) and the other covering fabrics made from man-made fibres or filaments ( IS : 1325-1958t 1. 0.3 The present revision of the above two standards was taken up to include a host of new definitions which have come into vogue in the recent years as a result of the developments in the man-made fibre industry. This opportunity has also been availed of to combine both the Indian Standards into one, thus covering the definitions of terms relating to man-made fibre and fabric industry in one comprehensive standard. 0.4 This standard has been Prepared with the intention of eliminating ambiguity or confusion arismg from local interpretations of definitions of terms commonly used in the man-made fibre and fabric industry and Some of the terms covered to establish a generally recognized usage. in this standard are also applicable to the other sectors of the textile industry. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has Been derived from the following publications: Handbook No. 11-1963 Methods of tests for textiles. British Standards Institution.
*Gloaaary tGloaaary of :extile terms of textile terms fabrics mede from men-made fibrea or filament& man-made fibres or filamenta.

3

IS:l324-l!M Textile terms Manchester. and definitions. 5th Ed. The Textile Textile Institute, Ltd,

The ` Mercury ' dictionary Manchester.

of textile terms.

Mercurv

ASTM Designation: D 123-65 Definitions of terms relating to textile American Society for Testing and Materials. materials.
LEEMINO (JOSEPH).

Brooklyn.
LONTON

Rayon.

1950.

Chemical

Publishing

Co,

The Modern-Textile dictionary. 1954. Duel, (GEORGE). Sloan and Pearce, Little, Brown h Co, New York. Harris' Handbook of textile fibres. MILTON ( HARRIS ), Ed. 1954. Harris Research Laboratories Inc, Washington. 0.5.1 The definitions of terms adopted from `,Textile terms and definitions ' published by the Textile Institute, Manchester, are indicated by ( ** ) mark.

la SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes definitions of terms commonly used in the Part 1 of the standard contains man-made fibre and fabric industry. the definitions of terms relating to man-made fibres or filaments and Part 2 contams the definitions of terms relating to man-made fibre fabrics.
l.2 Definitions of terms relating to textile machinery, fabric defects and mill accessories have not been covered in this standard. 2. DEFINJTIONS PART I hANWADE FIBRES

A
Abraded Yam - Continuous filament yarn in which the outer filaments have been purposely cut or abraded at intervals to bring about a certain Abraded yarns are usually plied with other yarns de ee of hairiness. be Fr ore using. Abrasion -The surface. wearing away of any part of a material against another

Acetate - A specific term used for man-made fibres, monofilaments and continuous filament yarns of acetylated cellulose, with less amount of non-fibre forming material or without it. 4

Is:

1324-l9tM

Acetate Modii .ed - Acetate products composed principally of cellulose acetate and containing a certain amount of other fibre-forming material. Acrylic Fibre - -1 man-made cent or more of acrilonitrile. fibre made entirely or containing 85 per-

Aerated Yarn - A special type of viscose yarn, in which is enclosed a small amount of air or some inert gas. It is also known as `hollow filament `, ` tubular yarn ' or ' macaroni yarn `. Animalizing - A chemical process designed to confer on man-made fibres an affinity for dyestuffs normally used on wool. The process is carried out during or after the manufacture of the fibres. Anti-crease Process - A chemical or mechanical treatment or both of fabric to increase its capacity of recovery from wrinkling or mussing. designed to prevent Anti-shrink Treatment -Treatment shrinking when subjected to wetting or laundering. Anti-static Agent - A compound applied to textiles retention of electrical charges by the fibre. Arrasene A cord of man-made Atmosphere-Fading See ` Gas-Fading `. and rinsed rayon yarns fabrics from the

to eliminate purpose.

fibre used for embroidery

Avivage - The after treatment of desulphurized in order to give a soft hand to the stock.

Azlon - A generic term for fibres or filaments manufactured from modified proteins or derivatives thereof, with less amounts of non-fibre forming material or without it.

Ball Warp - Warp, which after being wound on a warping miI1, is bunched together in twistless rope form and then made into a ball or similar form. Ball-Warp Sizing ball warp or rope. The application of size to warp yarn in the form of

Basified Viscose - Viscose rayon which has been modified by treatment with synthetic resins in such a way that it can be dyed with dyes normally used for wool. Beaming - Winding of warp yarns on the warp beam cloth on a tube or a beam. or winding &f

Blending - A process of mixing fibres of different lots, varieties to produce yarns having desired characteristics. 5

types and

Is : 1324 - 1966 f*Blowiing ( Steam ) -- A process applied during finishing inwhich steam
is blown through cloth usually wound on a perforated Describes 0 Bolt yarns. 10 cm. . A roll or length of fabric. It is generally used for binding or trimming in widths up to at the breaking the compact, roller. gzcsolid or firm feel of a textile stock or

Braid - A narrow tubular or flat fabric produced by intertwining sets of

fhw;king Elongation ( or Exteosion ) - The elongation

Breaking Extensioo, Percent - The extension at breaking load expressed
as a percentage of the original length.

Breaking Load - The

maximum load ( or force ) supported by a specimen in a tensile test carried to rupture. It is commonlv expressed in grams ( kilograms ) or in ounces ( pounds ).

Breaking Stress - The value of the stress at breaking load in a tensile fest. bright Yarn-A
semi-dull, general term for lustrous yarn as contrasted extra-dull or matt yarn. rugged, short, stiff fibre. to dull,

Bristle -Any

Bulked Yarns - A yarn that has been prepared in such a way as to have
greater covering capacity or ` apparent volume ' than that of conventional yarn of equal linear density and of the same basic material with normal twist.

Btiy

Yqrns

a) Yarns in which the apparent density of the filaments is much lower than the real density, for example ` hollow filament yarns `, the cross-sectional appearance of which is so grossly irregular that close packing is impossible.

b) Spun .yarns made from staple fibres having a high degree
resilience, such as protein fibres, acrylic fibres.

of by

Bullion Cord - A cord having a core yarn, usually cotton, twisting other yarns, usually ` rayon `, around it.
made with a hard twist and used in stitching bgtton-holes tc give strength. 6

covered

Button-Hole-Twist - A multiple ply sewing thread of man-made

fibre around the edges of

IS:1324-1966

C
Cabled Yarn Cake -An
Cake Sizing Yarn produced by twisting two or more plied yarns.

annular-shaped Application

package

of man-made

fibre yarn.

of size to yarns

in cake form.

Carding - The separation and partial cleaning by processing a tangled or matted mass of fibres to a filmy web by working the fibres between two closely spaced, relatively moving surfaces, clothed with sharp points. Casein Fibre which forming is obtained A synthetic fibre made from from milk by precipitation. protein, namely, casein

Cellulose Acetate substance

A regenerated cellulosic fibre in which the fibre is cellulose acetate, an acetic acid ester of cellulose.

of cellulose and acetic acid. This, however,

Cellulose

Diacetate

-

Theoretically, cellulose diacetate is a compound acid containing 48.8 percent of combined acetic is not a commercial product. in a

Cellulose
which Cheese flangeless

Triacetate

not less than

- A generic term for cellulose acetate fibres 92 percent of the hydroxyl groups are acetylated.
package of yarn usually paper or other material of squeezing. of a fibre or yarn to recover by continuous looselv filament cross wound on

A cylindrical tube of wood,

Compressibility
cofnpressional

-

Ease

Compressional

deformation.

Resilience - The ability Yarn -

from or

Continuous
filaments strands

into a single

Filament

A yarn formed continuous strand. A term applied

Cord (or Cabled Yarn) including: a) cabled yarns,

to E variety

of textile

b) plied yarns c) structures cords.

used in tyres, made

and & by plaiting or braiding,

for

example,

parachute

ment calculated from proportionate commercial

Correct Invoice Weight -

`Ihe weight of a textile materral in a consignits oven-dry weight by adding to it the moisture regain
spacmg in a

Cover -The
fabric

degree of evenness and closeness of threat to produce the effect of a uniform plane surface. 7

`ts:1324-1966 a cloth is'covered

Cover Factor -A

number that indicates the extent to which the area af by one set of.threads. property which enables a fabric to resist

Crease Resistance -The wrinkling or mussing.

Creep - Deformation which is time dependent and exhibited by a textile material subjected to continuing load. Creep is recoverable or non-recoverable following removal of the applied load. Creep, Primary - The recoverable
component of creep after some time. component of creep.

Creep, Secondary - The non-recoverable

**Crepe Yarn - A twisted single yarn which, when woven into a cloth of suitable construction and given the appropriate finishing treatment, is capable of producing a pebbled surface effect.
NOTE I-

Originally,

highly twisted natural

silk yarn.

Example:
J/lS/lp denier. twist either S or Z, 2 200 tpm. in a similar construction from other yarns are produced NOTE 2 -Crepe natural and man-made fibres.

Crinkled Yarn -- A stretch yarn in which the deformation is wave like. The crimp is obtained by knitting a yarn into a fabric, heat setting the fabric and then back winding the yarn from the fabric. Cross Dyeing - A method of dyeing a union fabric in 2 baths successively
with different class of dyes.

Curing -The setting of a resin, plastic or chemical in textile material. The setting is usually obtained by heating. D Deformation -A change in the shape of a specimen, for exar ple, an increase in length produced as a result of the application of a load. Deformation may be immediate or delayed, and the latter may be recoverable or non-recoverable. Deformation, Delayed - See ` Creep `. Oeformatioq, Immediate Elastic - Recoverable
deformation which is essentially independent of tin_:, that is, deformation occurring in a time approaching zero time and recoverable in a time approaching zero time after removal of the applied load. &bric.

Delostering - A process of reduction of the natural
8

lustre of yarn or

IS:1324-1966 Denier number A unit of yarn of grams per 9000 number which metres of yarn. is numericallv equal to the

Density,

Linear -

The

mass per unit length. a reed wire and the space between material.

Dent - The unit of a reed comprising the adjacent wires. Desizing Dimensional
original A process of removing

size from textile

Restorability

dimensions A group

-The ability of a fabric to return to its expressed as a percentage of the original dimensions.

Dole through

of ` Rayon

' skeins twisted

into a roll. as prepared for extrusion

**Dope -

A solution of a fibre forming a spinning jet.

polymer

Dope-Dyed Fibre or Filament Dope-Dyeing
coloured

-

Yarn

or tow produced

by dope-dyeing. of

- Production of coloured' yarn or tow by incorporatioi pigments in the spinning solution.

Drape placed

The manner in which a fabric on a form frame or manikin. process of hot or cold molecular orientation.

falls when worn on the body or of man-made fibres to

Drawing-A
increase

stretching

Dressing
a) Sizing applied or firmness. to yarn or cloth to add weight, smoothness, on a beam, yajns before weaving. from strength ball-warp

b) The operation of assembling beam or chain, immediately

Dull Yarn incorporating solution.

Yarn which has a very subdued lustre usually produced by finely divided particles of titanium dioxide in the spinning process of colouring textile materials.

Dyeing -

The

E Elasticity - The property of a material by virtue of which it tends to deform on application of stress and to recover its original size and shape immediately after removal of the stress causing deformation. Elongation stretched percentage In a tensile test, the difference specimen and its initial length, of the latter. 9 between usually the length of a expressed as a

1s : 1324- 1966

Embossing-

A process by which rolls to give raised effect. or elongation percedtage following of initial

a fabric

is pressed

between

engraved extension as a

Extensibility - The ability

of a textile material to undergo the application of sufficient force. test, the elongation

Extension, Percent - In a tensile
length. F

expressed

Fashioning - Decreasing

or increasing the width of a knitted fabric during the knitting operation so that it conforms to a definite shape when the fabric is made into a garment.

Fibre Strength - Average

breaking

load of a single fibre.

Filament - A fibre of indefinite Filament or Yarn Number-The
expressed in suitable

length. or yarn

linear density of a filament units as tex, denier, millitex, etc.

Filling
a) Non-substantive and generally insoluble material, such as chinaclay and gypsum, added to fabrics together with starches or gums during finishing to add weight or to modify the appearance and handle of fabrics. b) A synonym for weft yarn. process of fabrics to impart to them the desired Finishing -The appearance and feel by means of bleaching, dyeing, printing or in any other manner.

Flexibility
a) The ease of bending stiff ( low ). b) In the rupture of a fabric ranging from pliable ( high ) to without

case of a fibre or fracture.

it is the ability

to be deformed

Flexoral Fatigue - A physical property expressed m terms of the number
of times a material can be bent on itself through before it ruptures or loses the ability to recover. a prescribed

angle,

Flock
a) Fibrous particles, chiefly those of fabrics, napped goods, etc. b) Flock obtained from rayon staple 10 obtained or tow. from shearing the pile

IS:1324-1966 Flocking - The application field to a surface previously **Foggy Yarn atmosphere. together novelty Yarn soiled of flock by dusting or by an coated with an adhesive. during processing by dirt electrostatic in the twisted as a

suspended yarns

Folded

Yarn -Yarn
Yarn

composed in one operation. with spiral

of two

or more effect

single usually

Frill Yarnyarn.

or corkscrew

made

G
Garnetting A mechanical process of opening hard and soft waste. of textile material

Gas-Fading by the action

Changes in hue or the fading of certain acidic gases. Glass in a form suitable

of colour

Glass ( Textile ) primarily

for spinning

or weaving. structure

Gut Thread -

A thread incorporated for the purpose of limiting

in a woven its extension.

or braided

H Hank
a) A synonym for skein. A yarn or twine in coiled roving, form. yarn or filament, or roving. b) A definite length of sliver, slubbing, for example, 840 yd of cotton yarn. c) A synonym for count as applied

to sliver,

slubbing,

Hank-Sizing
hank form.

( or Skein Sizing)

-

The

application

of size to yarn in

Heat-Setting -The process of stabilisation of fibres, yarns or fabrics to any shape by the action of moist or dry heat. The process consists essentially in exposing the material while under dimensional control and shape to a temperature higher than any temperature likely to be met with in its subsequent use. Heat-Relaxation
heat allowing

- The process of exposing the fabric complete freedom for the yarn or fabric

to moist or dry to shrink.

High Bulk Yarn -Spun synthetic yarns which owe their bulk to the blending of pre-shrunk and unshrunk fibres in which the different degree of shrinkage in the fibres in wet finishing produces a bulking out of the yarn.
11

IS:1324-1%6 High Draft - A draft which is higher than that normally
the conventional three roller system at the fly frames possible with or spinning frames.

Hollow Yarn or Filament -See
of air, expressed in grams

` Aerated

Yarn

`.

Humidity, Absolute - The weight of water vapour present in unit volume
per cubic metre, grams per cubic foot, etc.

K Knitting - The process of producing a fabric the interlooping of one or more yarns. Knot Strength -The
having an overhead clamps. It is used

.
with the aid of needles by

breaking load required to rupture a single strand knot in the portion of the specimen between the as an approximate measure for brittleness of yarn.

L
Lease - In weaving, the system of crossing the warp yarns in a loom, between the yarn beam and heddles, effected by passing each warp yarn Alternately over and under two lease rods.

Lofty - Describes fibres or yarns which are open, lively, highly and springy, resuming normal position after pressing in hand. M Macaroni Yarn See ( Aerated
yarn. fungal growth on a heavily of finished sized textile fabric. Yarn `.

elastic

Matt Yara - Dull-lusterd Mildew - A superficial
or sizing material.

material

Mill Ends - Remnants Mill Run -Yarns,
inspected have been

or short lengths

fabrics or other textile products which or which do not come up to the standard quality. a fabric `. combined.

are

not

Mixed - Describes

or yarn in which two or more types of fibres

Mixture - See ` Blending

Modified Rayon - Rayon composed principally of regenerated cellulose and containing amounts of non-regenerated cellulose fibre-forming material; for example, a fibre spun from viscose containing casein or other proteinous fibre.

IS:1324-l!Ri6 Modulus of Elasticity -The ratio of the stress expressed in force per unit linear density (denier ) to the strain ( percent elongation ). Moisture Equilibrium-The condition reached by a sample or specimen in a controlled atmosphere when the net difference between the amount of moisture absorbed and the amount of moisture desorbed, as shown by change in weight, shows no trend and becomes insignificant. Monofilament - A single filament in normal textile operations. Multifilament of sufficient size to function as a yarn

Yarn with many continuous

filaments or strands.

Nap t

N The downy or fuzzy surface of cloth produced by brushing. in

Novelty Yarn -Yarns produced for special effects; usually uneven size or colour. Flakes, nubs and slubs are typical of novelty yarn.

Nylon - A generic term for man-made fibres in which the fibre forming substance is any long chain synthetic polyamide having recurring amide groups ( -C-NH- ) as an integral part of the polymer chain.

0 Olelln - A man-made fibre in which the fibre forming substance is any long chain synthetic polymer composed of at least 85 percent by weight of ethylene, propylene or other olefin units. process for imparting improved whiteness to an Optical Bleach -A uncoloured textile material in the form of fibres, filaments, yarns or fabrics by application of colourless compounds which flouresce under ultra violet light. The apparent whiteness of the textile material is increased due to increase in the apparent reflectance in the visible region by conversion of ultra violet radiation into visible light. weight of a sample of textile material dried to Oven-Dry Weight -The substantially constant weight in an oven maintained at 105" f 3�C and supplied with air at the standard atmospheric conditions (65 f 2 percent relative humidity and 27" & 2�C ). P or rough surface texture

Pebble -

The irregular

of a fabric.

Perching -

A process of examining

cloth for defects. vapour or gas under a

Permeability - The rate of flow of fluid, differential pressure through a material. 13

IS : 1324 - 1966 Picks which The weft or filling A dull has been yarn which or coloured added. lies across yarn spun the length from form of a fabric. to of

Pigmented Pile -

Yarn -

a solution all or part

a pigment

The raised loops or tufts ( cut loops ) that the surface of a pile Fabric. The yarn Describes forming simplest the loops or tufts knit structure fabric.

Pile Yarn Plain Knit Porosity

( cut loops ) of a pile

as in hose. within the plus air or

- `The ratio of the volume of air or void contained boundaries of a material to the total volume ( solid material void ) expressed as a percentage. application colours.

Printing

The decoration of the surface-or surfaces of textiles by the of insoluble pigments or dyes in definite repeated forms and

R Raising of woven The production of a layer of protruding fibres on the surface or fnitted fabrics, by brushing, teazling or rubbing. monofilaments cellulose with it and less

RayonA generic term for man-made fibres, continuous filaments composed of regenerated amounts of non-fibre fo+minv material or without Rayon, Modified Rayon Spun Yarn Rayon Staple -Rayon
or by cutting Rayon staple rayon tow.

See ` Modified

Rayon

`. Yarn `. waste. directly into rayon

Rayon, Solution-Dyed

or Spun-Dyed -- See ` Pigmented
Yarn spun from rayon staple

or cut rayon

fibres of spinnable length manufactured This does not include rayon waste. cutting

Tow -

A multifilament strand suitable for or spinning directly into spun rayon yarn.

R&Jiiace The property of a material by virtue of which return to the original state from its deformed state.

it is able to on a

Roving -.- A continuous
r&ing frame and from

slightly twisted strand which yarn is spun.

of fibres

produced

S Saran A man-made vinyl chloride. fibre composed of copqlymers of vinylidene and

14

Is:1324-1964
Sase (or
different

Sases ) Yarn count.

Spun rayon

yarn

made to

of viscose

stade

of

Sizing, Single End-Application winding from one yarn package

of size to another. assemblage place

individual

yarns

during

Sliver, carded twist.

A continuous thickened

of a strand

of fibres without

Slug-An

abruptly

in yarn.

Snag-ResistanceThe ability of a hosiery fabric, held under a predetermined and uniform tension, to resist a downward penetration and pull of an adjustable snagging needle. Snarls from Small curly portions in a yarn with twist. snarls or kinks projecting

Snarl Yarn the core.

A compound

yarn which displays

Soaking to throwing.

Treatment

applied

to skein or cake of rayon yarn preparatory Fibre or Filament `.

Solution-Dyed

Yarn - See ` Dope-Dyed See ` Dope-Dyeing '

Solution Dyeing -

fibre in which the fibre forming long chain synthetic polymer comprised of at least segmented polyurethane.

Spandex - A man-made

substance is a 85 percent of

5

Spinning

a)

The -process of making liquid materials.

yarns

or

cordage

from

fibres,

tow

or

b)

The formation of a yarn by a combination and twisting opeation applied to prepared rovings. extrusion by pressure solution into a coagulating filament or filaments.

drawing or drafting fibre masses, such as

Cl The 4

through a spinnerett of a liquid or medium which produces a solid of*

The formation of a yarn from filaments by the combination cutting and breaking, together with drafting and twisting a single series of operations. a characteristic goods on smooth

in

Spiral Yarn Sponging steam

A plied yarn: displaying of one component around the o;hey. The process of steaming box to obtain shrinkage.

spiralling
s&d

piece

a pqifc$+ted

/

15

IS:1324-1964 Spooling - The winding of yarn or sliver on spools. Spun-Dyed Yarn - See ` Dope-Dyed Fibre or Filament `. Spun-Dyeing - See t Dope-Dyeing
`. Stagger - In rayon sizing, the placing of bundles of yarn in the basket in rows alternating in the order of bricks in a wall.

Staple Length - A measure of fibre'length
tive sample from a bulk,

of a typical

and representa-

charge on fibres, yarns or fabrics static - Accumulation of electrostatic when they rub against each other or against the insulated parts of the processing machinery.

Strength, Tearing - The force required fabric under specified conditions. Strengtb, Tensile General -The Stress, General - The

to start or continue a tear in a

strength shown by a specimen subjected to tension as distinct from torsion, compression or shear.

resultaxit internal resistance to deformation d_evtloped within a specimen subjected to an external force, for example, tensile stress, shear stress, or co.mpressional stress.
usually reaches a maximum at the-time of rupture. When a NOTE -Strew textile material is subjected to a .stress below that causing rupture, the stress' graduall,lls %eerruewith time.

b

stretch - A cprocess change ' accompanied Stretch, Warp - The Stretch Yarns -Yarns
during sizing operation. amount of s&etching

by an increase in dimension. sustained by warp yarn

made from thermoplastic fibre, usually in the form of continuous filament, which are capable of pronounced degree of stretch and rapid recovery. , ;l

Synthetic - A term to denote man-made
by the polymeAzation of monomers.

fibres or filaments

produced

1

a) The dimension in length yarn on twisting. b) The difference between the straightened and woven lengths warp threads due to their bending around the weft threads.

of

of

Tape Sizing - A process of applying size to ;he warp.
16

IS: Taping together without A defect in sized warps in which groups by size to give a tape like appearance. Preparation of weavers the application of size. beam directly of ends from

1324 - 1966
are stuck yarns

Taping, Dry Tare -

crepe

The weight of all external and internal case, bale or other type of container including tubes, etc.

packing materials of a the weight of bobbins, of a material to a force

Tensile
tending

Test -A
to stretch
NOTE

test to measure the resistance the specimen in one direction. test is not regarded

The tearing

RS a tensile test. cold or heat.

Thermal Character Thread ( Sewing)

-

A term

used to denote

plied, characterized - A variety of yarn, normally by a combination of twisting and finishing with solid or semi-solid, waxlike materials to secure a smooth, compact strand which is quite flexible but presents no loose fibres.

Throwing --Doubling Top -- An untwisted
made direct

and twisting

of filamentous

yarns. after combing or

strand of staple fibre from man-made fibre tow.

obtained

Tubular Yarn -

See ` Aerated

Yarn

`. which twist. each

Twist, Cable-A twine, cord or rope construction in ~successive `iwist is in the opposite direction to the preceding Twist, Hawser and first ply construction;

A twin:, cord or rope construction in which the single twists are m the same direction, as in S/S/Z or Z/Z/S the twist

Twist Setting

- Any of the several methods used to fix or set in yarns to prevent snarling, tangling or kinking. Tyre-Cord -Cabled
as reinforcement yarn in tyres. made from natural or synthetic

fibres for use

V Vinyon - A man-made and vinyl acetate.
fibre made from copolymer of vinyl chloride

W Warping machine The preparation of warps for looms by arranging the yarns on a beam. 17 or for warp knitting

IS : 1324 - 1966 from a warp beam

Warp-Knit Fabric Warp ( or End )
a) Threads

A fabric knitted on a machine and guides each yarn separately

that receives yarns from each needle.

lengthwise

in a fabric

as woven. running in the same

b) A number of threads in long lengths and direction intended for weaving or knitting.

Warp Stretch -See Weight,

` Stretch

Warp

`.

Commercial-The oven-dry weight of staple, spun yarn or filament yarn after scouring by definite methods plus the weight corresponding to their commerCia1 moisture regain. Weight, Gross-The
total weight of a consignment case, bale or sample; including the weight of packing materials, containers and of supports, such as cones, bobbins, etc. Y

Yarn -

A continuous strand of textile fibres or filaments with or without twist suitable for plying, knitting, braiding, weaving, or otherwise intertwining to form a textile end product. Yarn occurs in the following forms: a) Spun Yarn - A yarn twisted together; b) composed of fibres ( short length, of and cellophane
cabled yarn,

or staple ) filaments

Filament
assembled

Yarn -A

yarn with or without

composed twist; twist;

continuous

c) A monofilament,

with or without

d) A narrow strip of materials, foil, with or without twist.
NOTE - Varieties fancy yarn, etc.

such as paper,

or metal
cord, thread,

include single yarn, plied yarn,

Yarn, Backing the stuffer fibres. yarn

The base yarn that holds the pile in place and the warp and the weft. A single yarn spun from a blend or mixture

formed

by

Yarn, Blended -

of different

Yarn, Cabled ( or Cord ) Yarn, Carded -- Yarns
combed

See ` Cord ( or Cabled

Yarn

) `.

made in the manufacturing

from fibres that have been carded but not process. Most spun yarns are of this type.

Yarn, Combination
types of fibres,

- A ply yarn twisted from single yarns of different for example, silk and rayon or viscose and acetate rayon.
18

IS : 1324- 1966 Yarn, Cross-Blended
different types rayon staple.

- A single yarn spun from a blend or mixture of of fibres, for example, yarn spun from cotton fibre and

Yarn,

Fancy-

appearance deliberately

A yarn that differs significantly from the normal of a single or plied yarn due to the presence of irrecularities, produced during its formation.

Yarn, Filament Yarn, Flake -

See ' Yarn

( b ) `. intentional flakes or unevenness

Spun yarn in fibre arrangement.

containing

Yarn, Intermediates
conversion tops, etc.

- A generic term for products obtained during the of fibres to yarns, including card webs, laps, slivers, rovings,
of paper `. manufactured

Yarn, Kraft - A yarn made by twisting a strip from wood pulp by the sulphate process. Yarn Number See ` Filament
or Yarn Number

,Yarn, Self-Blended

- A single yarn spun from a blend or mixture of the same types of fibre, for example, spun rayon yarn produced from staple of different lengths and different counts.
or acetate rayon made A continuous filament, novelty yarn of viscose purposely uneven in the spinning operat&n. by mixing and spinning two or more different

Yarn, Thick and Thin Yarn, Union kinds of fibres

Yarn made or yarns.

PART 2

MAN-MADE A

FJBRE FABRICS

Accordian

Fabric - A weft-knitted fabric showing a figure design in two or more colours, produced on one set of needles by knitting, tucking and missing; and in which tuck loops are introduced to eliminate long lengths of floating thread at the back. **Angel Lace ( Knitting ) - A warp-knitted fabric made on a beardedThe fabric is made with needle or compound-needle machine. separating threads, usually of secondary cellulose acetate, which are dissolved out to leave narrow strips for trimmings. Antique Satin A heavy, dull-lustered 19 fabric, woven with fancy yarns.

IS : I324 - 1966 B Basket Cloth -A
passes alternately fabric in which each group of two or more warp ends over and under groups of two or more picks.

Bengaline
pronounced the warp.

-

A warp-faced plain woven fabric resembling ` poplin ' with cords or ribs running weftway, the weft being coarser than

**Bolting Cloth -- A light weight open fabric characterized by its fine Both warp and uniform mesh, used fork sifting flour or screen printing. and weft threads are accurately spaced and are woven in gauze or other non-slip construction in order to maintain the mesh size. Bonded Fibre Fabric Broad GoodsA fabric with a structure consisting of one more webs or mass of fibres held together with a bonding material. All woven from ribbon. fabrics 60 cm or more in width, or as

distinguished

Brocade -A
de:@ fabric,

jacquard weave fabric of rich appearance. Unlike the in a ` Damask ' which appears to be flat with the surface of the the design in a Brocade looks as if it were raised or embroidered.

**Broken

Filament-A fibrous appearance of a fabric made from continuous filament yarn which may be localized or general and which is caused by damage to individual filaments. **Broken Twill constant, Any twill weave in which the move number is not with the result that the continuity of the twill line is broken.

Brushed Rayon - Woven or knitted rayon fabric which has been given considerable brushing or napping by the teasel treatment or by rollers covered with card clothing used for napping purpose.

C Canton Crepe - A plain-woven ` Crepe de Chine `. Casement
weaves crepe with rippled texture, heavier than

Cloth -A

and textures.

light-weight curtain fabric made in a variety of The weft yarns are coarser than the warp yarns.

**Cavalry Twill-A firm warp-faced cloth in which the weave gives steep double twill lines separated by pronounced grooves formed by the weft. The name was originally applied to firm heavy-weight cloths for making riding breeches for cavalry, but was later extended to cover cloths used for rain coats and other clothing purposes.
20

IS : 1324- 1966 Cellular -- A term describing
and orderly be achieved a fabric constructed so as to have a close In woven fabric, this can distribution of hollows or holes. by honeycomb, leno or mock-leno weaves. of plain or twill weave, sometimes dyed in plain fabric woven out of

Challis-A

light, soft and pliable fabric usually printed in small floral designs but colours. A plain and open hard twisted yarn. weave,

Chiffon -

light-weight

Chiffon Velvet Circular-Knit
knitting machine.

A light-weight, A fabric

soft velvet made

with a short thick form

pile,

Fabric -

in a tubular

on a circular in a variation

Corduroy -

A cut pile fabric, of twill or satin weave.

with ridges

or cords, woven

**Crash - A fabric, originally made of linen, which has an irregular appearance, due to the use of thick, uneven yarn, particularly in the Woven in plain or fancy crepe weaves, cloths of linen, cotton, weft. spun rayon and unions of these are now made. Typical linen crash fabrics for towels are plain woven from 16 to 25 lea ( 66 to 103 tex.) ,flax tow yarns. Crepe A fabric, characterized by a crinkled, puckered or pebbly surface, with highly twisted yarns in the wa1.p or weft or both. Crepe is also woven in twill and satin or jacquard weave. by a satin weave on the `face Satin - A fabric characterized The weft is generally of crepe twist. The and a crepe on the back. fabric appears dull on one side and lustrous on the other. It is also called ` Satin-Back Crepe `.

Crepe-Back

Crepe de Chine -

A finely crinkled plain weave fabric with a smooth and lustrous surface exceptionally soft, light-weight and well-draping. Crepe effect is obtained by alternating two weft yarns twisted in one direction with the next two yarns twisted in the opposite direction.

Crepe Georgette

- A light-weight, semi-shear, plain-woven in appearance, ,woven with highly twisted yarns, alternating ` Z ' twists in both warp and weft. Crepe Marocain
coarser

crepe, dull in c S.' and The weft is

- A heavy dress-weight c canton crepe `. than the warp and gives a cross-ribbed effect.

Crepon - -4 fabric srmrlar to cr :pe but heavier, characterized by blister or pucker effect in stripes or figures formed by thick, alternately twisted
warp yarns.

21

IS : 1324 - 1966

D Damask - A firm, lustrous,
flat-jacquard flatter. of these pattern, reversible fabric with a satm ground and a somewhat similar in appearance to Brocade but fabric finished with a nap on one side. from 5-end satin weave. Some

Doeskin - A twill-woven
fabrics are made

Double Jersey - A fabric with fine rib structures made on a machine having two beds of needles, each part knitting independently of the other. The resultant fabric has two interconnected layers which are back to back; having the appearance at front and back of the face of jersey fabric; that is, the two sides of the cloth are interlocked or interof a doubly-knitted nlain-jersey knitted to create the impression material. Duvetyn - A twill-woven
produced by raising, fabric with a very soft, velvet-like appearance cropping and brushing the face the fabric.

of

E term for ` sponge cloth ' or ` ratine ' woven from a hard twist warp and soft spun weft, usually with a fancy yarn to give a; soft and loose-woven fabric.

Eponge - A French

F Fabric Laid - A fabric
held together made without by a binding material. weft yarns. The warp yarns are

Paille - A soft, flat-ribbed plain-woven fabric with body and drape in which the ends per decimetre are more than the picks per decimetre. The ribs are wider and flatter than those in ` grosgrain `. Faille Taffeta - A `taffeta
fibres used for filtering fibres are used because

' with pronounced

ribs running

crosswise.

Filter Cloth - A fabric made of various weaves and different

types of Glass fibres, nylon and other synthetic purposes. of their inertness to many chemicals with a soft nap in

Flannel - A light-weight plain- or twill-woven fabric finish on one side, partially concealing the weave. -Flat Crepe - A smooth,
texture than other crepes.

soft fabric in plain weave, less crinkled It is often called c french crepe `. fabric, in twnl weave; soft and well

Foulard -

A light-weight

draping.

French Crepe - See ` Flat Crepe `.
22

-.

IS : 1324 - 1966

Frieze -A heavy, coarse twill-woven, napped fabric. It usually has coarser warp than weft and is made to produce a mixed colour effect by double cloth weave.

Frise - A pile fabric

of uncut

loops. G

Gaberdine - A firm, tightly
diagonal ribs distinguished

woven, steep-twill fabric characterized by appreciably more ends than picks.

by

Gauze - A light, sheer, open mesh, or mock-leno weave. Thin curtain

loosely-woven fabric in plain, leno fabrics are often called ' gauze `.

**Genoa Velvet - A heavy type of velvet with three picks to a wire and a special ground weave, the repeat of which is on four ends and six picks. It is commonly a figured velvet with a smooth ground and a pile figure developed in various colours.

**Georgette - A fine light-weight
weave, made and weft. from crepe yarns

open-texture fabric, usually in plain usually 2` S ' and 2` Z ' in both warp off the loom or knitting machine and

Grey Goods -- Fabrics in an unfinished state.

just taken

,Gros de Londres - A cross-ribbed fabric in plain weave or its derivative, with heavy and fine ribs alternating; or with ribs of different colours.

-Grosgrain - A hard finished,
derivative ;;;ilyfvier

closely woven, ribbed fabric, in plain or of plain weave having the ribs running crosswise. The ribs than those in `poplin ' and are rounder than those in

H

Honeycomb - A rough textured
produced by floating warp fabric resembles the cellular ` waffle cloth `.

fabric with markea ridges and hollows and weft yarns. The appearance of the comb of the honey bee. It is also called surface produced by

Huckaback - A fabric

with pebbly or irregular short floats of warp and weft on a plain ground.

I

Industrial Faorics in industry.

A variety

of fabrics

used for non-apparel

purposes

23

tS : 1324- 1966 J Jersey circular A plain-knit fabric as opposed knit, flat knit or warp knit. to rib-knit one. It may be

Lame-Any Len0 -

fabric in any weave in warp or weft for decoration.

using metal

threads

or JARI

threads

A fabric with a leno weave in which warp ends are in pairs or groups, partly twisting around one another between picks; commonly a light-weight open-mesh cloth.

**Locknit - A fabric made on a warp knitting machine bar and two full-set guide bars, where the guide bar controlled as follows:
a) Front b) Back twill back. guide guide bar bar 2-3, 1-O and repeat; I-0, 1-2 and repeat. a rich,
full

with one needle movements are

and and a fairly stiff

Lyons Velvet -A

` vel :et ' having

pile

M Marquisette A leno sheer fabric fabric with a soft, crisp with a raised hand. or puckered surface

Matelasse - A double woven that has a quilted appearance.

hbrics - A class of heavy fabrics used in various industries, such as sheeting for the laundry trade, drill for oil and chemical filters, duck for tent, etc. Mechanical Messaline
Milanese effect. -

-

A light?weight

` satin ' fabric,
fabric

woven with fine yarns. diagonal the growth cross of

A type olf warp-knit

with a distinctive treated to resist

Mildew
mildew

Resistant
or mould.

Fabrics-Fabric
A fabric but made with

Mock Romaine
and appearance warp.

Crepe -

similar to ` Romaine crepe ' in texture combination twist yarns only in the or a faille ' with a watered or waved

Moire effect

A fabric usually a ` taffeta given by a special finish.

24

IS : 1324 - 1966 Mossy Crepe pebbly, a-sandy woven rough effect than A fabric with a fancy crepe weave characterized by a It is also called ` sand crepe ' because it presents surface. on its face. fabric, lnore closely

Mousseline Mull -

de Soie - A crisp, plain weave, sheer ` chiffon ' and not as soft as voile.
lustrous fabric in plain

A soft, sheer,

weave.

N Net An open work material usually rather made en a lace machine. heavier

Ninon - A very thin, smooth than ` chiffon `.

crisp fabric

in plain weave,

Off-Square-A
appreciably.

fabric Fabric

where

ends

or

picks

per

decimetre and

differ

Oil Cloth make

coated fabric

with a resin-forming soaked in boiled

material linseed

pigments. dried to and

Oiled Fabric --Thin
it waterproof.

oil and having

Ottoman rounder

A heavy cross-ribbed plain weave fabric ribs than those in ` faille ' or ` bengaline `. fabric with basket weave, usually

larger

Oxford-A
effects.

made

in two-colour

P Panne Panne Satin A highly lustrous rather stiff satin fabric. pile pressed which flat in

Velvet -- A light-weight Fabric -- Fabric
dropping

` velvet ' with

the

one direction.

Parachute Pigment

in man or supply

used for making purposes. `, made

parachutes

are used yarns.

Taffeta -

A dull ` taffeta

of dull or pigmented

Pile Fabric--A

fabric in which certain threads project and form a pile on the surface. ` Velvets ' and ` plushes ' in which extra warp yarns are used or ` velveteen ' and ' corduroy ' in which extra yarns are used, are some of the examples of ` pile fabric `.

Pique surface

A group of fabrics in plain weave or its derivative, with varied textures formed by raised stripes or wales running crosswise.

25

IS : 1324 - 1966 FabricA fabric that is produced from two yarns of different qualities of colours, characters or qualities of one of which appear on the face and of the other on the back. A yarn may be plated by being covered by another yarn. Plated fabric is extensively used in making heavy sweater and other bulky materials.
Plushgreater A eut pile fabric in derivative depth than that in ` velvet `. of plain weave with pile of weave, The rib

Plated

Poplin -

A light-weight, firm, cross-ribbed fabric in plain between c taffeta ' and ` bengaline' in weight and appearance. effect is obtained by coarser yarn in the weft than in the warp.

R Radium -. A firm,
Usually it is tightly a high lustre. smooth, soft, closely woven fabric in plain weave. woven under high tension and is finished to produce `. in plain weave or its derivative, with narrow

Ratine -

See ' Eponge
A fabric widthwise.

Rep or Repp ribs running

Ribbed Satin -

A ribbed fabric, such as ` bengaline ' or ` faille ' woven, with a satin face, the ribs giving a broken, lustrous surface to the face of the fabric. This fabric may be given a moire finish. ting wider fabrics

Ribbon (Cut

or Slit ) -

A fabric 30 cm or less in width made to a desired width. narrow fabric. ribs formed heavy

by cut-

Ribbon-Woven RibJhit
alternating

A woven

Fabric -

on right

Knitted fabric with length-wise and wrong sides, plain-woven,

by wales fabric

Romaine
having

slightly

Crepe -A

light-weight, dull lustre.

sheer

S Sateen -A Satin -A
fabric with weft floats. fabric with warp floats. with a lustrous with a lustrous surface surface Satin obtained obtained `. weave. by a satin by a satin weave weave

Satin-Back Satin-Backed

Crepe -

See ` Crepe-Back A lustrous

Velvet -

` velvet
26

' with satin

IS:1324 Seamless Fabric - Tubular
knit fabric without seams.

- 1966

Seersucker - A light-weight plain weave fabric with permanent wovenin, crinkled stripes, running lengthwise. The crinkle is formed by slack tension in alternate groups of warp yarns.
Serge - A fabric with twill weave and smooth finish. and close. It is very fine

Shantung - A plain weave fabric

with a slubbed made with filament warp and weft yarns. filament yarn. rayon fabric

or nubbed in twill

texture, made

Sharkskin - A firm, heavy, acetate
with delustered

weave

Sheer - A class of thin, light-weight, diaphanous fabrics, such as ` sheer crepe `, ` sheer velvet `, ` georgette `, ` chiffon `, etc. Sponge Cloth -- See ` Eponge `" Surah - A soft, light-weight,
giving plain effect. lustrous fabric woven in twill weave

T Taffeta - A closely, woven, smooth, crisp fabric in plain weave or its derivative, in which the warp and weft yarns are of the same or nearly the same count. Tissue Taffeta 1 A very light-weight, Transparent Valvet - A light-weight,
plain weave. ` taffeta soft, sheer velvet in derivative of

of yarns on The fabric has a fine chain stitch, running lengtha tricot machine. One of the most common wise on one side and crosswise on the other. tricot fabrics is warp-knit `jersey `.

Tricot - A fine closely knitted fabric made. with a number

Tricotine - A hard textured fabric woven with a steep twill weave. It resembles `gaberdine ' but has a distinct double twill line running from left to right. Triple Sheer - A tightly woven, sheer fabric with a fine flat surface. Tweed -A
fabric in plain, twill or variation wiry and somewhat hairy in texture. tyre, constructed of twill weave, rough,

Tyre Cord-Fabrics

which comprise the main carcass of pneumatic predominently of warp cords ( cable yarns ) with 27

IS : 1324- 1966
light wefts. The latter merely serve to hold the cords together These fabrics are often called ` warp sheets `. cessing. for pro-

Tyre Fabrics -

Fabrics used in the construction of pneumatic tyres, such as casing plies, breakers, chafers, etc. These include tyre cord fabrics and tyre canvas ( cross woven ) fabrics.

V Velvet ante and A warp pile fabric, soft to the touch. usually having a cllt pile, rich :n'appear-

Velveteen - A weft pile fabric, similar to ` corduroy ' but having a surface uniformly covered with a short full cut pile. The weft yarn is soft spun, which when cut gives a soft smooth velvety pile. W Weft-Knit
crosswise clear

Fabric-A
direction

fabric produced by a method as distinguished from warp-knitting.

of knitting

in a

Whipcord -A

twill-woven fabric usually finish having pronounced ribs.

with a steep-warp

twill and a

( Continued from page 2) Members
ARUIWOAM SIIRI T. KRISHXAMACHARI SHRI ASHOK'RAMANLAL SHRI 0. P. DEAWAN
SHRI S.

Representing
The Travancore Rayons Ltd, Rayonpuram

( Alternate )

SHRI M. A. EKAMBARA~ SHRI K. C. BHANDAIU ( Alternate) Jasmine Mills Private Ltd, Bombay SIIRI M. S. KAPADIA SHRI V. G. BROKER ( Alternate ) Khanna Silk Mills Private Ltd, Bombay SHRIRAMCHANDKHANNA Directorate General of Technical Development DR M. P. KIIERA (Ministry of Supply & Technical Development) SHRI JASTINDER SINOH ( Alternate ) SHRI KRISIINAIUJMAR M. MEHTA The Ambika Silk Mills Co Ltd, Bombay Paragon Textile Mills, Bombay SHRI SHAWTILAL M. MEHTA SHR1 SLiltENDRA M. MBIfTA Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay Dx Ran1 K. MULCHANDANI The Nanikram Sobhraj Mills Private Ltd, Ahmedebad The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, SHRI J. G. PARII~H Bombay SHRI I. P. PODDAR The Calcutta Silk Mfg Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI R. K. SONTUAT.TA( Alternate ) SHRI B. SlRIiAR Shrce Shakti Mills Ltd, Bombay Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association, Bombay SRRI J. K. TURAUHIA SHRI JAYANTILAL G. V~I~HAXIA SLandard Silk Mills, Surat

The New Vinod Silk Mills Private Ltd, Bombay The Silk & Rayon Textiles Export Promotion Council, Bombay The Sirsilk Limited, Sirpur-Kaghaznagar

28

