NAT Td IS 15799 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


qm sth fare ferit атай cht чагт 
faterat — fere mer caret тет 
( этеа эїїх Чое чогот ) 


( TEA JAQ ) 


Methods for Testing Tar and 
Bituminous Materials — Ageing of 
Bitumen ( RTFO and PAV Tests ) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.50, 93.080.20 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH MT, 4 feet – 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 5 


Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Product Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 2008 as * Methods of testing tar and bituminous materials — Determination of 
durability of bitumen’. As the standard prescribes the methods for preparation of RTFO and PAV test residues on 
which various tests are carried out to measure the effect of heat and air, the title of this standard has accordingly 
been changed. 
In this revision, following major changes have been made: 

a) Clause 4.2 ‘Determination of oven preheat time’ has been incorporated; 

b) Clause 5.1 ‘Preparation of oven’ has been incorporated; 

c) Note under Clause 6.4 regarding calibration of temperature measuring device has been incorporated; 

d) Note under Clause 6.5 regarding calibration of pressure gauge has been incorporated; and 


e) Informative Annex A on reporting of results from the RTFO test and data on precision and bias for tests 
carried out on bitumen before and after the RTFO test has also been included. 


In formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from ASTM D 2872-12 ‘Standard test 
method for effect of heat and air on moving film of asphalt (Rolling Thin Film Oven Test)’ and ASTM D 6521-19 
‘Standard practice for accelerated aging of asphalt binder using a Pressurized Aging Vessel (PAV)’. 


Durability is a measure of change in the physical properties of bitumen and bituminous material with age. Poor 
durability, which is an excessive rate of hardening can lead to premature embrittlement and surfacing failure 
resulting in cracking and chip loss of the pavement. The ageing of bituminous binders is one of the key factors 
causing the deterioration of bituminous concrete pavements. Therefore, it is important to quantify and study 
various properties of bitumen to interpret short and long term impact of ageing. The tests of bitumen aging 
described in this standard are: 


a) The Rolling Thin Film Oven Test (RTFOT) in which the effects of heat and air are determined from 
changes in physical test values as measured before and after the oven treatment. 

b) Pressure Aging Vessel (PAV), is normally performed after an initial conditioning using a RTFO residue to 
simulate the changes in rheology which occur in bitumen binders during in-service oxidative ageing. 


The residues obtained from RTFO test or PAV test as per this standard shall be used for carrying out characterization 
tests for determination of effect of these treatments on the selected properties. 


The reporting of results from the RTFO test and data on precision and bias for tests carried out on bitumen before 
and after the RTFO test for mass change, viscosity and ductility are given at informative Annex A. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 15799 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR TESTING TAR AND BITUMINOUS 
MATERIALS — AGEING OF BITUMEN 
( RTFO AND PAV TESTS ) 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes two methods of treatment 
of bitumen to predict the effect of ageing on selected 
properties of bitumen before and after the treatment, 
namely, Rolling Thin Film Oven (RTFO) test and 
Pressurized Ageing Vessel (PAV) test. These tests are 
prescribed in following two sections: 


a) Section 1 — Rolling Thin Film Oven (RTFO) 
test (effect of heat and air on a moving film of 
bitumen); and 


b) Section 2 — Pressurized Ageing Vessel (PAV) 
test (accelerated ageing of bitumen by means of 
pressurized air and elevated temperature). 


1.2 The residues obtained from RTFO and PAV tests 
shall be tested for various parameters to predict the 
effect of ageing. 


1.3 It is intended to simulate the type of changes, 
which occur in bituminous binders during hot mix 
and in service oxidative ageing but may not accurately 
simulate the relative rates of ageing. 


NOTES: 

1 The ageing of bitumen binders during service is affected by 
ambient temperature, air pressure and by mixtures associated 
variables, such as, volumetric proportions of the mix, 
permeability of the mix, properties of aggregates and possibly 
other factors. 

2 Some modified bitumen binders may undergo phase separate 
or form skins during RTFO conditioning or PAV ageing and 
the results from subsequent testing of this residue may not be 
representative of modified bitumen short term aged under field 
conditions. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standard contains provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. 
334 : 2002 


Title 


Glossary of terms relating to bitumen 
and tar (third revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


Forthe purpose ofthis standard, the following definition 
and those given in IS 334 shall apply. 


3.1 Durability — It is the combined effect in properties 
of bitumen caused due to conventional hot-mixing 
at about 160?C and in-service oxidative ageing that 
occurs in bitumen binders during pavement service . 


SECTION 1 ROLLING THIN FILM 
OVEN (RTFO) TEST 


4 APPARATUS 


4.1 Oven 


4.1.1 A double walled, electrically heated convection 
type oven, interior dimensions shall be 381 mm 
high, 483 mm wide (including the plenum), and 
445 + 13 mm deep (with the door closed). The door 
shall contain a symmetrically located window with 
dimensions of 305 - 330 mm wide and 203 - 229 mm 
high. The window shall contain two sheets of heat- 
resistant glass separated by an air space. The window 
should permit an unobstructed view of the interior of 
the oven. The top of the upper heating element shall be 
25 + 3 mm below the oven floor. The oven shall have 
vents at the top and bottom. The bottom vents shall be 
located symmetrically to supply incoming air around 
the heating elements. They shall have an open area of 
15.0 + 0.7 cm*. The top vents shall be symmetrically 
arranged in the upper part of the oven and have an open 
area of 9.3 + 0.45 cm’. 


4.1.2 The oven shall have an air plenum covering the 
side walls and ceiling. The air space shall be 38.1 mm 
deep from the walls and ceiling. At a midpoint in the 
width of the oven and 152.4 mm from the face of the 
circular metal carriage to its axis, a squirrel cage- 
type fan 133 mm outer diameter (OD) and 73 mm 
wide shall be turned at 1725 rpm by an externally 
mounted motor. The squirrel cage fan shall be set so 
that the fan turns in an opposite direction to its vanes. 
The air flow characteristics of the fan-plenum system 
shall be suction from the floor of the oven through the 
wall plenums and exhaust of the air through the fan. 
Figure 1 and Fig. 2 show details of this plenum system. 


IS 15799 : 2021 


FAN MOTOR 
1725 RPM 


TOP VIEW OF FAN 
DIRECTION OF ROTATION 


THERMOMETER 


OVEN 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM ОЕ AIR FLow FRONT VIEW 


AIR 

PLENUM 
SPRING CLIP = 
SAMPLE BOTTLE | (ASO XK XXX KX 
RETAINER ООО] 


3 Nos. (305 X 3.17 THICK 
ALUMINIUM DISC ee 


(Ox 
L 


4 

inn 

m 

2 

= 

О 

< 

m 

E 

m 

л 
SOS 
~~ 
OO 


Oc 
д 
2m 


xx 
QL 
QO 
QL 


Ø8 COPPER 
TUBE FOR LL 
AIR LINE Сс 
a Nog en 4 Nos. EQUISPACED SAMPLE Ces 
HOLES EQUISPACED OLEO BOTTLE 
ON 203.2 DIA. B.C. - B.C. 
4 Nos. SPACER 
0.D.12.7 х1.р.6.35 x54.6LG. 
4 Nos. SPACER 
FRONT VIEW O.D.12.7 xLD.6.35 x20.6 LG. 


SIDE VIEW 
All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 CIRCULAR METAL CARRIAGE 


4.1.3 The oven shall be equipped with a proportional 
control thermostat capable of maintaining 163 + 0.5°C 
temperature. The sensing element of the thermostat 
shall be place at any location that enables the oven 
to maintain temperature control as specified in this 
standard. The thermometer shall be hung or affixed to 
a mounting in the ceiling, which is 50.8 mm from the 
right side of the oven at a midpoint in the depth of the 
oven. The heating controls shall be capable of bringing 
the fully loaded oven back to the test temperature 
within a 10 min period after insertion of the samples in 
a preheated oven. 


4.1.4 The oven shall be provided within a 304.8 
mm diameter vertical circular carriage which is 
mechanically driven through a 19 mm diameter shaft 
at a speed of 15 + 0.2 rev/min. This carriage shall be 
provided with the suitable openings and clips for firmly 
holding eight glass containers along the horizontal 
position in vertical plane. 


4.1.5 The oven shall be equipped with an air jet 
having outlet orifice 1.016 mm diameter (No. 60 drill) 
positioned to blow heated air into each bottle at its 
lowest point of travel and connected to a 7.6 m length 
of 8 mm outside diameter refrigeration copper tubing. 
The tubing shall be coiled to lie flat on the bottom of 
the oven and lead to a source of fresh, dried, dust-free 
regulated air. 


NOTE — Activated silica gel treated with an indicator is a 
satisfactory desiccant for the dried air. 


IS 15799 : 2021 


4.2 Determination of Oven Preheat Time 


Determine the preheat time for the oven in accordance 
with either 4.2.1 or 4.2.2. 


4.21 Adjust the oven control thermostat to the 
setting that will be used during the test. Select this 
setting so that when the oven is fully loaded and the 
air is on, the oven will equilibrate at 163 + 0.5°C, as 
indicated by the test thermometer. Turn the oven on 
and simultaneously record the start time to the nearest 
whole minute. Determine and record the temperature 
of the oven at 15-min intervals. Continue this process 
until the oven reaches thermal equilibrium. Thermal 
equilibrium is considered to be the time when the oven 
temperature does not vary by more than 0.5°C between 
two consecutive readings. The oven preheat time is the 
time that it takes to reach thermal equilibrium plus an 
additional 30 min. 


4.2.2 In lieu of completing the steps described in 4.2.1, 
a minimum preheat time of 4 h may be used. 
NOTE — If 4.2.1 is used, this determination must be made for 
each oven, and shall be repeated at least annually or whenever 
environmental conditions or the test location is changed. If 
4.2.2 is used, no annual determination is necessary. 


4.3 Flow Meter 


The flow meter may be any suitable type capable of 
accurately measuring the air flow at a rate of 4 000 ml/ 
min and shall be located downstream of all regulating 
devices and upstream of the copper coil. It shall be 


931.75 + 1.5 
MATERIAL :- 
PYREX BRAND TUBING 
STANDARD WALL 
64 OD WALL THICKNESS 
2.4 € 0.3 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 SAMPLE BOTTLE 


IS 15799 : 2021 


calibrated periodically using wet test meter or other 
displacement method based on air flow exiting the air 
jet with the oven off and at room temperature. 


4.4 Thermometer 


This thermometer shall be used to make all temperature 
measurements required by this test method. In order to 
reduce the risks associated with thermometer breakage, 
the thermometer may be fully or partially encapsulated 
in an optically transparent polymer sheath having 
a maximum thickness of 0.25 mm. In place of test 
thermometer electronic temperature measurement 
device may also be used. 


4.5 Glass Container 


The container in which the sample is to be tested shall 
be of heat-resistant glass conforming to the dimensions 
shown in Fig. 3. 


4.6 Cooling Rack 


A wire or sheet metal rack constructed of stainless steel 
or aluminum, which allows the sample containers to 
cool in a horizontal position, with each container in the 
same horizontal plane. The rack shall be constructed 
in such a way that allows air to flow freely around 
each container with at least 25 mm clearance between 
containers and any solid surface. 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 Preparation of Oven 


5.1.1 Position the air outlet orifice so that it is 6 + 3 mm 
from the opening ofthe glass container. The orifice shall 
also be so positioned that the jet blows horizontally 
into the central arc of the opening of the circling 
glass container. 


5.1.2 Position the thermometer specified in 4.4 so 
that the end of the bulb of the thermometer 1s within 
25.4 mm of an imaginary line level with the center of 
the shaft holding the revolving carriage. 


5.1.3 Level the oven so that the horizontal axes of the 
glass containers when in position in the carriage are 
level to within + 1.0°. 


5.1.4 Start the fan. The fan shall remain on whenever 
the oven heater 1s on and the oven door is closed. This 
standard permits (but does not require) the fan to be 
stopped when the oven door is opened. Stopping the 
fan may be accomplished manually, with an electronic 
door interlock, or through other means. 


5.1.5 Preheatthe oven forthe preheat time determined in 
4.2 or longer prior to testing with the control thermostat 
adjusted to the setting that will be used during the test. 
Select this setting so that when the oven is fully loaded 
and the air is on, the oven will equilibrate at 163 — 
0.5?C, as indicated by the test thermometer. 


NOTE — Because the presence of sample containers affects 
the temperature distribution in the oven, containers should be 
present in the oven when the thermostat setting is determined. 
The use of empty containers is acceptable for this purpose. 


5.2 The sample as received shall be free of water. Heat 
the sample in its container with a loosely fitted cover 
in an oven not to exceed 150?C for the minimum time 
necessary to ensure that the sample is completely fluid. 
Manually stir the sample but avoid incorporating air 
bubbles. 


5.3 Pour 35 + 0.5 g of the sample into each of the 
required glass containers, providing sufficient material 
for characterizing tests which are to be run on the 
residue. 


5.4 Immediately after pouring the sample into a glass 
container, turn the container to a horizontal position. 
Rotate the container slowly for at least one full rotation, 
and attempt to pre-coat its cylindrical surface. It is not 
necessary to pre-coat the open end of the container, 
and care should be taken to prevent the sample from 
flowing out of the container during this step. Place the 
container horizontally in a clean cooling rack that 15 
maintained in a draft-free, room-temperature location 
away from ovens and other sources of heat. 


NOTES: 

1 Complete pre-coating may not be possible for certain binders. 
2 For maximum precision in determining mass change, 
the cooling rack should be in a location that is the same 
temperature and humidity as the balance used for measuring 
the mass of the containers. 


3 Static electricity may cause unstable mass measurements, 
due in part to the characteristics of the glass sample containers. 
This problem can be minimized by mounting a passive ion 
source inside the balance draft shield. 


5.5 Allow the glass sample containers to cool in the 
cooling rack for a minimum of 60 min and a maximum 
of 180 min. 


NOTE — When mass change is being determined, use two 
separate containers for this determination. After cooling, 
determine the mass of these containers using an analytical 
balance with least count of 0.001 g. 


5.6 With the oven at operating temperature and the air 
flow set at 4000 + 200 ml/min, arrange the containers 
holding the bitumen in the carriage so that the carriage 
is balanced. Fill unused spaces in the carriage with 
empty containers. Close the door and rotate the carriage 
assembly at a rate of 15 + 0.2 rev/min. Maintain the 
sample in oven with the air flowing and the carriage 
rotating for 85 min. The test temperature of 163 + 
0.5?C shall be reached within first 10 min, otherwise 
discontinue the test. 


5.7 At the conclusion ofthe testing period, remove each 
glass sample container, one at a time and transfer the 
contents into a bigger container and gently stir it to 
homogenize it for further ageing in PAV. 


SECTION 2 PRESSURE AGING 
VESSEL (PAV) TEST 


6 APPARATUS (see Fig. 4) 


6.1 Pressure Vessel 


A stainless steel pressure vessel designed to operate 
at 2.1 + 0.1 MPa between 90? to 110°C with interior 
dimensions adequate to hold a pan holder capable of 
holding ten stainless steel pans in horizontal (level) 
position (see Fig. 5) such that the bitumen binder 
film thickness is reasonably uniform. The holder shall 
be designed for easy insertion and removal from the 
vessel. 


NOTE — The vessel may be a separate unit to be placed in a 
forced draft oven for conditioning the bitumen binders or an 
integral part of the temperature control system (for example, 
by direct heating of the vessel or by surrounding the vessel 
with a permanently affixed heating unit forced air oven or 
liquid bath). For practical purposes, it is recommended that the 
vessel have the dimensions of 250 mm in diameter and 265 
mm in height. 


6.2 Pressure and Temperature Controlling Devices 


6.2.1 A pressure relief valve that prevents pressure in 
the vessel from exceeding the design pressure of the 
vessel, but in no case exceeding 2.5 MPa during ageing. 


6.2.2 A pressure regulator or regulating system capable 
of controlling the pressure within the vessel to + 0.02 
MPa, and with a capacity adequate to reduce the 


PRESSURE 
REGULATOR 


COMPRESSED AIR 
CYLINDER 


TEMPERATURE 
CONTROL 


IS 15799 : 2021 


pressure from the source of compressed air so that the 
pressure within the loaded pressure vessel is maintained 
at 2.1 + 0.1 MPa during the ageing process. 


6.2.3 A slow release bleed valve that allows the pressure 
in the vessel at the completion of the conditioning 
procedure to be reduced from 2.1 MPa to local 
atmospheric pressure within 8 to 15 min. 


6.3 Temperature Controlling Devices 


6.3.1 A digital temperature control device for 
maintaining the temperature during ageing within the 
pressure vessel at the ageing temperature of + 0.5°C. 


6.3.2 A heating device (forced-draft oven or fluid bath) 
capable of restoring the ageing temperature within the 
vessel after loading the pans and the pan holder and 
prior to pressurizing the vessel within 2 h of placing the 
loading vessel in the heating device and maintaining 
the temperature within the pressure vessel at the ageing 
temperature + 0.5?C. 


6.3.3 A pressure vessel with integral temperature control 
system that is capable of bringing the loaded pressure 
vessel to the desired conditioning temperature + 0.5°C 
within 2 has recorded by the Resistance Temperature 
Detector (RTD) inside the loaded pressure vessel and 
maintaining the temperature within the pressure vessel 
at the ageing temperature + 0.5?C. 


NOTE — Preheating the pressure vessel may be necessary to 
achieve the ageing temperature within the required 2 h period. 


PRESSURE GAUGE 
OR SENSOR 


BLEED VALVE 


PRESSURE 
RELIEF VALVE 


NEEDLE 
VALVE 


QUICK 
DISCONNECT 


PRESSURE 
VESSEL 


Fic. 4 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF PAV TEST SYSTEM 


IS 15799 : 2021 


TO TEMPERATURE 
TRANSDUCER AND 
TEMPERATURE READOUT 


WALL CLEARANCE z 10 


PROVIDE AT LEAST 5 
CLEARANCE TO 
NEAREST SURFACE 


ASSEMBLY 
SUPPORT POINT 


b4210 
FROM INSIDE 
SURFACE OF 
THE P.A.V. 
b2 210 
FROM TOP OF 


ASPHALT BINDER 


ASSEMBLY TO INCLUDE 
PANS AND SUPPORT 


10 Nos.TFOT PANS 
SUPPORTED ON SHELF 
OR STANDARDS,ENTIRE 
ASSEMBLY SHALL BE 
REMOVABLE AS AN 
INTEGRAL UNIT 


(АП Dimensions in Millimetres) 


NOTES: 


1 Distance ‘a’ controls the level of the pan. The assembly shall be supported at three or more support points. The distance ‘a’ measure 
from each assembly support point to the bottom of the pan (top of shelf or pan support point) shall be controlled to 0.05 mm. 


2 Distance b, and b, shall be such that any active port ion of the temperature transducer is 210 mm from any adjacent surface. 


3 Distance ‘c’ shall be > 12mm. 


Fic. 5 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM SHOWING LOCATION OF PANS AND RTD witu PAV 


6.4 Temperature and Pressure Measuring Devices 


6.4.1 A platinum RTD accurate to the nearest 0.1°C for 
measuring the temperature inside the pressure vessel. 
The RTD shall be calibrated as an integral unit with its 
respective meter or electronic circuitry. 
NOTE — Verify the calibration of RTD and its respective 
meter or electronic circuitry to 0.1°C at least every six months 


using a calibrated temperature indicator traceable to a national 
standard. 


6.4.2 A strip chart recorder or other data acquisition 
system capable of recording temperature throughout 
the ageing process to + 0.1°C. As an alternative, an 
electronic device capable of reporting only maximum 
and minimum temperatures (accurate to + 0.1 °C) may 
be used. 


6.5 Pressure Gauge 


A pressure gauge capable of measuring the pressure 
in the pressure vessel to within + 0.02 MPa during the 
ageing process. 


NOTES : 


1 Calibrate the pressure gauge to an accuracy of 0.02 MPa at 
least every six months. 


2 For those vessels or PAV systems where pressurization is 
operator-controlled, determine the optimum temperature at 
which to apply pressure to the pressure vessel. Several ageing 
runs should be conducted. With the vessel loaded with pan rack 
and empty pans. increase the: temperature inside the vessel 
to the ageing temperature, When the temperature inside the 
vessel is within 10°C of the ageing temperature, apply an air 
pressure of 2.1 + 0.1 MPa. Record the temperature increase 
when pressure is applied. Perform the procedure at least three 
times and use the average temperature increase to establish 
the temperature at which to apply pressure to the vessel for 
performing the ageing procedure. 


6.6 Stainless Steel Pans 


A cylindrical pan, 140 mm inside diameter and 10 
mm deep with a flat bottom. This shall be made of 
aluminium or stainless steel approximately 0.76 mm 
and 0.64 mm thick respectively. Fifty millilitres of the 
sample in this size container give a film thickness of 
approximately 3.2 mm 


6.7 Vacuum Oven 


A vacuum oven capable of maintaining temperature 
up to 180°C with an accuracy of + 5?C and vacuum 
of 15 + 1.0 kPa absolute shall be used. The pressure 
vessel itself may be used in lieu of a vacuum oven if it 
Is capable of maintaining a temperature of 180?C anda 
vacuum of 15.0 kPa. 


6.8 Vacuum System 


A vacuum system capable of generating and maintaining 
pressure below 15.0 kPa absolute, Suitable vacuum 
systems include a vacuum pump, an air aspirator, or a 
house vacuum system. 


7 PROCEDURE 


7.1 Place the pan holder inside the pressure vessel. 
If an oven is used, place the pressure vessel inside 
the oven, select an ageing temperature and preheat 
the pressure vessel to the ageing temperature. If an 
integrated temperature control pressure vessel is used, 
one should select an ageing temperature and follow the 
manufacturer's instruction for preheating the pressure 
vessel. 
NOTE — For vessel s placed in an oven, preheating the vessel 
to 10? to 15?C above the ageing temperature can be used to 
reduce the drop in PAV temperature during the loading process 
and minimize the time required to stabilize the system, after 
loading to attain the required temperature. 


7.2 Weigh 50 + 0.5 g of above residue obtained from 
RTFO treatment (from Section 1) into a stainless steel 
cylindrical pan which will yield approximately 3.2 mm 
thick film of residue. 


7.3 Place the filled pans in the pan holder and place the 
pan holder inside the pressure vessel and close it. If an 
oven is used, place the pressure vessel inside the oven. 
Wait until the temperature inside the vessel is within 
10°С of the ageing temperature (100°C). Then, apply an 
air pressure of 2.10 + 0.1 MPa and then start timing the 
test. If the temperature inside the vessel has not reached 
the desired temperature for applying pressure within 2 
h of loading the pan holder and pans, discontinue the 
procedure and discard the residue samples. 


7.4 Maintain the temperature and air pressure inside the 
vessel for 20 h + 10 min. If the temperature rises above 
and falls below the target ageing temperature + 0.5°C 
for more than a total of 60 min during the 20 h ageing 
period, discard the material. Also, if the pressure at the 
end of ageing period is outside of the range, discard the 
material. 


7.5 At the end of 20 h ageing period, begin the slow 
reduction of the internal pressure of the PAV, using the 
air pressure bleed valve. The bleed valve is adjusted 


IS 15799 : 2021 


to an opening such that it equalizes the internal and 
external pressures on the PAV within 8-15 min, thus 
avoiding excessive bubbling and foaming of residue. 


7.6 Vacuum Degas the Aged Samples 


7.6.1 Remove the pan holder and pans from the PAV 
and place the pan in an oven set to 163?C for 15 € 1 
min. 


NOTE — PAV residue may be heated in the stainless steel pans 
at 163?C and stirred to remove air bubbles. These precautions 
will help avoid oxidative hardening and volatile loss that will 
harden the sample. During the heating process, the sample 
should be covered and stirred occasionally scraping the bottom 
of the pans to ensure homogeneity. 


7.6.2 Pre-heat the vacuum oven to 170 + 5°C. 


7.6.3 Remove the pans from the oven and pour the hot 
residue from the pans containing a single sample into a 
single container. Select a container of dimension such 
that the depth of the residue in the container is between 
15 mm and 40 mm. After the last pan is scraped, 
transfer the container to the vacuum oven within 1 min. 
Maintain the temperature of vacuum oven at 170 + 5°С 
for 10 + 1 min. 


7.6.4 Open the vacuum valve as rapidly as possible to 
reduce the pressure to 15 + 2.5 kPa absolute. Maintain 
absolute pressure at 15 + 2.5 kPa for 30 + 1 min. 
Release the vacuum and remove the container. If any 
bubbles remain on the surface of the residue, remove 
them by flashing the surface of the residue with a torch 
or hot knife. 


7.6.5 If tests to determine the properties of degassed 
PAV residue are not performed immediately, it is 
permissible to cover and store the samples in their 
containers at room temperature for future testing. 


8 REPORT 


The following information shall be reported: 
a) Sample identification; 
b) Ageing test temperature, nearest to 0.5 °С; 
c) Maximum or the minimum ageing temperature, 
recorded nearest to 0.1?C; 
d) Total time during ageing that temperature was 
outside the specified range, nearest minute; and 


е) Total ageing time, hours and minutes. 


9 PRECISION 


Since this standard describes the procedure for ageing 
of bitumen and bituminous material, and no testing 
is mentioned, precision and bias statements are not 
specified. 


IS 15799 : 2021 


ANNEX А 
( Foreword ) 
( Informative ) 


A-1 REPORT 


A-1.1 Report the results from the RTFO test in terms of 
the physical changes in the bitumen brought about by 
this method. These values are obtained by performing 
appropriate standard tests on the asphalt before and 
after the RTFO test. 


A-1.2 When determined, report the average mass 
change of the material in the two containers as a mass 
percent of the original material. Report this calculated 
result to the nearest 0.001 percent. A mass loss shall be 
reported as a negative number while a mass gain shall 
be reported as a positive number. 
NOTE — This test can result in either a mass loss or a mass 
gain. During the test, volatile components evaporate, causing a 
decrease in mass, while oxygen reacts with the sample, causing 
an increase in mass. The combined effect determines whether 
the sample has an overall mass gain or an overall mass loss. 
Samples with a very low percentage of volatile components 
usually will exhibit a mass gain, while samples with a high 
percentage of volatile components usually will exhibit a mass 
loss. 


A-2 PRECISION AND BIAS 


A-2.1 Criteria for judging the acceptability of the 
viscosity at 60?C and the ductility at 15.6?C test results 
on the residue after heating are given in Table 1. The 
values given in column 2 are the standard deviations 
that have been found to be appropriate for the materials 
and conditions of test described in column 1. The values 
given in column 3 are the limits that should not be 
exceeded by the difference between the results of two 


properly conducted tests. The values given in column 4 
are the coefficients of variation that have been found to 
be appropriate for the materials and conditions of test 
described in column 1. The values given in column 5 are 
the limits that should not be exceeded by the difference 
between the results of two properly conducted tests 
expressed as a percent of their mean. 


A-2.2 The precision of mass change measurements 
has been estimated based on an analysis of AASHTO 
Materials Reference Laboratory (AMRL) data 
representing approximately 5900 repetitions of this 
test. The analysis indicates that the standard deviation 
of the test (Zs) can be expressed as a function of the 
mass change (X) by using the following equations: 


Mass Change Single Operator Multi-Lab 
Standard Standard 
Deviation Deviation 
(Х) (15) (15) 
If X € -0.1 Is = 0.013 – 1s = 0.020 – 
percent 0.070 (X) 0.200 (X) 
If X> -0.1 15 = 0.020 1s — 0.040 
percent 


A-2.3 The 95 percent confidence limit for the acceptable 
range of two results (d2s) can be determined by 
multiplying the standard deviation (/5) estimates given 
in 10.2 by a factor of 2.83. 


A-2.4 This test method has no bias because the values 
determined are defined only in terms of the test method. 


Table 1 Precision of Test on Residue 
( Clause A-2.1 ) 


Test Methods Standard Deviation Acceptable Range of | Coefficient of Variation Acceptable Range of 
Two Results (percent of mean) 'Two Results 
(percent of mean) 

(15) (425) (15 percent) (425 percent) 

Single-Operator Precision 

Viscosity at 60°С = — 2.3 6.5 

Ductility at 15.6°C 3cm 9 cm — = 

Multi-Laboratory Precision 

Viscosity at 60°C — — 42 11.9 

Ductility at 15.6°C 6cm 16cm = — 


IS 15799 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Bitumen, Tar and Related Products Sectional Committee, PCD 06 


Organization 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), 
New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (BPCL), Mumbai 
Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department (CPWD), 
New Delhi 


G R Infra-Projects Ltd, Gurgaon 

GP Global Asphalt Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 

Indian Institute of Delhi (IIT Delhi) 

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee (IIT Roorkee) 


National Rural Road Development Agency, 
New Delhi 


National Test House (NTH), Kolkata 
Personal Capacity 

Shell Bitumen India Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon 
Airport Authority of India (AAI), Delhi 


Ashoka Buildcon Ltd, Nashik 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (BPCL), Kochi 

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (BPCL) R&D, 
Mumbai 

Bitchem Asphalt Technologies, Meghalaya 

Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd (CPCL), Chennai 

CSIR North East Institute of Science & Technology 
(NEIST), Jorhat 

Dilip Buildcon Ltd., Bhopal 

Directorate of General Border Roads, Seema Sadak 
Bhawan, New Delhi 


Engineer-In-Chiefs Army HQ, New Delhi 


Highway Research Station, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SATISH CHANDRA (Chairman) 
Suri M. N. NAGABHUSHANA 
Dn B. P. Baruan (Alternate) 


Suri M. К. SHEVADE 


Dn RAJANI LAKHANI 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 


Suri U. C. GUPTA 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR JAIN 
DR ARAVIND SWAMY 


DR SHAM SUNDAR RAVINDRANATH 
Suni B. C. PRADHAN 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR 
Suni P. S. KANDHAL 
SHRI NILANJAN SARKER 


SHRI VINOD KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI SupRIO Gosh (Alternate) 


SHRI Алт PATIL 
SHRI DEVENDRA Marone (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR. Т 
Suri К. Казо (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY BHARGAVA 
SMT SONAL MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANTA DUTTA 
Suri MuziBUR RAHMAN (Alternate) 


Dr S. KuMAR 
Suri Н. RAMAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr SHASHI D. BARUAH 
Dn B. P. BARuAH (Alternate) 


Suri В.в. KAMESWARA RAO 
Dn Амоѕн К. C. (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI UMAKANT Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI К. JAYAPRASAD 
Suri О. P. Srivatava (Alternate) 


Ms R. GEETHA 
Suri T. S. SUNDAR (Alternate) 


IS 15799 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 
Hindalco Industries Ltd, Mumbai SHRI К. VENKATESH 
Suri HarsHaD Panpit (Alternate) 
Hindustan Colas Ltd, Mumbai SHRI T. К. SUBHAASH 


Suri К. С. RANGANATHA (Alternate) 
SHRI HARSHAD PANDIT (YOUNG PROFESSIONAL) 
SHRI K. VENKATESH (YOUNG PROFESSIONAL) 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited Suri B. Ravi 
(HP Green R&D Center), Banglore SHRI К.к. KRISHNA (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun Dr Mano) SRIVASTAVA 


SHRI ANAND SINGH (Alternate) 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IIT Madras) Dr J. MURALI KRISHNAN 
Dr A. VEERARAGHAVAN (Alternate) 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Refinery Division), Suri S. M. UKEY 
New Delhi Suri S. B. LAHKAR (Alternate) 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, R&D Centre, Faridabad DR N.s. RAMAN 
Dn I. Devorta (Alternate I) 
SHRI DHANESH Kumar (Alternate П) 


Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi Suri S. К. NiRMAL 
Suri К. V. PATIL (Alternate) 
Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi SHRI VIVEKANAND 


SHRI ANIL KUMBHARE (Alternate I) 
SHRI SACHIN VINAYAK Zore (Alternate П) 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR 
SHRI VARUN AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


Nayara Energy Ltd, Mumbai SHRI MRIGANKA TARAFDAR 
Suri Duras GONDALIA (Alternate) 
Om Infracon Pvt Ltd, Guwahati Suri А. N. DAs 


SHRI DIGAMBAR DEKA (YOUNG PROFESSIONAL) 
SHRI MANISH BAJAJ (YOUNG PROFESSIONAL) 


OOMS Polymer Modified Bitumen Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon Ѕнк B. R. TYAGI 
Suri PALASH KATHAL (Alternate) 


Total Oil India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai Dr PANKAJ KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI Gaurav GocNE (Alternate) 
Zydex Industries Ltd, Vadodara Dr Azay КАМКА 


SHRI HIMANSHU AGARWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI VISHAL SALVIA (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General Suri V. К. Diunp1, Scientist ‘G’ AND HEAD (PCD) 
[ REPRESENTING DiRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Smt NISHA BURA 
SciENrTIST ‘C’, BIS 


10 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 06 (13658). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 СІТ. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


