А (Reaffirmed 2020) 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


qasart & femp mga этїї 
(447 97987 ) 


Basic Requirements for an Abattoir 
( Second Revision ) 


ICS 67.120.10 


© BIS 2016 


ТЯ 9799 5431 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW чач, 9 етте за art, 45 15ееП-110002 
Lm MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2016 Price Group 9 


Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectional Committee, FAD 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Slaughter House and Meat Industry Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Though millions of animals like sheep, goats, pigs and cattle are slaughtered every year in the country, the 
conditions of slaughter houses where these animals are being slaughtered are far from satisfactory requirements. 
These slaughter houses have not been constructed on modern lines and they do not fulfill the requirements of 
hygiene, sanitation, public health and of the prevention of cruelty to animals. This standard 1s being formulated 
to help in improving the present conditions of slaughter houses and in guiding the construction of new slaughter 
houses on modern lines especially with a view of facilitating greater utilization of slaughterhouse byproducts. 


The fundamental principle of hygiene, as well as economic consideration demand that the slaughtering of animals 
for human consumption is carried out in establishments specially constructed for the purpose and kept under 
constant sanitary control. A well designed and constructed structure is needed to systematically pursue slaughter 
of food animals, the dressing of carcasses and handling of by-products produced thereof. Further, when the 
process progresses, there is greater risk of contamination of the product. Therefore, prevention is determined by 
the layout and the flow pattern of the product. Thus, the site of the slaughterhouse must be chosen carefully and 
designed appropriately. The facilities provided must be suitable for the species to be handled anticipating 
throughput and kind of operations to be conducted (whether by-products are to be handled in the facility itself or 
elsewhere). 


This standard was first published in 1970 and revised in 1979. The first revision incorporated improved lay-outs, 
flow diagrams and requirements for installations and plant wastes disposal. 


This second revision has been undertaken to incorporate a number of modifications and additions like those of 
improved layout plans and flow diagrams. In this revision, requirements for location of abattoirs and list of 
facilities required in an abattoir and requirements for rails for carcasses have been updated. In this revision, list 
of basic equipments required for slaughter and dressing has been incorporated. Further, requirements for cleaning 
and sanitation and requirements for meat worker/handlers have also been incorporated. This standard has been 
formulated based on the inputs received from the Department of Meat Science and Technology, Madras Veterinary 
College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu and considering ‘Standard design for small-scale modular slaughterhouses (FAO, 
1988) and Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 and incorporating various animal 
welfare practices suggested by PeTA, India. 


Animal Welfare Act, 2001 and Prevention of Cruelty to Animal (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001, may be referred 
to for issues related to humane method of treatment to animals. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4393 : 2016 


Indian Standard 
BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ABATTOIR 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the typical layout plan, hygienic, 
sanitary, basic requirements for an abattoir for carrying 
out slaughter of cattle, sheep, goats and pigs. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

1982 : 2015 Code of practice for ante-mortem and 
post-mortem inspection of meat 
animals (second revision) 

2190 : 2010 Selection, installation апа 
maintenance of first-aid fire 
extinguishers — Code of practice 

6628 : 1972 Specification for slide rails for use 
in abattoirs 

10500 : 2012 Drinking Water — Specification 


(second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1982 shall apply. 


4 LOCATION 


The following facilities are considered mandatory in 
the proposed site for construction of an abattoir: 


a) Availability of stock (food animals) in and 
around the area. It must be located closer to 
production centre (livestock farms) rather than 
consumption centres as transport of meat either 
in refrigerated or non-refrigerated trucks 1s 
much easier than transporting live animals, 
which is a critical determinant of meat quality. 

b) Copious supply of potable water (see 
IS 10500) and three phase electricity 
connection. 

c) Adequate facilities for handling the effluent 
generated. 


d) Contiguity with uncongested road and rail 
network. 


e) Proximity to public transport, sufficiently 
available throughout the day. 


f) Freedom from flooding, objectionable odours, 
smoke, dust or other contamination (industrial 
area). 


g) The site should be away from human 
dwellings and should be away from airports 
in order to avoid bird menace. 


h) Remoteness from residential dwellings and 
other developments that might pose a problem 
of complaints of noise and odour. 

j) Ground suitable for good foundations 
including piling. 

k) Finally it must have enough land for possible 
future expansion. 


NOTE — In case the construction is within the municipal limits, 
plan for construction shall follow the relevant bye-laws 
prescribed by the municipal authorities of the place. 


5 LAYOUT PLAN 


5.1 The abattoirs shall have the following essential 
facilities: 

1. Proper transport of animals. 

2. Facilities for proper unloading. 

3. Holding pens for animals before slaughter 
(Lairage). 
Ante mortem inspection facility (see IS 1982). 
Foot dip with disinfectants. 
Stunning pen/area. 


Dp Wm 


Carrying out humane slaughter/Religious - 
Jhatka/Halal methods. 


Overhead rail system. 


№ o 


Slaughter hall to ensure maintenance of strict 
hygiene during slaughter. 


10. Facilities for flaying and dressing and 
washing of carcasses. 


11. Post mortem examination facilities (see 
IS 1982). 


12. Hot water washing facilities (82?C). 
13. Knife sterilizers. 

14. Emergency slaughter hall. 

15. Detained and condemned meat room. 


IS 4393 : 2016 


16. Movable or permanent working platforms. 


17. Wide doors (1.37m/4.5 feet) for free passage 
of meat carcasses. 


18. Knee/elbow/foot operated wash basins. 
19. Separate rooms for cleaning gut, stomach and 
intestines. 


20. Stainless steel bins for blood, edible and 
inedible offals. 


21. Storage of fats/hide/pig bristles/horns/hooves, 
if necessary. 


22. Separate demarcation between clean and 
unclean area. 


23. Meat inspector/veterinarian room. 

24. Veterinary laboratory. 

25. Lockers/rest room/laundry/toilets for meat 
handlers. 

26. Store room. 

27. Electrical and machine room. 

28. Chilling and freezing rooms. 

29. Boiler and steam generators. 

30. Isolation pen for sick and suspected animals. 

3]. Water proof flooring and side walls. 

32. Proper drainage with catch basins. 

33. Traps and vents for drainage. 

34. Good ventilation with adequate lighting. 

35. Potable water supply and storage tanks. 

36. Effluent treatment plant. 

37. Separate place for storing manure. 

38. Protection against pest and vermin. 

39. Office room, first aid and security room. 

40. Facility for vehicle washing. 

41. Non-corrodible food grade equipment and 
instruments. 

42. Disposal of condemned carcass/material — 
Incineration. 

43. Rendering plant. 


44. Refrigerated or non-refrigerated covered 
vehicles/trucks for transport of carcass. 


45. Dispatch area for finished product. 


5.1.1 Typical layout plan and flow diagram for an 
abattoir for slaughtering cattle are given in Fig. 1 and 
Fig. 2, respectively. Typical layout plan and flow 
diagram for an abattoir for slaughtering pigs are given 
in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, respectively. Typical layout plan 
and flow diagram for an abattoir for slaughtering goat 
and sheep are given in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, respectively. 
These figures are for guidance only. The plan may vary 
depending on shape and size of plot, number of animals 
to be slaughtered per day and individual requirements 
of a particular abattoir. 


5.1.2 The retail or wholesale market for meat, if 
required, can be included within the complex itself, 
the same should be physically excluded from the rest 
of the establishment in such a manner that the 
customers have an access only to these sections where 
such business 15 transacted. 


5.2 Abattoirs shall have an adequate separation between 
clean and unclean sections, which shall be arranged in 
such a way that from the introduction of a live animal 
into the abattoir up to the emergence of meat and offal 
classed as fit for human consumption, there shall be a 
continuous process, without any possibility of reversal, 
inter-section or over lapping between the live animals 
and meat, and between meat and by-products or waste. 
Typical flow diagrams for offals and by-products 
(rendering) are given in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. 


5.2.1 A flow diagram for basic operation of an abattoir 
is shown in Fig. 9 for information and guidance only. 
The layout of entire abattoir, as far as possible, should 
have a forward flow. 


5.3 Other Factors Affecting the Layout of the 
Abattoir and Allied Operations on Site 


5.3.1 Prevailing Winds 


Prevailing winds shall blow from the clean side to the 
unclean side of the abattoir premises. 


5.3.2 Natural Slope 


Natural slope shall be such that rainwater and runoff 
from the unclean area shall not flow into the abattoir, 
nor shall they flow from the unclean to the clean side 
of the premises. 


5.4 Area Required 


Generally for a small abattoir (up to 30 000 units/year) 
the area required will be about 1-2 acres. For a medium 
plant (50 000 + units/year) about 2-4 acres will be 
required. A large abattoir handling over 100 000 units 
annually will require about 4-6 acres of land. 


NOTE — Animal unit is a term commonly used to describe the 
number of animals slaughtered in an abattoir. An animal unit is 
the equivalent of one adult bovine or two pigs or three calves 
or five sheep. 


6 UNITS IN AN ABATTOIR 


6.1 In view of the facilities to be provided (see 5.1), 
the abattoir shall have the following units: 

a) Reception area or resting grounds, 

b) Lairages, 

c) Slaughter halls, 

d) Ancillary accommodation, 

е) Isolation block, and 

f) Chiller and freezer rooms. 


CATTLE SLAUGHTER HOUSE DESIGN 
PLANT 


STUNNING 
BLEEDING AREA 


INSPECTION SLAUGHTER AREA 


DISPATCH 


EMERGENCY 
SLAUGHTER 


BOILER 


AND 
w 
i TOILET GENERATOR| |WATER| 
Ww | ROOM TANK Ed 
V 


EFFLUENT 
REFERENCES R/S-ROLLING SHUTTER 
1 - STUNNING AREA D - DOOR GROUND FLOOR PLAN 
2 - EQUIPMENT ROOM W - WINDOW 
3 - TROUGH О - COUNTER (OPENING) 
4 - WORK ТОР 


5 - CONDEMNED MEAT 
Fic. 1 TypicAL LAYOUT PLAN FOR CATTLE ABATTOR 


9107 : <6е? SI 


IS 4393 : 2016 


CATTLE / BUFFALO - SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE 


RECEIVING ANIMALS 


| 


LAIRAGE (RESTING) 


| 


ANTE - MORTEM INSPECTION 


| 


STUNNING 


HOISTING 


STICKING (BLEEDING 6 min) 


| 


BUNGING (TYING THE RECTUM) 


| 


FLAYING 


| 


HEAD AND FEET REMOVAL 


| 


LIGATING THE OESOPHAGUS 


| 


EVISCERATION (REMOVAL OF VISCERA) 


| 


POST MORTEM EXAMINATION 


| 


SPLITTING 

QUARTERING | 
WHOLESALE / WASHING 
RETAIL CUTS | 

| CHILLING (0°C) 
PACKAGING 

= FREEZING (-18°C) 

TRANSPORT 


NOTE — In Halal/Jhatka method of slaughter, the facilities have to be provided 
for sticking the animals on the floor and hoist to over head rails. 


Fic. 2 FLow DIAGRAM FOR CATTLE ABATTOIR 


4 


IS 4393 : 2016 


SLAUGHTER HOUSE FOR PIGS 
STUNNING ес, 


BLOOD 
FREE 
AREA z 
о 
> E 
об ош 
oe L9 Tos 
E EO oa 
Qtr ao 
52 ао 
== 
шо 


АҒАР АҒ АН АҒА АР АУ АР АҒА 


NNN) 


D 
7 LAB REST 
/ am эшш ROZM 
LP AAA AV AV AV AA, Рр. / АУ АШУ ЖЕУ ЖЕУ АШУ А 
T у ; | 
ЈА “км 
f INEDIBLE OFFAL P 
—— о О] 

ПА НЕ D 
| EDIBLE OFFAL 
“=== D czzz 


CHILLER 4 

FREEZER И 

A 

ROOM / 
f В 


DISPATCH 


GROUND FLOOR PLAN 


REFERENCES 
1- SCALDING TANK 7-HOT WATER HOSE 
2 - DEHAIRING R/S- ROLLING SHUTTER 
3 - SINGEING D - DOOR 
4 - DEHEADING W - WINDOW 


5 - SPLIT & WASH O - COUNTER (OPENING) 
6 - OFFAL TROLEY 


Fic. 3 TypicAL LAYOUT PLAN FOR PIG ABATTOIR 


IS 4393 : 2016 


PIG-SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE 


RECEIVING ANIMALS 


LAIRAGE (RESTING) 


| 


ANTE - MORTEM INSPECTION 


| 


STUNNING 


| 


HOISTING 
STICKING (BLEEDING 6 min) 


SCALDING (62°-64°) 


| 


DEHAIRING 


| 


GAMBRELING 


SINGEING/SCRAPPING OF BRISTILES / HAIRS 


| 


PRE-EVISCERATION WASH 


| 


BUNGING (TYING THE RECTUM) 


HEAD REMOVAL (DECAPITATION) 


TYING THE OESOPHAGUS 


| 


EVISCERATION 


| 


POST MORTEM EXAMINATION 


| 


SPLITTING / HALVING 


WASHING 


CHILLING (0°C) 


FABRICATION - WHOLESALE / RETAIL CUTS 


PACKAGING 


| 


FREEZING (-18*C) 


| 


TRANSPORT 


Fic. 4 FLow DIAGRAM OF STANDARD PIG SLAUGHTER OPERATIONS 


SHEEP / GOAT SLAUGHTER HOUSE DESIGN 


wi FIRSTAID р N 


EMERGENCY 
SLAUGHTER 


N ROOM 


=== аса Аа D AL AG 


ESAn munn SSS 


E 
BLEEDING STUNNING || 
DESKINNING AREA AREA 


SLAUGHTER 
INSPECTION 


DISPATCH 


=a 


D 
1 
=т=т 
[ie ГК 
| | М 
IDG [рш 
бш! [у 
К! 


LAIRAGE 


1 - STUNNING AREA BOILER 
2 - EQUIPMENT ROOM 
3- TROUGH 


4 - WORK TOP GENERATOR WATER | 
5 - CONDEMNED MEAT GROUND FLOOR PLAN ROOM TANK 
ROOM 


R/S - ROLLING SHUTTER —— 

D-DOOR 

W - WINDOW VEHICLE RENDERING TREATMENT 
CLEANING PLANT 

О - COUNTER (OPENING) PLANT 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL LAYOUT PLAN FOR GOAT AND SHEEP ABATTOIR 


9107 : Є6ЄӮ SI 


IS 4393 : 2016 


SHEEP/GOAT - SLAUGHTER PROCEDURE 


RECEIVING ANIMALS 


| 


LAIRAGE (RESTING) 


| 


ANTE - MORTEM INSPECTION 


| 


STUNNING 


| 


HOISTING 


| 


STICKING (BLEEDING 5 -6 min) 


| 


BUNGING (TYING THE RECTUM) 


| 


FLAYING 


| 


HEAD AND FEET REMOVAL 


| 


LIGATING THE OESOPHAGUS 


| 


EVISCERATION (REMOVAL OF VISCERA) 


POST MORTEM EXAMINATION 


| 


WHOLESALE / WASHING 
RETAIL CUTS | 
| CHILLING (0°C) 
PACKAGING 
RM FREEZING (-18°C) 
TRANSPORT 


NOTE — In Halal/Jhatka method of slaughter, the facilities have to be provided 
for sticking the animals on the floor and hoist to over head rails. 


Fic. 6 FLow DIAGRAM FOR GOAT AND SHEEP ABATTOIR 


UMBRELLA 
TRIPE WASHER 
(FOR CATTLE 


NLY 
Wea жан) eM» 
TROUGH PACKING TABLE 


TRIPE WASHING 
MACHINES 
BLEACHING 

OPTIONAL 


COOLING 
OPTIONAL 


PAUNCH TABLE 


/N 
ке eps л. 
PAUNCH p qe L PAUNCH TO 


r[u I BUTCHERS 
ojl [9] 
ZIDE = 
358 2 
5 Ajr а. 
ог o I 
|5505 
aja- < 
о zu = 
ш 
MANURE ТО ВУ - PRODUCTS CASING STRIPPER 
CASINGS | о|аСАЗІМӘО WASH TROUGH MACHINE TESTING AND 
TABLE 2iz AND PACKING TABLE 
VISCERA o MANURE HOPPER 
FROM casmcs| __| Sof dL 7| | | 1 | CASING TO 
BUTCHERS 
DRESSING EIE EU Wiz) о 
AREA шош E 22102 р 
z|3 212 55158 d 
2250 n о - 
ilg" 
ш MANURE TO BY - PRODUCTS 
WASH WASH 
TROUGH TROUGH 
FATS 
HEARTS 
LIVERS TO BUTCHERS 
(OPTIONAL) LUNGS 
KIDNEYS 
SPLEENS 


PARTS 
WASH AND TRIM 
HEARTS 


WASH FATS 
TRIM REMAINING 
PARTS 


Е- 
5| Z 
э | = 
alo 
wu} Q 
ELS 
x| o 
< 
а О 
oz 


Fic. 7 CATTLE, PIG AND GOAT OrrALs FLow DIAGRAM 


9107 : <6е? SI 


01 


TALLOW 
DAUMS 


PREBREAKER TALLOW REFINING 
& SETTLING TANK 


CATTLE TALLOW TANK 


CONDEMNED AND PUMP 
VISCERA 

CONDEMNED 
CARCASS 


RAW BLOOD TO PHARMA- Sum а = 
CONDEMNED = 

CEUTICAL (ASEPTIC CONDITION) REDUCTION $o| láz 

ax MELTER — TALLOW 95 Ok 

BLOOD “ЕГ dés 

21 20 

Ш Eo 
c од 


ЕХТКАСТОК 


МЕАТ 


HOIST 4 ELEVATING 


CONVEYOR 


од 
ш 
5 
2 
Ф PERCOLA- 


DISPATCH 
BAGGING 
DRYING 


HOPPER 


PREBREAKER 


5 
E SHEEP/ = 
as GOATS С 2 
83 Б 9 о| zs 
dá BLOOD 2 2 2 2 ше 
O| [CONDEMNED JE 2 ©) Qa 
VISCERA M ax т 5 5% 
SIZE 9 оа 
o 


CONDEMNED 
CARCASS REDUCTION 
CONDEMNED 

HEAD 


Fic. 8 By-Propucts (RENDERING) FLow DIAGRAM 


9102 : ЄӨЄР SI 


IS 4393 : 2016 


PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM 


RECEIVING ANIMALS 


ANTE-MORTEM 
EXAMINATION / INSPECTION 


LAIRAGE (RESTING) 
STUNNING 


HOISTING / SHACKLING 


STICKING 


BLEEDING (5-6 MIN) 


REMOVAL OF HEAD & FEET 
DECAPITATION) 


FLAYING 


EVISCERATION 
(REMOVAL OF ORGAN) 


POST MORTEM EXAMINATION 


m PASSED 
SPLITTING 
WASHING 
CHILLING(0*C) 
HALVING / QUARTERING 
WHOLESALE / RETAIL CUTS 
"E pore 


FREEZING(-18°C) 


EAD ON ARRIVAL — ВІО - WASTE DISPOSAL/ 
RENDERING 


INJURED / UNFIT  —»- ТКЕАТМЕМТ/ 
ANIMALS MEA ENDER M MERI 


BIO" - WASH DISPOSAL 


UNCLEAN AREA 


HEAD AND FEET 


INEDIBLE OFFAL 


CONDEMNED 
CARCASS/ 
TRIMMINGS /ORGAN 


| TRANSPORT ---»- MARKET / SALES COUNTER 
ПІ CLEAN AREA [1] UNCLEAN AREA 


(GREEN) (RED) 


Fic. 9 GENERAL Process FLow DIAGRAM 


IS 4393 : 2016 


6.1.1 Reception Area or Resting Grounds 


The abattoir shall have reception area of adequate size 
or resting grounds where the livestock are subjected 
to veterinary inspection before they are passed on to 
lairage for resting for 24 h. This shall have the 
following facilities. 


6.1.1.1 Facilities for unloading ramp 


Unless all animals are arriving on hoof, proper ramps 
for direct unloading of animals from trucks or railway 
wagons should be provided. Ramps should be 
positioned to be even with the vehicle; width should 
be suitable enough for animals. Ramps should have 
side protection and non-slip floors and aligned so that 
there are no gaps where an animal might become 
trapped and injured. Ideally, animals should not have 
to walk up or down ramps with slope not greater than 
30° to the horizontal (1 in 2.75, or4 in 11). It is better 
to use hydraulic loading platforms or hydraulically 
operated lifting decks on vehicles. The ramps should 
directly lead to ante-mortem area with office room 
for veterinary inspector. People handling animals, 
should follow good animal welfare measures in order 
to avoid stress, injury or suffering to the animals and 
protect human safety. 


6.1.1.2 The reception area or resting grounds shall have 
facility for watering and examining animals before 
sending to holding pens. 


6.1.1.3 Separate isolation pens shall be provided with 
watering and feeding arrangements for: (a) sick 
animals or animals suspected to be suffering from 
contagious and infectious diseases, and (b) injured or 
fractious animals, in order to segregate them from the 
remaining animals. 


6.1.1.4 Adequate holding area shall be provided 
according to the class of animals to be slaughtere. The 
holding area shall have water and feeding facilities. 
The resting grounds should have overhead protective 
shelters. 


6.1.2 Lairage 


6.1.2.1 Animals should be kept in the lairage without 
overcrowding or injury or being exposed to climatic 
stress. The lairage shall be adequate in size for the 
number of animals to be kept. Space sufficient to house 
three days supply of cattle and/or two days supply of 
sheep or pigs is considered necessary. Space provided 
to animals should be such that the animal can freely 
move and express its normal behavior patterns as far 
as possible. The space provided in the pens shall be 
not less than 2.3 m? - 2.8 n? per animal for cattle which 
are kept without tying and not less than 3.3 m? per 
animal for the tied one. The space provided in the pens 
shall be not less 0.6 m? per animal for medium sized 


pigs and not less than 0.7 m? per animal for heavy pigs, 
calves, sheep and goat. 


6.1.2.2 The animals shall be kept separately depending 
upon their type and class. There shall be no mixing of 
animals of different species. There shall be separate 
pens for male and female, horned and polled, animals 
in heat (oestrous) and pregnant animals. 


6.1.2.3 The lairage shall be roofed and so constructed 
as to protect the animals from extreme climatic 
conditions like heat, cold and rain to avoid stress. 
Handling facilities should be designed to ensure ease 
of handling and to prevent injury to animals. There 
should be no physical features in the lairage which 
cause recurring injuries to animals. 


6.1.2.4 Floors shall have mild slopes to prevent 
accumulation of water and prevent water logging. 
Slurry and manure should be frequently removed from 
the shelter facilities. 


6.1.2.5 Lairage should be maintained dry, clean and 
free from rodents and insects. The lairage shall have 
adequate facilities for cleaning and/or drying of 
animals; adequate supply of clean water for drinking 
and washing and facilities for feeding whenever 
necessary; and ante-mortem inspection. 


6.1.2.6 Where separate lairage or sections are to be 
provided for livestock meant for Jhatka and Halal, 
complete visual separation shall be effected and 
entrances shall be as far apart as possible. 


6.1.3 Slaughter Halls 


Separate provisions, wherever required, shall be made in 
an abattoir for slaughtering, dressing and processing of: 


а) sheep and goats (Halal); 
b) sheep and goats (Jhatka); 
с) pigs; 

d) cattle (Halal); and 

e) cattle (Jhatka). 


The slaughter halls and ancillary accommodation thus 
provided shall be separated, keeping in view the 
economic and local requirements, by solid walls 
depending upon the site. Exits to such sections shall 
be kept as far apart as possible. 


6.1.3.1 Separate space shall be provided for stunning 
(wherever applicable), bleeding and dressing of the 
carcasses. The curbing should be not less than 150 mm 
high and 100 mm wide with the top sloped not less 
than 459. 


6.1.3.2 Races 


Single-file race should not be too wide, crowded and 
should not appear as a dead end. Single-file races must 


be narrow enough to prevent animals from turning 
around or becoming wedged beside each other. Cattle 
race should be wide (76 cm) and races for pigs, goats 
and sheep should have only 3 cm of clearance on each 
side of the largest animal. Curved race is more efficient 
because animal entering the race cannot see people or 
other activity up ahead, provided laid out correctly. 
Curved races must be laid out so that animals standing 
in the crowding-pen can see a minimum of three body 
lengths up the race before it turns. 


6.1.3.3 Stunning area (wherever applicable) 


The area in front of the stunning pen should be at least 
3m in width to the opposing wall or bleeding trough 
and be fitted with upright bars 5cm in diameter and 1.2 
m high, spaced in 40 cm intervals for safety purposes. 
Animals should enter the device easily. If they balk or 
back up, check for distractions. Animal's vision should 
be blocked so that they do not see people or suddenly 
moving objects. Metal shields should be installed around 
the animal's head on box type restrainers. Animals tend 
to panic when they lose their footing. Non-slip flooring 
should be provided in box-type restrainers and a non- 
slip cleated entrance ramp should be provided on 
conveyor restrainers. Parts of restraint device that press 
against the animal's body should move with slow steady 
motion. Animals should never be left in a stunning box 
or restraint device but should be stunned slaughtered 
immediately after entry with rituals or otherwise, as the 
case may be. 


6.1.3.4 Knocking section may be so planned as to suit 
the animal and particularly the ritual slaughter, if any. 
It should have facility to slaughter crippled animals 
brought from ante-mortem inspection area to slaughter 
department and also the floor and hand washing 
facilities. An animal shall not be slaughtered in sight 
of other animals. The knocking section and dry landing 
area associated with it shall be so built that escape from 
this section can be easily carried out by an operator 
without allowing the animal to pass the escape barrier. 
This may normally be accomplished by an arrangement 
such as placing vertical pipes 150 mm in diameter, 
1.5 m high on prepared vertical pipe inserts, about 
120 mm high or the internal diameter of the pipe used 
for the vertical placed not less than 500 mm apart. 


6.1.3.5 A curbed-in bleeding area of adequate size 
should be provided. The bleeding trough should be at 
least 1.5 m wide for cattle, possessing a good gradient, 
side walls of the same height, and two drains, one for 
blood and one for water for the purpose of cleaning. 
The length of the bleeding line will depend on the 
throughput and the system of conveying carcasses, but 
should be generous, since the majority of blood flow 
requires 6-8 min. It shall be so located that the blood 
shall not be splashed on other animals being 


IS 4393 : 2016 


slaughtered or on the carcass being skinned. Blood 
drain and collection should be immediate and proper. 
A floor wash point should be provided for intermittent 
cleaning. Also a hand-wash basin and knife sterilizer 
should be provided for the sticker to sterilize knife and 
wash his hands periodically. 


6.1.3.6 Dressing area 


Dressing of carcasses should not be done on floor. 
Adequate means and tools for dehiding or skinning of 
the animals should be provided. Means for immediate 
disposal of hides or skins should be provided. Hides 
or skins should be immediately transported either in a 
closed wheel barrow or by a chute provided with self- 
closing door. In no case the hides or skins should be 
spread on slaughter floor for inspection. Floor wash 
point and adequate number of hand wash basins with 
sterilizer should be provided in this section. Means for 
immediate disposal of legs, horns, hooves, etc, should 
be provided through spring load floor chutes or side 
wall doors or closed wheel barrows. In case wheel 
barrows or trucks are used, care should be taken that 
at no point wheel barrow or truck has to ply under the 
dressing rails and a clear passage is provided for 
movement of the trucks. 


6.1.3.7 Viscera inspection facilities 


Adequate space and suitable and properly located 
facilities shall be provided for inspection ofthe viscera 
of the various types of animals slaughtered. This 
department shall have adequate facilities for hand 
washing, tool sterilization and floor washing and 
contrivances for immediate separation and disposal of 
condemned material. Adequate arrangements may be 
made for identification, inspection and correlation of 
carcass, viscera and head. 


6.1.3.8 Carcass washing facility 


A curbed and separately drained area or an area of 
sufficient size sloped 33 mm/m to a floor drain, where 
approved carcasses may be washed with a jet of water, 
should be provided. Carcass should be washed with 
hot water at > 74°С for at least 10 s. The treatment of 
carcass with one or more of the following 15 also 
permitted for cleaning purpose: 


a) Chlorine; 

b) Organic acids for example acetic acid, lactic 
acid, citric acid, fumaric acid; 

c) Hydrogen peroxide; 

d) Antimicrobials; and 

e) Phosphates. 


6.1.4 Ancillary Accommodation 


6.1.4.1 A separate room and hanging space shall be 
provided for emptying and cleaning of stomachs and 


IS 4393 : 2016 


intestines. This room shall have a separate exit. Pluck 
and viscera cleaning and separating departments should 
be divided into edible and inedible sections for further 
processing. Those sections should preferably be 
separated from the slaughter floor, except for one or 
two connecting doorways provided with solid, self- 
closing doors, completely covering the opening. 


6.1.4.2 Condemned carcasses should be disposed off 
at rendering plant. If rendering facilities are not 
provided, the condemned material should be denatured 
and held in watertight metal containers in suitable 
inedible product room pending daily removal by 
contractors for disposal through suitable prescribed 
waste disposal methods. 


6.1.4.3 Suitable and sufficient accommodation shall be 
provided for the retention of all meat condemned as unfit 
for human consumption and shall be locked up 
separately. 


6.1.4.4 If a separate block for hide curing or skin drying 
is not provided in the abattoir, the hides or skins may be 
stored in a separate room and removed daily. 


6.1.4.5 Suitable and sufficient facilities shall be 
provided for the isolation of meat requiring further 
examination by the veterinary inspector in a suitable 
laboratory within the premises of the abattoir. 


6.1.4.6 Veterinary laboratory 


A room equipped for carrying out a trichinoscopic test 
is compulsory in abattoirs handling pigs. In larger 
premises, a well-equipped laboratory is essential, not 
only for the preliminary diagnosis of animal disease 
but also to maintain the overall hygienic standards. 


6.1.4.7 Veterinary office 


An adequately equipped lockable room for the 
exclusive use of the veterinarian/meat inspectors. The 
rooms should be provided with hand-washing and 
shower facilities, and lockers for clothing (clean and 
dirty) and meat inspection equipment. A convenient 
means of cleaning footwear before entry into changing 
rooms is an advantage. 


6.1.4.8 Labour welfare facilities 


Welllocated toilet rooms (1 per 15 employees) should 
be provided in the abattoir building sufficiently away 
from slaughter walls. A separate hall with lockers and 
shower facilities (1 per 15 employees) should be 
provided. Adequate drinking water and washing 
facilities (cleaning agents, soap and chemicals) should 
be provided at convenient locations. Adequate facilities 
for cloak room, canteen with dining hall and first-aid 
should also be provided. A store room for overalls, 
equipment and clean manual implements, normally 
required for the work, must be provided. Hand basins 


or wash trough with taps controlled preferably with 
the knee or elbow must be provided at the exit of these 
facilities. 


6.1.5 Isolation Block 


It is also called as emergency slaughterhouse or 
miniature abattoir. In large abattoirs isolation block is 
necessary for detention of suspected animals for its 
observation and treatment and if necessary to do 
emergency slaughter in case of fractured, injured 
animals. The isolation block will have a small lairage 
to keep 4 cattle with a slaughter hall, cooling hall, 
bacteriological laboratory, incinerator and sterilization 
rooms. This block must be located at a distance from 
the main buildings and workers should not move from 
here to the main buildings. It should be situated near 
to the suspect meat detention room and should be in 
direct communication with the by-products 
department. 


6.1.6 Chiller and Freezer Rooms 


Chiller room shall have temperature of 0?C to 4?C and 
freezer room shall have a temperature of -18 + 2°C. 
Hanging halls, if air-conditioned should have 
temperature not higher than 10?C. Two retaining 
compartments constructed of rust-resistant wire gauge 
or expanded metal portion extending from about 75 
mm above ground to ceiling should be provided, one 
for holding retained carcasses and the other for holding 
the carcasses affected with Cysticercus bovis. 


7 RAILS FOR CARCASSES 


7.1 Any of the following systems for line dressing can 
be taken into operation, the type depending mainly on 
the level of throughput, equipment design and species. 


7.1.1 Gravity Rail System 


Recommended for 10-40 animals per hour, carcass is 
suspended from a spreader and single wheel trolley or 
runner are gravitated to each station and stopped by a 
manually operated stop on the overhead rail. 


7.1.2 Intermittent Powered System 


Recommended for 10-75 animals per hour, it involves 
the mechanical moving of the carcasses suspended on 
a spreader and trolley along a level rail at intervals by 
means of a variable timing device which can be pre 
set to suit the slaughter rate. 


7.1.3 Continuous Powered System 


Recommended for 40-120 animals per hour, here 
dressing line 1s in continuous motion with more 
sophisticated equipment light mechanical hide puller, 
moving top inspection table and the carcass can be 
revolved a full 360? while on the rail allowing the 
operator to work all sides from one position. 


7.2 Rails (see IS 6628) with hooks of suitable rust- 
proof metal or mild steel shall be provided for hanging 
the carcasses and similar provision for plucks shall be 
made, permitting free circulation of air. The hooks shall 
be suitably cleaned and sterilized regularly. 


7.3 The height and length of rails, provided for bleeding 
and dressing, shall be in accordance with Table 1. 


Table 1 Requirements of Height and Length of 
Bleeding and Dressing Rails 


(Clause 7.3) 


SI Carcass Height ^ Length per 
No. cm Carcass 
cm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Bleeding rail for sheep, goats 300” 30 
and pigs 
ii) Bleeding rail for cattle/buffalo 45010500 50 
ii) Dressing rail for sheep, goats 230 to 340? =Е 
and pigs 
iv) Dressing rail for cattle/buffalo 340 — 


D Falling at the rate of 1 cm/100 cm(for gravity rail). 
? Remaining dressing rail height shall be 320 cm. 


7.4 The space required per carcass and the distance 
between the rails in hanging or chill room, shall be in 
accordance with Table 2. 


Table 2 Requirements of Space per Carcass and 
Distance Between Rails in Hanging or Chill Room 


(Clause 7.4) 


SI Carcass Space per Distance Heights of 
No. Carcass Between Rails Rails 
cm cm cm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Sheep апа goats? 30 90 to 100 320 
ii) Pigs): 
a) Weight of pig 70 kg 50 90 to 100 320 
and over 
b) Weight of pig below 30 90 to 100 320 
70 kg 
iii) Cattle/buffalo 80 to 100 90 to 100 320 


P for sheep, goats and pigs double stacking shall be done. 


8 CIVIL CONSTRUCTION 


8.1 Abattoir Premises 


Should have concrete brick wall with barbed wired 
fencing upto 10 feet, with security in order to control 
the unauthorized entry of vehicles, persons and 
animals. Surfaces on the site must be paved or grassed. 
Smaller abattoirs must have a surface that is dust and 
mud free, readily cleanable and well drained. Larger 
houses should be planted with trees in order to make 
premises environment friendly. Provision of sufficient 
storm water drainage should be there. 


IS 4393 : 2016 


Walkways for staff between the blocks and the abattoir 
must preferably be roofed. Specific areas such as 
collection points for manure from holding pens and 
paunch contents must also be paved and drained. 


8.2 Ante-mortem and Pen Area Including Lairage 


The area should be paved with impervious material 
such as concrete non-slippery herring-bone type 
suitable to stand wear and tear by hooves, or brick, 
and pitched to suitable drainage facilities. Curbs of 
impervious material 150 to 300 mm high should be 
provided around the borders of livestock pen area, 
except at the entrances. The pen should preferably be 
covered. The squares in the floors should be 20 cm 
(8 inch) by 20 cm (8 inch). There should be V shaped 
grooves in the flooring with minimum depth of 2.5 cm 
and width of 2.5 cm. 


8.3 Plant Building 


Materials used shall be impervious, easily cleansable, 
and resistant to wear and corrosion. Materials such as 
wood, plaster board, and porous acoustic-type boards, 
which are absorbent and difficult to keep clean should 
not be used in edible departments. 


8.3.1 Floors 


The floors should be non-absorbent and non-slippery 
with rough finish, and shall have suitable gradient for 
drainage. 


8.3.2 Coves 


Coves with radii sufficient to promote sanitation should 
be installed at the juncture of floors and walls in all 
rooms and not less than 100 mm. 


8.3.3 Interior Walls 


Interior walls should be smooth and flat and 
constructed of impervious materials such as glazed 
brick, glazed tile, smooth surfaced Portland cement 
plaster, or other non-toxic, non-absorbent material 
applied to a suitable base. Walls should be provided 
with suitable sanitary type bumpers to prevent damage 
by hand trucks, carcass shanks, and the like. It is 
recommended that the interior walls should have 
washable surface up to the height of 2 m from the floor 
so that the splashes may be washed and disinfected. 
The smooth walls will be painted in light colours to a 
height of 3 m. 


8.3.4 Ceilings 


Ceilings should be of good height (5 m or more is 
desirable in work rooms). So far as structural conditions 
permit, ceilings shall be smooth and flat. Ceilings shall 
be constructed of Portland cement plaster, large size 
cement asbestos boards with joints sealed with a 
flexible ceiling compound, or other acceptable 


IS 4393 : 2016 


impervious material and finished so as to minimize 
condensation, mould development, flaking and 
accumulation of dirt. The walls (above glazed type 
portion) and ceiling may be painted with water- 
resistant paint to maintain them clean. 


8.3.5 Window Ledges 


Window ledges should slope at 45? to promote 
sanitation. To avoid damage to glass in windows from 
impact of hand trucks and similar equipment, the 
window sills should be 1 200 mm above the floor level. 
Proper ventilation through mechanical venting or 
through working vents should be provided in the roof 
structure. 


8.3.6 Doorways and Doors 


Doorways through which product is transferred on 
rails or in hand trucks shall be at least 1 500 mm wide, 
except for the doors used in connection with rails, 
which should be approximately 3 000 mm high can 
be at least 1 500 mm wide. Doors shall either be of 
rust-resistant metal construction throughout, or if 
made with rust-resistant metal having tight soft wood, 
they shall be clad on both sides with soldered or 
welded seams. Door jambs shall be clad with rust- 
resistant metal securely affixed so as to provide no 
crevices for dirt or vermin and the juncture at which 
the door joins the walls shall be effectively sealed 
with a flexible sealing compound. 


8.3.7 Screens and Insect Control 


АП windows, doorways, and other openings that may 
admit flies should be equipped with effective insect 
and rodent screens. ‘Fly chaser’ fans and ducts or air 
curtains shall be provided over doorways in outside 
wall of food handling areas that are used for dispatch 
or receiving. 


8.3.8 Rodent-Proofing 


Except in the case of solid masonry walls constructed 
of glazed tile, glazed brick, and the like, expanded 
metal or wire mesh, not exceeding 12.5 mm mesh, shall 
be embedded in walls and floors at their junction. This 
mesh should extend vertically and horizontally to a 
sufficient distance to exclude the entrance of rats and 
other rodents. 


8.3.9 Stairs 


Stairs in edible product handling departments shall be 
of impervious construction with solid treads and closed 
risers and shall have side curbs of similar material 150 
mm high measured at the front edge of the treads. Floor 
openings for chutes, etc, and for stairways except at 
entrances should have curbs of impervious materials, 
such as concrete or metal, at least 300 mm high, to 
prevent floor drainage from entering such chutes. 


8.4 Vehicular Areas for Trucks 


Concrete paved areas, properly drained and extending 
at least 6 m from building, loading docks or livestock 
platforms shall be provided at places where vehicles 
are loaded or unloaded. Pressure washing jets and 
disinfection facilities for trucks carrying animals should 
be provided. Vehicles which offload live animals, loads 
intestines, heads and feet as well as vehicles removing 
paunch contents, condemned material and refuse are 
restricted to the dirty area and may not enter areas 
where meat vehicles and staff who handle meat are to 
be found. Separate routes for stock and meat vehicles 
should be provided. Approach roads should be at least 
6 m wide. Drainage and cleaning facilities should be 
available in vehicle parking areas where animals are 
offloaded or meat is loaded. 


8.5 Drainage 


8.5.1 All parts of floors where wet operations are 
conducted should be well drained. Drainage must be 
from clean to dirty areas. As a general rule, one 
drainage inlet should be provided for each 37 m? of 
floor space. A slope of about 20mm/m to drainage inlets 
should be provided for usual conditions. It is important 
that the floors slope uniformly to drains with no low 
spots which collect liquid. Floor drains should not be 
provided in freezer rooms or dry storage areas. When 
floor drains are installed in rooms where the water seal 
in traps is likely to evaporate without replenishment, 
they should be provided with suitable removable metal 
screw plugs. Special arrangements have to be made 
for dealing with stomach and intestinal contents, the 
drains for bovine material to be at least 20 cm in 
diameter and for the smaller species 15 cm. 


8.5.2 Traps and Vents on Drainage Lines 


Each floor drain, including blood drains, should be 
equipped with a deep seal trap (I-, U-, or S-shape ). 
Drainage lines shall be properly vented to the outside 
air and be equipped with effective rodent screens. 


8.5.3 Sanitary Drainage Lines 


Drainage lines from toilet pans and urinals should not 
be connected with other drainage lines within the plant 
and may not discharge into a grease catch basin. Such 
lines shall be installed so that if leakage develops, it 
shall not affect the product or the equipment. 


8.5.4 All floor drains should be so constructed and the 
floor so made that these can be easily cleaned and then 
shall be a minimum area to be drained per outlet. It is 
recommended that ‘U’ drains set with satisfactory 
covers should be used and made totally fly-proof and 
rodent-proof. 


8.5.5 Special Drainage Requirements 


In certain departments, special floor drainage 15 
required. For example, floor drainage valleys are 
essential under the dressing rails for hogs, calves, and 
sheep. Such valleys shall be about 600 mm wide and 
integral with the floor. The valleys shall slope at least 
10 mm/m to drains with the valleys. In so-called on 
the rail cattle slaughtering departments, floor valleys 
under the dressing rails shall be provided unless the 
floor drainage is carefully localized within drainage 
inlets placed advantageously beneath the dressing rails. 


9 LIGHTING AND VENTILATION 


9.1 Un-refrigerated work rooms should be provided 
with adequate direct natural light and ventilation or 
ample artificial light and ventilation by mechanical 
means. Uncoloured glass having a high transmissibility 
of light may be used in skylights and windows. The 
glass area should be approximately one-fourth the floor 
area of a workroom. This ratio should be increased 
where there are obstructions, such as adjacent 
buildings, overhead catwalks, and hoists, which 
interfere with the admittance of direct natural light. 
Well distributed artificial lighting of good quality 
should be provided at all places where adequate natural 
light is not available or is insufficient. 


9.2 Every abattoir shall be so constructed that meat 
inspection may be carried out in daylight. Sockets for 
the use of inspection lamps shall be provided at 
convenient places. 


9.3 Every abattoir shall be provided with well-distributed 
artificial light of an overall intensity of not less than 
220 lux throughout the slaughter hall and workrooms 
and at places where meat inspection is carried out, the 
overall intensity of artificial light shall be not less than 
540 lux. The overall intensity of artificial light shall be 
not less than 110 lux in other areas. 


9.4 Every abattoir shall be provided with suitable and 
sufficient means of ventilation to the outside air. The 
construction ofthe slaughter hall should be so arranged 
that the dressed carcasses are not exposed to direct 
sunlight. 


10 SUPPLY OF WATER 


10.1 A sufficient and constant supply of potable water 
(see IS 10500) shall be available at adequate pressure 
throughout the premises. 


10.1.1 The pressure for the general purpose of floor 
washing, etc, may preferably be 30 psi to 50 psi for 
thorough floor cleaning. 


10.1.2 For thorough and efficient washing of carcasses, 
a higher pressure of 150 psi to 250 psi is recommended. 


17 


IS 4393 : 2016 


10.1.3 Floor washing point may be provided preferably 
for minimum 37 m? on slaughter floor and working 
departments. 


10.1.4 The water distribution plant may be located at 
the load centre. 


10.2 A constant supply of clean hot water shall be 
available in the slaughter hall and workrooms during 
working hours. 


10.2.1 Hot water 15 required at not less than 82?C for 
frequent sterilizing of equipment. 


10.3 Every sanitary convenience in an abattoir shall 
be supplied with water by means of suitable flushing 
appliance. 


10.4 Suitable facilities for washing of hands (including 
adequate supplies of hot and cold running water, nail 
brushes and soap or other detergent) shall be provided 
for persons working in an abattoir. Where non-potable 
water is used for fire control, steam production and 
cooling refrigeration equipment, etc, it shall be carried 
in completely separate lines preferably identified by 
colour and with no cross-connection or back siphonage 
with lines carrying potable water. 


10.5 Water Requirement 


10.5.1 Water requirement for an abattoir for pigs 1s 
approximately 454 litre/animal/day. 


10.5.2 Water requirement for an abattoir for cattle 15 
approximately 272 litre/animal/day. 


10.5.3 Water requirement for an abattoir for sheep and 
goat is approximately 45 litre/animal/day plus 25 
percent at a reasonable pressure of 15 psi. 


10.6 Water should be tested once in a month for 
bacteriological requirements and once in six months 
for chemical requirements (see IS 10500). The abattoir 
owner shall keep meticulous records of the results of 
bacteriological and chemical tests. 


11 EQUIPMENT CONSTRUCTION 


11.1 Basic Equipment Required for Slaughter and 
Dressing 


11.1.1 The basic equipment that is needed for the 
slaughtering operation consists of (The list 15 for 
guidance only, type and quantum of equipment will 
depend on the slaughtering procedures employed): 


a) 


Stunning gun, electrical head tongs or simple 
stunning equipment for direct blow, 


b) Knives - sticking (16cm sharpened on both 
sides), skinning (16cm curved), 

с) А sharpening steel, 

d) Sharpening stone, 


IS 4393 : 2016 


Scabbard and belt for holding knives, 
Meat saw (hand or electric) and cleaver, 


Shackle or chain hoist strong enough to hold 
the weight of the animal to be slaughtered, 


Skinning rack (dressing cradle), 


Overhead rail system/strong beam, tripod or 
track 2.4 - 3.4 m from the floor, 


Spreader-gambrel or metal pipe, 
Buckets, 

Working platforms, 

Wire mesh aprons, and 


Protective clothing for meat handlers/ 
workers. 


11.1.2 The following additional equipment are required 
when pigs are scalded and scrapped rather than 
skinned: 


a) Scalding barrel or tank; 

b) Pot, barrel or system for boiling water; 
c) Bell scrapers/Dehairing machine; 

d) Solid scraping table or platform; 

e) Thermometer; 

f) Hooks/Gambrels; and 

g) Torch or flame gun. 


11.1.3 Other/miscellaneous useful equipments include, 


a) mechanical/electrical stunning equipment; 
b) bleeding hooks (for vertical bleeding); 

c) blood collecting trough; and 

d) wash trough (for tripe). 


11.1.4 The following items are necessary for sanitation 
of hands and tools: 


a) Hand wash-basin, and 
b) Implement sterilizers. 


11.2 Excepting such equipment as utility boards, other 
equipment shall be constructed either of rust-resisting 
metal such as stainless steel or galvanized metal with 
smoothness of high quality commercial hot dip. The 
galvanized metal 15 generally not desirable where high 
resistance to corrosive action of food products and 
cleaning compounds is required. Plastic may be used. 
In that case plastic shall be abrasion- and heat-resistant, 
shatter-proof, non-toxic and should not contain, any 
constituents that may affect the meat or meat products 
during contact. 


11.3 Accessibility for Cleaning and Maintenance 


11.3.1 AII parts of the product zone shall be readily 
accessible to sight and reach for cleaning and inspection. 


11.3.2 Where necessary for proper cleaning and 
inspection, equipment shall be easily demountable. To 


facilitate this dismantling, quick opening devices that 
require no tools or, such simple tools as a mallet and 
an open-end wrench shall be provided. Bayonet joints, 
butterfly clamps, spring bolts, and other similar devices 
are desirable for connecting or closing parts of 
equipment. Where parts should be retained by nuts and 
bolts, the design shall provide for fixed studs with wing 
nuts, rather than bolts to a tapped hole. 


11.3.3 All bearings shall be located outside the product 
zone and if adjacent thereto, shall be constructed with 
a readily removable seal at the entrance of the shaft, 
into the product zone. 


11.3.4 Interior corners of equipment shall be provided 
with radii (minimum 6 mm), except where greater radii 
are required to facilitate drainage and cleaning. 


11.3.5 All welding within the product zone shall be 
continuous, smooth, even and relatively flush with the 
adjacent surfaces. 


11.3.6 All parts of the product zone shall be free of 
recesses, open seams and gaps, crevices, protruding 
ledges, inside threads, inside shoulders, inside bolts or 
rivets and deal ends. 


11.3.7 Where necessary for sanitary maintenance, 
equipment shall be constructed and installed so as to 
be completely self-draining. 


11.3.8 Care shall be taken to prevent contaminating 
product by lubricants used in overhead motors, gears, 
and similar devices. If drip pans are necessary, they 
should be easily accessible for inspection and 
removable for cleaning. 


11.3.9 The safety or gear guards shall be readily 
removable for cleaning and inspection. 


11.3.10 All external surfaces that do not contact with 
food products shall be free of pen seams, gaps, crevices 
and inaccessible recesses. 


11.3.11 For elimination of fatigue and comfortable 
working for labourers the working table should be at 
waist height of the worker to work in standing position. 
If the table is at more height (that is 800 mm to 860 
mm) it should have a platform incorporated for the 
balance height above 860 mm. 


11.3.12 Working platform for on-the-rail operations 
should be of such height that the slaughter man has 
neither to stoop too low or stretch himself to his 
operation zone, and he should be able to reach 
operation zone in his natural standing position. 


11.4 Non-acceptable Materials 
The following materials shall not be used in an abattoir: 


a) Copper and its alloys in equipment used for 
edible products; 


b) Cadmium in any form in equipment handling 
edible products; 

c) Equipment with painted surface in product 
zone; 

d) Enamel containers or equipment 15 not 
desirable; and 

e) Lead. 


12 INSTALLATION 


Following points should be strictly observed during 
installation of equipment from hygiene and sanitation 
point of view: 


a) All permanently mounted equipment shall 
either be installed sufficiently away from 
walls ( minimum 300 mm ) to provide access 
for cleaning and inspection, or should touch 
the walls. 

b) All permanently mounted equipment shall 
either be installed sufficiently above the floor 
( minimum 300 mm) to provide access for 
cleaning and inspection or be completely 
sealed (watertight ) to the floor area. 
Wall-mounted cabinets and electrical 
connections ( such as switch boxes, electrical 
control panels, and BX cables ) shall be 
installed at least 25 mm from equipment or 
walls or shall be completely sealed to the 
equipment or walls. 


c) 


d) АП tables or other equipment having water 
on the working surface shall be provided with 
turned-up edges. The height of the turned-up 
edge depends on the volume of water used 
and the operations conducted. In no instance 


should the turn-up be less than 25 mm. 
13 SANITATION AND CLEANING 


13.1 Cleaning 


13.1.1 However, it is important to implement 
procedures which are applicable to the processing area 
being cleaned taking into consideration the nature of 
contaminants, type of detergents and method of 
cleaning. 


13.1.2 Nature of Contaminants 


Most ofthe contaminants in a abattoir are fat or protein, 
lubricants, vermin, bone chips, manure, bristles, hair, 
skin, tissue, spilled chemicals. 


13.1.3 Cleaning Techniques 


Depending upon the requirement any of the following 
types of cleaning can be used: 


a) Manual cleaning, 
b) Mechanical cleaning, 


IS 4393 : 2016 


c) High pressure cleaning, 
d) Moist steam cleaning, and 
e) Foam cleaning. 


13.2 Sanitation Measures 
13.2.1 Dry Clean 


Removing all pieces of meat, fat and other product 
residues. 


13.2.2 Soaking 


Small pieces/parts of equipment can be soaked in a 
tank of water and detergent. Large equipment, floor 
and walls can be foamed. 


13.2.3 Physical Cleaning 


After soaking, equipment is cleaned manually, using a 
brush or mechanically using high pressure or steam 
cleaning. Manual scouring to remove protein crusts 
and adhesive layers. 


13.2.4 Rinsing 


Thorough hose down with warm water to remove 
detergent residues, contamination. 


13.2.5 Drying 


Excess water should be removed from horizontal 
surfaces by wiping with paper towels or scraping with 
scrubbers. 


13.2.6 Sanitation 


Sanitizing agents may be applied as spray or mist, 
immediately after post cleaning rinse until next day’s 
production. 


13.2.7 Pre-operation Hose Down 


This serves to remove sanitizer residues and to rinse 
off contamination. 


13.3 Detergents 


13.3.1 Any detergent formulation may contain 2 to 15 
components which may belong to the following 
categories: 


a) Alkalis — caustic soda, caustic potash, 
carbonate, silicate, phosphate. 

b) Acids — phosphoric, nitric, citric, glycolic, 
sulphamic, hydrochloric. 

Chelating agents — EDTA, NTA, gluconate, 


glucoheptonate, citrate. 


с) 
d) Solvents — isopropanal, propylene glycol, 
butyl diglycol, ethers. 

e) Surfactants — anionic (Ammonium lauryl 
sulphate), Cationic (quartz-quaternary 
Ammonium compounds) non-ionic, 
amphoteric. 


IS 4393 : 2016 


f) Inhibitors — organic, (sodium benzoate). 
Inorganic, (sodium nitrite, sodium Chromate). 

g) Enzymes — protease, lipase, amylase. 

h) Oxidizing agents —  hypochlorite, 
Isocyanurates, Dichlor, Stabilised Chlorine 
dioxide, hydrogen per oxide. 

j) Stabilizers — Cynuric acid. 

k) Viscosity modifiers. 


13.4 Water to be used for cleaning and washing should 
be potable (see IS 10500). Water should be tested once 
in a month for bacteriological requirements and once 
in six months for chemical requirements (see IS 10500). 
The slaughter house/abattoir in charge must keep 
meticulous records of the results of bacteriological and 
chemical tests. 


13.5 Microbial standards for surfaces in contact with 
products are as follows: 


a) Thorough clean surfaces: 


Total viable count (TVC) 
Coliform count 


: less than 10/cm? 
:0 
b) Clean surfaces: 


Total viable count (TVC) 
Coliform count 


: less than 50/cm? 
: 0 
с) Surface in use: 


Total viable count (TVC) : less than 1 000/cm? 
Coliform count : 0 


14 PLANT WASTE WATER DISPOSAL 


14.1 An efficient method of disposing of plant wastes 
should be provided. If permitted by local bye-laws, 
the plant waste may be discharged after proper 
treatment into a municipal sewer system, as this is most 
desirable. If a private septic tank or sewage disposal 
system is used, it shall be efficiently designed and 
operated so as not to produce objectionable conditions 
on or near the official premises. Normally, for removal 
of grease and manure catch basins and vibrating screen 
with hopper, respectively, should be provided. 


14.2 Catch Basin for Grease Recovery 


Catch basin for the recovery of grease should be 
suitably located and not placed in or near edible 
products department or area where edible products are 
unloaded from or loaded on to vehicles, To facilitate 
ready cleaning, such basins should have inclined 
bottoms and should be without covers. They should 
be so constructed that they may be completely emptied 
of their contents for cleaning. A hose connection for 
furnishing hot water for cleaning purposes should be 
provided at convenient locations near the basin. The 
area surrounding an outside catch basin should be 


20 


paved with impervious material, such as concrete, and 
provided with suitable drainage facilities. Suitable 
facilities should be provided for the transfer of grease 
to the point of disposal after it is skimmed from the 
basins by mechanical or other means. 


14.3 Manure Removal 


A separate drain line for water containing manure 
should be provided. This waste water may be pumped 
by wet pit or dry pit to non-clog pumps and manure 
screened out and disposed of by mechanical or the other 
suitable means. Some consideration as in catch basin 
should be given for location of this plant. 


14.4 Buildings, manure and silos should be located in 
a way that minimizes their harmful influence on the 
environment; pollution of water sources by the slurry 
and manure should be prevented. Tanks for the 
collection of effluent and pre-purification plants must 
be situated at the lowest point of the site, on the dirty 
side. 


15 SAFETY REQUIREMENT 


There shall be adequate fire fighting arrangements and 
portable first aid fire appliances shall be fixed in 
accordance with IS 2190. 


16 MEAT WORKERS/HANDLERS 


16.1 Person possessing valid license or certificate by 
the municipality/corporation or local authority should 
be employed in an abattoir. The license should be 
renewed once in two years after medical examination 
of the person. 


16.2 Persons below the age of 18 years and above 58 
years should not be employed. 


16.3 Person suffering from communicable infectious/ 
contagious diseases should not be employed either to 
slaughter or work in the abattoir. 


16.4 Daily routine health check up of all meat workers 
for cough/cold/fever/wounds should be done while 
entering the abattoir. 


16.5 Wrist watches, gold/silver ornaments, flowers 
should not be worn and mobile phones and perfume 
should not be used in the slaughter/processing area. 


16.6 All meat workers, both male and female should 
cover their head and trim their nails and wear proper 
clothing, hand gloves and gum boots to ensure 
hygiene. 


16.7 When returning from an illness, management 
must demand a medical certificate from that person 
indicating that they have no impediment to return to 
work. (This is to prevent such a person contaminating 
the product with pathogenic microorganisms.) 


16.8 А person with an open cut or abrasion should not 
handle the product unless the cut is completely covered 
with a coloured, waterproof covering. 


16.9 All personnel working in the abattoir should 
maintain their own personal cleanliness. 


16.10 Protective clothing includes light coloured 
overalls or a coat and trousers, chain mail gloves and 
aprons (where applicable), footwear and hair/snood 
coverings. 


16.11 АП personal belongings and clothing should be 
stored in an area away from the abattoir, in designated 
lockers. 


21 


IS 4393 : 2016 


16.12 Smoking and eating and/or drinking are not 
permitted іп the production area. 


16.13 Hand washing should be conducted on entering 
and leaving the abattoir, immediately after finishing 
any task that involved contact with intestinal contents/ 
faecal material on the carcasses and after using the 
toilet facilities. 


16.14 The access of visitors should be controlled to 
prevent contamination. 


16.15 All necessary precautions should be taken to prevent 
cross-contamination, including the use of protective 
clothing, hair covering and footwear by all visitors. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it 15 taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 18 (2443). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


