IS : 2911 ( Part III ) - 1980

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE FOUNDATIONS
PART Ill UNDER-REAMED PILES

(First Revision)
Fifth Reprint JULY 1998

UDC 624.1X33.04

: 006.76

Q Copyright 1981

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

Gr8

February 1981

IS : 2911(PartIU)-1980

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE FOUNDATIONS
PART III ( UNDER-REAMED PILES

First Revision)
Sectional Committee,
Retresenting Central Building Roorkee Research Institute (CSIR),

Foundation
Chairman
PROP DINESH MOHAN

Engineering

BDC 43

Members DR' R. K. BHANDARI
SHIU I.

Central Calcutta

Bltilding Port Trust,

Research Calcutta

Institute

(CSIR),

Koorkee

SHRI S. GUHA (Allen&e) SHRI K. N. DADINA SHRI M. G. SHRI N. SHR~ R. K. SHFU H. SHRI A. G.
DANDAVATE

G. CHACKO

C. DUCCAL (Alternate) DAS GUPTA Simplex Concrete Piles (I) Pvt Ltd, Calcutta GUHA BISWA~ (Alternate) DA~TIDAR In personal capacity (5, Hungerford Court, 121 Hungerford Street, Calcutta) SHRI V. G. DESHPANDE Pressure Piling Co (India) Pvt Ltd, Bombay DIRRCTOR (CSMRS) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR (CSMRS) (Alternate) SHRI A. H. DIVANJX Asia Foundation and Construction Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. N. JANGLE (Alternate) SHRI A. GHBraitzlaz:urn & Jessop Construction-_Co Ltd, SHRI N. E. A. RAGHAVAN (Al&mate) DR GOPAL RANJAN University of Roorkee, Roorkee DR SHASHI K. GIJLHATI lndian Institute of Technology, New Delhi SHRI A. VARADARAJAN (@emate) (Continued on page 2) 0 Copy@hr 1981 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acr (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deuned to be an inf Wt . of copyright under the said Act.

In personal capacity (P 820, Block P, New A&ore, Calcutta) Concrete Association of India, Bombay

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980
(Continued from page 1) Members Represenfing

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI M. IYENGAR DR R. K. M. BwANDARI'(AltenZafe) G. S. Jain & Associates, Roorkee SHRI G. R. S. JA~N JOINT DIRECTOR RESEARCH (SM) Ministry of Railways

(RDSO)

JOINT DIRECTOR R&XARCH (B & S), Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay National Buildings Organizatton, New Delhi M. N. Dastur and Company Pvt Ltd, Calcutta

'

SHRI SUNIL BERRY (Alternate) SHRI S. R. KULKARNI SHRI S. ROY (Alternate) SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA

RDSO (Alfmute) DR R. K. KAITI SWRIK. K. KHANNA

Building and Roads Branch, Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi %RI A. P. &`fPTHlJR Mckenzies Limited,. Bombay SHRI V. B. MATHUR Bokaro Steel Plant (Steel Authority of India), SHRI Y. V. NARASIMHA RAO Bokaro Steel City BRIG O~IR SINGH ,Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters MAJ H. K. BHUTAN: (Alternure) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay Sriru B. K. PANTHAKY SHRI V. M. MADOE (Alternate) Indian Gcotechnicj! Society, PRESIDENT . . New Delhi SECRETARY(Alternate) College of Engineering, Guindy, Madras PROFESSOR (CIVIL ENGG) A~~ISTAN? PROFESSOR (CIVIL ENGG) (Alternate) Cementation Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. R. PUNJA Steel Authority of India, New Delhi SHRI A. A. RAJU Nag(adi Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi DR V. V. S. RAO Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI ARJUN RIJHSINCHANI SHRI 0. S. SRIVA~TAVA(Alternate) Engineering Research Laboratories, Government of SHRI K. R. SAXENA Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad United Technical Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi DR S. P. S~VA~TAVA DR R. KAPUR (Alhnate) Roads Wing, Ministry of Shipping and Transport SHRI N. SIVAGURU SHRI S. SEETHARAMAN (Alternate) SHRI T. N. SUBBA RAO Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. A. RzDDI (Alters&) SUPERINTENDWG ENGINEER (DESIGN) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Ezzmrrrvz ENGINEER (DESIGN V) (Alternate) SHRI M. D. TAMBEKAR Bombay Port Trust, Bombay Director General, IS1 (l+@`icio hfembn) SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director (Civ Engg) Secretary Snar K. M. MATHUR Deputy Director (Civ Engg), IS1 (Continued ORpage 33)

2

.Is : 2911 (PartIIq-1980

Indian Standard
-CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE FOUNDATIONS
PART III UNDER-REAMED PILES

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (Part III) (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 May 19801 after the draft finalized by the Foundation Engineering Sectional Comrmttee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Under-reamed piles are of bored cast in situ and bored compaction concrete types having one or more bulbs formed by suitably enlarging the borehole for the pile stem. With the provision of bulb(s), substantial bearing or anchorage is available. These piles find application in widely varying situations in different types of soils where foundations are required to be taken down to a certain depth in view of considerations like the need (a) to avoid the undesirable effect of seasonal moisture changes as in expansive soils; (b) to reach firm strata; (c) to obtain adequate capacity for downward, upward and lateral loads and moments; or (d) to take the foundations below scour level. 0.3 When the ground consists of expansive soil, for example black cotton soil, the bulb of the under-reamed pile provides anchorage against uplift due to swelling pressure -apart from the increased bearing. In case,of filled-up or otherwise weak strata overlying. the firm strata, enlarged base in tht! fo;m of under-reamed bulb in firm strata provides larger bearing area and plies of greater bearing capacity can be made. In loose to medium pervious sandy and silty strata, bored compaction piles can be used as the process of compaction increases the load bearing capacity of the piles. Under-reamed piles may also be used under situations where the vibration and noise caused during construction of piles are ,to be avoided. The provision of bulb(s) is of special advantage in under-reamed piles to resist uplift and they can be used as anchors. 0.4 This standard was first published in 1973. This revision has been undertaken to bring it in line with other Indian Standards on pile foundation. 3

IS : 2911,(Part III) - 1980 0.5 The recommendations made in this code are based on the general principles applicable to pile foundations and the experience of construction of a large number of engineering works. 0.6 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this$ountry. Considerable assistance has been given by Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee, for preparing this standard. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the Anal value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a testshall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part III) covers the design and construction reamed piles having one or more bulb(s) formed along the stem. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Allowable Load - The load which may be applied to a pile after taking into account its ultimate load capacity, pile spacing, overall bearing capacity of the ground below the pile, the allowable settlement, negative skin friction and the loading conditions including reversal of loads. 2.2 Batter Pile (Raker Pile) the vertical. The pile which is installed at an angle to of under-

2.3 Bearing Pile - A pile formed in the ground for transmitting the load of structure to the soil by the resistance developed at its tip or along its It may be formed either vertically or at an inclination surface or both. (Batter Pile) and may be required to take uplift. When it is primarily meant for resisting uplift or pull it is called an `Anchor Pile'. If the pile supports the'load primarily by resistance developed at the pile point or base it is referred to as an `End Bearing Pile' and if the load is supported primarily by friction along its surface, the pile is termed as `Friction Pile'. pile formed within the ground by 2.4 Bored Cast in situ Pile -A excavating or boring a hole within it, with or without the use of a temporary When casing and subsequently filling it with plain or reinforced concrete. the casing is left permanently it is termed as cased pile and when the casing
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (rtied).

4

IS : 2911 (Part

III) 0 1980

is taken out it is termed as uncased pile. In installing a bored pile, the sides of the bor'ehole (when it does not stand by itself) is required to be stabilized with the aid of,a temporary casing, or with the aid of drilling mud of suitable consistency. 2.5 Bored Compaction Pile - A bored cast in situ pile with or without bulb(s) in which the compaction of surrounding ground and freshly filled concrete in pile bore is simultaneously achieved by suitable method. If the pile with bulb(s), it is known `under-reamed bored compaction pile'. is the level where the installed pile is cut-off to 2.6 Cut-Off Level -It support the pile caps or beams or any other structural components at that level. . 2.7 Datum
Bar -

A rigid bar placed on immovable supports. The ratio of the ultimate load capacity of a pile

2.8 Factor of Safety to the safe load of a pile.

2.9 Initial Test_It is carried out on test pile(s) generally made for the purpose with a vrew to determining the safe load or ultimate load capacity or both.
2.10 Kentledge -

Dead weight used for applying a test load on pile.

2.11 Multi-Under-Reamed Pile - An under-reamed pile having more than one bulb. The pile having two bulbs is known as double underreamed pile. 2.12 Net Displacement - Net movement of the pile top after the pile has been subjected to a test load and subsequently released. 2.13 Routine (Check) Tests - It is carried out on a working pile with a view to determining displacement corresponding to the allowable load. 2.14 Safe Load - It is a load on a pile derived by applying a factor of safety on ultimate load capacity of pile or as determined by pile load test or as obtained in accordance with 5.2.3.3.
Pile - A pile which is selected for load-testing and which is subsequently loaded for that purpose. The test pile may form a working pile itself if subject to routine load test with up to one and one-half times the safe load in case of compression test and equal to safe load in uplift and lateral thrust. 2.15 Test

2.16 Total Displacement under a given load. 2.17 Total
Elastic

(Gross)

-

The total movement of the pile top is the magnitude of the

Displacement-This 5

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 displacement of the pile due to rebound caused at the top after removal of given test load. This comprises two components as follows: a) Elastic displacement of the soil participating in load transfer; and b) Elastic displacement of the pile shaft. 2.18 Trial Pile - One or more piles, which are not working pile, that may be installed intially to assess load carrying capacity of the piles. These are tested either to their ultimate bearing capacity or to twice the estimated safe load. 2.19 Ultimate Load Capacity - The maximum load which a pile can carry before failure of ground (when the soil fails by shear) or failure of pile materials. 2.20 Under-Reamed Pile - A bored cast in situ or bored compaction concrete pile with an enlarged bulb(s) made by either cutting or scooping out the soil or by any other suitable process. 2.21 Working 2.22 Working system. 3. NECESSARY Load Pile The load assigned to a pile according to design. A pile forming part of foundation of a structural

INFORMATION

3.1 For the satisfactory design and construction of bored cast in situ and bored compacted under-reamed piles and pile foundation, the information on the following aspects is necessary: 4 Site investigation data as- laid down in IS : 1892-1979* or any other relevant Indian Standard. Sections of trial, borings, supplemented wherever appropriate by penetration tests, should incorporate data/information sufficiently on soil condition below the anticipated level of pile tip. The nature of the subsoil both around and beneath the proposed pile should be indicated on the basis of appropriate tests of strength, compressibility, etc. Ground-water levels and conditions (such as artesian conditions) should be indicated. Results of chemical tests to ascertain the sulphate and the chloride content and groundwater should be indicated particularly in areas where large scale piling is envisaged or where such information is not generally available. b) A qualitative indication of the degree of expansiveness of soil is given in Appendix A. The free swell test will be carried out according to IS: 2720 (Part-XL)-1977t. 4 In case of bridge foundations, data on high flood level, maximum scouring depth, normal water level during working season, etc. *Code of practice for subsurface investigations for foundations (jirst revision). tMethod of test for soils, Part XL Determination of free swell index of soils. 6

IS: 2911 (Part III) - 1980 In case of marine construction, necessary information as listed in IS: 4651 (Part I)-1974* should be provided.

4

In case rock is encountered, adequate description of the rock to convey its physical conditions as well as its strength characteristics should be indicated. In case of weathered rock, adequate physical description and its expected physical behaviour on boring should be indicated.

4 f1

`General plan and cross section of the building showing type of structural frame, including basement, if any, in relation to the proposed pile cap top levels. The general layout of vertical and horizontal, caps, but excluding the levels of finished pile caps the structure moments and weight of the shall be clearly showing estimated loads, torque at the top of pile piles and caps. The top indicated.

&I) It

is preferable to have the dead load, equipment and live loads separately indicated. Loads and moments for wind and earthquake should also be .separately indicated. Sufficient information about structures existing nearby should be provided.

4

33 As far as possible, all information in 3.1 shall be made available to the agency responsible for the design and/or construction of piles and/or foundation work. 3.3 The design details .of pile foundation shall indicate the information necessary for setting out the layout of each pile within a cap, cut-off levels, finished cap levels, orientation of cap in the foundation plan and the safe capacity of each type of piles, etc. 3.4 Due note shall be taken of the experience of under-reamed and other piles in the area close to the proposed site and any soil strata report thereof. 4. MATERrALS

Cl cement :Sg;z%1976t,

-The cement used shall conform to the requirements of IS: 455-1976$, IS: 8041-1978$, IS : 6909-19731) or IS:1489-

`*Code of practice.for plauning and design of ports and ha&ours, P+rt I Site inv&igation
(j#Cf6&k). fSpcc+a~on +Speuficat~on ~Specification K5+xification QSpcciEcation for for for for for ordinary and low heat Portkyd cement (Turk rcvirb) . Portland and a&q cement (f&d &.&VI). rapid hardening Portland cement. supuaulphatcd cement. Portland pozzolana cement (scoondr&&n). .

7

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 4.2 Steel - Reinforcement steel shall conform to IS : 432 (Part I)-1966* or IS: 1139-1966t or IS : 1786-1979$ or IS : 226-19755. The stresses allowed in steel should conform to IS : 456-197811. 4.2.1 For under-reamed bored compaction piles, the reinforcement cage shall be prepared by welding the hoop bars to withstand.the stresses during compaction process. 4.3 Concrete 4.3.1 Materials and methods of manufacture for cement concrete shall in general be in accordance with the method of concreting under the conditions of pile installation. 4.3.2 Consistency of concrete for cast in situ piles shall be suitable to the method of installation of piles. Concrete shall be so designed or chosen as to have homogeneous mix having a flowable `character consistent with the method of concreting under the given conditions of pile installation. In achieving these results, minor deviations in the mix proportions used in structural concrete may be necessary. 4.3.3 Slump of concrete shall range between 100 mm to 150 mm for concreting in water-free unlined boreholes. For concreting by tremie, a slump of 150 mm to 200 mm shall be used. 4.3.4 1,n case of tremie concreting for piles of smaller diameter and depth of up to 10 m, the minimum cement content should be 350 kg/m* of For piles of large diameter and/or deeper piles, the minimum concrete. cement content should be 400 kg/m* of concrete. For design purpose, the strength of concrete mix may be taken equivalent to Ml5 and M20, respectively, for concrete with cement content of 350 kg/m* and 400 kg/m*. Where concrete of higher strength is needed, richer concrete mix with higher cement content may be designed. In case of piles subsequently exposed to free water or in case of piles where concreting is done under water or drilling mud using methods other than the tremie, 10 percent extra cement over that required for the design grade of concrete at the specified slump shall be used subject to the minimum quantities -of cement specified above. 4.3.5 For the concrete, water and aggregates specifications laid down in IS: 456-197811 shall be followed in general. Natural rounded shingle of appropriate size may also be used as coarse aggregate. Tt helps to give high slump with less water cement ratio. For tremie concreting aggregates having nominal size more than 20 mm should not be used.
*Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement, Part I Mild steel + medjum tensile se bys (Iccond rev&m). Specification for hot rolled mild steel, tm(AA)tensde :teel and hqh yield strength steel d a ormed bars for concrete reinforcemen $Specification for cold worked high strengthdeibrmed &xl bars for concrete reinf&cement (se& r&n). @pecification for structural steel (standard quality) _fuc r&.&n). Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( y. raGaIr).

8

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 4.3.6 The concrete for piles in aggressive surroundings due to presence of sulphates, etc, should have a concrete mix of appropriate type of cement in suitable proportion.
4.3.6.1 If the concentration of sulphates (measured as SOs) exceeds one percent in soil or 2 500 parts per million (ppm] in water a mix using For soils 400 kg/m3 of sulphate resisting Portland cement should be used. with 0.5 to 1 percent of sulphates or ground water with 1 200 to 2 500 ppm, For the mix should have 330 kg/m3 of sulphate resisting Portland cement. concentrations lesser than above concrete mix with 330 kg/m3 ordinary In place Portland cement or 310 kg/m3 sulphate resisting should be used. of ordinary Portland cement, pozzolana cement/blast furnace slag cement may be used. 4.3.6.2 Concentration of sulphates ppm in water may be inconsequential. up to O-2 percent in soil and 300

4.3.7 For bored compaction piles rapid hardening cement (see 4.1) shall not be used. To facilitate construction, admixtures for retarding the setting of concrete may be used. 5. DESIGN

CONSIDERATIONS

foundations shall be designed in 5.1 General - Under-reamed pile such a way that the load from the structure they support, can be transmitted to the soil without causing any soil failure and without causing such settlement, differential or total, under permanent transient loading as may The pile shaft result in structural damage and/or functional distress, should have `adequate structural capacity to withstand all loads (vertical, axial or otherwise) and moments which are to be transmitted to the subsoil. 5.1.1 In deep deposits of expansive soils the minimum length of piles, irrespective of any other considerations, shall be 3.5 m below ground level. If the expansive,soil deposits are of shallow depth and overlying non-expansive soil strata of good bearing or rock, piles of smaller length can also be provided. In recently filled up grounds or other strata or poor bearing, the piles should pass through them and rest in good bearing strata. 5.1.2 The diameter of under-reamed bulbs may vary from 2 to 3 times stem diameter depending upon the feasibility of construction and design requirements. In bored cast in Titusunder-reamed piles the bulb diameter shall normally be 2.5 times, and in under-reamed compaction piles two times.

' 5.1.3 For piles up to 30 cm diameter, the spacing of bulbs should not For piles of diameter greater than exceed 1.5 times the diameter of bulb. 30 cm spacing can be reduced to I.25 times the stem diameter.
5.1.4 The top-most bulb should be at a minimum depth of 2 times the In expansive soils it should also not be less than l-75 m bulb diameter. The minimum clearance below the underside of pile below ground level. 9

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 cap embedded in the ground and the bulb should be a minimum the bulb diameter. 5.1.5 Under-reamed without ensuring their by drilling mud. The should not exceed two 1.5 times

piles with more than two bulbs are not advisable feasibility in strata needing stabilization of boreholes number of bulbs in case of bored compaction piles in such strata. needing consisting stabilization of harmful pile

5.1.6 The minimum diameter of stem for borehole by drilling mud should be 25 cm. 5.1.7 The constituents, minimum diameter of stem for strata such as sulphates, should be 30 cm.

5.1.8 For guidance typical details of bored cast in silu under-reamed foundations are shown in Fig. 1.

5.1.9 For batter piles, a batter of 30" for piles in dry ground conditions and 15" with horizontal for water or drilling mud filled holes should generally not be exceeded. The under-reamed compaction piles are normally constructed up to a batter of 15". pile 5.2 Design of Piles - The load carrying capacity of under-reamed depends mainly on the pile dimensions and soii strata. Axial load on a pile is transmitted by point bearing at the toe and the projected area of the bulb(s) and skin friction along the pile stem. Depending upon the nature of soil and pile geometry, in addition to the skin friction on stem, friction can develop on the soil cylinder between the extreme bulbs. In under-reamed compaction piles, the mechanism of load transfer remains the same but soil properties improved by compaction process are considered. In uplift load, point bearing component at toe is absent but unlike other straight shaft piles, point bearing on an anular projection of the bulb is present. Lateral load and moment are sustained by horizontal soil reaction developed along the pile length, which depends on several factors. The design of piles shall be such that it has an adequate factor of safety: a) as a structural member to transmit the imposed loads, and b) against failure of strata due to reaching ultimate strength. Further it should ensure that the desired limit of settlement is not exceeded. 5.2.1 Pile as a Struc@al Member - The pile should have adequate strength to sustain the design loads. The pile cross-section should be checked for combined effect of vertical loads (compressive and uplift) and/or lateral loads and moments. The stem should be designed as a short column considerating both concrete and steel (see 5.2.2) by the limit state method or working stress method. In case of latter, the permissible increase in (see IS : 875-1964* and stresses shall be taken for wind and seismic loads. IS : 1893-1975t.)
*Code of practice for structural safety of buildings: Loading standards (rev&j). tcriteria for earthquake resistant design of structures (third revision).

10

IS : 2911(Part III) - 1980

BORING LEV<L FOR MAKING

SECOND/LAST BULB 7

:

--Id-t
COVER 75 TO

100 30�-45"Approx,Du=NonnallyZ?5D 1B !hCTION OFMULTIUNDER-REAMED Px~x

9,=45" Approx,& 1A %kTION OF ~%NOLE UNDER-REAMED PILE

All dimensions in millimctres

Fm. 1

TYPICAL DETAILSOF BOREDCAST in situ UNDER-REAMED PILE FOUNDATIONS

5.2.2 Reinfwcemmt in Piles - The provision of reinforcement will depend on nature and magnitude of loads, nature of strata and method of installation. It should be adequate for vertical load, lateral load and moments, acting individually or in combination. It may be curtailed at appropriate depth subject to provision given in 5.2.2.1 and 5.2.2.2. 5.2.2.1 The minimum area of longitudinal reinforcement in stem should be 0.4 percent of mild steel (or equivalent deformed steel). Rein11

IS : 2911 (Part lII) - 1980
forcement is to be provided in the full length irrespective of any other considerations and is further subject to the condition that a minimum number of three lo-mm diameter mild steel or three 8*mm diameter high The transverse reinforcement as strength steel bars shall be provided. circular stirrups shall not be less than 6-mm diameter mild steel bars at a spacing of not more than the stem diameter or 30 cm whichever is less. In under-reamed compaction piles, a minimum number of four, 12-mm diameter mild steel or four IO-mm diameter high strength steel bars shall be provided. For piles of lengths exceeding 5 m and or 37.5 cm diameter, a minimum number of six 12-mm diameter bars of mild or high strength steel shall be provided. For piles exceeding 40 cm dia, a minimum number of six 12-mm diameter mild or high strength steel bars shall be provided. The circular stirrups for piles of lengths exceeding 5 m and diameter exceeding 37.5 cm shall be of 8 mm diameter bars. 5.2.2.2 For piles subjected to uplift loads, adequate reinforcement shall be provided to take full uplift which shall not be curtailed at any stage. 5.2.2.3 For piles up to 30 cm diameter, equivalent amount of steel placed centrally if concreting is done by tremie, may be provided. reinforcement etc, it may be

5.2.2.4 The minimum clear cover over the longitudinal shall be 40 mm. In aggressive environment of sulphates, increased to 75 mm.

5.2.3 Safe Load - Safe load on a pile can be determined from (a) calculating tiltimate load from soil properties and applying suitable factor of safety, (b) load test on pile as provided in IS : 2911 (Part IV)-1979*, and (c) safe load tables. 5.2.3.1 Safe loadfrom ultimate load capacity - The ultimate load capacity The soil properties required of a pile can be calculated from soil properties. are strength parameters, cohesion, angle of internal friction and soil density. If these properties are not available directly from laboratory and field tests, they may be indirectly obtained from in situ penetration test data [IS : 4968 (Part II)-19767 and IS : 6403-1971$]. The success of the approach essentially depends how realistically the soil properties are determined or deduced. a) Clayey soils For clayey soils the ultimate load carrying pile may be worked out from tpe following QU= where ~4, (cm") A,.JV,C,+A,.JV,.C',+C,`.A,' capacity of an under-reamed expressions: + .c.C,.A,

Qu (kg)

=

=

ultimate bearing capacity of pile; cross-sectional area of pile stem at toe level;

*Code of practice for design and construction of pile foundations: Part IV Load test on piles. tMethod for subsurface sounding'for soils: Part III Static cone penetration test (_/irst

rtiion)

$Code of practice for determination of allowable bearing pressure on shallow foundations. 12

.

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 bearing capacity factor, usually taken as 9; C, (kgf/cmt) z cohesion of the soil around toe; A, (cm2) = 7r/4 (D2U-D2) where D,(cm) and D (cm) are the under-reamed and stem diameter, respectively; average cohesion of soil around the under-reamed C', (kgf/cm2) = bulbs; reduction factor (usually taken 0.5 for clays) ; ;a (kgf/cm2) z average cohesion of the soil along the pile stem; A, (cm2) = surface area of the stem; and A', (cm2) = surface area of the cylinder circumscribing the underreamed bulbs.

Jve

The above expression holds for the usual spacing of under-reamed spaced at not more than one-and-a-half times their diameter.
NOTE 1 components. NOTE 2 NOTE 3 If the pile is with one bulb only the third term will not occur. For calculating uplift load first term will not occur in formula.

bulbs

The first two terms in formula are for bearing and the last two for friction

b) Sandy soils For sandy soils the following expression be used: Qu= A,.(&.D.X..NX+ X.dJV,,)+A, (~.D,.n.h..hQ+h.Nq

+-&.n.D.X.K tan S x (d:+df--di) where A, (cm2) A, (cma)

r=n x d,. r=l

; (kglcms) .NAand IV, dr (cm) d+ (cm) K S dl (cm) d,, (cm)

= rr/4.D2, where D (cm) is stem diameter; where D, (cm) is the under-reamed = n/4(Dz-Da) bulb diameter; ?= number of under-reamed bulbs; = average unit weight of soil (submerged unit weight in strata below water table); = bearing capacity factors depending upon the angle of internal friction; = depth of the centre of different under-reamed bulbs below ground level ; total depth of pile below ground level; = = earth pressure coefficient (usually taken 1.75 for sandy soils) ; = angle of wall friction (may be taken equal to the angle of internal friction 4) ; = depth of the centre of first under-reamed bulb; and = depth of the centre of the last under-reamed bulb.

NOTE I- `?Yhefirst two terms in the formula are for bearing component and the .<. `as;= $W fnction cpmpone$. - For uphft bearing on tip, Ap will not occur.

13

IS : 2911 (Part RI) - 1980
NOTE 3 - NA will be as specified in 1S : 6403-1971* and Jv, will be taken from Fi .2. This factor, apart from the angle of internal friction 4 depends upon the meth o! of installation of pile and the component containing this factor will generally be over estimated (up to about twice) in bored piles. c)

Soil strutu having both cohesionandfriction In soil strata having both cohesion and friction or in layered strata having two types of soil, the beari.ng capacity may be estimated using both the formula. However, in such cases the load tests will be a better guide. d) Comjaction piles in sandy strata For bored compaction piles in sandy strata, the formula in 5.2.3.1(b) shall be applicable but the modified value of C$ will be used as given below: where $= angle of internal friction of virgin soil. The values of NA, .N, and 6 are taken corresponding to The value of the earth pressure coefficient K will be 3.

4l

e) Piles resting on rock For piles resting on rock, the bearing component will be obtained by multiplying the safe bearing capacity of rock with bearing area of pile stem plus the bearing provided by the bulb portion. f) Factors of safety To obtain safe load in compression and uplift from ultimate load capacity generally the factors of safety will be 2.5 and 3, respectively. But in case of bored compaction piles with bulb diameter twice the shaft diameter, the factor of.safety in compression should be taken 2.25. 553.2 Safe 1oadJiom pile load tests- The safe load on pile(s) in compression uplift and lateral can be determined by carrying out load test on piles in accordance with IS : 2911 (Part IV)-1979t. In sizable work (more than two hundred piles) where detailed information about the strata and the guidance of past experience is not available, there should be a minimum of two pile load tests before finalizing the safe load on piles.
NOTE - It is unlikely that two simihu pile load testa `ve the same loaddetlection W viour. Also, ground conditions, position of water taT le, moisture content in soil and desiccation of top strata, can affect the load tests conducted at different tima of the ye. These factors should be kept in view while deciding the safe load.

5.2.3.3 In the absence of actual tests and detailed investigations, the safe load on under-reamed piles of bulb diameter 2-5 times the stem diameter may be taken as given in Appendix B. *Code of praeticc for determination of allowable bearing presure on &allow foundations.
t&de pile% of practice for dcaign and construction of pile foundations: Part IV Load test on

14

Is : 2911 (Part III) - 1980

20

25

30

35
fi

*u

IDJ

ANGLE OF INTERNAL FRlCTlON

FIG. 2

BEARING CAPACITY FACTOR Na 15

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 5.2.3.4 The lesser of the two safe loads obtained from 5.2.3.1 and 5.2.3.3 should be used in designs. Higher values can be used if established by initial load tests.

4

other than 5.!235, the total increase over safe load including those of 593.5 exceed 50 percent.

5.2.3.5 Permissible increase over safe load on biles Overloading- When a pile designed for a certain safe load is found to fall just short of the required load carried by it, an overload of up to 10 percent of the safe load on pile may be allowed on each pile. The total overloading on group should not be more than 10 percent of the safe load on group, nor more than 40 percent of the safe load on single pile. b) Tramient loading - The maximum permissible increase over the safe load of a pile as arising out of wind loading is 25 percent. In case of loads and moments arising out of earthquake effects the increase over the safe load on a pile may be limited to the provisions contained in IS : 1893-1975*. For seismic loads, under-reamed piles shall be treated as point bearing piles. The seismic and wind forces will not be considered to act simultaneously. For transient loading arising out of superimposed loads, no increase generally may be allowed. For broken wire conditions in transmission line tower foundations, permissible increase will be as provided in IS : 4091-19797. - If any increasein load on a pile has already been permitted for reasons NOTE

shall not

5.2.4 Jvegative Skin Friction or Drag Down Force-When a soil stratum through which a pile shaft has penetrated into an underlying hard stratum, compresses as a result of either it being unconsolidated or it being under a newly placed fill or as a result of remoulding during driving of the pile, a drag-down force is generated into the pile shaft up to a point in depth where the surrounding soil does not move downward relative to the pile shaft.
of this drag-down force is still under investigation, although a NOTE -Estimation few empirical approaches are in use. The concept is constantly. under revision and, therefore, no definite proposal is embodied in this standard. (Recognition of the existence of such a phenomenon shall be made and suitable reduction shall be made to the allowable load where appropriate. There is no evidence to show that the use of drilling fluids for the construction of piles afkcts the skin friction.)

5.2.5 LatGral Load on P&s - A pile may be subjected to transverse force from a number of causes, such as wind, earthquake, water current, earth pressures, effect of moving vehicles or ships, plant and equipment, etc. The lateral load carrying capacity of a single pile depends not only on the horizontal subgrade modulus of the surrounding soil but also on the structural strength of the pile shaft against bending consequent upon application of a lateral load. While &msidering lateral load on piles, effect of other
*Criteria for eartlqttake resistant design of atructurca (tied rmision). tCode of practice for design and construction of foundations for transmission line towers urd poles (jrfi r&).

16

I!3 : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 existent loads including the axial load on the pile should be taken into consideration for checking the structural capacity of the shaft. Piles under the action of lateral load and moment can be analysed by the modulus of subgrade reaction approaches. Due to the presence of bulbs, under-reamed piles tend to behave more as rigid piles and the analysis can be done on rigid pole basis. Normally reinforced long single bulb piles which are not rigid may be analysed after the generalized solutions of Matlock and Reese for sandy soils and Broms for clayey soils. For lateral loads with or without axial loads, up to those given in the Table 1 of Appendix B, no analysis may be necessary, if external moment is not acting. In the absence of actual in situ test values from prototype pile load test, the modulus of subgrade reaction values may be taken from the Table 2 given in Appendix C.
NOTE - It may be kept in view that modulus of subgrade reaction is a criti$Lf;o;er in the above analysis, yet there is no precise method for determining it. it will be realistic to ascertain the adequacy of design by field tests.

2

5.2.6 Batter Piles (Raker Piles) - Raker piles are normally provided where vertical piles cannot resist the required applied horizontal forces. In the preliminary design the load on raker ~pileis generally considered to be axial. The distribution of load between raker and vertical piles in a group may be determined by graphical or analytical methods. Where necessary, due consideration should be given to secondary bending induced as a result of the pile cap movement, particularly when the cap is rigid. Free standing raker piles are subjected to -bending moments due to their own weight or external forces from other causes. Raker piles embedded in 8l.l or consolidating deposits may become laterally loaded owing to the settlement of the surrounding soil. 55.7 Sfiacing of Piles 55.7.1 Spacing of piles shall be considered in relation to the nature ground, the types of piles and the manner in which the piles transfer the load to the ground.

of

52.7.2 Generally the centre to centre spacing for bored cast in situ under-reamed piles in a group should be two times the bulb diameter (20,). It shall not be less than l-5 D,,. For under-grade beams the maximum spacing of piles should generally not exceed 3 m. In under-reamed compaction piles, generally the spacing should not be less than l-5 D,, If the. adjacent piles are of different diameter, an average value of bulb diameter should be taken for spacing. 5.2.8 Grouping and Layout 528.1 For bored case in situ under-reamed piles at usual spacing of 2 D,, the group capacity will be equal to the safe load of individual For piles at a spacing pile multiplied by the number of piles in the group. of l-5 D, the,safe load assigned per pile in a group should be reduced by 10 percent. 17

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 In under-reamed compaction piles, at the usual spacing of 1.5 D.,, the capacity will be equal to the safe load on individual pile multiplied by the number of piles in the group.
group Nom - In under-reamed compaction piles, the capacity of the group may be more than given in 5.2.&l on account of the compaction effect.

5.2.8.2 In non-expansive soils, when the cap of the pile group is cast directly on reasonably firm stratum it may additionally contribute towards the bearing capacity of the group. 5.2.8.3 The settlement of pile groups depends upon soil and pile characteristics, spacing, group size method of installation and magnitude . and nature of loading. In clays sometimes long term settlements can become important while in sands almost all the settlements will be over quickly. A group of free standing piles is likely to settle more than a single pile but this increase may be marginal if the safe load on the piles is according to 5.2.3 and 5.2.8.1.
NOTE 1 - The settlement, in case of piles in sand, are generally computed from empirical relations. A suggested relationship for estimating settlements of free standing under-reamed pile groups in sands is:

where Ss = settlement of group in St = settlement of single pile B = distance between outer D = pile stem diameter in

cm, in cm; piles are under the same safe load per pile, piles centre in cm, and cm.

In clays the immediate settlements are computed using theory of elasticity and the long term settlements by consolidation theory. For the later, the pile group is considered as a footing at the centres of the lowermost bulbs. It may be noted that computed settlements, by the above approaches particularly piles in clay, are very large as compared to actually occurring in practice. for

Nom 2 -For the groups with caps resting on ground settlements are comparable with an isolated pile. NOTE 3 - In the case of under-reamed compaction piles with cap resting on ground, which is very often the case, the settlements of groups may be even less than the settlement of an isolated pile.

5.2.8.4 In case of structure supported on single pile/group of piles, resulting into large variation in the number of piles from column to column it is likely that a high order of differential settlement may result depending on the type of subsoil supporting the piles. Such high order of differential settlement may be either catered for in the structural design or it may be suitably reduced by judicious choice of variations in the actual pile loadings. For example, a single pile cap may be loaded to a level higher than that of a pile in a group in order to achieve reduced differential settlement between two adjacent pile caps supported on differential number of piles. 18

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 5.2.8.5 In load bearing walls, piles should generally be provided under all wall junctions to avoid point loads on beams. Positions of intermediate piles are then decided by keeping door openings fall in between two piles as far as possible. 5.3 Grade Beams 5.3.1 The grade beams supporting the walls shall be designed taking due account of arching effect due to masonry above beam. The beam with masonry due to composite action behaves as a deep beam. For the design of beams, a maximum bending moment of ~1~150, where w is uniformly distributed load per metre run (worked out by considering a maximum height of two storeys in structures with load bearing walls and one storey in framed structures) and 1 is the effective span in metres, will be taken if the beams are supported during construction till the masonry above it gains strength. The value of bending moment shall be increased to w12/30 if the beams are not supported. For considering composite action the minimum height of wall shall be 0.6 times the beam span. The brick strength should not be less than 30 kgf/cm2. For concentrated loads and other loads which come directly over the beam, full bending moment should be considered. 5.3.2 The minimum overall depth of grade beams shall be 150 mm. The reinforcement at bottom should be kept continuous in all the beams and an equal amount may be provided at top to a distance of quarter span both ways from the pile centres. The longitudinal reinforcement both at bottom and top should not be less than three bars of 10 mm diameter mild steel (or equivalent deformed steel). Stirrups of 6-mm diameter bars should be at a 300 mm spacing which should be reduced to 100 mm at the door openings near the wall edge up to a distance, of three times the depth of beam. No shear connectors are necessary in wall. 5.3.3 In expansive soil, the grade beams shall be kept a minimum of 80 mm clear off the ground. In other soils, the beams may rest on ground over a levelling concrete course of about 80 mm (see Fig. 3). In this case, part load may be considered to be borne by the ground and it may be accounted for in the design of piles. However, the beams should be designed as per clause 5.3.1. 5.3.4 In case of exterior beams over piles in expansive soils, a ledge projection of 75 mm thickness and extending 80 mm into ground (see Fig. 3) shall be provided on outer side of beam. 5.4 Design of Pile Cap -Pile caps are generally designed considering pile reaction as either concentrated loads or distributed loads. The depth of pile cap should be adequate for the shear for diagonal tension and it should also provide for necessary anchorage of reinforcement both for the column and the piles. 19

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 5.4.1 The pile caps may be designed by assuming that the load from column or pedestal is dispersed at 45" from the top of the cap up to the middepth of the pile cap from the base of the column or pedestal. The reaction from piles may also be taken to be distributed at 45" from the edge of the pile, up to the mid-depth of the pile cap. On this basis, the maximum bending moment and shear forces should be worked out at critical sections.
5.4.2 When pile reactions are considered as point loads, the critical section for shear in diagonal tension is taken at a distance equal to half the depth of cap from the face of the column or pedestal. For bending moment and shear for bond, the critical section is taken at the face of the column or pedestal. In computing the external shear or the critical section the entire reaction of any pile of diameter D whose centre is located at D/2 or more outside the section shall be assumed as producing shear on the section; the reaction from any pile whose centre is located at D/2 or more inside the section shall be assumed as producing no shear on the section. For intermediate positions of the pile centre, the portion of the pile reaction to be assumed as producing shear on the section shall be based on straight line interpolation between full value at D/2 outside the section and zero value inside the section. 5.4.3 The cap may also be designed as a solid slab carrying concentrated loads from piles. A square/rectangular pile cap can be divided in four triangular/trapezoidal areas by drawing diagonal lines at 45" from the corners. When the pile is cut by the line, the load on this pile is shared equally between the adjacent areas. The reaction of piles under an area will be taken towards producing shear. The bending moment are assumed to act from the centre of piles under an area at the face of the nearest pedestal or column. 5.4.4 Full dimension of the cap shall be taken as width to analyse the section for bending and shear in respective direction. Method of analysis and allowable stresses may be according to.%: 456-1978*. 5.4.5 The clear overhang of the pile cap beyond the outer most pile in the group shall normally be 100 to 150 mm, depending upon the pile size. 5.4.6 The cap is generally cast over a 75 mm thick levelling course of concrete. The clear cover for main reinforcement in the cap slab shall be not less than 75 mm. 5.4.7 The pile should pro_jcct 40 mm into the cap concrete.

6. EQUrPMENT

AND ACCESSORIES

6.1 The selection of equipment and accessories will depend upon the type of under-reamed piles, site conditions and nature of strata. Also it will depend on economic considerations and availability of manually or po\ver operated equipment.
*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete (f&d rc&&n). 21

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 6.2 A typical Appendix D. list of equipment for manual construction is given in

6.3 Bore holes may be made by earth augers. In case of manual boring, an auger boring guide shall be used to keep the bores vertical or to the desired inclination and in position. After the bore is made to the required depth, enlarging of the base shall be carried out by means of an under-reaming tool. 6.4 In ground with high water table having unstable pile bores, boring and under-reaming may be carried out using a suitable drilling mud. General guidelines for bentonite drilling mud are given in Appendix E. In normally met soil strata, drilling mud can be poured from top while boring and underreaming can be done by normal spiral earth auger and under-reamer. The level of drilling mud should always be about one metre above water table or the level at which caving in occurs. In case of very unstable strata with excessive caving in, continuous circulation of drilling mud using suitable pumping equipment and tripod, etc, alongwith modified auger and underreamer may be used. 6.5 Sometimes permeable strata overlying a rim clayey stratum may be cased and normal boring and under-reaming operation may be carried out in clayey stratum. 6.6 To avoid irregular shape and widening of bore hole in very loose strata at top, a casing pipe of suitable length may be used temporarily during boring and concreting. 6.7 For improved control over the inclination of batter piles, a tripod hoist with fixed pully should be used for lowering in of under-reaming tools. 6.8 For placing the concrete in bore holes full of drilling mud or subsoil water, tremie pipe of not less than 150 mm diameter with flap valve at the bottom should be used. 6.9 For batter under-reamed piles, the reinforcement cage should be placed If concreting is not guiding it by a chute or any other suitable method. done by tremie, it should be done by chute. 6.10 In guiding vertical suitable under-reamed compaction piles, suitable devices should be used for the movement of drop weight and specified core assembly for its driving. For operating the drop weights of adequate capacity, winch with hoisting attachment should be used.

7. CONSTRUCTION 7.1 Under-reamed piles may be constructed by selecting suitable installation techniques at a given site depending on subsoil strata conditions and type of under-reamed pile and number of bulbs. 22

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 7.2 In construction
with the equipment given in 6, initially boring guide is fixed with its lower frame levelled for making desired angular adjustment Boring is done up to required depth and under-reaming for piles at batter. is completed. 7.2.1 In order to achieve proper under-reamed bulb, the depth of bore hole should be checked before starting under-reaming. It should also be checked during under-reaming and any extra soil at the bottom of bore hole removed by auger before reinserting the under-reaming tool.

7.2.2 The completion of desired under-reamed bulb is ascertained by (a> the vertical movement of the handle, and (6) when no further soil is cut. 7.2.3 In double or multi-under-reamed piles, boring is first completed to the depth required for the first (top) under-ream only and after completboring is extended further for the second undering the under-reaming, ream and the process is repeated.
7.3 Control of Alignment - The piles shall be installed as correctly as possible at the correct location and truly vertical (or at the specified batter). Great care shall be exercised in respect of single pile or piles in two-pile As a guide, for vertical piles a deviation of 1.5 groups under a column. percent and for raker piles a deviation of 4 percent shall not normally In special cases, a closer tolerance may be necessary. Piles be exceeded. shall not deviate more than 75 mm or one quarter the stem diameter, whichever is less (75 mm or D/ 10 whichever is more in case of piles having diameter more than 600 mm) from the designed position at the working level. In the case of single pile under a column, the positional deviation should not be more than 50 mm or one quarter of the stem diameter whichever is less (100 mm in case of piles having diameter more than 600 mm). For piles where cut-off is at substantial depths, the design should provide for the worst combination of the above tolerances in position and inclination. In case of piles deviating beyond these limits, corrective measures where necessary may be taken in the form of increasing pile size, provision of extra reinforcement in the pile, redesign of pile cap and pile ties. If the resulting eccentricity cannot be taken care of by the above measures, the piles should be replaced or supplemented by one or more additional piles.
NOTE- In case of raker piles up to a rake of 1 in 6, there may be no reduction in the capacity of the pile unless othenvise stated.

7.4 Concreting shall be done as soon as possible after completing the pile bore. The bore hole full of drilling mud should not be left unconcreted for more than 12 to 24 hours depending upon the stability of bore hole. 7.5 For placing concrete in pile bores, a funnel should be used and method of concreting should be such that the entire volume of the pile bore is filled

23

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980
up without the formations in the concrete. of voids and/or mixing of soil and drilling fluid

7.5.1 In empty bore holes for under-reamed piles a small quantity of concrete is poured to give about a 100 mm layer of concrete at the bottom. Reinforcement is lowered next and positioned correctly. Then concrete is poured to fill up the bore hole. Care should be taken that soil is not scrapped from sides if rodding is done for compaction. Vibrators shall not be used. 7.5.2 If the water is confined up to the bucket length portion at the toe and seepage is low, the water should be bailed out and concreting should be done as in 7.5.1. 7.5.3 In case the pile bore is stabilized with drilling mud or by maintaining water head within the bore hole, the bottom of bore hole shall be carefully cleaned by flushing it with fresh drilling mud, and pile bore will be checked for its depth immediately before concreting. Concreting shall be done by tremie method. The tremie should have a valve at its bottom and lowered with its valve closed at the start and filled The valve is then qpened to permit the flow of concrete up with concrete. which permits the upwards displacement of drilling mud. The pouring should be continuous and tremie is gradually lifted up such that the tremie pipe opening remains always in the concrete. If the final stage the quantity of concrete in tremie should be enough so that on tinal withdrawal some concrete spills over the ground.
NOTZ 1 - The concrete should be coherent, rich in cement (not less than 350 l&/m%) and of slump not less than 150 mm.
NOTE 2- The tremie pipe should always penetrate well into the concrete with an adequate margin of safety against accidental withdrawal of the pipe is surged to discharge the concrete NOTE 3 - The pile should be concreted wholly by tremie and the method ofdeposition should not be changed part way up the pile, to prevent the laitance from being entrapped within the pile. NOTE 4-

All tremie tubes should be scrupulously cleanrd before and after use.

NOTE 5 - Normally concreting of the piles should be uninterrupted. In the exceptional case of interruption of concreting, but which can be resumed within 1 or 2 hours, the tremie shall not be taken out of the concrete. Instead it shall be raised and lowered slowly, from time to time to prevent the concrete around the tremie from setting. Concreting should be resumed by introducing a little richer concrete with a slump of about 200 mm for easy displacement of the partly set concrete. If the concreting cannot be resumed before final set-up of concrete already placed, the pile so cast may be rcjectcd, or used with modifications. Nom 6 - Tn case of withdrawal of tremie out of the concrete, either a&dentally or to remove a choke in the tremie, the tremie may be re-introduced in a manner to prevent impregnation oflaitance or scum lying on the topof theconcrete already deposited in the bore.

24

Is : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 7.5.4 In inclined piles, the concreting or by tremie method. should be done through achute

7.5.5 For under-reamed bore compaction piles, the pile bore is first filled up without placing any reinforcement. Concreting is done as in 7.5.1 Soon after, the specified core assembly shall depending upon situation. be driven and extra concrete shall be poured in simultaneously to keep the level of concrete up to ground level. If hollow driving pipe is used in core assembly, the pipe-shall be withdrawn after filling it with fresh concrete which will be left behind.
NOTE - In under-reamed bored compaction piles, concreting should be uninterrupted and notes 45) and (6) under clause 7.5.3 will not apply.

7.5.6 The top of concrete in a pile shall be brought above the cut-off level to permit removal of all laitance and weak concrete before capping and to ensure good concrete at the cut-off level for proper embedment into the pile cap. 7.5.7 Where cut-off level is less than 1.5 metre below working level, concrete shall be cast to a minimum of 300 mm above cut-off level. For each additional O-3 m increase in cut off level below working level, additional coverage of 50 mm minimum shall be allowed. Higher allowance may be necessary depending on the length of the pile. When concrete is placed by tremie method, it shall be cast to the piling platform level to permit overflow of concrete for visual inspection or to a minimum of one metre above cut-off level. In the circumstance where cut-off level is below ground water, the need to maintain a pressure on the unset concrete equal to or greater than water pressure should be observed and accordingly length of extra concrete above cut-off level shall be determined. 7.5.8 Defective Pile -In case, defective piles are formed, they shall be removed or left in place whichever is convenient without affecting performance of the adjacent piles or the cap as a whole. Additional piles shall be provided to replace them as directed. 705.9 Any deviation from the designed location alignment or load capacity of any pile shall be noted and adequate measures taken well before the concreting of the pile cap and plinth beam if the deviations are beyond the permissible limit. 7.5.10 Estimation of Concrete Quantity - The extra concrete required for each bored cast in situ under-reamed bulb of 2.5 times the stem diameter may be taken equal to a stem length of 4 to 4.5 times its diameter, depending on the nature of strata and other site conditions. The volume of concrete actually placed shall be observed in the case of few piles initially cast and the average figure obtained may be used as a guide for working out the quantities of the concrete and cement for subsequent piles. 25

.

IS : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 For under-reamed compaction piles the amount of concrete used is about 1.2 times of the under-reamed cast in situ piles. is on the volumeof bore hola and Nom - If the estimates of concrete consumption not on the basis of concrete quantity actually consumed, the concrete used may be found smaller than estimated and cement tonsumption may work out to be less. 7.5.11 Recording of Pile Details records of `necessary information following may be recorded : A competent person at site should keep about the construction of piles. The

4 b) 4. 4 e) f1

Date and, sequence of installation of piles in a group;
Pile details -

Length, diameter of stem and bulbs, number of bulbs, type of pile, reinforcement, etc; Cut-off level and working level; Method of boring;

Ground water level; Any other information.

APPENDIX [Clause 3.1 (b)]
DEGREE

A

OF E?LPANSJ.VENESS

A-I. The degree of expansiveness and consequent damage to the structures with light loading may be qualitatively judged as shown below:
Degree of ex~ensivenm Differential free swell, percent

Low Moderate High Very high

Less than 20 20 to 35 35 to 50 Greater than 50

A-l.1 In areas of soil showing high or very high differential free swell values, conventional shallow strips footings may not be adequate. 26

IS : 2911 (Part IIX) - 1980

APPENDIX

B

(Clauses 5.2.3.3 and 5.2.5)
SAFE LOAD ON UNDER-REAMED PILES

B-l. SAFE LOAD TABLE B-l.1 The safe bearing, uplift and lateral loads for under-reamed piles given in Table 1 appiy to both medium compact (lO<N <30) sandy soils and clayey soils of medium (4<N < 8) consistency including expansive soils. The values are for piles with bulb diameter equal to two-and-a-half times the shaft diameter. The columns (3) and (4) of on Table 1 provide the minimum pile lengths for single and double under-reamed piles, respectively, in deep deposit of expansive soils. Also the length given for 375 mm diameter double underThe values given for reamed piles and more in other soils are minimum. double under-reamed piles in columns (9) and (13) are only applicable in expansive soils. The reinforcement shown is mild steel and it is adequate for loads in compression and lateral thrusts [Columns (8), (9), (16) and (17)]. For uplift [Column (12) and (13)], re q uisite amount of steel should be provided. In expansive soils, the reinforcement shown in Table 1 is adequate to take upward drag due to heaving up of the soil. The concrete considered is M 15. provided in 5.2.2. The cover requiremepts will be as

B-l.2 Safe loads for piles of lengths different from those shown in Table 1 can be obtained considering the decrease or increase as from columns 10, 11, 14 and 15 for the specific case. B-1.3 Safe loads for piles with more than two bulbs in expansive soils and more than one bulb in all other soils (including non-expansive clayey soils) can be worked out from Table 1 by adding 50 percent of the loads shown in columns (8) or (12) for each additional bulb in the values given in these columns. The additional capacity for increased length required to accommodate bulbs should be obtained from column (10) and (14). B-I.4 Values given in columns (16) and (17) for lateral be increased or decreased for change in pile lengths. Also reamed piles the values should not increase than those given For longer and/or multi-under reamed piles higher lateral adopted after establishing from field load tests. thrusts may not for multi-under in column (17). thrusts may be

B-l.5 For dense sandy (N 30) and stiff clayey (N 28) soils, the safe loads in compression and up P ift obtained from Table 1 may be increased by 25 percent. The lateral thrust values should not be increased unless the stability and strength of top soil (strata up to a depth of about three times the pile shaft diameter) is ascertained and found adequate. For piles in 27

IS: 2911(PartIII)-1980 loose(4~ N ~10) sandy and soft (2~ N <4) clayey soils, the safe loads should be taken 0.75 times the values shown in the Table. For very loose (N < 4) sandy and very soft (N Q 2) clayey soils the values obtained from the Table should be reduced by 50 percent. B-I.6 The safe loads obtained from Table 1, should be reduced by 25 percent if the pile bore holes are full of subsoil water of drilling mud during concreting. No such reduction may be done if the water is confined to the shaft portion below the bottom-most bulb. B-I.7 The safe loads in uplift and compression given by in Table 1 or obtained in accordance with B-l.2 to B-l.6 should be reduced by 15 percent for piles with bulb of twice the stem diameter. But no such reduction is required for lateral loads shown in Table 1. B-1.8 The safe loads for under-reamed compaction piles can be worked out by increasing the safe load of equivalent bored cast in situ under-reamed pile obtained from Table 1 by 1.5 times in case of medium (10~ N < 30) and 1.75 times in case of loose to very loose (N d 10) sandy soils. Depending upon the nature and initial compactness of strata, pile geometry and lay-out of piles, this increase may be up to a factor of 2 and initial load tests are suggested to arrive at final safe load values for design in case of sizable works. The values of lateral loads should not be increased by more than 1.5 times in all cases. In obtaining safe load of compaction pile the reduction for pile bore holes full of subsoil water or drilling mud during concreting should be taken 15 percent instead of 25 percent as given in B-1.6. The reduction for piles with twice the bulb diameter is to be taken 10 percent instead of 15 percent as given in B-1.7. The provision of reinforcement in under-reamed compaction piles will also be guided as stipulated in 5.2.2.1. El.9 The safe loads in Table 1, and the recommendations made to obtain safe load in different cases (B-l.2 to B-1.8) are based on extensive pile load tests. The loads thus obtained may be taken equal to two-thirds the loads corresponding to deflection of 12 mm for loads in compression and uplift. The deflections corresponding to respective safe loads will be about 6 mm and 4 mm. The deflection at safe lateral load will be about 4 mm. The values given in Table 1 will be normally on conservative side. For working out ultimate compressive and uplift loads, if defined as Gads corresponding to 25 mm deflection on load-deflection curve, the value obtained from Table 1 can be doubled.. But in case of lateral thrust twice the values in Table 1 should be considered corresponding to deflection of 12 mm only. El.10 The permissible increase over safe loads obtained from Table 1 should be taken as stipulated in 5.2.3.5 for respective conditions. Also the group capacity should be obtained in accordance with 5.2.8. 28

TABLE 1 SAFB LOAD FOR VBRTICAL BORED CAST IN SITU UNDBR-REN+fBD CLAYBY SOILS INCLUDING BLACK COlTON SOlLS Slza I DiaUnder Td meter cm
LENOTH MILD STaBL RElNFO~CXMWf

FILBswsANDYNm

COMPRBYZON
Increase 3pe;m Length t (8) t (9) 12 18 24 36 42 52.5 63 t (10) 0.9 1.15 1.4 1.8 1.9 2.15 2.4 Decreare per 3ocm Length t (11) 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.9

sA?B Loma Single underreamed

IN

UPWFT

&LtamTANoB

E"Y

"IF pile cm

Si le Double Qx&udinal un % r- under- Remforcemrnt reamed remed ,-,

R'pg-3 Single Double rwcmg under- underofdfimi reamed -d rings

Double underreamed

Incper 30 cm length

De- *crease, under underrecamed reamed 3fzn length

m (3) 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5

m (4) 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.75 4.0 4.5 5.0

No. (5) 3 4 4 5 6 7 9

Dia mm (6) 10 10 12 12 12 `12 12

cm (7) 18 22 25 30 30 30 30

t
(12) 4 6 8 12 14 17.5 21

t
(13) 6 9 12 18 21 25.75 ,31.5

t
(14) 0965 0.85 1.05 1.35 1.45 160 1.80

t
(15) 0.55 0.70 0.85 l-10 1.15 1.30 1.45

t
(16) 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 3.4 4.0 4.5

t
(17) 1.2 1.8 2.4 3.6 4.0 4.8 54

2

(1)
20 25 30 37.5 40 45 50

(2)
50 62.5 75 94 100 112.5 125

a
12 16 24 23 35 42

IS : 2911 (Part III)

- 1980

B-l.11 For piles subjected to external moments and or larger lateral loads than those given in Table 1, the pile should be designed properly and requisite amount of steel should be provided.
NOTE -For ' obtaining safe loads from Table 1, `N' value (standard penetration test value) a weighted average should b&taken up to a depth equal to the bulb diameter below the pile toe. In case of predominantly silty soils, the guiding `N' value for obtaining safe loads may be taken between the values given for sandy and clayey soils.

APPENDIX (Clause 5,2.5)
MODULUS

C

OF SUBGRADE

nB

C-1. The values of the constant of modulus of horizontal subgrade reaction in sand or the modulus of subgrade reaction, K, in clay may be taken from Tables 2 and 3.
TABLE
SOIL

2

TYPICAL

VALUES r

OF m,

Tvrv.

ah XN kg/cm* h \ Submerged Dry 0.260 0.775 2076 0.146 0.526 I.245 0.041

Loose sand Medium sand . Dense sand Very loose sand under repeated loading

TABLE

3

TYPICAL

VALUES

OF X (for

prehaded

clay)

UNCONFINED coMPRFsIVE STRENGTH kg/cm8

RANGE OF `VALUEOPK kg,'cm'

PROBABLE vrwRo~K kg/cm

0.2 to 0.4 1 to2, 2 to4 4

7 to 42 32 to 65 65 to 130

7.73 43.79 97.73 19546

30

IS : 2911 (Partm)-1!380

APPENDIX (CZazw 6.2)

D

EQUIPMENT FOR UNDER-REAMED (MANUAL CONSTRUCTION) D-l. EQUIPMENT the following equipment

PILES

D-l.1 Normally operation : a) An auger;

will be required

in manual

b) An under-reamer; c) A boring guide ; and d) Accessories like spare extensions, etc. cutting tool, concreting funnel,

D-1.1.1 For the piles of size larger than 30 cm and for larger depths additional equipment required will be a portable tripod hoist with a manually operated winch. D-1.1.2 For piles in high ground water tamale and unstable soil condii tions, boring and under-reaming shall be carried out with bentonite slurry using suitable equipment. Tremie pipe shall be used for concreting. D-1.1.3 The additional equipment compaction pile are the following: b) Pipe or solid core. normally required for under-reamed

a) Drop weight for driving the core assembly, and

APPENDIX (Clause 6.4)
BASXC PROPERTIES El. PROPERTIES OF DRILLING

E

MUD

(BENTONITE)

E-l.1 The bentonite suspension used in bore holes is basically a clay of montmorillonite group having exchangeable sodium cations. because of thegresence of medium cations, bentonite on dispersion will break down 31

as : 2911 (Part III) - 1980 into small plate like particles having a negative charge on the surfaces and positive charge on the edges. When the dispersion is left to stand undisturbed, the particles become oriented building up a mechanical structure of its own, the mechanical structure held by electrical bonds is observable as a jelly like mass or jell material. When the jell is agitated, the weak electrical bonds are box-ken and the dispersion becomes fluid. E2. FUNCTIONS E-2.1 The action of bentonite in stabilizing the sides of bore holes is primarily due to the thixotropic property of bentonite suspensions. The thixotropic property of bentonite suspension permits the material to have the consistency of a fluid when introduced into the excavation and when undisturbed forms a jelly which when agitated becomes a fluid again. E2.2 In the case of a granular soil, the bentonite suspension penetrates into the sides under positive pressure and after a while forms a jelly. The bentonite suspension gets deposited on the sides of the hole and makes the surface impervious and imparts a plastering effect. In impervious clay, the bentonite does not penetrate into the soil, but deposits only a thin film on the surface of the hole. Under such conditions, stability is derived from the hydro-static head of the suspension. E3. SPECIFICATION piling work shall satisfy the

E-3.1 The bentonite suspension used for following requirements :

a) The liquid limit of bentonite when tested in accordance with IS: 2720 (Part V)-1965* shall be more than 300 percent and less than 450 percent. b) The'sand content of the bentonite powder shall not be greater than 7 percent.
NOTEThe purposeof limiting the sand contentis mainly to control and reduce the and tear of the pumpingequipment.

Bentonite solution should be made by mixing it with fresh water using pump for circulation. The relative density of the bentonite solution should be between 1.034 and, 1.10. The differential free swell shall be more than 546 percent.

*Methods of test for soils: Part V Determinationof liquid and plastic limits (&: r&). 32

(crmtinucd from page 2)

Pile Foundations Connener
SHRI M. D. TAMBEKAR Members SHRI K. N. DADINA

Subcommittee,

BDC 43 : 5

Representing

Bombay Port Trust, Bombay In personal capacity (P 820, Block P, flew Al$ore,
Calcutta)

DEPUTYD=CT~R RESEARCH hIini%ry of Railways (SM II) &PUTY DIRECTOR STANnARD.5 SHRIdBG:zpL II) (Al&t-W Braithwaite Bum & Jessops Construction Co Ltd, . Calcutta M. N. Dastur & Co Pvt Ltd. Calcutta SHRIS. R. KULKARNI Cementation Co Ltd, Bombaj SHRIM. R. PUNJA Metallurgical & Engineering Cons&anti (Steel Snru S. K. SANYAL Authority of India), Bhilai Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHR~K. SARICAR Cen~~r!~lding Research Institute (CSIR), &RI D. SHARMA
DR S. P. SHRNASTAVA

Unit$dh'echnical

Consultants (Pvt) Ltd, New

DR R. KAFVR (Alternate)

33

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters:
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: Fax 323 0131,323 3375, 323 9402 11 3239382 Telegrams

: 91

11 3234062,91

11 3239399,91

: Manaksanstha
to all Offices) Telephone 8-77 00 32

(Common

Central Laboratory:
Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, Sahibabad 201010

Regional
Central *Eastern Northern Southern

Offices:
323 76 17 337 86 62 60 38 43 235 23 15 Andheri (East), 832 92 95

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 : 1114 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054
: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, CHENNAI E9, Behind Marol Telephone 160022 600113 Exchange,

: C.I.T.

Campus,

TWestern : Manakalaya, MUMBAI 400093

Branch Offices:
`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD Road, 380001 550 13 48 839 49 55 554021 40 36 27 21 01 41 8-28 88 01 8-71 1996 781003 500001 54 11 37 201083 37 29 25 21 68 76 Naval Kishore Road, 23 89 23

$ Peenya Industrial Area, BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex,

1st

Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur

5th Floor, Bhadbhada

Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 751001 641037 121001

Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi 16 A, Mathura Road, COIMBATORE Road, FARIDABAD 201001

Plot No. 43, Sector Savitri Complex,

116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD

53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, 5-8-560, L.N. Gupta Marg, Nampally Marg, C-Scheme, Station JAIPUR

GUWAHATI

Road, HYDERABAD 302001

E-52, Chitaranjan 117/418

8, Sarvodaya

Nagar, KANPUR

208005

Seth Bhawan, LUCKNOW NIT Building, Patliputra Institution

2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, 226001 Second Floor, Gokulpat Market,

NAGPUR

440010

52 51 71 26 23 05 32 36 35 621 17

Industrial

Estate, PATNA 800013 (India) Building 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 THIRUVANANTHAPURAM PO. Princep Street, 400007 Square, 695034

of Engineers

T.C. No. 14/1421,

University

PO. Palayam, Approach,

*Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee CALCUTTA TSales 700072

27 10 85 309 65 28 222 39 71

Office is at Novelty Chambers,

Grant Road, MUMBAI Narashimaraja

*Sales Office is at `F' Block, Unity Building, BANGALORE 560002

Printed

at

Simco Printing Press, Delhi

AMRNDMENT NO. 1
TO

JANUARY 1983

IS : 2911( Part III) - 1980 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE FOUNDATIONS
PART III UNDER-REAMED

PILES

(Firat Revision)
AbratiOM ( Pagt 12, chus~ 5.2.2J,.lin49 ) 197lz#`. ( Pag# 12, foot-note r&h e # ' mark ) [ Page 15, C~UU.W 5.2.5.1(b) 1: a) Lines3 and 4, z&8 existing matter: ' Q~ - ~: .A. * . Delete. Substitute ` of' for 6or `.

(Pags 12, E~~IU~ 5.2.3.1,linr 6 ) - Delete the words ` and IS : 6405-

of `&'

-

Substitute

the following Y.~~~~~

for the n

`.~~~~f~:~~~~~jn.y.~

n

r=l

b) Line ? - Substitute ` y( kg/cm~ ) ' for ` A( kg/u+) c) Line 10 ( Pags 14,
Fw. 2.

`.

Sub.tit.utc ` NY' fol `.Na `.

Note 3 ) - Substitute the following for the existing note:
willbetakenfrom

`N~3-~NywilIbcu'rpecifiedinIS:6103-1981*~dNcr

beyond+ = !w.'

This is based on Berexa~tseu'r curve up to 4 = !W and

Vaic'r carvea

[Pagu 14, clmus 5.2.3.1 (d), GM 7 ] - Substitute ` Ny `for ` MI `.
(Page 14, foot-note roith ` the existing foot-note:
l

' mark ) -

Substitute

the following

for

* *&de of practice for determination (jJ# rwiaia ).'

of' bearing capacity

of rhallow found&m

1

( Page 15, Fig. 2 ) - Substitute the following for the existing figure:
SO(1

20

25
ANGLE OF

30
INTERNAL

35

40
FRICTION $

bb

FM.

2

BEARINO CAPACITY FACTOR JV,,

1970r

( PW 32, &l4se E3.1, linr 4) - Substitute ` IS : 2720( Part V)' fw` IS : 2720( Part V )-196!i* `.

AMENDMENT NO. 2 TO

SEPTEMBER 1984

IS:2!?ll(Part 3)-1980 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN
AND CONSTRUCTION PART 3 OF PILE FOUNDATIONS PILES UNDER-REAMED

iFirs t Revision) Alterations --a--(Page 8, o&zuse 4.2, tine 1) - Substitute '1~:43z?(Part l)-lg82*' for '1s:4HPart l)-lg66*'. (Page 8, foot-nob with '*' mzrk) - Substitute the following for the existing foot-note:

'*Specification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard dram steel bars and hard drawn steel wire.for concrete reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars (thirdre~.&ion)

(Page II, olause 5.2.2.1, first sentence) Substitute the following for the existing sentence:
'The tinimum area of longitudinal reinforcement (any type or grade) within the pile shaft shall be 0.4 percent of the sectional area calculated on the basis of outside area of the shaft or casing if used.'

(Page21, okuse

5.4.2 cmd 5.4.3) - Delete.

(Page 21, okzuse 5.4.7) - Substitute '50 mm' for '40 mm'.

Addenda ---word8 after

(Pags 6, ~.WW 2.18, tine 2) - Ada the folbifing the word 'Shearwithin the bracket'as 'evidenced from the load aeMeleme%kt curves'.
:
(Page 8,
0242248s

Ena

5.2) - Ada

the

f~llouing in

the

`ana shall be designedaccording to IS: 456-1978 Code of practicefor plain snd reinforced concrete(third
lWd8h?Z). '

in *Yes
:

24, atauss 5.2.3(c)

- Ada the f0110uing

![sse IS:29ll(Part 4).1979+.1*.

mc

43) 2

AMENDMENT

NO. 3
TO

JULY 1987

IS : 2911( Part 3 )-1980 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PILE FOUNDATIONS
PART 3 UNDER-REAMED ( clause: `4.3.4 The minimum grade of concrete to be used for piling shall be M-20 and the minimum cement content shall be 4C0 kg/m8 in all coaditions. For piles up to 6 m deep M-15 concrete with minimum cement content 350 kg/ma without provision for under-water concreting may be used under favourable non-aggressive subsoil condition and where concrete of higher strength is not needed structurally or due to aggressive site conditions. The concrete in aggressive surroundings due to presence of sulphates, etc, shall conform to provision given in IS : 456-197811. For the concrete, water and aggregates specifications laid down in IS : 456-197811shall be followed in general. Natural rounded shingle-of appropriat? size may also be used as coarse aggregate. It helps to give high slump with less water-cement ratio. For tremie concreting aggregates having nominal size more than 20 mm should not be used.' ( Page 9, clauses 4.3.6.1 and 4.3.6.2 ) - Substitute the following for the existing clauses: `4.3.6 The average compressive stress under working load should not exceed 25.percent of the specified strength at 28 days calculated on the total cross-sectional area of the pile. If in the portion of the shaft above the top under-reamed a permanent casing of adequate thickness and of suitable size is used, the allowable stress may be suitably increased.' [ Page 14, clauses 5.2.3.1(c) and `5.2.3.2 see also Amendment - Substitute `IS : 2911 ( Part 4 )-1984t' J or `IS : 2911 ( Part 4)T"6;9;, )I . ( Page 14,foot-note the existing foot-note: with `t' mark ) Substitute the following for

OF

PILES

First Revision )
the following for the existing

( Page 8, clause 4.3.4 ) - Substitute

`tCodc of practice for design and construction of pile foundations: Part 4 Load test 0n piles (first revision ).'
[

Page 16, claw 5.2.3.5(b), last sentence ] - Delete.
( Pa@ 16pfoot-note with *t' mark ) Delete,

Gr 1 1

( Page 17, clause 5.2.5, second para and Note ) following for the existing matter:

Substitute

the

`A recommended method for the determination of depth of fixity, lateral deflection and maximum bendirg moment required for design is given in Appendix C for fully or partially embedded piles. Other accepted methods, such as the method of Reese and Matlock for fully embedded piles may also be used. Due to the presence of bulbs, underreamed piles tend to behave more as rigid piles and the analysis can be done on rigid pile basis. For lateral loads with or without axial loads, up to those given in Table 1 of Appendix C, no analysis may be necessary if external moment is not acting.
NOTE - Because of limited information on horizontal modulus of soil and refinements in the theoretical analysis, it is suggested that the adequacy of a design should be checked by an actual field load test.' ( Page 23, clause 7.3 ): a) ( Lines 7 and 11 ) - Substitute `sixth'for `quarter'. b) (Line 13)Add the following matter after the word `depths': `( below ground level ) or high ( above ground level )`.

( Page 26, clause A-l, column heading of informal ruble ) `Free swell, percent' for `Rifferential free sw.ell, percent'.
( Page 30, Appendix C ) -

Substitute

Appendix

Substitute the following for the existing including Fig. 4 and 5:

`APPENDIX ( Clause 5.2.5 )

C

DETERMINATION OF DEPTH OF FIXITY, LATERAL DEFLECTION AND MAXIMUM MOMENT OF LATERALLY LOADED PILES C-l. DETERMINATION OF LATERAL DEFLECTION PILE HEAD AND DEPTH OF FIXITY AT THE

C-l.1 The long flexible pile, fully or partially embedded, is treated as a cantilever fixed at some depth below the ground level ( see Fig. 4 ).

C-l.2 Determine the depth of fixity and hence the equivalent the cantilever using the plots given in Fig. 4. where T=5
EI KIand R=4 `F

length of

( Kl and Kz are constants given

2 2

in Tables 2 and 3 below, E is Young's

modulus of the pile material in kg/cm2 and I is the moment of inertia of the pile cross-section in cm4 ).

Z-3 4 2.1 !,
I \ \

-FREE ----FIXED

HEAD HEAD

PILE PILE

Q

\

.

e

\

.

3
OL 0

1.9 ----__, FOR PILES IN SANDS AND NORMALLY LOADED CLAYS

oz

3

1.3 0

I 2

I 4 L,/R OR

6 Ll/l

8

FOR PILES PRELOADED Ia

IN CLAYS

FIG. 4 DETERMINATION OF DEPTH FIXITY NOTE- Figure 5 is valid for long flexible piles where the embedded length, L is > 4R or 4T.

TABLE 2 VALUES OFCONSTANT
TYPEOPSOIL
(-__--___L---_~

Kl( kg/cmS)
VALUE

Dry

Submerged (3) 0.146 0925 1.245 0.040

(1)
Loose sand

(2) 0.260 0.775 2.075 -

Medium sand Dense sand Very loose sand under repeated loading or normally loading clays

3

L,/R 54 1.2. I

OR

Ll/T
PILE

iOR FREE HEAD

z z e
" 9

-

FOR

PILES

IN

I

PiELOAdED AND CLAYS

CLAYS

FOR
I.0 ----NORMALLY

PILES

IN SANDS
LOADED

c

'

0.6

0

0.5

1.0

15 OR
HEAD

2.0

24

L,/R
58 FOR FIXED

Ll/T
PILE

FIG. 5 DETERMINATION OF REDUCTIONFACTORSFOR COMPUTATION OF MAXIMUM MOMENT IN PILE

TABLE 3

VALUES

OF CONSTANT K, (

Wcm' )
VALUE

uNCOk44~N~~~MPRESWVB

kg/cm' (1) 0.2 to O-4 1 to 2 2to4 More than 4 C-l.3 Knowing (2) 7-75 48-80 9775 195.50

deflection

the length of the equivalent cantilever the Dile head (Y) shall be computed using the following equations: Y (cm) =
Q( h + LF )" 3 El

. ..for free head pile
. . . for fixed head pile

= Q ( LI + LP I3 12 El

where Q is the lateral load in kg. C-2. DETERMINATION OF MAXIMUM MOMENT IN THE PILE C-2.1 The fixed end moment (Mp) of the equivalent cantilever is higher than the actual maximum moment (M) of the pile. The actual maximum moment is obtained by multiplying the fixed end moment of the equivalent cantilever by a reduction factor, m given in Fig. 5. The fixed end moment of the equivalent cantilever is given by: . ..for free head pile j&=8(&+ Lr)

=Q(L+Lr)
2 The actual maximum moment (M) = m
(MF).'

...for fixed hkad pile

5
Pf4nWd at Slmco Printing Press. Delhi, India _

