атт Ah IS 11315 (Part 8) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


їе ATS A чт 95 татна {Әәчот ch 
REI 


ATT 8 ¡HTA 
(чест Чат ) 


Methods for Quantitative Description 
of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 


Part 8 Seepage 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2023 


ARA 99% St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR ЧӘЧ, 9 SEEL ЭТТЕ HHL AMT, 95 Й - 110002 
Nese” МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 4 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 8) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A series of Indian Standard on test methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rocks and rock masses 
are being developed/revised in view of recent advances in the field of rock mechanics. The majority of rock 
masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the 
discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure of a rock 
mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified 
descriptions of rock masses and discontinuities. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests 
that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 


Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has 
zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistosity 
planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe 
discontinuities are orientation, spacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage, number 
of sets and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on 
the discontinuities. 


It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described 
for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard, covering various parameters to describe 
discontinuities in rock masses. 


This standard (Part 8) covers the methods for quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses for seepage. 
This standard (Part 8) was first formulated in 1987. This revision incorporates the latest advancement and 
modifications based on the experience gained in the use of this standard. The other parts formulated in the series 
are: 


Part 1 Orientation 
Part 2 Spacing 

Part 3 Persistence 
Part 4 Roughness 

Part 5 Wall strength 
Part 6 Aperture 

Part 7 Filling 

Part 9 Number of sets 
Part 10 Block size 

Part 11 Core recovery and rock quality designation 
Part 12 Drill core study 


Seepage describes water flow and free moisture visible in individual discontinuities or in the rock mass as a whole. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)'. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11315 (Part 8) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF 


DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASSES 
PART 8 SEEPAGE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 8) covers the method for the 
quantitative description of seepage in the 
discontinuities in rock mass. 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitutes 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated was valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of this standard: 


IS No. Title 


IS 11358: Glossary of terms and 
1987 symbols relating to rock mechanics 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions of 
terms given in IS 11358 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Water seepage through rock masses results 
mainly from flow through water conducting 
discontinuities (secondary permeability). In the case 
of certain sedimentary rocks, the ‘primary’ 
permeability of the rock material may be significant 
such that a proportion of the total seepage occurs 
through the pores. The rate of seepage is roughly 
proportional to the local hydraulic gradient and to 
the relevant directional permeability proportionality 
being dependent on laminar flow. High velocity 
flow through open discontinuities may result in 
increased head losses due to turbulence. 


4.2 The prediction of groundwater levels, likely 
seepage paths and approximate water pressures may 
often give advance warning of stability or 
construction difficulties. The field description of 
rock masses should inevitably precede any 
recommendation for field permeability tests so these 
factors should be carefully assessed at this early 
stage. 


4.3 Irregular groundwater levels and perched water 
tables may be encountered in rock masses that are 
partitioned by persistent impermeable features such 
as dykes, clay filled discontinuities or permeable 
beds. The prediction of these potential flow-barriers 
and associated irregular water tables is of 
considerable importance especially for engineering 
projects where such barriers might be penetrated at 
depth by tunnelling, resulting in high pressure 
inflows. 


4.4 Seepage of water caused by drainage into an 
engineering excavation may have far reaching 
consequences in cases where a sinking ground water 
level would cause settlement of structures founded 
on overlying clay deposits. 


4.5 The approximate description of the local 
hydrogeology should be supplemented with detailed 
observations of seepage from individual 
discontinuities or particular sets, according to their 
relative importance to stability. A short comment 
concerning recent precipitation in the area, if known, 
will be helpful in the interpretation of these 
observations. Additional data concerning 
groundwater trends and rainfall and temperature 
records will be useful supplementary information. 


4.6 In the case ofrock slopes, the preliminary design 
estimates will be based on assumed values of 
effective normal stress. If, as a result of field 
observations one has to conclude that pessimistic 
assumptions of water pressure are justified (that is, a 
tension crack full of water with zero exit pressure at 
the toe of the unfavourable discontinuity) then this 
will clearly have the greatest consequences for 
design. So also will the field observation that ice 
formation is possible or probable, Deterioration of 
rock slopes and tunnel portals through ice welding 
and/or increased water pressure caused by ice- 
blocked drainage paths are serious seasonal 
problems in many countries. 


4.7 Seepage describe water flow and free moisture 
visible in discontinuity planes and the information is 
collected by visual observations (in underground 
excavations good lighting is essential). Air 
photographs, rainfall, spring flow, and temperature 
records assist in evaluation of seepage. 


IS 11315 (Part 8) : 2023 


5 PROCEDURE 


5.1 Available air photograph should be studied to 
obtain an overall view of the local drainage pattern 
and likely groundwater levels (Groundwater may be 
indicated by growth of vegetation along faults and 
basic dykes). Information on seasonal variations of 
groundwater levels, and on rainfall and temperature 
records should be obtained where possible. 


5.2 Description of the local hydrogeology will 
usually be limited in the preliminary stages of field 
mapping. There will probably be no boreholes for 
pumping tests, no wells for water level 
determination and drawdown tests, no tracer tests, 
and no piezometer installations. The hydrogeology 
will therefore have to be assessed from geological 
predictions of the likely locations of aquifers, from 
predictions of the likely orientation and location of 
impermeable flow barriers, and from predictions of 
the likely resultant seepage directions and 
groundwater levels. The need for exploratory 
boreholes for water level determination, tracer 
testing, piezometer installation and pumping or 


drawdown tests should be assessed, and their 
optimum location indicated on appropriate plans. 


NOTE — Local rainfall records should be obtained where 
possible, to help in the interpretation of seepage 
observations. This is especially important in the case of 
observation of surface outcrops, slopes, and tunnels at 
shallow depth. 


5.3 The mutual interaction of the planned 
engineering project and the assumed groundwater 
flow regime should be assessed and important 
consequences summarized. The effect of seepage 
towards or into a planned excavation such as a tunnel 
or slope should be described with a view to 
preliminary analysis. The predicted effect of any 
resultant drawdown of groundwater levels on 
existing installations, and on the settlement of clay 
foundations should be summarized. 


5.4 Seepage from individual unfilled and filled 
discontinuities or from specific sets exposed in a 
tunnel or in a surface exposure, can be assessed 
according to the following descriptive scheme: 


Unfilled discontinuities 


Seepage Rating Description 
I The discontinuity is tight and dry, water flow along it does not appear possible. 
П The discontinuity is dry with no evidence of water flow 
Ш The discontinuity is dry but shows evidence of water flow, like rust staining, etc. 
IV The discontinuity is damp but no free water is present. 
V The discontinuity shows seepage, occasional drops of water, but no continuous flow. 
VI The discontinuity shows a continuous flow of water (estimate l/min and describe 
pressure). 
Filled discontinuities 
Seepage Rating Description 
I The filling materials are heavily consolidated and dry, significant 
flow appears unlikely due to very low permeability. 
П The filling materials аге damp, but no free water is present. 
Ш The filling materials are wet, occasional drops of water. 
IV The filling materials show signs of outwash, continuous flow of water (estimate 
l/min). 
V The filling materials are washed out locally, considerable water flow along out-wash 
channels (estimate l/min and Describe pressure that is, low, and medium, high). 
VI The filling materials are washed out completely, very high water pressures 


experienced, especially on first exposure (estimate l/min and describe pressure). 


5.5 In the case of a rock engineering construction 
which acts as a drain for the rock mass, for example 
a tunnel, it is helpful if the overall flow into 
individual sections of the structure are described. 


This should ideally be performed immediately after 
excavation since groundwater levels or the rock 
mass storage may be depleted rapidly. Descriptions 
may be based on the following scheme: 


IS 11315 (Part 8) : 2023 


Rock mass (tunnel wall) 


Seepage Rating Description 

I Dry walls and roof, no detectable seepage. 

П Minor seepage, specify dripping discontinuities. 

Ш Medium inflow, specify discontinuities with continuous flow (estimate in flow of 
water 1/min/10 m length of excavation). 

IV Major inflow, specify discontinuities with strong flows (estimate in flow of water 
1/min/10 m length of excavation). 

V Exceptionally high inflow, specify source of exceptional flows (estimate in flow 


of water 1/11/10 m length of excavation). 


5.6 A field assessment of the likely effectiveness of 
surface drains, inclined drill holes, or drainage 
galleries should be made in the case of major rock 
slopes. This assessment will depend on the 
orientation, spacing and apertures of the relevant 
discontinuities. 


NOTES 


1 In the case of open pit mines, boreholes are drilled for 
mineral exploration and rock mechanics is commonly 
entertained only at a subsequent stage, if mineral 
evaluation is encouraging. The pre-existence of boreholes 
will allow a comprehensive hydrogeological study to be 
performed, including tracer tests, piezometer installation, 
falling-head and pumping tests. Boreholes walls can be 
surveyed for seepage horizons by means of periscopes, 
borehole cameras and TV equipment. 


2 Testing performed in drill holes (as falling head and 
Lugeon tests) for estimating rock mass permeability forms 
the subject of a separate Indian Standard. The description 
of any available Lugeon values is obviously an important 
supplement to the present suggested methods for 
description of rock masses and discontinuities. 


3 Bedding joints and beds of sedimentary rocks having 
high ‘primary’ permeability tends to be persistent features 
with the potential for hydraulically connecting large areas 
of sedimentary rock masses. Such efficient hydraulic 
connection will be inherently less marked in igneous and 
metamorphic environments if major regional joints and 
faults are absent. 


4 Faults sometimes contain highly permeable breccia 
adjacent to highly impermeable clay gouge. The hydraulic 
conductivity may therefore be strongly anisotropic, and 
may even be confined to flow parallel to the plane of the 
fault. It may be premature to describe a fault zone as dry if 
at tunnel or exploratory adit has not completely penetrated 
the feature. 


5 The highest location of seeping joints on a rock slope 
may be important indirect input for preliminary stability 
analysis. Likewise, the depth of a tunnel or its location 
relative to major weakness zones will be important, since 
this may imply potentially serious inflows. 


6 Wherever possible, measurement of water pressure to be 
conducted to assess whether the water inflow is affecting 
the shear strength of joint by outwash of joint filling or 
whether inflow is negligible but the water pressure is 
increasing the support pressure. 


5.7 The potential influence of frost and ice on the 


seepage paths through the rock mass should be 
assessed. Observations of seepage from the surface 
trace of discontinuities may be misleading in 
freezing temperatures. The possibility of ice blocked 
drainage paths should be assessed from the point of 
view of surface deterioration of rock excavation, 
and from the point of view of overall stability. 


6 PRESENTATION OF RESULTS 


6.1 Air photos, geological maps, or plans of suitable 
scale should be marked with arrows to indicate the 
general groundwater flow pattern that has been 
interpreted as a result of available hydrogeological 
data. If appropriate, rainfall and temperature records 
can be appended. 


6.2 Anticipated impermeable flow barriers such as 
dykes, major clay filled discontinuities and 
impermeable beds, should be drawn on simplified 
geological maps and vertical cross-sections, together 
with anticipated groundwater levels. Optimum 
locations for investigatory boreholes (and any 
existing boreholes), should be indicated as 
appropriate. 


6.3 The anticipated mutual interaction of the planned 
engineering project and the assumed groundwater 
flow regime should be described where possible. If 
sufficient data are available for reliable predictions, 
anticipated pre-construction and post-construction 
phreatic surfaces should be sketched. The likely 
effect of extreme weather conditions should be 
indicated if possible. Possible effects of frost and of 
artificial drainage measures should be appended. 


6.4 Local seepage observations for individual 
discontinuities for specific sets, or for the rock mass 
as a whole can be presented as seepage ratings I-VI. 
If enough observations are available, sketches 
showing the distributions of ratings can be 
contoured, drawn as histograms, or, in the case of 
tunnels, presented on longitudinal sections in 
parallel with structural data, in the same way that 
Lugeon values are presented parallel with borehole 


geology. 


IS 11315 (Part 8) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organization, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, 


New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology - ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
DRN. K. SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL ANIL RAJ 


SHRIG. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
M. S. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. K. MOHNOT 
DRR. D. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRIR. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 
PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DR К. К. SINHA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


DR С. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 


Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurugram 

THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 

In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, 
ACE Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida - 201310) 

In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 


New Delhi - 110044) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad - 121001) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 
Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi - 110059) 


In Personal Capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector - 49, Gurugram - 122018) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 11315 (Part 8) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate II) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/ 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CIVIL 
ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (19671). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


