IS 12572 ( Part 9 ) : 1988

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

GUIDE FOR EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
PART 9 METHOD OF TEST FOR SKIN IRRITATION BY SOLID MEDICAL DEVICES

UDC

615'4 : 614'8 : 616-022 : 6165002

DESCRIPTORS : EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES, BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS. SKIN IRRITATION.

@ BIS 1989

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHX 110002 September 1989 Price Group 2

Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee, CPDC 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 9 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 14 September 1988, after the draft finalized by the Medical Glass Instruments and Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. This part ( Part 9 ) of the standard is one of a series of methods of test for assessing the biological hazards of medical devices that directly contact body tissues or substances that arc to be introduced into the body by means other than oral. This part describes a method of test for skin irritation in rabbits of solid medical devices where direct contact with the skin is possible and it should be read in conjunction with Part 2 and 8 of this standard. This standard is proposed to be published in 12 parts. Other parts are as follows: Part 1 Terminology Part 2 Selection of biological methods of test Part 3 Method of testing by tissue implantation Part 4 Method of test for systemic toxicity: Assessment of acute toxicity of extracts from medical devices Part 5 Method of test for intracutaneous reactivity of extracts from medical devices Part 6 Method of test for systemic toxicity: Assessment of pyrogenicity in rabbits of extracts from medical devices Part 7 Methods of test for sensitization: Assessment of potential of medical devices to produce delayed contact dermatitis Part 8 Method of test for skin irritation of extracts from medical devices Part 10 Method of test for dental materials Part 11 Method of test for eye irritation Part 12 Methods of test for toxicity to cells in culture of extracts from medical devices In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 5736 : Part 8 : 1984 `Evaluation of medical devices for biological hazards : Part 8 Method of test for skin irritation of solid medical devices', issued by the British Standards Institution, UK.

IS 12572 ( Part 9 ) : 1988

Indian Standard

GUIDE FOR EVALUATION OF MEDICAL DEVICES FOR BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
PART 9 METHOD OF TEST FOR SKIN IRRITATLON BY SOLID MEDICAL DEVICES

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 9 ) describes a method of test designed to assess the irritation of skin by medical devices in direct contact. 1.2 The test material is applied to the skin for five consecutive days. 1.3 This method of test is recommended where practicable for the initial assessment of devices in Categories C, D and E, ( see Part 2 of this standard ), that is:

a)

b) 4

Curegory C - Those intended for short term ( short-term covers a period from a few minutes to severals weeks continuous use ) use within the body or in contact with the mucosal surfaces, such as, tracheal tubes, urinary catheters, intravenous cannulae. Category D - Those intended to be used in contact with the skin, such as, splints. Category Ea - Those intended to be used to contain or administer substances by means of routes other than those in Category El, such as, eyedrop containers.

2.5 Oedema Tissue reaction characterized by swelling at the application site. 2.4 Test Material The final product or sample of final product that is to be tested. 3 ANIMALS AND HUSBANDRY 3.1 Three albino rabbits of a single outbred strain shall be used. They shall be healthy young adults of either sex weighing not less than 2 kg. 3.2 The animals shall be caged individually and shall have free access to food and water. 4 PREPARATION OF TEST MATERIAL 4.1 Test Material 4.1.1 Test material from pre-sterilized (refers to devices obtained from the manufacturer or supplier and sterilized) devices shall be handled aseptically throughout the test procedure. 4.1.2 Test material from devices that are normally supplied non-sterile but are sterilized before use, shall be sterilized and handled aseptically, throughout the test procedure. 4.1.3 Test material from devices not required to be sterile in use shall be tested as supplied but shall be handled aseptically throughout the test procedure. 4.2 Preparation of Test Material 4.2.1 Prepare samples 25 mm x 25 mm of such a thickness as would approximate to normal use but not greater than 5 mm. 4.2.2 Prepare suitable negative control samples in the same way. 4.2.3 Ideally, the negative control should closely resemble the test material and should have been shown to be non-irritant,
NOTE - Failing the availability of such a material, 4-ply gauze IP may be used.

2 TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Device, Medical Device Any item used in medical treatment, diagnosis or contraception not intended to have a pharmacological action on the body.
2.2 Erythema

Tissue reaction characterized by redness at the application site. 2.3 Es&u Tissue reaction characterized by scab formation at the application site. 2.4 Final Product A medical device in its ready-for-use state.
1

IS 12572 ( Part 9 ) : 1988 5 TEST PROCEDURE 5.1 Preparation of Animals On the day before the test, clip the fur on-the backs of three rabbits close to the skin to permit a sufficient distance on both sides of the spinal column for application and observation of all test sites. Immediately before the application of the test material, abrade the right hand sites of each animal to break partially the stratum corneum. 5.2 Application of Test Material 5.2.1 Apply the samples of the test material directly to the skin on each side of each rabbit as shown in Fig. 1. 5.2.2 Similary, apply the control samples to each rabbit. 5.2.3 If not already moist, moisten the test material and the control with sterile saline. 5.2.4 Cover the application sites with retaining dressings for 23 h. At the end of this time, discard the test and control material and mark the positions of the sites. If necessary, remove residual, materials by appropriate means, for example, washing with warm ( 20 to 23" C ) sterile saline solution and blotting dry, taking care to avoid damaging the skin. 5.2.5 Apply fresh test samples and control samples at the same sites. Repeat these procedures to give a total of five applications over five consecutive days.
5.3 Observation of Animals

5.3.1 Note the appearance of each application __ site ' ! after .the remova' of the sample and ;~~~~t~:e'ey,,`~~~i~~t~o~t application, that is, 5.3.2 Describe and rate the skin reactions of erythema and oedema according to the rating system given in Table 1 for each application site at each time interval and record the results for the test report. Table 1 Rating System for Skin Reaction ( CIause 5.3.2 )
Reaction Eryrhema and Eschar Formation No erythema Very slight erythema ( barely preceptible) Well defined erythema Severe erythema ( beet redness ) to slight eschar formation Oedema Formation No oedema Very slight oedema ( barely perceptible) Well defined oedema ( edges of area well defined by definite raising ) yot;,;e oedema (raised approximately Numerical Rating

Moderate to severe erythema

0 1

2

3 Severe oedema ( raised more than 1 mm and extending beyond exposure area ) 4 skin sites NOTE - Other adverse changes at the shculd be recorded and reported.

TEST IN TACT

F I G.

1 L OCATIONS

OF

SKIN APPIJCATIONS SITPS

IS 12572 ( Part 9 ) : 1988 6 PRESENTATION OF TEST RESULTS 6.1 The results shall be submitted in a test report that includes a complete record of the method of preparation, the procedures folloued and any other relevant data necessary for the assessment of results as described in 7. 7 ASSESSMENT OF RESULTS 7.0 Assessment of the results should be carried out by an experienced person ( preferably a toxicologist ) who is aware of the conditions of use of the final product and has appropriate chemical and biological data concerning it ( see 3.3 and 3.4 of Part 2 of this standard ). 7.1 The overall assessment of test results shall be carried out taking into consideration any difference observed between the abraded and the intact sites, and the test and the control sites. 7.2 If the assessor considers the results to be either inconclusive or invalid, the test shall be repeated using further three animals and fresh samples of the test material.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bsreau of Indian Staudards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the f?urcau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. N O part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference:

Dot : No. CPDC 12 ( 2036 1
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75 Regional Offices :
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

36 24 99 i 2 3 1843 16 41

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMAD.ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.
-_

r 41 24 42 < 41 25 19 14' 29 16
6 32 92 95

Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, lndra

