( Reaffirmed 2002 )

rst8216-1976

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR INSPECTION OF LIFT WIRE ROPES
Lii
Chaitmaa
SEBIV.

and Escalators Sectional Chnmittee, ETDC 46
Re@senting
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi

A. KBI~ENAMVBTEY

Members SHBIK. A. AIVANTEAXUAFCAYANAX ( dltmat~ to Shri V. A. Hrishnamurthy ) Direct;z;eleneral S~BI G. R. BHATU

of Supplies

& Dirposala.

SHB~ ROEEANLat ( Altemaft~) CliIEB BLE(ITBIOAL l!.NoINEXCBRailway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ADDITIONAL Camv EcEomt10~L ENoINEEB ( A~lsraa;c) Public Works & Housing Department, Government &IsB BNoIXJmB ( bJtOTBIOAL ) of Maharashtra, Bombay Directorate of Electricity, Government of West SHBXNIEMALENDU DAMGUPTA Bengal, Calcutta Chisay;trGdrupector, Government of Tamil SHSI MOEAY~D HAF.~EED ELE~TBIO~LIHaPE0%`0E ( TEOHNIO~L 1 ( Almutu ) J. J. Engineerlug Co, Bombay SEEI J. C. PA!iZ&L Central Public Works Department (Architect SESU R. M. PBADEAN Wing), New Delhi Electrical Insuector to Government of Kamataka. S~BI P. V. RAFAAE
BangalorG

.

'

SHBI S. V. RAXNATEKA~ SEEI P. K. BANKA ( Aftmutc ) SRBI S. P. TYA~I SaBIv. K. ~EAHNA(~bYlUt~)
8HBIP.L.vAHI

Electric Construction 24 Parganas Elec;itri Iospectorate,

&

Bquipment Delhi

Co

Ltd,

Administration,

Otis Elevator Co (India) Ltd, Bombay SERI I. T. h'fAZ?SWEANI( Alfmutc ) Engiueer-in-Chief `s Branch, Army Headquarters SIIEI H. R. VEJZBXA Mar G. S. BAJAJ ( Al&mate ) ( Coatimcad on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1976
INDIAN This publication publtha >
reproduction in whole

4;

STANDARDS

INSTI~TION

is protected under the Indian Co&right Ad f XV of 1957) an* or in part by any me801 except with written permi&r%rthe &all be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the aaid Act. ._

IS t 8216 - 1976
( cimrinucdfrom #age 1) Members
SHBI G.J. WILSON SEEI M. KAMATH ( Altcmufc ) SEEIS. P. SAOED~V, Director ( Elec tech) Director General, IS1 ( E@i&

Mrmb )

Sacrstary SEBI M. N. MURTEY Aaaistant Director ( Elec tech ), IS1

IS : 8216 - 1936

Indian Standard
. GUIDE FOR INSPECTION OF LIFT WIRE ROPES
0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was ado ted by the Indii Standards Institution on 26 August 1976, after the dra& 6naIized by the Lifts and Escalators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division
CUUUCil.

0.2 It should be noted that it is not practicable to spell out the inspection procedure for every single type of wire rope installation nor to outline every detail of the inspection procedure. The inspector should use his best judgemertt in making the impection and in selecting his location from which a proper examination of the rope can best be made: 0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing/the result of a test, shall he rounded off in accordance with IS : Z-1960*. ThfJ number of signiticant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this staudard.

1. SCOPE

1

14 kc : his standard provides guidance to the owners for proper inspection of su.@msion, compensation and governor ropes of lifts.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Crown

Wire - A strand on the periphery of the rope.

2.2 Pitch or Length of Lay - The distauce parallel to the axis of the rope ( or strand ), in which a strand ( or wire ) makes one complete helical convolution about the core (or centre). - i'!
*Rules for rounding off numerical'values ( revised). . -17 U

3

3. ROPE LIFE 3.1 Lii rope life depends upon a multitude of factors and may extend over
Although it is quite periods ranging from a few months to several yean. general practice to express life of wire ropes in terms of the time they have been in service, this method is not so accurate a measure as car travel. Here again, car travel is not the same as rope travel as, for example, in 2 : 1 Further, the number of reverse roping, rope travel is twice the car travel. bends has a decided influence on the life of rope. 4. CAUSE OF WEARING OUT OF ROPE

4.1 Wire ropes wear out from two causes:
a) Breakage of the wires, and b) Reduction in area caused by wearing of the outside wires. In normal practice, the former is the more predominant.

5. METHODS OF INSPECTION
5.0 The methods specified in the 5.1 to 5.7, based on field experience, recommended as a guide for the inspection of lift wire ropes. are

5.1 Before

starting inspection, all dirty and overlubricated ropes should be cleaned. A hand lamp with a special clamp which can be anchored with the lift rope may be used for inspection purposes.

5.2 For traction machines, the ropes on counterweight side from top of the car, with the car located at the top of the lift shaft, should be examined.
5.3 For basement drive machine the portions of the ropes leading from the driving machine sheave and from the counterweight to the overhead wheels should be examined from the car top as the car descends. A small portion left shall be examined from the pit. 5.4 A convenient method of indicating the location of the unexamined sections of ropes which should be examined later from the machine room or overhead machinery space or from pit is to mark the rope with a chalk. 5.5 The car should be moved downward one or two metres at a time and rope at each of these stops should be examined. 5.6 It should be noted when broken wires begin to appear. Thereafter, at frequent time intervals .the rate of increase in the number of broken wires should be determined. Any rapid increase inthe number of broken wires is significant, but frequently after a rapid im$&se, the number of broken wires will remain relatively constant for a considerable period of time, ;

lS I I32160 lM6 5.7 The number of broken crown wires in a pitch of lay measured along
the length of a rope should be counted. A pitch of lay may be considered as a section of rope approximately six and one-half times the diameter of the rope. 6. CONDEMNATION

OF ROPES

6.1 For single or double wrapped traction machines discard suspension or
compensating ropes under any one of the following conditions:

4 b) 4

If the broken wires are equally distributed among the strands, when the number of broken wires per pitch of lay in the worst section of rope exceeds the values shown under A in Table I. If four or five wires, side by side, are broken across the crown of any strands, when the number of broken wires per pitch of lay in the worst section of rope exceeds values shown under B of Table 1. If the distribution of broken wires is unequal and broken wires predominate in one or two strands, when the number of broken wires per pitch of lay in the worst section of the rope exceeds the values shown under C of Table 1. If any unfavourable factors, such as corrosion ( red dust or rouge ) , excessive wear of individual wires in the strands, unequal tension, poor sheave grooves, etc, exist and when the number of broken wires exceeds 50 percent of the values indicated in Table 1 for conditions (a), (b) and (c) described above.

4

6.2 The ropes should be discarded whenever their actual diameter drops below the value shown in Table 2.
TABLE 1 NUMBER OF BROKRN WIRES FOR CONDEMNATION
Tmms or WIBE ROPE (1) 6x 19 NUMBEB or BBOKM Wnaa c A (2) 24-30 ("s, (:I ,

8x

19

32-W

12-20 16-24

8.12 lo-16

Nom - The upper limits are wed when inspections are made at least monthly by a competent person. TABLE 2 mm ACFUAL REDUCED, DIAMETEB, mm
NOMIFIALDI-,

REDUCTION
12 14

OF DIAMETERS
16 18 20 25

11.2

13.2

14.8

,r$3.8

18.8

23.4

ISr8216- 1976 6.3 Governor ropes should be inspected and discarded in the manner outlined in 6.1 for suspension and compensating ropes of traction machines.
7. CAUTION 7.1 Breaks in the valleys of the ropes, while infrequent, may be an indication of internal breaks. The ropes should be discarded when the total number of broken wires in the valleys of a rope lay exceeds one. 7.2 A valley break is one in which the outside wire of a strand breaks in the immediate vicinity of the point where it contacts a wire or wires of an adjacent strand, generally at a point not visible when the wire rope is examined externally. In other words, one broken end of the wire is long enough to reach from one valley to the next one and the other end of the break generally cannot be seen. This is not to be confused with a broken outside wire when the original break occurred at a worn crown and a secondary fracture has occurred near the point where two adjacent strands make contact. In this case, a piece of wire has broken out and is missing, and generally both ends of the broken wire remaining are visible. 7.3 It should be noted that where preformed rope is used, greater care is required on inspection in order to detect broken wires which do not protrude from the surface of the rope. 7.4 Internal breakage of wire in ropes is difficult to detect and consequently may be a greater hazard than surface wear. The surface of the rope may show little or no wear, but if the rope is bent over a short radius, the individual wires will snap and in extreme cases the rope wires may be broken by hand. Such failures are more likely to occur in governor and compensating ropes where the ropes are lightly loaded and the ratio of sheave to rope diameter is small. 8. REPLACEMENT 8.1 When replacing suspension and compensating ropes, all ropes in a set should be replaced. All the ropes in the set should be from the same manufacturer and of the same material, grade, construction and diameter and preferably be cut from the same reel.

6

