NAT HA IS 12458 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Ur Na ATT THAN Hy AT 
Raf — aero ag fat 


( Teel JAQ ) 


Fire Resistance of Through 
Penetration Firestops — 
Method of Test 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.50 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2019 Price Group 5 


Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Fire Safety Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in the year 1988, with a view to provide the requirements of fire resistance test 
of firestops intended for use in openings in fire resistance wall and/or floor-ceiling assemblies as horizontal and/ 
or vertical stops. This revision has been brought out on the basis of experience gained over the years and to bring 
the requirements in line with latest developments at international level. 

The following are the significant modifications incorporated in this revision: 


a) The title of the standard has been modified from ‘Method of fire resistance test of firestops’ to ‘Fire 
resistance of through penetration firestops — Method of test’; 

The standard heating condition has been updated by making a reference to IS/ISO 834-1 : 1999 ‘Fire 
resistance tests — Elements of building construction: Part 1 General requirements’; 


b 


wm 


c) Typical locations of thermocouples have been updated with an illustration depicting the same including 
on the unexposed side; 


d) Description of fire resistance rating and test report details have been elaborated; and 
e) The terminology section has also been updated. 


The method of fire resistance test of various structural elements of buildings are covered in various parts of 
IS/ISO 834 with the general requirements specified in IS/ISO 834-1 : 1999. In this standard also, the requirements 
of test equipment have been aligned to IS/ISO 834-1 : 1999. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (revised)’. 


IS 12458 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


FIRE RESISTANCE OF THROUGH PENETRATION 
FIRESTOPS — METHOD OF TEST 


( First Revision ) 
eee IS No. Title 
1.1 This standard specifies the method of test and 903 : 1993 Specification for fire hose delivery 
determination of fire resistance rating of through couplings branch pipe, nozzles and 
penetration firestops of various materials and nozzle spanner (fourth revision) 
construction that are intended for use in openings in 8757:1999 Glossary of terms associated with fire 


fire resistive wall or floor-ceiling assemblies, or both. 


1.2 The standard covers the requirements to expose the 
firestop assembly to a standard time and temperature 
curve as per IS/ISO 834-1 followed by a hose stream 
test. Fire resistance ratings are then provided on the 
following criteria: 


a) Integrity, in terms of the duration of time, the 
firestop resists fire before the first development 
of through opening or flaming on the unexposed 
side, and acceptable performance under hose 
stream test. 


b 


wm 


Insulation performance of the penetration sealing 
system, and acceptable performance under hose 
stream test. 


1.3 This standard does not specify method of test to 
evaluate the influence of inclusion of penetrations and 
sealing systems on the load bearing capacity of the fire 
separating elements nor does it specify method to check 
suitability of firestop assemblies for use after exposure. 


1.4 This standard also does not specify method of 
test to evaluate the ability of the firestop to withstand 
stresses induced by the movement or displacement of 
the penetrants. 


NOTE — A guidance on providing engineering judgement 
based on test is given in Annex A for information only. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS/ISO 834-1 Fire-resistance tests — Elements of 
: 1999 building construction: Part 1 General 
requirements 


safety (first revision) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in 
IS 8757 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Firestop Assembly — Fire stop assembly for 
through penetrations is a combination of firestop 
compatible for use with the penetrant, such as, cables, 
cable trays, conduits, ducts, pipes, etc, and their means 
of support through the wall or opening that together 
restores the fire resistance rating of the fire separating 
elements in terms of its integrity and/or insulation 
properties. 


3.2 Fire Separating Element — Fire resistant floors, 
walls and other separating elements of construction with 
protected opening having fire resistance determined 
in accordance with IS/ISO 834-1, which restrict the 
spread of fire. 


3.3 Penetration — Aperture within a fire separating 
element usually present to accommodate the passage of 
a service through that element. 


3.4 Penetrant (Penetrating Service) — Penetrating 
items like, cables, conduits, pipes, ducts, etc, excluding 
air ventilation systems and fire-rated ventilation ducts, 
smoke extract ducts, fire-rated service ducts and shafts, 
passing through the penetration in fire separating 
element. 


3.5 Penetrant Support — The mechanical support 
provided in the form of clips, ties, hangers, or any 
other device designed to carry the load imposed by the 
penetrants. 


3.6 Test Construction — Complete firestop assembly, 
consisting of the fire separating element, penetrants, 
penetrant support and firestop system. 


4 APPARATUS 


Tests shall be performed using furnace, thermocouples, 
restraint and support frames and other required 
instrumentations as per IS/ISO 834-1 and this standard. 


IS 12458 : 2019 


4.1 Furnace — It shall be capable of subjecting a full 
size specimen individually or in combination with others 
in a fire rated horizontal or vertical structural element 
with fire resistance not less than that of the specimen 
to be evaluated. The periphery of firestop shall not be 
closer than 300 mm or 1.5 times the thickness of the 
test assembly, to the furnace edge, whichever is greater. 
The furnace shall also be capable of reproducing 
standard conditions of heating and pressure. 


4.2 Thermocouples — Thermocouples shall be 
provided for measuring the internal furnace temperature 
and unexposed surface temperature of the firestop 
assembly test construction in conformity with the 
requirements given in IS/ISO 834-1. 


4.3 Pressure Measuring Equipment — Pressure 
measuring equipment coupled with the furnace shall 
be provided in conformity with the requirements of 
IS/ISO 834-1. 


4.4 Hose Stream Equipment — The equipment shall 
be provided to apply hose stream immediately after 
the fire exposure in conformity with the requirement 
of 7.3.2. 


5 TEST CONDITIONS 


All test conditions shall conform to the requirements 
given in IS/ISO 834-1, except where specified otherwise 
in this standard. In case a firestop assembly is intended 
for use in both floors and walls, then each orientation 
shall be tested. 


5.1 Standard Heating Conditions 


Standard heating conditions shall conform to the 
requirements given in 6.1 of IS/ISO 834-1. In addition, 
the requirements specified in this standard shall apply. 
In case of any deviation, the requirements given in this 
standard shall govern. 


5.2 Measurement of Furnace Temperature 


5.2.1 The furnace temperature is deemed to be the 
average of the temperatures recorded by thermocouples 
arranged within the furnace to give an approximation to 
its average temperature. 


5.2.2 The number of thermocouples shall not be less 
than one for each 1.5 m? of surface area of walls and 
floors of the furnace, in which the test specimen of 
through cable fire penetrations firestops are installed. 
In any case, the number of thermocouples shall not be 
less than five. 


5.2.3 The furnace thermometers shall be in accordance 
with IS/ISO 834-1 for the measurement and control of 
furnace temperature. It shall be uniformly distributed 
so as to give a reliable indication of the average gas 
temperature in the vicinity of heated face of the test 
construction. The hot junctions shall be located initially 


in a plane (100 + 10) mm from the exposed face of 
the separating element. In addition, no junction shall 
be closer than 100 mm to any projecting part of the 
seal, a penetrating service or any part of the furnace at 
the start of the test. 


5.2.4 Temperature Distribution within the Furnace 


Atany time after the first 10 min of test, the temperature 
recorded by any thermocouple, shall not differ from 
the corresponding temperature of the standard time 
temperature curve by more than + 100 °C. For specimens 
incorporating a significant amount of combustible 
material, the deviation of any one thermocouple shall 
not exceed 200 °C. 


5.3 Measurement of Temperature at the Unexposed 
Side 


5.3.1 Typical Thermocouple Location 


Temperature measurements are to be made by 
thermocouples placed at each of the following 
locations on the unexposed side of the test sample and 
test assembly, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 


a) Point A — At a point on the surface of the 
test sample, 25 mm from one of each type of 
through-penetrating item employed in the field 
of the through-penetration firestop material. 
Thermocouples are to be covered by a pad, 
however, if the grouping of penetrating items 
through the test sample does not permit use of a 
pad, the thermocouple can be avoided. 


b) Point B — At a minimum of one point on the 
through-penetration firestop material surface at 
the periphery of the test sample. 


c) Point C — At least three points on the through- 
penetration firestop material surface approximately 
equidistant from a penetrating item or group of 
penetrating items in the field of the firestop and 
the periphery. 

d) Point D — At a point on any frame installed 
around the perimeter of the opening. 


e) Point E — Ata point on the unexposed surface of 
the wall or floor assembly at least 0.5 m from any 
opening. 

f) Point F — At one point on each type of through- 
penetrating item. On each type of through- 
penetrating item at a point 25 mm from the 
unexposed surface of the test assembly. When the 
through-penetrating item is insulated or coated 
on the unexposed side, the thermocouple shall be 
located on the exterior surface of the insulation or 
coating. When the insulation or coating does not 
extend the full length of the penetrating item on the 
unexposed side, an additional thermocouple shall 
be installed on the penetrating item 25 mm beyond 
the termination of the insulation or coating. 


UNEXPOSED SIDE 


IS 12458 : 2019 


Fic. 1 TypicAL THERMOCOUPLE LOCATIONS 


g) Temperature measurements can be made at 
locations in addition to those in 5.3.1 for the 
purpose of evaluating the performance of fire 
stops. 


5.3.2 Temperatures shall be measured at intervals of 
10 min or less until a reading exceeding 100 °C has 
been obtained at any one point. Thereafter, the readings 
can be taken more frequently at the discretion of testing 
personnel, but the intervals shall not be less than 5 min. 


5.4 Differential Furnace Pressure Measurements 


The differential pressure at the surface of the test 
assembly shall be measured at every minute frequency. 


5.4.1 The location of the pressure sensor shall be 
identified where they will not be subjected to direct 
impact of flames and exhaust gas convection. 


5.4.2 Horizontal Test Assembly 


Except the first 5 min, the differential furnace pressure 
shall be maintained at minimum of 2.5 Pa at a distance 
of 300 mm from the surface of the horizontal test 
assembly. 


5.4.3 Vertical Test Assembly 


Except the first 5 min, the minimum differential 
furnace pressure of 2.5 Pa shall be maintained at a 
level of 20 mm below the lowest level of the material 
being tested. 


5.5 Instrumentation 


The control, monitoring and recording equipment 
necessary to carry out tests shall be in accordance with 
IS/ISO 834-1, except those noted herein. 


6 TEST SPECIMENS 


6.1 Each type of firestop assembly used as described 
by the construction drawing shall be tested in a higher 
rating fire resisting wall or floor. The penetrating 
items of the test sample shall be such that they extend 
300 + 25 mm from the exposed side and 900 + 25 mm 
from the unexposed side. 


6.2 Each ends of the penetrant are to be covered on the 
exposed side of the test assembly to prevent excessive 
transfer of gases through the test sample. When the 
penetrant is intended to be representative of a closed 
system that is not normally vented or open to the 
atmosphere, the penetrant can also be capped or sealed 
on the unexposed side. Otherwise, penetrant shall not 
be capped or sealed on the unexposed side. 


7 TEST PROCEDURE AND RATING 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 The test methods described in this clause should 
be used to establish the effect of inclusion of fire 
stopped penetration in a fire separating element, on 
the fire resistance of that assembly. The fire may be 


IS 12458 : 2019 


transmitted due to gap between joints of the penetrant/ 
firestop/ fire separating element, opening formed 
within the penetrant/ firestop, rise of temperature on 
the unexposed surface of the separating element in 
the vicinity of the penetrant, etc. These methods of 
transmission of fire should be considered at the time of 
evaluation of performance of the firestop assembly. Any 
failure that could lead to transmission of fire should be 
noted. Based on the test performed according to this 
standard, the fire stop assembly shall be assigned either 
an integrity rating only or both integrity and insulation 
rating (see 7.4). 


7.1.2 The tests shall be performed only using the 
penetrants without the medium it is used for example, 
gases, fluids, etc. For evaluating performance of 
penetrants in service (that is, carrying gases, fluids, etc), 
the applicant should consult with the testing laboratory 
to identify the required tests. 


7.2 Conditioning 


7.2.1 The test construction shall be subjected to 
conditioning in accordance with IS/ISO 834-1, except 
where noted otherwise in this standard. However, with 
some firestop systems it is difficult or impossible to 
achieve such uniformity. Therefore, firestop systems 
shall be eligible for testing when their dampest portion 
has achieved a moisture content corresponding to 
drying to equilibrium with air in the range from 50 to 
75 percent relative humidity at 23 °C. The test specimen 
shall be conditioned for a week. 


7.2.2 The drying of the test specimen may be by natural 
or artificial means and a temperature of 60 °C should 
not be exceeded. 


7.3 Procedure 


7.3.1 The sample shall be tested for the rating period 
and shall withstand fire test without permitting the 
passage of flame on sustained flaming for duration of 
not more than 10 s on the unexposed side of the test 
sample. The transmission of heat resulting in raised 
temperature measured by any thermocouple on the 
unexposed surfaces of firestop shall not be more than 
180 °C above its initial temperature. At the end of 
this test, the same sample shall be subjected to hose 
stream test within 10 min according to the procedure 
given in 7.3.2 and the sample shall not develop any 
opening that would permit a projection of water from 
the stream beyond unexposed side. Alternatively, 
the hose stream test can be performed on a duplicate 
sample subjected to fire test for half the fire rating 
period. 

NOTE — The passage of flame is characterized by ignition 

of cotton, fibre pad (100 mm? x 20 mm thick of mass 


3-4 g conditioned at 100 °C for 30 min) at a distance of 
25 mm, Max. 


7.3.2 Hose Stream Test 


The stream is to be delivered through a 63 mm hose 
and discharged through a stand pipe (see IS 903) with 
water pressure and duration of application as given in 
Table 1. The nozzle orifice shall be 6 m from the centre 
of the exposed surface of the test specimen. The stream 
shall be directed first at one corner of the assembly 
and then at all other parts of the exposed face with 
all changes in directions being made slowly at about 
1-2 m/s. The nozzle shall be moved from side to side to 
slowly cover the entire exposed surface. The direction 
shall be then changed to apply stream at 90° to the 
previous direction of application, by moving the stream 
slowly off the test construction. 


Table 1 Pressure and Duration — Hose Stream Test 
( Clause 7.3.2 ) 


SI Period of Water Duration of 


No. Fire Test Pressure at Application per m? 
t, Min Base of Nozzle of Exposed Area 
kPa S 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) 480>t>240 310 32 

ii) 240>t>120 210 16 

iii) 120>t>90 210 9.7 

iv) t<90 210 6.5 

7.3.3 During the test, the measurement and 


observations shall be made in accordance with 
IS/ISO 834-1 and the provisions of this standard. The 
rating shall be rounded off to the nearest completed 
minute of test in terms of elapsed time between the 
commencement of heating and the time at which the 
integrity and insulation criteria are no longer complied 
with in accordance with this standard. In addition to 
overall rating of the system, reporting of individual 
ratings like integrity rating and insulation rating 
separately shall be permissible. The failure of any 
penetrant or seal incorporated in the firestop assembly 
being evaluated shall constitute failure of that system. 


7.4 Rating 


7.4.1 Integrity Rating 


It is the rating period for which the firestop test 
assembly is able to withstand the fire test without 
allowing the passage of flame or occurrence of flaming 
on the unexposed side of the test sample. Also, the 
tested firestop assembly shall not develop any openings 
upon subjecting to hose stream test, for the rating to be 
valid. 


7.4.2 Insulation Rating 


It is the rating period for which the temperature of the 
firestop test assembly measured by any thermocouple 


on the unexposed surface of the firestop or on any 
penetrant is not more than 180°C above its initial 
temperature. Also, the firestop test assembly shall 
withstand the fire test along with hose stream test, for 
the rating to be valid. 


8 REPORT 


The test report shall include the following information: 
a) Name of the testing laboratory; 
b) Date of test; 


c) Name of the manufacturer and the trade name of 
the product; 


d) Description of the assembly, materials, firestop 
and penetrants, including drawings showing 
exact size of the components, and the location of 
firestops within the test construction, to uniquely 
define and identify that system and the materials; 


e) 


g) 


h) 


IS 12458 : 2019 


Description of the installation procedures 
along with information on service support system 
used; 


Description of the test procedure and test set up 
indicating location ofthermocouples and other 
devices for measurement; 


Measurement (for example, temperature, relative 
humidity, pressure differential between exposed 
and unexposed surface, etc) and observations 
obtained during the test and after the furnace 
fire is extinguished. Observations with respect to 
the behavior of the firestops should include any 
cracks, deformation, flaming, smoke, etc; and 
The ‘integrity rating’ and/or ‘insulation rating’ of 
each firestop assembly, including statement of the 
performance of the firestop system with respect 
to integrity and/or insulation. 


IS 12458 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 1.4) 


GUIDANCE ON PROVIDING ENGINEERING JUDGEMENT 
BASED ON TEST 


A-1 When field conditions differ from original 
design or unanticipated construction hindrances are 
encountered and the field conditions cannot be easily or 
cost effectively redesigned, design recommendations 
are typically made to propose alternative methods 
that ensure performance of the firestop system is not 
compromised. These are referred to as ‘Engineering 
Judgments or EJs’ and are specified below for guidance 
only. Since, these recommendations are not based 
upon identical designs as that which were fire tested, 
it is important that they be developed using sound 
engineering principles and good judgment. 


a) Engineering Judgements (EJs) should not be used 
for situations where a tested system is available. 


b) Only a firestop manufacturer’s qualified technical 
personnel or, fire protection engineer, or an 
independent testing agency that tests and evaluates 
firestop systems can issue EJs. 


c) EJs should be based upon interpolation of 
previously tested firestop systems that are either 
sufficiently similar in nature or clearly bracket 
the conditions upon which the judgment is to 
be given. Additional knowledge and technical 
interpretations based upon accepted engineering 
principles, fire science and fire testing guidelines 
may also be used as further support data. 


d 


wa 


EJs should be accepted only for a single, specific 
job and project location and should not be 
transferred to any other job or project location 
without thorough and appropriate review of all 
aspects of the next job or location’s circumstances. 


e) The test results obtained with separating elements 
of concrete or masonry may be applied to 


8 


h 


J 


= 


= 


wm 


corresponding separating elements of greater 
thickness and density than that tested. The test 
results obtained with separating elements of 
lightweight concrete may be applied to concrete 
or masonry elements of greater thickness than that 
tested. 


The test results obtained with firestop systems 
tested in vertical separating elements should 
not be used to assess performance in horizontal 
elements and vice-versa. The anticipated effects 
of the expansion, contraction or deflection of 
structural members (floors, walls, etc) to which 
the firestop sealing systems are to be attached 
should be considered in a complete evaluation 
of fire performance. Additional support (if any) 
provided to the structural members should reflect 
the actual condition(s). 


The test results obtained using pipes apply only to 
the material type (combustible/non-combustible), 
the nominal outside diameter, the nominal wall 
thickness, the number and the type of the pipes 
that were tested. The risk of fire propagation 
varies with the piping material used. 


The test results obtained using cables apply only 
to the number, size and type of cables tested. The 
test results may be applied to single cable with 
smaller diameter or smaller number of cables in a 
bundle than tested. 


For providing EJs and for quality control, it 
should be necessary to conduct material property 
tests like specific heat, thermal conductivity, etc 
(in the temperature range associated with fires) in 
addition to fire resistance tests. 


IS 12458 : 2019 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Safety Sectional Committee, CED 36 


Organization 
In personal capacity (K-33, Green Park, New Delhi) 


Advance Firetec and Research Lab Pvt. Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre For Fire Explosive & Environment Safety, 
Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation, Navi 
Mumbai 


Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 

Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate of Fire & Emergency Services, Panaji 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Fire and Security Association of India, Gurugram 


Fire Safe India Foundation, Mumbai 


FM Engineering International Limited, Bengaluru 
Fyrprotek (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 

New Delhi 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hilti India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri S. K. DHERI (Chairman) 


SHRI S. K. NANDI 
SHRIMATI INDU SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TANDLE 


Dr Suvir SINGH 
Suri A. A. ANSARI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
SHRI SHAM SUNDER GARG (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. WADHWA 


Suri J. P. K. Hepat 


SHRI ARVIND MANDKE 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI PAPIYA SARKAR 
Ms. RAsHMI BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI S. RADHA 
Lt Cor M. S. HAKKAPAKKI (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI NARESH KAUL 
Suri R. B. BHUTDA (Alternate) 


Suri K. P. Dominic 
SHRI NEERAJ SEHGAL (Alternate) 


SHRI MILINDKUMAR DESHMUKH 


SHRI SRIKANTH Y AJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KRISHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


Suri D. P. NANDA 
Suri R. P. SincH (Alternate) 


SHRI BRIJBHUSAN SINGH 
Ms KAMALIKA KUNDU (Alternate) 


Suri S. C. MEHROTRA 
SHRI SITARAM AGGARWAL (Alternate 


IS 12458 : 2019 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India), New Delhi 


J & K Fire and Emergency Services, Srinagar 


Johnson Controls (1) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Karnataka Fire Services, Bengaluru 


Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, New Delhi 


Military Engineer Services (E-in-C’s Branch), 
New Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 


National Association of Fire Officers (NAFO), 
Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 
Pacific Fire Controls, Delhi 


Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Reliance Refineries Limited, Jamnagar 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services Department, 
Chennai 


Techno Fire Protection Services Pvt. Ltd, Pune 
The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


Telangana Fire Services, Hyderabad 


U.P. Fire Services, Lucknow 


West Bengal Fire Services, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


SHRI U. S. CHILLAR 
Suri M. S. ParyaL (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MUZUMDAR 
SHRI Nitin Rastoai (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri K. K. MITRA 
SHRI SANJEEV ANGRA (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Suri S. S. Warıck (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. SHAMI 


SHRI S. C. GUPTA 
Suri B. R. GADEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY AGARWAL 
Lt CoL SRIRAM SOMANCHI (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR JHA 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR ARORA 
SHRI DAKSH Arora (Alternate) 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI VARADENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 
FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri M. SHAHUL HAMEED 
SHRIMATI MEENAKSHI VIJAYAKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri D. G. KOIMATTUR 
Ar. VIJAY GARG 


SHRI C. LAKSHMI PRASAD 
Suri V. PAPAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN SHARMA 


REPRESENTATIVE 


IS 12458 : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (B-152, F' Floor, East of SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 
Kailash, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (D-317, II" Floor, Nirman Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


In personal capacity (274, Tapovan Senior Citizens SHRI T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ARUN KUMAR 
ScıEnTIsT ‘D’ (CrviL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 36 (12607). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


