eT d TT Ah IS 17893 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ah nA freer — fife RaT 


Work Permit System — Code of 


Practice 
ICS 13.100 
© BIS 2023 
AA gier Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HITS ST, 9 sre Tet ME AH AM, ay feet - 110002 
Vs” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in | www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 15 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had ben approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Work permit means a certified procedure for allowing certain work to be carried out in a fixed place and during 
a given period of time. It is also a procedure authorizing entry to certain facilities. It provides a check list for a 
systematic method of risk assessment, warns the residual hazards in the job, and outlines the precautions to be 
taken while carrying out the job to achieve the stated objectives. It provides responsibility for the persons who 
are accountable for authorizing the work and ensuring that the workplace is safe. It establishes safe working 
conditions for carrying out any maintenance/repair/inspection work, and to serve as an official record of those 
established conditions as requirements agreed upon by the issuer and acceptor of the permit. 


Work permit is used to authorize routine/non-routine work to be carried out. It clearly explains the precautions 
to be taken to ensure safety of personnel, installations and environment while performing the job. 


This standard provides guidance for preparation of work permit for work areas whose activities are restrictive in 
nature such as 'cold work’, ‘hot work’, 'radiography’ etc. There is no international standard on this subject. 
During preparation of the standard, considerable assistance has been taken from the documents/checklists/ 
proformas already in use in India and accepted by agencies such as Directorate of Factories Act of various state 
government, AERB and etc. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex H. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
WORK PERMIT SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes work permit for the 
following work areas: 


a) Cold work permit; 

b) Hot work permit; 

c) Confined space/vessel entry permit; 
d) Excavation permit; 

e) Electrical work permit; 

f) Work at height permit; and 

g) Radiography 


1.2 In general, Work permit procedure is applicable 
to all restricted areas in the plant or unit. However, 
Work permit may not be applicable for the 
following areas/activities: 


a) Routine welding/cutting and similar 
maintenance/fabrication jobs carried out 
inside or adjacent to any plant unit 
workshops and central workshops or the 
area demarcated/allotted by the approval of 
the facility in-charge; 


b) Routine sampling for the purpose of 
laboratory analysis; 


c) Canteen for cooking, preparing tea/food, 
etc; 


d) Torches, furnaces, sparking equipment, etc 
located in designated locations of 
laboratory; 


e) Collection of garbage from specified safe 
locations in the plant area; 


f) All cold jobs in office buildings including 
control room buildings. However, jobs 
requiring electrical isolation, work at 
height and excavation, etc in these areas 
will require work permit; 


g) Visual inspection by maintenance or 
inspection personnel of rotary or static 
equipment in the plant; 


h) Replacement of tube light rods inside 
buildings. Verbal permission from shift 
in-charge/area in-charge is to be obtained 
before starting the job. Replacement of 
bulbs on poles inside plant areas and on 
roads requires permit; 


j) Gardening related manual jobs like grass 
cutting with hand cutter, branch trimming 
cutting, etc around office buildings, control 
room buildings, plant areas, non-plant 
areas. However for jobs requiring electrical 
connection like lawn movers, mechanized 
hacksaw machine, and work at height like 
climbing on tree and excavation more than 
30 cm deep will require respective work 
permit; and 


k) Any other routine activities authorized by 
the facility in-charge by a separate 
notification. 


2 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR WORK 
PERMIT 


2.1 The process of work permit involves adherence 
to specific procedures for issuance of work permit, 
compliance of agreed conditions in the permit 
during work execution and closure of permit when 
the job is completed. 


2.2 The process involves different category of 
people in connection with work permit such as: 
issuer, acceptor/executor, area in-charge, area 
operator/technician, gas tester, maintenance 
technician/contract supervisor, etc. 


2.3 The issuer is responsible for and controls the 
entire work permit process. 


2.4 Work Permit is to be made in triplicate. The first 
copy is the acceptors/executors copy, and the 
acceptor shall display his copy at the job location to 
make the area personnel aware of the job in progress 
and is readily available for audit. The issuer retains 
the second copy for control of work activities and 
for record purpose and the third copy is for safety 
department. 


2.5 A request for work permit comes from either the 
issuer or the acceptor. The issuer is normally the 
shift in-charge of the operations area and the 
acceptor is the person who carries out the work and 
has responsibility for the execution of work. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


2.6 Before filling up necessary details in the work 
permit, the issuer and acceptor jointly make a risk 
assessment of the job and agree on the following: 


a) Specific procedures to be adopted during 
executing the job; 


b) Preparations required before the actual job 
is carried out; and 


c) Special needs like personal protective 
equipment (PPE), etc. 


2.7 If the work is to be continued beyond the 
specified hours, further continuation of work or 
renewal of work for next day is allowed based on 
approval of specific authorities and the type of work. 


2.8 The work can be stopped at any moment of time 
if work conditions are not conducive or if the work 
conditions deviate from the requirements in the 
work permit. 


2.9 Plant authorities are required to train the 
employees in the work permit procedures to take up 
various roles as identified in the procedure. 


3 DETAILS OF WORK PERMITS FOR 
DIFFERENT WORKS 


3.1 Cold Work 


3.1.1 Cold Work is an activity, which is not likely to 
produce sufficient heat capable of igniting 
flammable gases. Annex A shall be followed to issue 
cold work permit. 


3.1.2 Examples of Cold work are as follows: 
a) Erection/removal of scaffolding; 
b) Insulation of equipment/pipelines; 
c) Painting — All painting of equipment or 


pipelines or buildings at temperatures 
below 50 °C; 


NOTE — Pressure spray painting requires a hot work 
permit. 


d) Routine instrument repairs/troubleshooting 
that do not involve process isolation or 
work on process trips; 


e) Equipment greasing and lubrication; 
f) Condition monitoring of rotary equipment; 
g) Tests to be carried out by maintenance 


personnel or any other external agency 
other than the operating personnel; 


h) Work on equipment like DCS panel, UPS, 
invertors; 


j Excavation, digging, road cutting, 
removing soil, chipping and grading to a 
depth less than 30 cm deep, either using 
mechanical equipment or manually; 


k) Work at height-any work at or above 1.8 m 
above ground level, where permanent 
platform and guard railing are not 
provided; 


m) Hydro-jetting; 


n) Online sealing (only fermenting job-no 
drilling); 


p) Sand blasting; 


q) Use of portable electric tools and 
appliances in areas other than plant 
operating areas; 


r) Use of vacuum cleaners/other gadgets 
requiring power supply in areas other than 
plant operating areas; and 


s) All inspection and test work performed by 
employees other than those assigned to 
operate the equipment. 


3.2 Hot Work 


3.2.1 Hot work is any type of work which produces 
heat/spark capable of igniting any flammable or 
combustible material. Annex B shall be followed to 
issue Hot Work Permit. 


3.2.2 Examples of hot work are as follows: 


a) Welding, grinding, burning, soldering, 
brazing, blasting, gas cutting, chipping by 
spark-producing tools, use of open flames, 
tar melting, electrical arc of any kind and 
any other equipment which may create a 
source of ignition, use of hot plates; 


b) Hacksaw cutting on equipment, line or 
vessel of hydrocarbon services; 


c) Any equipment, line or vessel which 
contained any explosive, corrosive or toxic 
material and removed from service for 
cleaning, repairing, maintaining, 
reclaiming or discarding in and around 
workshop to a location where “Hot Work” 
is already permitted; 


d) Use of Non-flame proof electrical 
equipment like cameras, mobile phones, 
non-intrinsically safe radio pagers, etc use 


of certain power driven tools like 
pneumatic concrete breaker, use of 
equipment operated by internal 
combustion engines, etc inside hazardous 
areas; 


e 


wm 


On line leak sealing (if includes hot work 
like drilling, etc) in pipelines and 
equipment, hot tapping involving welding 
and drilling in pipelines, and pressure spray 
painting; and 


f) The following jobs though not qualify as hot 
jobs as per definition, require hot work 
permit: 


1) Work involving radioactive sources: 
The isolation or restoration of a 
radioactive source including the use of 
mobile X-ray/radiography equipment. 


2) Work beneath or adjacent to un- 
insulated electrical power cables (for 
example, LT, HT lines) within 3.0 m 
radial distance. 


3.3 Confined space/Vessel entry 


3.3.1 A confined space is defined as an area which 
is not designed for continuous human occupancy. It 
is large enough for a person to bodily enter in the 
area and perform the assigned work. It has got 
limited or restricted means for entry and exit and 
may or may not be enclosed. Annex C shall be 
followed to issue confined space entry permit. 


3.3.2 Confined space is subjected to potential 
hazards, namely, accumulation of toxic or 
flammable gas/vapour, inert gas, oxygen deficiency 
(< 20 percent v/v), flooding of liquid, steam or any 
other hazardous substance or development of 
hazardous conditions. 


3.3.3 Some of the examples of confined spaces are 
as follows: 


a) Tanks, columns, reactors, oil/water sewer 
pits, coolers, condensers, reservoirs, pipe 
lines, tanker trucks, skirts of column and 
vessels, floating roof decks, ducts, pits, 
tunnels, etc; and 


b) This also includes column skirts, large 
diameter pipelines, storage tanks, spheres, 
bullets, bins, silos, sumps, trenches, pits, 
sewers, furnaces, flare stacks, gas turbine 
chambers, underground service lines, work 
in open type vessel deeper than head level, 
boiler drums, surface condensers, flue 
ducts, Heating ventilation and air 
conditioning ducts, false ceilings and 
floors, deck of floating roof tank etc, 
where deficiency of oxygen or presence of 
toxic/flammable gases is likely and/or the 


IS 17893 : 2023 


access is difficult during 
maintenance/inspection work. 


3.4 Excavation 


For carrying out excavation of ground/soil below 
30 cm, a separate permit that is excavation permit 
shall be issued. Annex D shall be followed to issue 
excavation permit. 


3.5 Electrical Work 


For carrying out electrical work, positive isolation of 
electrical energy of power driven equipment is 
essential. A separate permit that is electrical work 
permit shall be issued for the electrical work. 
Annex E shall be followed to issue electrical work 
permit. 


3.6 Work at Height 


Work Permit shall be issued for jobs involving 
work at height greater than 1.8 m. A separate 
permit that is, working at height permit shall be 
issued for working at height. Annex F shall be 
followed to issue working at height permit. 


3.7 Radiography 


For jobs of radiography on pipelines/equipments, 
isolation and restoration of radioactive source is 
essential. A separate permit that is radiation permit 
shall be issued for works related to radiography. 
Annex G shall be followed to issue radiation permit. 


4 DETAILS AND PROCEDURE FOR WORK 
PERMIT FORMATS 


4.1 The work permit format contains several 
sections and provides a checklist for the issuer and 
the acceptor to identify different hazards associated 
with the work and what precautions and procedures 
need to be followed in carrying out the job in a safe 
manner. Details of different items in the various 
sections of the permit are as follows: 


4.1.1 Job Particulars 


The following details relevant to the work are filled 
in this section: 


a) Plant — The manufacturing unit or a plant 
or a non-process facility; 


b) Area/Section — Part of the facility 
belonging to a plant or unit; 


c) The work permit to be issued to the 
person/agency who are entrusted to carry 
out the work; 


d) Date and time; 


IS 17893 : 2023 


e) The work permit must bear the 
person(s)/employee(s) name and 
designation with his department/discipline. 
No permit should be issued directly to the 
contractors; 


f) Equipment tag no. and equipment 
name — The designated number and name 
as per the equipment master list and easily 
identifiable by all people involved in the 
work execution; 


g) Specific limitations of the work permit; 


h) Specific instructions to work permit holder, 
if any; 


j) Job description — The details of work 
relating to maintenance, construction, 
inspection, etc to be carried out. The work 
permit is to be worded such that it is limited 
to specific equipment or area only and 
clearly defining the job required to be done; 
and 


k) Name of contractor — If a contractor is 
planned for carrying out the job, the name 
of the contractor is to be mentioned by the 
person who is executing the job. 


4.1.2 Nature of Job 


4.1.2.1 Identifying the nature of work helps to 
decide the appropriate precautionary measures to be 
taken during the work progress. 


4.1.2.2 Select the nature of the job mentioned in hot 
work and vessel entry permit (whether the job is 
flame producing, spark producing or vessel entry). 
If it is not specified under these natures of work then 
select other with mentioning the activity. 


4.1.3 Checklists 


4.1.3.1 Process equipment normally handles 
hazardous substances under various operating 
conditions like high temperature and high pressure. 
Jobs/equipment need to be made safe from potential 
hazards present due to nature of work, working 
conditions or due to hazardous tools used before 
work can be started. 


4.1.3.2. In cases involving road repair or 
excavations etc, access by emergency services may 
be hindered and it is necessary that these services 
are informed before such work is carried out. 


4.1.3.3 Authorized procedures should be in place for 
work involving hydro jetting, hot tapping, 
excavation, etc and compliance of these procedures 
ensure safe execution of the job. 


4.1.3.4 Before issuing the work permit the 
authorized area-in-charge must ensure that the 
equipment or area involved is safe to proceed with 
the work and no hazard could be created on the work 
to be done. 


4.1.3.5 The following checklist identifies the various 
preparations required to carry out the work safely. 


4.1.4 Isolation/Blinding 


4.1.4.1 The process isolations can be achieved by the 
following methods: 


a) By closing isolation valve tight shut and 
keeping drain/vent valve open between the 
equipment and isolation valve; 


b) By closing the double block valves and 
keeping the in between bleed system open; 


c) By closing isolation valve tight shut and 
inserting blind of same classification as the 
pipeline or the equipment; 


d) By physical disconnection of pipelines 
attached to the equipment and blinding the 
open end (live end); and 


e) By closing the motor operated valve 
(MOV) and isolating power supply to the 
drive motor of MOV. 


4.1.4.2 Isolation methods in item (a) and (b) of 
4.1.4.1 are not reliable and should not be adopted for 
jobs involving hot work, entry into confined 
space/vessel and for the services of hazardous 
chemicals. 


4.1.4.3 Positive isolation by slip blinding (item c of 
4.1.4.1) is required for cold work if the work is to be 
resumed after a break or is planned for longer 
duration (more than one day). 


4.1.4.4 AII open lines have to be end blinded where 
equipment is to be removed from site and sent for 
repairs. 


4.1.4.5 Effective process isolations have to be 
ensured by issuer depending upon nature and 
duration of work. 


4.1.4.6 If the isolation valves are not passing, 
isolation by closing the valves may be sufficient for 
jobs like breaking lines for strainer cleaning, 
preventive maintenance jobs on pumps, changing of 
gauges on process equipment, etc. Issuer should 
decide whether such isolation is adequately safe or 
not. 


4.1.4.7 Job involving hot work or entry into confined 
space, positive isolation by insertion of slip blinds, 


or physical disconnection and blinding live ends are 
necessary. 


4.1.5 Isolation /"DO NOT OPERATE"TAG 


4.1.5.1 All isolations should carry isolation tags 
marked “DO NOT OPERATE" and a record of 
tagging and removal should be maintained. 


4.1.5.2 All isolation tags shall be removed after 
completion of work and closure of the work permit. 


4.1.5.3 Area operator/issuer is responsible for 
securely attaching the isolation tags to the 
equipment/valves, etc and for removing the same 
after the work is over. 


4.1.6 Depressurization/Draining 


For the jobs on pipelines, tanks, etc the operating 
department will arrange for depressurization, 
draining, cleaning or purging, etc. All equipment 
must be  depressurized and made free of 
hydrocarbon, toxic, flammable gases by following 
approved procedures. It must be ensured that no 
traces of such material are trapped in isolated 
pockets. 


4.1.7 Washing/Steaming/Purging 


4.1.7.1 It may be required to decontaminate intended 
equipment completely by washing off with cold/hot 
water, steaming or purging with inert gas and/or air 
as necessary. 


4.1.7.2 The equipment service, nature of work and 
requirement of safe conditions for job will determine 
the extent of washing/steaming and purging. 


4.1.7.3 The approved procedures for washing, 
steaming and purging should be followed by the 
issuer of the permit before work can be started. 


4.1.8 Electrical Isolation and Restoration 


Procedure for electrical work permit to be followed. 
Electrical work permit number (with date) to be 
mentioned at appropriate place in the permit. 
Tagging to be done by all agencies as per procedure. 


4.1.9 Mechanically Blocked to Avoid Rotation 


For jobs on rotating equipments the rotor or any 
other rotating part must be completely stopped 
before working on it. 


4.1.10 Use of Non-sparking Tools Required 


To be ensured for the job on equipment/piping used 
for hydrocarbon service till it is totally 
decontaminated. For maintenance work on 


IS 17893 : 2023 


hydrocarbon services the requirement to be 
mentioned by the permit issuer. 


4.1.11 Necessary arrangement for preventing 
ignition sources/sparks coming in contact with 
combustibles/hydrocarbons should be made (for 
example, cage using fire resistant blankets). 
Welding/gas cutting or grinding operations generate 
sparks/hot slag which spread in surrounding area 
and may lead to fire or explosion. 


4.1.11.1 Adequate fire protection measures should 
be specified to avoid spread of sparks by confining 
work activities and arresting sparks locally. 
Additional fire protection measures like wetting the 
nearby area by spraying water or wet fire blanket can 
be specified. 


4.1.12 Surrounding area, hot lines, valve glands, 
flange joints, sewer openings should be checked and 
covered with fire resistant blankets. If sewers/drain 
channels containing hazardous/flammable liquids/ 
vapor, steam condensate, hot liquids, etc exist near 
the work area, these are required to be covered 
effectively for the following: 


a) To avoid potential exposure of the working 
persons to any health hazards; 


b) To avoid fire hazards due to 
sparks/welding slag released during hot 
Work; and 


c) To avoid hazardous vapor being sucked 
into confined space/vessel, in case of work 
involving entry into confined space/vessel, 
etc. 


4.1.12.1 Necessary temporary Cross 
over/barricading should be provided to prevent 
working persons falling into drain/sewer during 
work. 


4.1.13 Portable Fire Extinguisher Provided 


Wherever hot work is carried out, appropriate fire 
extinguisher should be made available in work area. 


4.1.14 Running Water Hose Provided 


If hot work is carried out in a hazardous area, 
firewater hose connected to fire hydrant is to be kept 
ready so that it can be used when emergency arises. 


4.1.15 Return Earthing Cable Should be 
Provided and Welding Cable should be Insulated 


4.1.15.1 To prevent any electrical shock injury to the 
persons using electrical welding machine or any 
such equipment, these equipment must be positively 
earthed/grounded for return/residual current. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


4.1.15.2 Electrical engineer/technician must certify 
that the welding machine/equipment has been 
properly grounded/earthed. 


4.1.16 Ladder 


Proper portable ladder  provided/Suitable 
scaffolding to be provided-while working at height, 
where no permanent platforms are available, 
ladders, temporary fixed/moveable 
platforms/scaffoldings must be provided, in no case 
make-shift arrangement like drums, etc should be 
made. Specify the appropriate type of ladder to be 
used as per the work at height procedures. These 
include aluminum, wooden, FRP, trestle, roof 
ladder, rope ladder, telescopic and extension 
ladders. Scaffoldings-Specify the appropriate type 
of scaffolding to be used as per the work at height 
procedures. These include tubular scaffolding. 
Bamboo scaffoldings are not allowed. 


4.1.17 Scaffolding Certified for Use 


Scaffolding should be certified before use and 
suitable identification tags to be provided. 


4.1.18 Radioactive Source Isolation 


If radioactive source is present on or nearby 
equipment where maintenance work is to be 
performed, the radioactive source should be isolated 
before such a work is started. If isolation is not 
possible, the source must be physically removed. 


4.1.19 Welding/gas cutting or grinding operations 
generate  sparks/hot slag which spread in 
surrounding area and may lead to fire or explosion. 
Adequate fire protection measures should be 
specified to avoid spread of sparks by confining 
work activities and arresting sparks locally. 
Additional fire protection measures like wetting the 
nearby area by spraying water or wet fire blanket can 
be specified. 


4.1.20 Escape Route should be Checked and 
Cleared 


Before any work permit is issued especially for hot 
work, confined space/vessel entry, the issuer to 
ensure that safe escape route is available. There 
should not be any obstacles or hindrance in the 
escape route. 


4.1.21 Ventilation should be Ensured 


For jobs in confine spaces the additional air supply 
to be made using either air hose/air mover/air 
blower. Isolation/blinding of nearby nitrogen line is 
to be ensured. 


4.1.22 Proper Illumination Should be Available 
(24 V Flame Proof, Hand Lamp) 


For jobs in confined spaces only 24 V Flame proof 
hand lamp to be used. If lighting is required for any 
job involving release of flammable vapours or work 
is carried out in a hazardous area, it is mandatory to 
use flameproof electrical equipment. Only 
flameproof 24 V electric hand lamp shall be used. 
Use of 230 V hand lamps inside confined 
space/vessel is prohibited. 


4.1.23 After completion of preparation for vessel 
entry “OK to enter Tag” is to be displayed by issuer 
on manhole. 


4.1.24 Stand by Person/Fireman 


A trained standby person must be always available 
at manhole of the tank during confined space entry. 
Requirement of standby fireman is to be decided by 
control room shift in-charge. For all work 
involving confined space/vessel entry, one person 
is required to be on guard outside the confined 
space/vessel, for help or in case of any distress call 
raised by persons working inside. It is the duty of 
the standby person to arrange for the rescue or raise 
the call for help. In case a hot work is carried out in 
a hazardous area, one person trained in fire-fighting 
should be posted near the work area. The permit 
issuer provides the necessary standby persons for 
above cases. The name of such standby persons 
should be mentioned in the work permit. 


4.1.25 Special precaution as follows are to be taken 
against release of oil, gas or solven/others. 


4.1.25.1 If any additional job preparations are 
required and are not covered in the above 
procedures, the same should be specified here. 


4.1.25.2 One example is specification of special 
gadgets like fall arrest system; distress alarms, etc 
for work inside deep vessels and columns. 


4.1.25.3 Any other special precaution and/or 
procedure to be followed by the person(s) doing the 
work must be clearly mentioned and explained. 


5 PERSONAL PROTECTION EQUIPMENT 


All employees are required to wear safety helmet, 
safety goggles, hand gloves and safety shoes as 
personal protection equipment (PPE) in their work 
areas. Additional PPEs are to be specified by the 
issuer depending upon nature of work and hazards 
involved in the work. The agency undertaking the 
job will do arrangement for protective appliances. 


5.1 Hand Gloves 


Persons are expected to use cotton hand gloves 
during any work activity for protection of hands 
from minor injuries. However, special hand gloves 
are specified for protection of hands from injuries 
due to contact with hazardous substances, electrical 
shock, heat or fire during work. 


5.2 Ear Protection 
To be used for the work in high noise areas. 


5.3 Face Shield 


Face shields are to be specified as additional PPE for 
protection of eyes and/or face against potential 
splash of hazardous substances/ chemicals. 


5.4 Full Body Double Lifeline Safety Harness 


Safety belt with lifeline is a fall arrest device. Only 
full body safety harness with double lifelines to be 
used. It is to be specified in case persons are 
required to work from a height of 1.8 m or above 
on unprotected surfaces/structures or fragile roofs. 
The lifeline is to be anchored with a secured 
structure. 


5.5 Body Protection (Specify Type) 


Persons are required to use appropriate protective 
suit for hazardous work for protection against 
potential splash of chemicals, excessive heat, fire, 
hot substances, cryogenic liquids or other hazardous 
substances. 


The following protective suits are to be specified as 
necessary for safe execution of work: 


a) PVC suit (with/or without hood) — For 
protection against potential splash of 
chemicals; 


b) Aluminized glass fibre suit — For 
protection against excessive heat, fire; 


c) PVC suit/hood with airline — To work in 
contaminated atmosphere and provide 
protection against contact of chemicals as 
well as respiratory protection; and 


d) Cold suit — To work inside 
chambers/storage area having very low 
operating temperature, for protection 
against excessive cold temperatures. 


5.6 Foot/Leg Protection 
Specific foot protection (other than safety shoes) 


against heat, chemical splash or any other hazard to 
be mentioned by issuer. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


5.7 Online air Breathing Apparatus 


Jobs involving chemical vapors/dust must be done 
by wearing on line air mask. Requirement needs to 
be mentioned by issuer. 


5.8 Airline Mask/SCBA/Cartridge Gas Mask 


5.8.1 Different types of respirators are used for 
respiratory protection against toxic gas, vapor, 
fumes, etc. These are airline mask, self-contained 
breathing apparatus (SCBA), cartridge gas mask, 
etc. 


5.8.2 Where a person is likely to be exposed to toxic 
substances during work either in open or in confined 
space, appropriate respiratory protection is required 
to be specified. Respiratory protection is also 
required where work environment is inert or oxygen 
concentration is less than 20 percent. 


5.8.3 Cartridge gas mask is not suitable for use in 
work environment deficient in oxygen or containing 
inert gases. Cartridge gas masks are used as 
respiratory protection in environment containing 
low concentrations of contaminants and the 
concentrations are known. 


5.8.4 Persons required to use respiratory equipment 
must be trained and validated. 


5.9 Dust Mask 


Dust mask is specified where persons are likely to 
be exposed to hazardous dust/fibrous particles. 


6 GAS TEST 


6.1 Gas test for oxygen content, hydrocarbon 
content and toxic content (if vessel/tank used for 
chemicals, toxic in nature) are to be carried out by 
the permit issuer for carrying jobs covered under hot 
work and vessel entry, for entry into excavated pits 
and vehicle entry inside plant area. The name and 
time of the person-carrying test shall be mentioned 
in the respective permits. It is proposed to carryout 
gas test for hydrocarbon content within 5.0 m radius 
of the work location for welding jobs (including 
drain channels (if any) and close to flange 
joints/valve glands of adjacent equipment). In case 
of spark producing activity effective arrangement 
for prevention of ignition sources coming into 
contact with combustibles/hydrocarbons should be 
made by providing booths/cage made of fire 
resistant materials. 


6.2 Permissible Values of Gas Test Results 


If any gas test indicates presence of flammable, toxic 
gas or vapor or oxygen deficiency, corrective 


IS 17893 : 2023 


actions have to be taken to make conditions safe for 
carrying out work before issuing of work permit. 


a) Oxygen content — Min 19.5 percent; 


b) Hydrocarbon content [percent low 
exposure limit (LEL)]-Zero; and 


c) Toxic content — Below threshold limit 
value (TLV) of the chemical for which the 
equipment/tanks being used. 


NOTE — Oxygen test results greater than 23 percent 
indicate oxygen enrichment of the atmosphere and 
this condition is extremely hazardous. 


6.3 Reporting of Gas Test results 


6.3.1 The gas test should be done prior to issuance 
of work permit to the acceptor and be repeated just 
prior to starting of hot work, or confined 
space/vessel entry. 


6.3.2 The results should be reported by plant 
personnel authorized by plant HOD/area in-charge. 


6.3.3 As per the work conditions and the type of 
work being carried out, it is necessary to do the gas 
tests at regular intervals. The issuer decides the 
frequency of testing and the type of gases to be 
tested. 


6.3.4 Gas tests should be done at every renewal and 
revalidation of the work permit. 


7 APPROVALS 


7.1 Upon compliance as per the points in the 
checklists or any other special precautions/ 
procedures (that is, gas test, etc) the permit will be 
finally approved by issuer and the job executor. 
Plant HOD shall authorize hot work and vessel 
entry permits and excavation permits. Job executor 
shall mention the name of contractor if contractor 
is performing the job. 


7.2 Issuer 


7.2.1 In operating plant areas the shift in-charge 
shall issue the permit for the area under his 
jurisdiction. For the jobs on pipelines the 
product/utility supplier shall initiate (issue) the 
permit if the work is to carried out up to the battery 
limit of receiving plant. Inside battery limit the 
receiving plant shall issue permit after confirming 
due safety precautions at suppliers end. The issuer is 
an employee of the company. No person can issue 
work permit to himself. 


7.2.2 All HODs can authorize personnel working 
under them to issue the permit for the area under his 
jurisdiction. A list of employees who are authorized 


to issue permit shall be maintained in all 
plants/areas. 


7.2.3 The issuer has the following responsibilities: 


a) The issuer is responsible for and controls 
the entire work permit process; 


b) The issuer shall ensure that necessary 
equipment preparation has been completed 
and adequate safety measures have been 
taken. He shall mention any special safety 
precautions and PPE to be used by way of 
an independent risk assessment for difficult 
jobs and jobs which are being done for the 
first time and not so frequent; 


C) A separate Work permit shall be issued for 
equipment blinding, disconnection, 
erection of scaffolding/temporary work 
platform, etc. before a permit is issued for 
actual job execution; 


d) The issuer of the Work permit should 
ensure that relevant check sheets as 
specified in the permit with respect to job 
have been identified and completed; 


e) The incoming shift engineer/shift in-charge 
shall review the ongoing work permits and 
if conditions are not conducive or violated, 
he can stop the ongoing work; 


f) The issuer is responsible for getting the 
approvals of plant/area in-charge before 
the permit is given to the acceptor; and 


g) The issuer should sign the work permits 
that have been closed and handed over to 
him. 


Only radiography Permit (see Annex G) shall be 
issued by supervisory employee under whom the 
radiography contractor is working. 


7.3 Executor 


7.3.1 HODs from the maintenance, inspection, 
construction or any other engineering services 
departments can authorize personnel working under 
them to receive the permit. A list of employees who 
are authorized to receive permit shall be maintained 
in all plants/areas. The executor is an employee of 
the company. 


7.3.1.1 Prior to issue of work permit, the issuer and 
executor shall jointly inspect the job location and 
identify the requirements of job preparation and 
special PPE required for safe execution of the job. 


7.3.1.2 The responsibility for safe execution of the 
job lies with the acceptor of the permit. He ensures 


that all precautions/PPE stipulated in the permit are 
complied with and safe procedures are followed. 


7.3.1.3 After the executor signs the permit he will 
hand over the permit to the technician/contractor 
supervisor working under him. Maintenance 
technician/contractor supervisor shall sign in permit 
and meet area operator before starting the work. 


7.3.1.4 The area operator after satisfying himself 
that the conditions mentioned in the permit are 
complied with, signs the work permit and returns the 
permit to maintenance  technician/contractor 
supervisor for starting the job. 


7.3.1.5 The executor should display his copy of the 
permit at the work site for the personnel around the 
area to be aware of the work being executed and also 
for any auditor to know that a job is under progress 
in the area. 


7.3.1.6 A toolbox talk (safety talk) has to be 
conducted by the acceptor to the contract workers 
prior to start of the job. The safety talk should 
emphasize the proper procedure for carrying out the 
job, identify any hazards involved and the 
precautions to be taken. When necessary, prior 
training sessions can be arranged as appropriate. 


7.3.1.7 It is the responsibility of the executor to 
ensure that the contractor is made aware of the 
following during the execution of job: 


a) The conditions identified in the work 
permit are compiled at all times during the 
execution of the work; 


b) The contract worker/supervisor should 
inform executor and area operator, if job 
conditions deviate from the safe execution 
of the job; and 


c) It is the responsibility of the contract 
supervisor to provide requisite PPE to the 
workers. 


7.3.1.8 After the work is complete, the executor 
should ensure that the housekeeping of the area is 
restored to normal before signing of the permit as 
completed. 


7.3.1.9 In case of confined space/vessel entry the 
executor should ensure that all men and other 
material have been removed from the work area 
before the equipment is boxed up. 


7.3.1.10 In case the job is to be carried out through 
contractors under the supervision of plant operations 
personnel and no maintenance personnel are 
involved, the shift in-charge can issue permit to the 
shift engineer or the area operator. The authorization 


IS 17893 : 2023 


to accept the permit by the shift engineer or the 
area operator will be done by plant HOD or area 
in-charge. 


7.3.1.11 Arrangement of tools, tackles, ladders and 
scaffolding required for the job will be the 
responsibility of the agency undertaking the job. It 
shall ensure certification of hand tools, portable 
electrical tools, ladders, scaffoldings etc before 
taking into use. 


7.4 Plant/Area in Charge 


For (1) hot work and confined space permit, (ii) 
excavation permit, authorization of plant/area in 
charge is required. Employees working above the 
level of shift in charge in the plant/non plant areas 
and authorized by the plant HOD will sign as 
plant/area in charge. HOD himself can sign as 
plant/area in charge for authorizing these permits. 


7.5 'The Area Operator 


7.5.1 When the work permit is presented to the area 
operator by the acceptor, the area operator satisfies 
himself that the work conditions identified in the 
work permit have been complied with. He then signs 
in work permit and hands over the permit back to the 
maintenance technician/contractor supervisor for 
starting the work. 


7.5.2, When the work is complete and the permit is 
to be closed, the area operator inspects the work area 
for the housekeeping and cleanliness and signs in the 
work permit and hands over the permit to the 
acceptor. 


7.5.3 Also the incoming shift operator should review 
the ongoing works in his work area and give his 
approval for continuance of work by putting his 
signature in the appropriate place. 


7.5.4 The area operator shall keep himself aware of 
the jobs being executed in his area and ensure safe 
conditions are maintained. 


7.5.5 He shall keep watch on the jobs and take 
appropriate action, if any hazardous condition is 
developed during the course of the work. If 
conditions warrant, he may suspend the job, and 
immediately inform the shift in-charge/shift 
engineer. 


7.5.6 The incoming area operator of the next shift is 
responsible for endorsing the conditions as specified 
in the work permit as prior to continuation of the 
work. 


7.5.7 After the work is complete, the acceptor should 
ensure that the housekeeping of the area is back to 
normal before signing of the permit as completion. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


8 INTER PLANT CLEARNACES 


8.1 For the jobs on pipeline which terminates in 
other plant/district, the persons permitting the work 
should inform and consent with signature of area 
in-charge/shift in-charge shall be taken in each shift 
to ensure that line is safe for work. If a work is to be 
carried out on an equipment or facility which 
connects another plant where the safety of the job 
relies on isolations which are outside the control of 
the plant on which the work is to be carried out, the 
permit shall be endorsed by the shift in charges of 
both the plants on the permit. 


8.2 For any maintenance work on outside battery 
limit pipelines supplying raw material, chemicals, or 
utilities, the owner of pipeline authorizes work on 
such lines and issues work permit. 


8.3 Inter-plant clearances necessitating isolations at 
battery limits of receiving plants/facilities are 
required before starting any work. The receiving 
plants will issue separate work permits for necessary 
isolations to their maintenance department. 


8.4 If the work area falls under the ownership of 
another plant/department the owner of the pipeline 
obtains a separate work permit from the area owner 
where job is required to be carried out. 


8.5 In case other pipelines are running adjacent to 
the line where work is to be carried out, the owner 
of the pipeline identifies the intended pipeline 
clearly and displays identification marks along the 
pipeline before issuing a work permit. This is to 
avoid unintended work on any charged pipelines by 
mistake. 


8.6 The acceptor should take necessary precautions 
against damage to adjacent charged pipelines during 
execution of work and possible situation of 
emergency due to sudden release of process material 
from nearby pipelines. 


9 REVALIDATION AND RENEWALS 
9.1 Validity of Work Permit 


Permit shall be issued by initiator/issuer for the 
period till end of the shift only. In case if the job is 
not taken up or not completed within the same shift 
of issue of the permit, the permit must be renewed 
by endorsement of incoming shift-in-charge by 
incorporating/ensuring necessary changes/safety 
requirements. The executor shall sign and forward it 
to issuing authority for extension of the work permit. 
Validity of radiography permit shall be for single 
use only and duration of which shall be mentioned 
in permit itself. 


9.2 Revalidation and Renewal of Work Permit 


9.2.1 If work is to be continued without interruption 
beyond the approved time limits, then the work 
permit requires to be revalidated. If work is 
suspended for rest of the day and is restarted on the 
next day, the work permit requires renewal. 


9.2.2 Work permits will be revalidated or renewed 
by issuer when requested by acceptor. Acceptor 
approaches the issuer with the acceptor's copy of 
work permit duly filled in with details of extension 
required at the back side of work permit and signed 
by him. 


9.2.3 Revalidation/renewal of work permit will be 
done by issuer after a joint site inspection along with 
acceptor and checking the conditions in the work 
area and then endorsing the extension appropriately 
in the work permit. 


9.2.4 After extension of validity/or renewal of work 
permit, it is required to be endorsed by area operator. 


9.2.5 All signing authorities must sign the permit for 
extension of the permit. 


9.2.6 Validity of work permit (cold work), hot work, 
vessel entry permit and excavation permit shall be 
for seven days. Upon completion of seven days new 
permit is to be issued. 


9.3 Gas Tests Before Revalidation and Renewal 
of Work Permit 


Necessary gas tests should be carried out at the time 
of revalidation/renewal of work permit. The results 
of the gas tests will be recorded in the appropriate 
columns on the backside of the permit by gas tester 
with his signature. 


10 CLOSURES AND CANCELLATION 
10.1 Closure of Work Permit 


10.1.1 The permit can be extended for a total of 
seven calendar days maximum. For work extending 
beyond seven days, a new work permit has to be 
issued after closing the present work permit. Also if 
there is a break in the work for more than one 
calendar day, a new permit has to be issued. After 
completion of the job, agency undertaking the job 
must ensure that all tools, tackles, men and material 
have been removed from the place of work and the 
area has been made clean. Guards, gratings, railings 
if have been removed shall be fixed properly. 


10.1.2 AII signing authorities for approval must sign 
the permit for closure of the permit. 


10.1.3 On completion of job before the time of 
expiry of the permit, the permit must be returned to 
the issuing authority with the status of the job, date 
and time duly marked on the permit. 


10.2 Cancellation of Work permit 


10.2.1 Permit shall be cancelled under the following 
conditions: 


a) Declaration of  plant/site 
situation (fire, etc); 


emergency 


b) Any accident at the permit work area; and 
c) Permit conditions are violated. 


In the case of (a) and (b) acceptor should stop the 
work and cancel the permit automatically while in 
the case of (c) it will be by any of the signatories of 
the work permit or an auditor. 


10.2.2 Permit can also be suspended for a short 
duration if the work conditions are not meeting the 
conditions specified in the work permit and till such 
time the conditions are rectified. This can be done 
by any of the signatories of the work permit or an 
authorized auditor. 


11 AUDITS 


11.1 Auditors authorized by the plant HOD or the 
HOD safety will audit the work permits. A detailed 
audit checklist will be developed for use by the 
HOD safety. 


11.1.1 The purpose of audit is to ensure the 
following: 


a) The permit preparation is adequately done 
keeping in mind the hazards involved; 


b) The job conditions are met and the use of 
PPE is followed; 


c) The job is carried out in a safe manner; and 
d) The permit procedures are followed. 
11.1.2 Some of the auditors functions are as below: 


a) By examining permits in the book to see if 
they are filled in correctly and the right 
precautions have been identified; 


b) By examining the actual execution of job 
and ensuring that it complies with what is 
addressed; 


c) The frequency of the audit shall be random, 
but at least once a week; 


IS 17893 : 2023 


d) Permitauditor submits a report to the sector 
chief/[HOD of the plant. It is the 
responsibility of the plant HOD to take 


corrective actions as per the 
recommendations/suggestions given in the 
audit; 

e) Permit audit findings shall be 


communicated to both issuer and acceptor 
for immediate compliance; and 


f) Permits may be cancelled by the auditor at 
any moment if conditions are found not 
satisfactory/change of situation/change in 
agreed conditions. 


12 RESPONSIBILITY 
12.1 HOD Safety 


12.1.1 HOD safety shall arrange to train and 
validate all people involved in the signing of work 
permit procedures. The list of such people 
authorized to sign in the work permit should 
however be prepared by the individual plant HODs 
and area in charge. The final authorization shall be 
done by the respective plant HODs/area in charge 
as per format attached. 


12.1.2 HOD safety shall also arrange to provide 
training and validating people identified as auditors 
of these procedures. The auditors will be from the 
plants or safety dept. 


12.1.3 He shall provide necessary training material 
and develop procedures for validation and 
authorization of various signatories to the work 
permit in close coordination with plant HOD and 
area in charge. 


12.1.4 He is responsible for periodic review 
and updating of work permit procedures. 


12.1.5 Where differences arise in the interpretation 
of work permit procedures, the same shall be 
resolved by the HOD Safety. 


12.2 Plant HOD 


12.2.1 Plant HOD/area in-charge shall identify all 
personnel involved in the work permit system and 
train and validate in coordination with HOD safety. 


12.2.2 The plant HOD will publish the list of 
authorized persons in the prescribed format after due 
validation and training. 


13 RECORDS 


The original/acceptor copy of all closed permits 
shall be kept by the issuer for a period of at least 
30 days from the closure of the permits. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 3.1) 
COLD WORK PERMIT 
1) SI No. : 
ii) Work Clearance From : h of date To: 


iii) Issued to (Department/Section/Contractor) : 


iv) Exact Location of Work (Area/Unit/Equipment No. etc.) : 


v) Nearest Fire Alarm Point : 


vi) Description of Work : 


Name of Permittee : Date 


Sign. of Permittee : 


h of Date 


A-1 THE ITEMS AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 1 SHALL BE CHECKED BEFORE ISSUING THE 
PERMIT. (TICK MARK IN THE APPROPRIATE BOX. CHECKLIST ITEMS MARKED WITH 


ASTERISK (*) SHALL BE COMPLIED BY RECEIVER) 


Table 1 Items to be Checked Before Issuing the Permit 


(Clause A-1) 


SI.No. Item 


(1) (2) 


Done Not Required 


(3) (4) 


1) Equipment/Work area inspected 
ii) Surrounding area checked, cleaned and covered 


iii) Equipment blinded/disconnected/closed/isolated/wedge 
opened* 


iv) Equipment properly drained, and depressurized 


w Equipment electrically isolated and tagged vide 
Permit no. ------------------- 
Remarks : 


IS 17893 : 2023 


A-2 THE ACTIVITY HAS THE FOLLOWING EXPECTED RESIDUAL HAZARDS (TICK THE 
RELEVANT ITEMS) AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 2. 


Table 2 Residual Hazards Associated with the Activity 
(Clause A-2) 


SI No. Residual Hazards Associated with the Activity Tick [] 

(1) (2) (3) 
1) Lack of oxygen 

ii) Combustible gases 

iti) Toxic gases 

iv) Steam condensate 

v) Pyrophoric iron 

vi) Corrosive chemicals 

vii) Others, specify 

Remarks : 


IS 17893 : 2023 


A-3 THE ADDITIONAL PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE) TO BE USED IN 
ADDITION TO STANDARD PPE (HELMET, SAFETY SHOES, HAND GLOVES, BOILER 
SUIT) (TICK THE RELEVANT ITEMS) AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 3. 


Table 3 Additional PPEs to be Used in Addition to Standard PPE. 
(Clause A-3) 


SI No. Residual Hazards Associated with the Activity Tick 

Ge Q) 3) 
i) Face Shield 

ii) Goggles 

iii) Dust respirator 

iv) Fresh air mask 

v) Lifeline 

vi) Safety harness 

vii) Compressed air set 
viii) Earmuff 

ix) Others (specify) 


A-4 ADDITIONAL PRECAUTIONS IF ANY: 


ISSUER PERMITTEE 
(RECEIVER) 
Signature : Date Signature : Date 
Name : Name: ` 
Designation : Tel. No. : Designation : Tel. No. : 


A-5 CLOSING OF THE WORK PERMIT 


IS 17893 : 2023 


completed/stopped and area cleared 


Receiver : Certified that the subject work has beenlIssuer ` Verified that the job has been completed and 
area cleared and is safe from any hazard. 


Date and Time 


Name & DesignationSignature Date and Time 


Name and Designation Signature 


A-6 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COLD 
WORK PERMIT 


A-6.1 The work permit shall be filled up carefully 
and accurately in clear handwriting ensuring that 
complete information is provided in all the 
sections/subsections and none of column is left 
blank. Sketches should be provided wherever 
possible to avoid miscommunication. 


A-6.2 Appropriate safe guards and required 
personnel protective equipment (PPEs) shall be 
determined by a careful analysis of the potential 
hazards and the operations to be performed prior to 
starting the work. 


A-6.3 Requirement of standby personnel from 
process/maintenance/contractor/fire and safety etc, 
if any shall be mentioned in the additional 
requirement. 


A-6.4 In case of fire alarm all work must 
immediately be stopped. In case of emergency 
sirens, all work must be stopped and all 
nonessential personnel must leave work site and 
processed to designated areas. 


A-6.5 For renewal of work clearance, the issuer shall 
ensure that the conditions are satisfactory for the 
work to continue. If the conditions have changed, it 
may be necessary to issue a new permit or amend the 
existing permit. 


A-6.6 This permit shall be valid for a period of 8 
hours only, unless it is renewed/extended. This 
clearance on the same permit can be 
renewed/extended up to a maximum of seven 
calendar days. 


A-6.7 Original permit must be available at work site 
at all times. 


A-6.8 On completion of the work, the permit shall 
be closed and returned to the issuer. 


A-6.9 The permit shall be issued in duplicate. 
Original permit (yellow) shall be issued by 
receiver/executer and duplicate (white) shall be 
retained by issuer. 


A-6.10 Enclose important Do's and Don'ts duly 
signed with each permit. 


A-6.11 Safety toolbox talk has to be ensured by 
receiver before start of work and record for the same 
shall be maintained. 


A-6.12 Obtain separate permit for “working at 
height", if required. 


A-7 DO'S AND DON'TS FOR COLD WORK 
(To be attached with all cold work permits) 


Permit No.- 
A-7.1 Do's 


A-7.1.1 Ensure the availability of valid work permit 
before start of work. 


A-7.1.2 Ensure that work permit conditions are fully 
complied at site. 


A-7.1.3 Equipment should be properly isolated from 
all sources of energy before start of work. 


A-7.1.4 Ensure that walkways and passages are free 
from all slip/trip and fall hazard. 


A-7.1.5 All draining of oil should be in closed 
system as the draining of oil on floor will make the 
work area and area around the work unsafe. 


A-7.1.6 Ensure proper illumination of work place 
while working in dark. 


A-7.1.7 Ensure use of non-sparking tools in 
flammable areas. 


A-7.1.8 Executor should ensure the quality of hand 
tools and their health. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


A-7.1.9 Always first wedge open the flanges. 


A-7.1.10 Use of proper PPE must be ensured during 
cold work by executor. Use of safety helmet and 
shoe is mandatory for all works inside plant. 


A-7.1.11 While carrying out cold work inside 
confined space, proper ventilation and illumination 
should be ensured before start of job. 


A-7.1.12 Electric cable should be free from joints 
with sound insulation. Portable electrical equipment 
should have no loose connections. 


A-7.1.13 All portable/mobile electrical equipment 
should be connected with ELCB. 


A-7.1.14 Executor should ensure that the lifting 
machine (crane), tools and tackles are properly 
tested and SWL and date of testing is displayed on 
equipment. 


A-7.1.15 Barricading of the area below lifting 
machine (crane), chain pulley blocks etc, should be 
ensured before starting the job. 


A-7.1.16 Gas test should be carried out before 
(Signature of receiver) 


(Signature of issuer) 


issuing cold work permit, wherever required. 


A-7.1.17 Remove all scraps and unused material 
from site on completion of work. 


A-7.1.18 Executor should know the nearest fire 
alarm point, fire order, fire station phone number, 
first-aid center phone no., nearest safety shower, 
escape route and location of designated assembly 
points and siren code before start of work. 


A-7.2 Don'ts 
A-7.2.1 Never stand or work under suspended loads. 


A-7.2.2 Never enter work area without safety helmet 
and shoe. 


A-7.2.3 Do not wear loose/ synthetic clothes while 
on work. 


A-7.2.4 Do not use short cuts on work. 


A-7.2.5 Do not use lamp of more than 24 V while 
working in confined space. 


A-7.2.6 Do not run a machine without putting back 
the guard on its exposed moving part. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 3.2) 
HOT WORK 
i) SI No. : 
ii) Work Clearance From : h of date To h. of Date : 


iii) Issued to (Department/Section/Contractor) : 


iv) Exact Location of Work (Area/Unit/Equipment No. etc) : 


Permit Type 


Normal Shut Down Blanket Please Tick IV] in Required 
Permit Type 


v) Nearest Fire Alarm Point : 


vi) Description of Work : 


Name of Permittee : Date : 


Signature of Permittee : 


B-1 THE ITEMS AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 1 SHALL BE CHECKED BEFORE ISSUING THE 
PERMIT. [PLEASE PUT TICK (\) IN THE APPROPRIATE BOX. CHECKLIST ITEMS MARKED 
WITH ASTERISK (*) SHALL BE COMPLIED BY RECEIVER. FOR HOT JOB IN CONFINED 
SPACE, SL NO. XIII) SHALL BE TICKED FOR *DONE" ONLY] 


Table 4 Items to be Checked Before Issuing the Permit 
(Clause B-1) 


SI No. Item Done Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
A General 
i) Equipment/Work area inspected 
ii) Surrounding area checked, cleaned and covered 
iii) Sewers, manholes, etc and hot surfaces nearby 
covered 
iv) Considered hazard from other operations and 
concerned persons alerted 
v) Equipment blinded/disconnected/closed/isolated/ 


wedge opened 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Table 4 (Continued) 
SI No. Item Done Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
vi) Equipment properly drained and depressurized 
vii) Equipment properly steamed/purged 
Vili) Equipment water flushed 
ix) Free access for approach of fire tenders has been 
maintained. 
x) Iron sulfide removed/kept wet 
xi) Equipment electrically isolated and tagged vide 
permit no. 
xii) Gas Test : HCs = % LEL; O, = % Toxic gas = ppm 
xiii)* Running water hose/fire extinguisher provided. 
Fire water system available. 
xiv)* Area cordoned off and precautionary tags/boards 
provided 
B For hot work/Entry to confined space 
i) Proper ventilation and lighting providing 
ii) Proper means of exit/escape provided 
iii) Standby personnel provided from process/maintenance/ 
contractor/fire/safety dept 
iv) Checked for oil and gas trapped behind the lining in 
equipment 
v)* Shield provided against spark 
vi)* Portable equipment/nozzles properly grounded 
vii)* Attendant at man way provided for entry into confined 


space (2 Persons) 


Table 4 (Concluded) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


SI No. Item Done Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
viii)* Adequate communication provided to stand 
by person 
ix)* Trained attendant provided with rescue 
equipment/SCBA 
x) Space adequately cooled for safe entry of 
person 
xi) Continuous inert gas flow arranged 
xii) Check for earthing/ELCB of any temporary 


electrical connections being used for welding 


xiii)* Gas cylinders are kept outside the confined 
space 
xiv)* Checked spark arrestor on mobile equipments 
xv) Welding machine checked for safe location 
xvi) Permit taken for working at height vide 
permit no. 
C For vessel entry 
Dk Approved type Spark Arrestor on the mobile 


equipment/vehicle provided. 


Remarks : 


IS 17893 : 2023 


B-2 THE ACTIVITY HAS THE FOLLOWING EXPECTED RESIDUAL HAZARDS [TICK (Y) THE 
RELEVANT ITEMS] AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 5. 


Table 5 Residual Hazards Associated with the Activity 
(Clause B-2) 


SI No. Residual Hazards Associated with the Activity Tick 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Lack of oxygen 
ii) Combustible gases 
iii) Toxic gases 
iv) Steam condensate 
v) Pyrophoric iron 
vi) Corrosive chemicals 
vii) Others, specify 
Remarks : 


20 


IS 17893 : 2023 


B-3 THE ADDITIONAL PPEs AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 6 SHALL BE USED IN ADDITION TO 
STANDARD PPEs SUCH AS HELMET, SAFETY SHOES, HAND GLOVES & BOILER SUIT [TICK 
(V) THE RELEVANT ITEMS]. 


Table 6 Additional PPEs to be Used in Addition to Standard PPE. 
(Clause B-3) 


SI No. Additional PPEs to be Used in Addition to Tick 
Standard PPE 
(1) (3) 
(2) 
1) Face shield 
ii) Goggles 
lii) Dust respirator 
iv) Fresh air mask 
v) Lifeline 
vi) Safety harness 
vii) Compressed air set 
viii) Earmuff 
ix) Others (specify) 


B-4 ADDITIONAL PRECAUTIONS IF ANY: 


B-5 THE DETAILS OF RECIPIENT SHOULD BE GIVEN IN A FORMAT AS SPECIFIED IN 


TABLE 7. 


21 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Table 7 Details of Recipients 


(Clause B-5) 


SI No. Recipient Signature 


(1) (2) (3) 


Designation 


(4) 


Name 


(5) 


Date 


(6) 


Tel. No. 


(7) 


vii) Fire Permit Signatory 
(Issuer) 

viii) Gas Safety Inspector 
(GSD 


ix) Permittee/Receiver 


22 


B-6 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS HOT WORK 
AND CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PERMIT 


B-6.1 Work permit shall be filled up carefully and 
no column shall be left blank. Provide sketches, if 
required. 


B-6.2 Appropriate safe guards and PPEs shall be 
determined by analysis of the potential hazards prior 
to starting the work. 


B-6.3 In case of fire alarm all work must 
immediately be stopped. In case of emergency 
sirens, all work must be stopped and all 
non-essential personnel must leave work site and 
proceed to designated areas. 


B-6.4 Only certified vehicle/engines and permitted 
type of electrical equipment and tools are allowed in 
operating areas. 


B-6.5 Welding machines should be located in 
non-hazardous and ventilated areas. 


B-6.6 Gas test is mandatory. No hot work shall be 
permitted unless the explosive meter reading is 
Zero. 


B-6.7 Vessel entry, where no hot work is to be 
carried out, shall be permitted if combustible gases 
are up to 5 percent of lower explosive limit [LEL]. 
Entry with an air-supplied mask shall be permitted 
with LEL of up to 20 percent. The Oxygen level 
shall be at least 19.5 percent volume, and the 
concentration of toxic gases below the threshold 
limits. 


B-6.8 When a person is entering confined space, the 
receiver must keep minimum two trained attendants 
at the manhole or entry point. 


B-6.9 For renewal of work clearance, the issuer shall 
ensure that the conditions are satisfactory for the 
work to continue. If the conditions have changed, it 
should be necessary to issue a new permit or amend 
the existing permit. 


B-6.10 Permit shall be considered issued for job 
after "clearance renewal" is signed. This clearance 
on the same permit can be renewed/extended up to a 
maximum of seven calendar days, except in case of 
plant shutdown, where permit can be issued for a 
maximum period of 15 days. Blanket permit may be 
issued for a maximum period of 30 days. 


B-6.11 During the registration period of permit, if 
job is not done for a day or more (except holidays/ 
sundays), receiver shall enter in prescribed register 
at fire station in advance about the discontinuity of 
job. 


B-6.12 This permit must be available at work site at 
all times. 


23 


IS 17893 : 2023 


B-6.13 On completion of the work, the permit must 
be closed and submitted to F and S as record by 
receiver. 


B-6.14 Hot work shall include welding, grinding, 
gas cutting, burning, open flame, soldering, shot 
blasting, chipping, riveting, drilling, camera 
flashing, power tools, IC engines, mixer machines, 
use of certain non-explosion proof equipment, 
vehicle entry or any other activities which may 
generate heat or spark. 


B-6.15 Permit issuing authority, or any authorized 
officer can check the permit/stop the job and even 
cancel the permit on safety norms violation any 
time. 


B-6.16 Enclose important Do’s and Don’ts duly 
signed with each permit. 


B-6.17 All precautions given in permit must be 
clearly adhered by the permittee. 


B-6.18 Daily toolbox talk/safety briefing to be 
ensured by the permittee before start of job. A 
register on toolbox talk shall be kept at site as record 
and signed by personnel associated with the work. 


B-6.19 Pre-use check of portable gas testers must be 
done to ensure its operability by GSI before the gas 
test at work site. 


B-7 DO’S & DON’TS FOR HOT WORK (To be 
attached with all hot work permits) 


Permit No.- 


B-7.1 Do’s 


B-7.1.1 Ensure the availability of valid work permit 
and clearance before start of work. 


B-7.1.2 Ensure that work permit conditions are fully 
complied at site. 


B-7.1.3 Area shall be free from all flammables and 
combustibles and the, drains etc, where there is 
likelihood of presence of hydrocarbon during the 
course of work shall be covered and sealed. 


B-7.1.4 In case of gas welding/cutting, cylinders 
should be kept in upright position and these should 
be easily identifiable by its colour. 


B-7.1.5 Hose connections of gas cylinders should be 
checked before starting of hot job. The hoses must 
be free from all cuts and kinks and distinct in color 
(maroon for acetylene and black for oxygen). 


B-7.1.6 Executor must ensure use of proper PPEs 
during hot work. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


B-7.1.7 In case of welding/cutting, etc it should be 
ensured that spark is arrested at site only, especially 
while carrying out hot work at height. 


B-7.1.8 Executer shall ensure use of flash back 
arrestor in gas cylinders while using oxy-acetylene 
sets. Use welding lighters only to light the welding 
torch. 


B-7.1.9 While carrying out hot work inside confined 
space, proper ventilation and illumination should be 
ensured before start of job. 


B-7.1.10 Electric cable shall be free from joints with 
sound insulation. Portable electrical equipment 
should have no loose connections. 


B-7.1.11 All portable/mobile electrical equipment 
shall be connected with ELCB. 


B-7.1.12 Executor shall ensure that the lifting 
machine (crane), tools and tackles are properly 
tested and SWL and date of testing is displayed on 
equipment. 


B-7.1.13 Barricading of the area below lifting 
machine (crane) should be ensured before carrying 
out the job. 


B-7.1.14 Gas test shall be carried out before issuing 
hot work permit and the work area must be free from 
hydrocarbon. 


B-7.1.15 Executor shall ensure that all vehicles 
entering inside battery area have a chief control of 
explosives approved spark arrestor on exhaust. 
Vehicle shall move on designated route only. 


(Signature of receiver) 


24 


B-7.1.16 Executor must know the nearest fire 
alarm point, Fire order, fire station phone number, 
first-aid center phone no., nearest safety shower, 
Escape route and location of designated assembly 
points and siren code before start of work. 


B-7.1.17 Executor shall ensure the quality of hand 
tools and their health. 


B-7.1.18 Ensure valve cap on cylinders during 
storage and transportation, if shrouds are not 
provided. 

B-7.2 Don'ts 


B-7.2.1 Never stand or work under suspended loads. 


B-7.2.2 Never enter work area without safety helmet 
and safety shoe. 


B-7.2.3 Do not wear loose/synthetic clothes while 
on work. 


B-7.2.4 Do not use short cuts on work 


B-7.2.5 Do not use lamp of more than 24 V while 
working in confined space. 


B-7.2.6 Do not use electrode holders as cable 
connectors for extension of welding cable. 


B-7.2.7 Never keep acetylene cylinders in horizontal 
condition, even if they are empty. 


B-7.2.8 Never use grinder without wheel guard on 
abrasive wheels. 


(Signature of issuer) 


IS 17893 : 2023 
ANNEX C 
(Clause 3.3) 
CONFINED SPACE/VESSEL ENTRY PERMIT 


C-1 PRE ENTRY CHECKLIST FOR CONFINED SPACES (TO BE FILLED UP AND COMPLIED 
BEFORE EACH ENTRY INTO CONFINED SPACE. THE COMPLIANCE SHALL BE FOLLOWED 
BY ‘CONFINED SPACE ENTRY PERMIT?) 


i) SI No. : 
ii) Refinery : 
iii) Associated Permit : Hot Work/Vehicle entry Permit( ) Cold Work Permit( ) Confined Space Entry Permit( ) 


Radiography Permit( ) Excavation Permit( ) Electrical isolation/Energisation Permit( ) Working at height permit( ) 


iv) Exact Location of Work : (Unit/ Area/ Equipment No.) : 


v) Description of Work : 
vi) Expected Date and Time of Entry : Expected Date of Completion : 


C-2 MAXIMUM NO. OF ENTRANTS ALLOWED : 
C-3 THE NAME OF TRAINED ATTENDANT FOR ENTRY (TRAINING VALIDITY 1 YEAR) 
AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 8 
Table 8 Name of Trained Attendant for Entry 
(Clause C-3) 
SI. No. Name Trained on 


(1) Q) (3) 


25 


IS 17893 : 2023 


C-4 THE NAME OF TRAINED ENTRANTS FOR ENTRY (TRAINING VALIDITY 1 YEAR) 
AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 9 


Table 9 Name of Trained Entrants for Entry 
(Clause C-4) 


SI No. Name Trained on 


(1) (2) (3) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
ix) 
x) 
xi) 
xii) 
xiii) 
xiv) 
xv) 


xvi) 


C-5 COMMUNICATION FACILITY PROVIDED AND PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED : Yes (must 
be “yes” only). 
C-6 RESCUE PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED : Yes (must be “yes” only). 


26 


IS 17893 : 2023 
C-7 ALL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT IS OF INTRINSICALLY SAFE/FLAMEPROOF TYPE : 
Done ( ) To be done ( ) Not Required ( ) 
C-8 SAFETY SIGNS, BOARDS AND BARRIERS ARE AVAILABLE : 
Done ( ) To be done ( ) Not Required ( ) 
C-9 DEBRIEFING AND KEY POINT TIPPING TO AUTHORIZED ENTRANTS 
Done ( ) To be done ( ) Not Required ( ) 


PERMITTEE/ENTRY ENGINEER 


Designation ‘ss —— disse 


Signature with date `... NENNEN NEEN 


C-10 THE CHECKLIST TO BE FILLED UP BY PERMIT ISSUER (GSI) AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 10. 


Table 10 Checklist to be Filled up by Permit Issuer 
(Clause C-10) 


SI No Item Required Not required Done 


(1) Q) (3) (4) G) 


D Energy Isolation 


1) Pumps or lines blinded, disconnected or blocked 
ii) Positive isolation of electrical source, with LOTO 
iii) Other sources such as air, water, steam, gas 


blinded, disconnected or blocked 
II) Ventillation 


1)* Mechanical (must be air eductor or FLP type for 
inflammables) 


ii) Natural ventilation only 
IIT) Portable gas tester checked for healthiness 


IV) Continuous gas monitoring required 


27 


Sie Table 10 (Continued) 


SI No Item Required Not required Done 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Vi PPE 


1) Full body harness with life line provided. 


il) SCBA/air line available at site 


iii) Retrieval equipment available at site. 
iv) Dust respirator provided 
v) Protective clothing, hand gloves, footwear, safety helmet, 


ear protection 


vi) Eye/face protection 


VI)* Hoisting equipment 


VID* Resuscitator-inhalator 


NOTE — Check-list marked with * shall be complied by the executer. 


C-11 GAS TESTING READING AFTER OPENING OF MAN WAY 


C-11.1 Flammable................. percent Low Explosive Limit (LEL) 
C-11.2 Oxygen................ percent by volume 
C-11.3 Any other gas (specify).................. part per million (PPM) 


C-12 THE SUBSEQUENT GAS TESTS AFTER PREPARATION OF EQUIPMENT AS SPECIFIED IN 
TABLE 11 (TO BE CONTINUED TILL THE EQUIPMENT SAFE FOR ENTRY) 


Table 11 Subsequent Gas Tests After Preparation of Equipment 
(Clause C-12) 


SINo. Date Time Flammable (Percent LEL) Oxygen (Percent by Any Other Gas 
(5 Percent LEL or less) Volume) (Min. 19.5 (Specify), in ppm 
Percent) 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 


NOTE — The control measures and precautions appropriate for the safe entry and execution of the work in the confined space have been 
implemented and the persons required to work in the confined space have been advised of and understand the requirements. 


28 


IS 17893 : 2023 


ISSUER RECEIVER/ENTRY ENGINEER 

(Person in Direct Control) Person/Contractor Supervisor working in confined 
space) 

Date: ............ Fesses Dates isset Times roses 

Names sv C RARUS Names lite preside gi e dene he 

Designation : ................................... Designation 225 dissem nement 

Signatures: ENEE ee feels scat adie ce KENE LTE 


* Points shall be complied by entry engineer/ receiver and checked by issuer. 
NOTES 


1 Pre entry confined space checklist shall be used before every Confined space entry permit. 
2 No confined space permit shall be issued, till the requirements of checklist are complied. 


C-13 THE ITEMS AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 12 SHALL BE CHECKED BEFORE ISSUING 
THE CLEARANCE (TO BE CHECKED WITH VALID PERMIT FOR CONFINED SPACE). 


Table 12 Items to be Checked Before Issuing the Clearance 
(Clause C-13) 


SI No. Item Done Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Equipment/Work area inspected 
ii) Surrounding area checked, cleaned and covered 
iii) Space is free from all unwanted materials such as scraps/ 


debris, surplus items, left over tools and tackles and 
combustible materials 


iv) Space is free from all combustible material 


v) Space is free from all persons presence after checking 
and manhole cover has been engaged 


vi) Illumination and ventilation 

vii) The safety sign for “safe entry” has been removed from 
man way 

viii) Danger sign to caution all against entry has been 


displayed at man way 


ix) Additional precaution if any 


Gas Safety Inspector (GSI) 


29 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Table 12 (Continued) 


SI No. Item Done Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Permittee/Receiver 
Signature Signature 
Name Name 
Designation Designation 
Tel No. Tel No. 


C-14 DO'S AND DON’TS FOR WORKING IN 
CONFINED SPACE (To be attached with all 
Confined Space entry permits) 


Permit No.- 
C-14.1 Do's 


C-14.1.1 Check for valid work permit “Entry into 
Confined Space" before entry into confined space. 


C-14.1.2 Ensure that the confined space is positively 
isolated from your source of energy and has been 
made free from harmful gases. 


C-14.1.3 Proper ventilation and illumination of 
space must be ensured. 


C-14.1.4 Wherever forced ventilation is used. The 
gas test should be carried out after minimum 10 min 
of stopping the eductor/fan/blower. 


C-14.1.5 Thorough gas test must be carried out 
before issuing permit to ensure that there is no 
pocket of gas available inside and the place is safe 
for performing the particular task inside confined 
space. For entry of person the concentration of toxic 
gases should not exceed Threshold Limit Value 
(TLV) and oxygen must be minimum 19.5 percent 
by volume. 


C-14.1.6 Use suitable respiratory protection for 
entry in the confined space, having oxygen 
deficiency or having toxic gases more than TLV. 


C-14.1.7 Attendant should be available all the times 
at man way entry of confined space, till the work is 
in progress inside. The permit should be available 
with him and he shall maintain attendance in 
prescribed form. 


C-14.1.8 Attendant must be in constant touch with 
persons working inside and know the actions to be 
taken for rescue/emergency handling, if so required. 


C-14.1.9 The low voltage light limited to 24 V 


(Signature of receiver) 


30 


should be allowed inside confined space. All electric 
connection shall be provided with ELCB. 


C-14.1.10 Wherever possible, lifelines with safety 
harness should be used for entry into confined space. 


C-14.1.11 Special precautions are required for entry 
into inert gas atmosphere. It requires the controlled 
condition inside confined space as well as 
mandatory use of compressed breathing air supply 
to person going inside with alternate air supply 
arrangement. 


C-14.1.12 Keep at least 2 access/exit for each 
confined space, wherever possible. The access 
should be unobstructed and approachable. 


C-14.1.13 Use required PPE and personal gas 
monitors while entering inside. Use of Safety helmet 
and safety shoe is mandatory for all work areas. Use 
air mask for areas, where there is likelihood of 
accumulation of gas during the work such as in 
sewers. 


C-14.1.14 The person in confined space should pass 
the warning signal to stand by person in case of any 
suffocation/difficulty for help. 


C-14.1.15 Carry out regular gas test of confined 
spaces, where there is possibility of gas generation 
due to nature of work, being performed inside such 
as removal of sludge, hot works, etc. 


C-14.2 Don'ts 


C-14.2.1 Do not use light of more than 24 V inside 
confined space. 


C-14.2.2 Do not give any other responsibility to 
stand by person, which may cause his absence at 
man way. 


C-14.2.3 Do not obstruct the man ways from any 
side of confined space. 


(Signature of Issuer) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


C-15 THE ATTENDANCE SHEET FOR PERSONS INSIDE CONFINED SPACE SHOULD BE 


AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 13 (TO BE MAINTAINED BY ATTENDANT AT MAN WAY OF 
CONFINED SPACE) 


Dates idet e Re REFS REDE TE 
Equipment No. : ................................. 


Confined space permit no. : ................... 


Valid upto: ese eee RR 
Table 13 Attendance Sheet of Persons Inside Confined Space 
(Clause C-15) 
SI No. Name of Person Date of Entry Time of Time of Exit ,h Sign of 
Entering Entry, h (Mention Date, if Attendant 
Changed) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) 

ii) 

iii) 

iv) 

v) 

NOTES 


1 This attendance sheet shall be filled and maintained at man way of confined space by stand by person for all entries in confined space. 


2 This will be an integral part of permit system. engineer-in-charge shall ensure that the stand by person has been imparted training for 
the job and he knows the job. He should remain in touch with persons inside during the job. 


31 


IS 17893 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 3.4) 
EXCAVATION PERMIT 
i) SI No. : 
ii) Work Clearance From : h of date To h of Date 


iii) Issued to (Department/Section/Contractor) : 

iv) Exact Location of Work (Area/Unit/Equipment No. etc.) : 
v) Name of Permittee : 

Date : 


Signature of Permittee : 


vi) Please Tick the Type of Permit Required. 


PERMIT | NORMAL SHUTDOWN CONSTRUCTION 


TYPE 


D-1 DETAILS OF DEPARTMENT AND EXACT LOCATION OF EXCAVATION 


D-1.1 Asset Custodian Department... Date sims 
D-1.2 Exact location of excavation................................................ (Attach marked up drawing) 

In Plant Area Tank Dyke Along Pipe way Along Cable way 

Across Road/Footpath In Open Ground Across Drainage Flume Others 

D-2 SIZE OF EXCAVATION(APPROXIMATELY ).......... M DEEP, ............. M WIDE............ M LONG 
D-3.PURPOSE EE 
D-4 COMMENCING DATE. : ............... TIME : ........ EXPIRY DATE: ................ TIME: ........... 
D-5 EXECUTING DEPARTMENT : nes CONTRACTOR............... eren 
D-6 NAME OF PERMITTEE WITH DESIGNATION...................-. TELEPHONE NO .................. 


SIGNATURE 


32 


IS 17893 : 2023 


D-7 PERMISSION IS GRANTED AS DESCRIBED ABOVE D-1.1 TO D-6. 
D-8 EXCAVATION CLEARANCE IS OBTAINED AND ATTACHED SI No. : 


D-9 THE ASSOCIATED PERMITS/SAFETY REQUIREMENTS AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 14. 


Table 14 Associated Permits/Safety Requirements 
(Clause D-9) 


SI No. Associated Permits/Safety Requirements Tick 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Cold work permit 
ii) Hot work permit 
iii) Confined space permit (Depth > 1.2 m) 
iv) Hand excavation only 
v) Provide warning sign 
vi) Provide flashing light (flameproof in case of 


hazardous area) 


vi) Barricade 
viii) Provide shoring 
ix) Batter the sides to 45 degree or less 
x) Provide fire extinguisher 
xi) Provide means of access 
xii) Excavated soil 1 m away from edge, Min 
xiii) Body harness/lifeline 
xiv) Gumboot/safety suit 
xv) Any other (specify) 


33 


IS 17893 : 2023 


D-10 EXPECTED RESIDUAL HAZARDS : 1... 2 ——Á— ÓÁ——— 
D-11 MECHANICAL EXCAVATION ALLOWED ONLY FOR ` een 
Permit Issuer Name: ies deu nse d HOD of issuing Dept. Name........................… 
Designations sis ee NEWER ETT ts Désignation. tentant er epe es cux ES 
Signature: sieste dak ais aks Lire ts Signature co oet ce APE Ne A p E E 
Date: onec meo ot mu ede eaten ipe ti ae, Date rennes tee at Snide snide Rare e oss 
NOTES 


1 The permit must be obtained one day in advance. Keep the excavation clearance attached with permit. 

2 Permit must be available at site all the time during the work. 

3 Permit shall be in triplicate. Original shall be for permittee, first copy for issuer and second copy for fire station. 

4 The permit shall be issued normally for a period not exceeding 7 days with renewal in each shift. However for shut down units/ 
facilities, it can be issued for a maximum period of 15 days with renewal in each shift and for construction activities a maximum period 
of 30 days. 


5 The PPE such as safety helmet, safety shoe, boiler suit and hand gloves is mandatory for work. 


6 Daily Safety tool box talk including key point tipping to contractor personnel shall be carried out by permittee before commencement 
of work and the record of same shall be maintained. 0 


EXCAVATION CLEARANCE SI No. : 


(THIS IS NOT AN EXCAVATION PERMIT) 
Permittee : 


Signature : 


Name : 


Date : 


D-12 EXACT LOCATION OF WORK (AREA/ UNIT/ EQUIPMENT NO. 


D-15 PERMISSION IS SOLICITED FROM ..... H ON (DATE. EDS H ON 
(DATE) eue 

Dip SIGNATURE OF EXECUTER......... cce NAME AND DESIGNATION OF 
EXECUTOR.......... cerne 


34 


IS 17893 : 2023 


D-17 UNDERGROUND POWER CABLE : Existing ( ) Not existing ( ) 

D-17.1 Permission Given : Yes ( ) No( ) 

D172 Precaution, if Any eSI IiSe D P NRI IH E Ir 
Signature .......................... Date scie 

D-18 UNDERGROUND TELECOMMUNICATION CABLE : Existing () Not existing ( ) 
D-18.1 Permission Given: Yes() No( ) 

D-18:2 Precaution; Any oce Ma a EE Siete Meteo oo eek 
Signature ....................... Date: i edu 

D-19 UNDERGROUND FIREWATER LINE: Existing ( ) Not existing ( ) 

D-19.1 Permission Given: Yes() No( ) 

D:19:2-Precautions if Any v.35 3.53.03 dE de Bs N dire Ue VAM RI e 
Signature ....................... Dàte iius 


D-20 UNDERGROUND OIL/SEWER LINE, DRINKING WATER LINE, ABOVE GROUND OPEN 
DRAIN : Existing( ) Not existing ( ) 

D-20.1 Permission Given: Yes( ) No( ) 

D:20:2 Precaution; if Any... ence ten PME 
Signatüte-: oot ee Dates 

D-21 UNDERGROUND COMPUTER CABLE ` Existing( ) Not existing ( ) 

D-21.1 Permission Given: Yes( ) No( ) 

D-21.2 PPrecaution it Any: icu oe D He HDD EMI etium 
e LA IRC 

D-22 UNDERGROUND PRODUCT LINE, UTILITY LINE : Existing( ) Not existing ( ) 
D-22.1 Permission Given: Yes( ) No( ) 

D=22.2 Precaution; If Any... ee ent EE I PN in 
Signature ....................... Date 4: ves 

D-23 UNDERGROUND INSTRUMENT CABLE : Existing( ) Not existing ( ) 

D-23.1 Permission Given: Yes () No ( ) 

D-23.2 Precaution, if Anx... e e e e e s ne ener rere 


Signature ....................... Dâte issus 


35 


IS 17893 : 2023 


D-24 UNDERGROUND CATHODIC PROTECTION CABLE : Existing( ) 


D-24.1 Permission Given: Yes() 


No() 


Not existing ( ) 


D:24:2 Precautions if Any... [75 unes rore een ue e name elt nine eme Tee eee 


Signature ....................... Date ............... 


D-25 INSTRUCTION 


D-25.1 The excavation clearance is required for all 
excavations including road and dyke cutting. 
Obtaining this clearance is prerequisite for 
EXCAVATION PERMIT. 


D-25.2 This clearance shall be obtained for a 
maximum period of 15 days, except at construction 
sites, non-operational areas, where it shall be for a 
maximum period of 1 month. 


D-25.3 This clearance shall be kept attached 
with excavation permit at site. 


D-25.4 The clearance shall be issued in triplicate, 
original for permittee, first copy for issuer and 
second copy for fire station. The clearance shall be 
initiated by executer. 


D-25.5 On issue, original copy will be with 
executor, duplicate copy with fire station and 
triplicate copy with area in-charge/GSI (Gas Safety 
Inspector). 

D-25.6 The clearance by area in-charge/GSI shall 
be given just before clearance by shift fire safety 
Officer (FSO) and registration at fire station. At 
last shift FSO will also check that clearances from 
all other dept. have been received. 


D-25.7 This clearance shall be 
issued after registration at fire station. 


considered 


D-25.8 When job is completed, the receiver shall 
collect all the copies, and enclose them with closed 
copy of excavation permit before handing over to 
permit issuer. Permit issuer in turn after closing the 
permit will return the same to fire station. 


D-25.9 For cutting of road in addition to this 
clearance, format for road closure and excavation 
permit shall be required. The road closure format 
shall be filled and submitted to fire station by the 
executor at least one day before starting the work. 


D-25.10 All road cuttings shall be properly 
barricaded with precautionary signs and alternate 
routes shall be displayed at the site by the executor. 


36 


D-25.11 Duly signed “Do’s and Don'ts during 
excavation work" shall be integral part of excavation 
permit. All points mentioned in “Do’s and Don'ts" 
must be complied at site. 


D-26 DOS AND DONT’S DURING 
EXCAVATION WORK (TO BE ATTACHED 
WITH ALL EXCAVATION PERMIT) 


Permit No. 
D-26.1 Do's 


D-26.1.1 Ensure that clearance has been obtained 
from various departments in prescribed form for all 
excavation works. 


D-26.1.2 Ensure that excavation permit and 
clearance has been obtained for excavation work and 
the same is valid. 


D-26.1.3 All excavations and open trenches must be 
barricaded around the opening. Warning lamp can 
be used for operating area and roads during darkness 
(use FLP type fixture in hazardous area). 


D-26.1.4 There must be sufficient and safe means of 
access and escape for excavated sites. 


D-26.1.5 Excavation area should be free from 
fumes/gases heavier than air because it may cause 
asphyxiation or poisoning. All excavation of depth 
more than 1.2 m or more should be treated as 
confined space and permit for entry into confined 
space should be obtained. 


D-26.1.6 Excavation to a depth of 1 m or more shall 
be cut stepped back to give a suitable slope or 
securely held by bracing so as to avoid the danger of 
side to collapse. 


D-26.1.7 All trenches 1.2 m or more in depth shall 
at all times be equipped with at least one ladder for 
each 30.48 m length of excavation or fraction 
thereof. All such ladders shall be extended from 
bottom of the trench to at least 1 m above the 
surface of the ground. 


D-26.1.8 Barricading of 1 m height (with red and 
white band/ self-glowing caution boards) should be 
carried out for excavation beyond 1.5 m depth. 


D-26.1.9 All cutting shall be carried out from top to 
bottom. 


D-26.1.10 Special precautions are required for using 
mechanical excavators inside refinery as it requires 
Hot work permit to operate the same in operating 
areas of refinery (except on roads). 


D-26.1.11 Practice to giving permission to cut half 
road and utilizing half road for movement of vehicle 
should be avoided, unless the conditions mentioned 
under Don'ts are complied. 


D-26.1.12 Use suitable PPE as per job requirement 
mentioned in work permit. 


D-26.1.13 Inform all incidents to 
supervisor and fire station immediately. 


your 
D-26.2 Don'ts 


D-26.2.1 Under no circumstances under cutting to 
be carried out. 


(Signature of receiver) 


37 


IS 17893 : 2023 


D-26.2.2 Excavated earth shall not be dumped 
within 1 m of the edge of the excavation or depth the 
trench whichever is more. 


D-26.2.3 Excavated earth should not be dumped on 
nearby pathway/approaches, on product/steam line, 
in front of emergency facilities such as fire 
hydrants/monitor, fire alarm points, inlet of foam 
pourers etc and on OWS man hole covers. 


D-26.2.4 No vehicle should be allowed to go too 
close to the edge of the excavation because it may 
cause side collapse. Maintain at least 2 m distances 
from the edge of the excavation. Adequate and 
well-anchored stop blocks should be provided on 
the surface to vehicle being driven reversed into the 
excavation. 


D-26.2.5 No mechanical excavation is to be carried 
out up to a depth of 1.5 m from the ground level in 
operating areas. In such cases manual excavation is 
required to be carried out up to a depth of 1.5 m from 
the ground level. 


D-26.2.6 No one should be allowed to move on edge 
of excavation. 


(Signature of issuer) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 3.5) 
ELECTRICAL WORK 
(OFFICE COPY) ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ 
ENERGISATION PERMIT-High ENERGISATION PERMIT- 

PART-III Tension (HT)/Low Tension(LT) HT/LT 
SI No. : Re-Energise clearance certificate De-energise clearance certificate 
ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ for HT/LT equipment for HT/LT equipment 
ENERGISAT ION PERMIT- 
HT/LT 


(To be filled by operation-in- (To be filled by operation-in-charge (To be filled by operation-in- 


charge of working area on 
receipt of job completion 
certificate-PART-I and II) 


Equipment tag no. ...... 


De-energized on 


of working area) charge of working area) 

A) Unius eo eter SN Ten ay Uni: c ts 

b) Equipment tag no. b) Equipment tag no. 

c) [Date REA ch hd orate de hee Mr c) (REN ht etai 

d) Requirement emergency............... d) Equipment not in 
operation. ......... 

e) Aina cro tr i e) Requirement emergency......... 

f) All locks and tags f) Ordinary........................… 

removed................... 


g) Equipment earthing found LOTO operation performed on 
intact........... "Local Switch". 


h) All clearances returned with job Kindly de-energise the above 
completion certificates. .................. equipment. 


All tools, equipments, manpower and 
unused materials have been removed and 
surrounding area of the said equipment 
has been cleaned. 


Kindly energise the above equipment. 


38 


IS 17893 : 2023 


(OFFICE COPY) ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ 

PART-II ENERGISATION PERMIT- High ENERGISATION PERMIT- 
Tension (HT)/Low Tension(LT) HT/LT 

SI No. : 

ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ Re-energise clearance certificate De-energise clearance certificate 

ENERGISAT ION PERMIT- for HT/LT equipment for HT/LT equipment 

HT/LT 


(To be filled by operation- (To be filled by operation-in-charge (To be filled by operation-in- 
in-charge of working area of working area) charge of working area) 

on receipt of job completion 

certificate-PART-I and II) 


Date and Time  Time................ Title. Lans 
UTE Designation................ Designation................ 
(signature) (signature) 
Name suisses ia JOB COMPLETION JOB COMPLETION 
CERTIFICATE CERTIFICATE 
[To be filled by authorised person of [To be filled by authorised 
electrical operation] person of electrical operation] 
Signature The equipment energised The equipment de-energised after 
————— des after performing following checks/ performing following checks/ 
activities : activities : 
Isolation device is in SS No. ....... 
and it's ID........................... 
YES......... NO... N/A ......... Y BS os e es: N/A. one 
a) Damaged internals of breaker/ a) Equipment not in operation 
MCC rectified 


b) Temporary safety ground's removed b) All back feeding circuits 


isolated 
Energized on ............. c) IR value of cable/equipment : c) Control supply switched off 
Checked-found O.K. 
Date and Time ............ d) Each lid/cover of breaker boxed up d) Space heater supply switched 
off 
Name ene esee trs e) All LOTO of isolating device removed e) Breaker/MCC put off and 
) Control fuse put back in place f) Breaker racked out 


39 


IS 17893 : 2023 


(OFFICE COPY) 
PART-III 

SI No. : 

ELECTRICAL 
ISOLATION/ENERGISAT 
ION PERMIT-HT/LT 

(To be filled by operation- 
in-charge of working area 


on receipt of job completion 
certificate-PART-I and II) 


Designation ............... 


Signature ................ 


ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ 


ENERGISATION PERMIT- 
Tension (HT)/Low Tension(LT) 


High 


Re-energise clearance certificate for 
HT/LT Equipment 


(To be filled by operation-in-charge 
of working area) 


g) Power fuse put back in place 


h) Breaker control plug put back on 
its base 


j) Breaker checked in test position 
and found O.K. 


k) Trip circuit found healthy 


m) Breaker racked in to service position 


n) Control supply switched on 


p) Space heater supply switched on 


q) Breaker/MCC module front door 
closed 


r) MCC [MCC module] switched on 


Designation................ 
(signature) 


40 


ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ 


ENERGISATION PERMIT- 
HT/LT 


De-energise clearancecertificate 
for HT/LT equipment 


(To be filled by operation-in- 
charge of working area) 


g) Control fuse pulled out 


h) Power fuse pulled out 


j)Back lid of breaker panel 
opened 


k) Breaker/ MCC 
visually checked 


intemais 


m) Line discharged and voltage 
test done 


n) Temporary 
provided 


safety ground 


p) Breaker/MCC back/front lids 
closed 


q) LOTO performed 
Breaker/MCC 


on 


Designation................ 
(signature) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


(OFFICE COPY) ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ 
PART-II ENERGISATION PERMIT- High ENERGISATION PERMIT- 
Tension (HT)/Low Tension(LT) HT/LT 
SI No. : 
Re-Energise clearance certificate De-Energise clearance certificate 
ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ for HT/LT equipment 
ENERGISAT ION PERMIT- for HT/LT equipment 
HT/LT 


(To be filled by operation- (To be filled by operation-in-charge (To be filled by operation-in- 


in-charge of working area of working area) 
on receipt of job completion 
certificate-PART-I and II) 


INSTRUCTIONS 


a) This certificate shall comprise of three parts, bearing 
common Serial Number and shall be printed on a 
single page separated by two vertical perforations. 
The PART-I is for de-energisation, the PART-II is 
for re-energisation and PART-II is office copy to be 
retained by the department of Operation-In-Charge. 


b) This Clearance certificate shall be issued in 
duplicate (white and pink copies). Both the copies to 
be given to electrical operation. On competition of 
the job authorized person of electrical operation 
shall sign on both the copies of this certificate and 
shall return the original white copy to the section of 
operation-in-charge. Electrical operation shall retain 
the second pink copy. 


c) For any equipment, the de-energising and re- 
energising clearance certificates shall bear the same 
serial numbers. The check boxes shall be ticked 
only to mark the selection. 


d) The issuing department of this clearance certificate 
should be informed immediately after de-energising/ 
re-energising the equipment. However, permission 
for any activity on the isolated equipment shall be 
granted by the operational-in-charge only after 
Authorized person of Electrical operation returns the 
original certifying job completion. 


e) Switching off and isolation of space heater circuit 
shall be mandatory along with de-energisation of a 
motor unless specifically requested in writing by 
Electrical Maintenance to keep it ON. 


f) After ensuring that spring is not in charged 
condition and damaged internals of Breaker is 
rectified, rack in the breaker and put the local/ 
remote switch in remote position. 


41 


charge of working area) 


INSTRUCTIONS 


a)This certificate shall comprise of three parts, 
bearing common serial number and shall be 
printed on a single page separated by two vertical 
perforations. The PART I is for de-energisation, 
the PART II is for re-energisation and PART III is 
office copy to be retained by the department of 
operation-in-charge. 


b)This clearance certificate shall be issued in 
dublicate. (white and pink copies). Both the 
copies to be given to electrical operation. On 
competition of the job authorised person of 
electrical operation shall sign on both the copies 
of this certificate and shall return the original 
white copy to the section of operation-in-charge. 
Electrical operation shall retain the second pink 
copy. 

c) For any equipment, the de-energising and re- 
energising clearance certificates shall bear the 
same serial numbers. The check boxes shall be 
ticked only to mark the selection. 


d)The issuing department of this clearance 
certificate should be informed immediately after 
de-energising/ re-energising the equipment. 
However, permission for any activity on the 
isolated equipment shall be granted by the 
operational-in-charge only after autorised person 
of electrical operation returns the original 
certifying job completion. 


e) Switching off and isolation of space heater 
circuit shall be mandatory along with de- 
energisation of a motor unless specifically 
requested in writing by electrical maintenance 
to keep it ON. 

f)Any damage observed by visual checking of 
breaker/switch internals shall be informed to 
electrical maintenance through Authorised 
officer of electrical operation. 


IS 17893 : 2023 


(OFFICE COPY) ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ 
PART-III ENERGISATION PERMIT- High ENERGISATION PERMIT- 
SI No. : Tension (HT)/Low Tension(LT) HT/LT 


ELECTRICAL ISOLATION/ Re-energise clearance certificate for HT De-energise clearance certificate 
ENERGISAT ION PERMIT- /LT equipment 


HT/LT for HT/LT equipment 


(To be filled by Operation- (To be filled by operation-In-charge (To be filled by operation-in- 
In-Charge of working area of working area) charge of working area) 

on receipt of job completion 

certificate-PART-I and II) 


g) The nomenclature for S No. which shall be g) The nomenclature for S No. which shall be 


followed and printed on the clearance certificate is followed and printed on the clearance certificate 
given as under : is given as under : 

"XXX/ZZZZ/YY? "XXX/ZZZZ/Y Y? 
where XXX : three digit book number, ZZZZ : where XXX : three digit book number, ZZZZ : 
Four digit clearance number and YY : Last two Four digit clearance number and YY : Last two 
digits of current year. digits of current year. 


h) The two stars (**) in format no. shall be replaced ` h) The two stars (**) in format no. shall be replaced 
with abbreviated name of the respective Refineries with abbreviated name of the respective 
like HR, MR, BR, GR, DR etc in the final print. Refineries like HR, MR, BR, GR, DR etc in the 

final print. 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 3.6) 


PERMIT FOR WORKING AT HEIGHT 
(REQUIRED FOR WORKING AT HEIGHTS OF 1.8 m & ABOVE) 


F-1 THIS PERMIT AUTHORIZES FOR PROVISION OF SAFE ACCESS/PLATFORM/WORKING 
ARRANGEMENT AT HEIGHT FOR CARRYING OUT THE JOB. 
F-2 FROM : hr Date to hr Date 


F-3 NAME OF THE AGENCY/CONTRACTOR : 


F-4 NAME OF THE SITE SUPERVISOR : 


F-5 JOB/WORK ORDER NO: Location of Work : 
F-6 DESCRIPTION OF WORK : 


F-7 TOTAL NO. OF WORKERS ALLOWED : 


42 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-8 PERMITTEE SHALL CHECK THE FOLLOWING ITEMS FOR COMPLIANCE BEFORE 
SOLICITING THE PERMISSION. 


SI No. Items Yes Not Req. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Have scaffolds been checked and certified in prescribed form by scaffold () () 
supervisor? 
ii) Have scaffolds been tagged with green card duly filled and signed by () () 
scaffold supervisor? 
iii) Is scaffold rechecked and re-certified weekly? () () 
iv) Is scaffold erected on firm ground and sole plate and base plate have been ( ) ( ) 
used? 
v) Is the hanging baskets used of proper construction, tested and certified () () 
for the purpose? 
vi) Is the work platform made free of hazards of all traps/trips/slips and fall? ( ) ( ) 
vii) Have cat ladders, crawling boards etc been used for safe working at () () 
sloping roof? 
viii) Has edge protection provided against fall from roof/elevated space? () () 


43 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-9 THE FOLLOWING ITEMS SHALL BE CHECKED FOR RISK ASSESMENT BY ISSUER AND 
COMPLIED BY PERMITTEE BEFORE SOLICITING THE PERMISSION. 


SI No. Items Yes Not Req. 
(D (2) (3) (4) 
i) Are the platforms been provided with Toe board, guardrail and area below () () 


is barricaded? 


ii) Checked whether safety harness and necessary arrangement for tying the () () 
life-line, fall arresters etc provided to the worker for working at height? 


iii) Have precautions been listed below for safe working at height for source of () () 
energy Such as electricity? 


iv) Is the raised work surface properly illuminated? CG () 

v) Are the workers working near unguarded shafts, excavations or hot line? () () 

vi) Checked for provision of collective fall protection such as safety net? () () 

vii) Additional PPE recommended? () () 

viii) Are proper means of access to the scaffold including use of standard aluminum () () 
ladder provided? 


F-10 ADDITIONAL PRECAUTION REQUIRED, IF ANY 


Fire Permit Signatory (FPS)/Gas Safety Inspector(GSI)| Permittee/Receiver 


(Issuer) 


Signature Signature 


Name ___ Name 


Desig. —— —— č Z — P Desig. 


Concerned Area Head of Department (HOD)/RSM **| Permittee HOD ** 


Signature and Date Signature and Date 


** Required in case : Permit is needed beyond normal working hours (8.00 h to 17.00 h)/round the 
clock/Sundays and holidays. 


44 


F-11 CLOSING OF THE WORK PERMIT 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Date: and “Time: e 2:2: rr RII RI 
Signature 
Date and Time : ................. eere eene 


Name and Designation : 


E TEE 


Issuer : Verified that job has been completed and area cleared, and is safe from any hazards. 


F-12 ADDITIONAL PRECAUTIONS 


The additional precautions as specified in Table 15. 


Table 15 Additional Precaution 


(Clause F-12) 
SI No. Date From To Precautions if any, Other Wise Mention 
“NIL” 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
ISSUER RECEIVER 
Name of GSI/FPS : ........................................ Name of Permittee : ........................................ 
Designation of GSI/FPS Designation of Permittee 
UE EE E NS uini REDE 
bri T Dri pe 


45 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-12 INSTRUCTIONS 


F-12.1 This permit will be issued in Triplicate. 
GREEN COPY (ORIGINAL) and WHITE COPY 
(TRIPLICATE) will be for the  permittee. 
ISSUING AUTHORITY will retain WHITE 
COPY (DUPLICATE). This permit shall be valid 
for a period of 8 h only, unless it is renewed/ 
extended. This clearance on the same permit can be 
renewed/extended up to a maximum of 7 calendar 
days. 


F-12.2 After the completion of the job, copies of 
work permit should be returned to the ISSUER. 


F-12.3 Items applicable must be ticked (V). 


F-12.4 All works at height shall be 
discontinued during rain/high wind/floods. 


F-12.5 Stop all jobs in case scaffold is sagging 
unduly, Report to EIC. 


F-12.6 Metallic tubular scaffolding and standard 
aluminium ladders are only to be used. 


F-12.7 All works must stop on instruction from 
permit issuing authority, permittee and officers of 
Fire and Safety Department or whenever unsafe 
condition is detected. 
F-12.8 Permittee shall obtain permission from the 
respective disciplines. 


F-12.9 Permittee to ensure the compliance of safety 
precaution required mentioned in permit 


46 


F-12.10 Use of approved type full body safety 
harness along with lifeline is must for working at 
height of 2.0 m and above. 


F-12.11 Permit must be available at site during the 
work. 


F-12.12 Use of safety helmet and shoe is mandatory 
for all work sites. 


F-12.13 Permittee shall ensure that all working 
personnel have taken SAFETY TRAINING before 
start of work. Toolbox talk and key point tipping 
shall be given by permittee daily before start of 
work. 


F-12.14 Sketches should be provided, if required. 


F-12.15 Term “TRAP” means a gap of 1 inch or 
more in scaffold platform, *TRIP" means projected 
object on floor of work platform such as overlap of 
scaffold boards etc, “SLIP” means oily/slippery 
floor of scaffold platform and “FALL” means Fall 
prevention measures such as guard rail/toe guard is 
in place. 


F-13 PRE ERECTION CHECKLIST FOR 
SCAFFOLDS (To be filled up and complied before 
erection of scaffold at site, before giving permit to 
start the erection) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-13.1 Exact Location of Work : (Unit/Area/Equipment No.) : .................................................... 


F-13.3 Expected Date and Time to Start Erection : .................................................................. 
F-13.4 Expected Date of Completion : .................................................................................... 


F-14 MAXIMUM NO. OF PERSONS ALLOWED SCAFFOLD AFTER ERECTION : ..................... 


F-15 TICK MARK THE ASSOSCIATED PERMIT AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 16. 


Table 16 Associated Permits 


(Clause F-15) 
SI No. Associated Permits Tick Mark 

(1) Q) (3) 

i) Hot work/entry into confined space permit 

ii) Cold work permit 

iii) Confined space entry permit 

iv) Radiography permit 

v) Excavation permit 

vi) Electrical isolation/Energisation permit 
vii) Working at height permit 


47 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-16 FOR THE SCAFFOLD SUFFICIENT QUANTITY OF MATERIALS AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 17 
ARE AVAILABLE AT SITE. 


Table 17 For the Scaffold Sufficient Quantity of Materials are Available at Site 
(Clause F-16) 


SI No. Items Yes Not Not Required (NR) 

(UI (2) (3) (4) (5) 

1) Scaffold pipes, see NOTE 1 

ii) Scaffold couplers, see NOTE 1 

iii) Deck boards, see NOTE 1 

iv) Base plate, see NOTE 1 

v) Sole plate 

vi) Toe board, see NOTE 2 

vii) Reveal pin 
viii) Standard aluminum ladder (as 


per IS/BS), see NOTE 2 


ix) Mettle wire to fix ladder, see 
NOTE 2 
D Tags (red and green), 
see NOTE 1 
xi) Toe board clip, see NOTE 2 
xii) Joint pin 


xiii) Approved full body safety 
harness with lanyard/life line, 
see NOTE 3 


xiv) Double fork type lanyard with 
energy absorber, see NOTE 4 


XV) Fall arrester 


xvi) Safety Net 


NOTES 
1 Compulsory for all scaffolds, used for working at height by persons. 


2 Compulsory for scaffold of height 1.8 M and above. 
3 Compulsory for 2 M and above. 
4 Compulsory during scaffold erection, repair, modification and dismantling and also when ladder is not in use. 


48 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-17 NAME OF TRAINED SCAFFOLD SUPERVISOR (TRAINING VALIDITY- 1 YEARS) AS 
SPECIFIED IN TABLE 18. 


Table 18 Name of Trained Scaffold Supervisor (Training validity-1 years) 
(Clause F-17) 


SI No. Name Trained on 


(1) (2) (3) 


i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
viii) 
ix) 


x) 


F-18 THE QUALITY OF SCAFFOLD MATERIALS AVAILABLE AT SITE AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 
19. 


Table 19 Quality of Scaffold Materials Available at Site 
(Clause F-18) 


SI No. Items Yes No 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Are scaffold tubes not damaged/deformed? 


ii) Are scaffold boards/sole plates damaged/deformed? 


iii) Is couplers suitable type and free from defects? 

iv) Are base plates free from defects? 

v) Are standard metal wires available for tying ladder? 

vi) Are standard aluminium ladder (s) free from defects, deformity and 


temporary repairs? 


Name and designation of site engineer / E-I-C : ...................................................................... 
signature LL dal dames dia sde etes era dense dst setti des deua emen e eee ner eee 


49 


IS 17893 : 2023 


F-19 THE SAFETY CHECK BY ISSUER AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 20. 


Table 20 Safety Check by Issuer 
(Clause F-19) 


SI No. Item Yes No Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Area inspected for erection of scaffold 
and found surface consolidated/hardened 
ii) Is safety harness(s) with lanyards 
available and in good condition? 
iii) Are other PPE such as fall arrester 
available? 
iv) Is Safety net available? 
v) Is 100 percent safety briefing given by 
Site engineer before start of work? 
vi) Are scaffold materials properly stacked 
at site, without obstruction approach 
routs? 
Vil) Are warning signs, barricading tapes 
available at site? 
viii) Is medical certificate for persons 
working at a height of 2 m and above 
available? 
Date. Time. vem pr c er M ge eee 
Signature : Signature : 
Name... Designation........... Name... Designation......... 
NOTES 


1 This pre erection checklist shall be filled up by executer and issuer before start erection of each scaffold. Pre-erection checklist shall 
be filled by E-I-C in duplicate and submit to issuer for further check. On further check by issuer, the executer shall comply with all 


requirements as mentioned in checklist and sign the checklist. 


2 Duplicate copy shall be returned to issuer after compliance, whereas original shall be retained by executer. Check-list points marked 
as "NO" must be attended and addressed in this format. 


50 


F-19 CHECKLIST FOR SCAFFOLD AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 21. 


Table 21 Checklist for Scaffold 
(Clause F-19) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


SI No. Unit /Item Location/Equipment/ Date/Inspected Type of Scaffold/ Erectered by 
Checkpoint Condition Comments Action 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Foundation Firm and even 
ii) Standards Vertical 
Staggered joints 
Right spacing 
Not damaged 
iii) Ledgers Level 
Staggered joints 
Not loose 
Not damaged 
iv) Transoms Right spacing 
Not loose 
v) Bracing Ties EE 
None missing 
vi) Fittings OHNE 
Right fitting 
Not damaged 
vii) Ladders Check couplers 
Proper angle 
Right length 
Properly secured 
Separate landing 
viii) Guardrails Right extension 
Right height 
Right length 
ix) Toe-boards None missing 
X) Others 
xi) General Comments 


Name 


Signature 


Date and Time 


51 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Contractor's Supervisor/Engineer : ........................................................................ 


Maintenance Engineer/Civil/Mechanical/Instrumentation Engineer : ............................................. 


hrec ————————————————————————— 


Designation 3 2 S EE SA ee EBERT 


Date and mes 5.355 EE ot SUME E 


NOTE — Contractor shall carry out further periodic inspections every seven days. Above signatories must approve any change made to 
the scaffold after signing this check list. 


F-20 MEDICAL CERTIFICATE 


F-20.1 Form for Medical Check Up for the Workman Engaged by the Contractor 
(Working at Heights) 


Certified that I have examined Shri Age 


who has signed below in my presence. The details of his examination as required are given in the 

enclosed medical examination report. I certify that all clinical and pathological tests were done in my 

hospital/dispensary under my instructions and I find him fit. General and physical examinations of Shri 

do not reveal any abnormality. He does not suffer from any acute/chronic skin disease or 

any contagious or infectious disease. He is medically fit to work at height of 2.0 meters and more since he is 

free from Vertigo, Epilepsy or Fits, general giddiness and height related disease. His B.P., Pulse, Eye sight etc 
are normal. 


In my opinion Shri is physically and mentally fit for job in 


Signature of the workmen 
Date : 


F-20.1 Signature and Rubber Stamp of Medical Practitioner with Name 


NOTE — This certificate is to be given on the letter head of the registered medical practitioner who is possessing allopathic qualification 
as recognized by the Indian medical council. Below the signature, the rubber stamp of the medical practitioner should be affixed. The 
letter head normally should contain the following : 


Name of the medical practitioner : ............................,......4..4. memes esse sese e he esee e eene 

Qualiticallons > 4 v coe ese etes KEES AE dun vedo iA vd la tal AN detta lus 
Registration nutüber 2: et o M teo etu e eee Deis beau ue ine P pd MESA 
Désignation is ren EE 


INGORE SS > ctor eal aao eed o tva ede ota Ee E dut LAGE BART CET GG AR Se a ee 


52 


IS 17893 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Clause 3.7) 
RADIATION PERMIT 
SI No. : 
(This permit is to be issued by area in-charge and registered at Fire Station) 
G-1 VALID FROM : h Date To h Date 


G-2 PERMISSION IS GRANTED TO DEPT./SECTION/CONTRACTOR : ..…............................... 
G-3 NAME OF RADIOGRAPHY AGENCE 
G-4 NAME OF SITE SUPERVISOR (LEVEL-2 HOLDER): ................................................. 
G-5 SPECIFIC LOCATION OF WORK `... 


G-6 NAME, DESIGN AND SIGNATURE OF PERMITTEE : .................................................. 


Part-1 (TO BE FILLED BY RADIOGRAPHY AGENCY) 


RADIATION SOURCE 
Type of Radiation : X-Ray.................. Gamma Ray : ... Ir-192 ... Co-60 
No. of Source : Radiation Activity (Intensity) : ...... kV/Ci 


MEASUREMENT OF CONTROL ON RADIATION EXPOSURE 


SI No. Instruments Yes No Not Required 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

1) Collimator 

ii) Radiation survey meter 

iii) Film badge 

iv) Concrete wall barrier 

v) Pocket dosimeter 

vi) Alarm/Lamp 

Cordon off Distance : in m. Others : 


53 


IS 17893 : 2023 


No. of Persons involving in radiation work : NENNEN NEEN ven 
Radiography site in charge : ...........cccceccececceccccccceccccencscescescsccscesseessceeceesesceseesscescesesaees 
Name/Signature of officer (Inspection Department) ` ....................,. NENNEN 


Name/Signature essieu ERR 


54 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Part-2 CHECKED BEFORE ISSUING THE PERMIT BY ISSUER 


(Please put tick [V ] mark in the appropriate box) 


SI No. Item Done Not Required 

(1) Q) (3) (4) 

i) Equipment/Work area inspected. 

ii) Associated permit taken for the job (specify 
the types and permit no.). 

iii) Area cordoned off (in case of radiography) 
with proper symbol. 

iv) Proper lighting provided. 

v) Radiation survey meter available at site. 


G-7 THE ADDITIONAL PPE AS SPECIFIED IN TABLE 22 TO BE USED IN ADDITION TO 
STANDARDS PPE (HELMET, SAFETY SHOES, HAND GLOVES, BOILER SUIT) (TICK THE 
RELEVANT ITEMS). 


Table 22 Additional PPE to be Used in Addition to Standards PPE 


(Clause G-7) 


SI No. Additional PPE Tick [V ] Mark 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Face shield 
ii) Goggles 
iii) Dust respirator 
iv) Fresh air mask 
v) Lifeline 
vi) Safety harness 
vii) Compressed air aet 
viii) Earmuff 
ix) Film badge/dosimeter 
x) Others 


55 


IS 17893 : 2023 


G-8 ADDITIONAL PRECAUTION, IF ANN: 


HOD/RSO ( In case of working GSL FPS Signature Permittee/ Receiver 

beyond office hours) 

Signature Signature 

Name sites imite te hd Name siens 
Designation : ................. eee Designation : ................... en Designation : .................. 
Telephone No. : ..................... eese. Telephone No. : .......................- Telephone No. : ............... 


G-9 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS 


G-9.1 This permit shall be valid for a period of 
8 h only, unless it is renewed/extended. This 
clearance on the same permit can be 
renewed/extended up to a maximum of seven 
calendar days. 


G-9.2 In case of fire alarm all work must 
immediately be stopped. In case of emergency 
Sirens, all work must be stopped and all nonessential 
personnel must leave work site and processed to 
designated areas. 


G-9.3 This permit must be available at work site at 
all times. 


G-9.4 This permit is to be made in duplicate : Blue 
and white colour. Blue copy is issued to permittee/ 
executor. The white copy is to be retained by 
issuing authority. 

G-9.5 On completion of job, area to be cleared and 
copies of permit to be returned to the issuer after 
closing of permit. The same shall be closed by issuer 
and kept as record. 


G-9.6 All the columns in the form should be filled 
properly. No column should be left blank. 


56 


G-9.7 Announcement to be made and removal of 
nonessential persons are to be ensured from 
condoned off area before commencement of job. 
The barricading is to be done with warning tape 
with display of radiation hazard symbol at site by 
the site radiographer after carrying out the radiation 
survey. 


G-9.8 The radiography should preferably be carried 
out at a time, when occupancy is least. 


G-9.9 Radiation source movement within the site is 
to be maintained as per RSO guidelines. 


G-9.10 The supervisor must be available at site 
during the radiography work. 


G-9.11 ‘“Level-2 holder” means “radiological 
safety officer" designated by the employer and who 
in the opinion of the competent authority is 
qualified to discharge the functions under Rule 22 
of Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 
2004. 


G-9.12 The distance for barricading is decided by 
RSO depending upon on strength of radiation 
source, occupancy factor and radiation work load. 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization(s) 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Goverment of India, Ministry of Defence 


Crop Care Federation of India , New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Goverment of India 


Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 
Gas Industries Association 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum , Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


57 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 


Kepresentative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


MR P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
MS LAKSHMI V. W. (Alternate) 


SHRI H. M BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUIJIA (Alternate) 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 17893 : 2023 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet and Natural 
Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association of India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (1-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY V. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROFS. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 

D SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 
SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 

SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex- 


Officio) | 


Member Secretary 
Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


58 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (17507). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


