( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 9528 ( Pa'rt I ) - 1980

Indian Standard
MANUAL FOR PLANNING OF ( SSB) PLC SYSTEMS
PART I PLkZ SYSTEMS

Power Line Carrier Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 25
Chairman SHRI T. R. SUBRAHMANYAN. Members SHRI D. R. ULLAL ( Alternate to Shri T. R. Subrahmanyan ) Gujarat State Electricity Board, Vadodara SHRI S. C. BUCH SRRI K. K. CHRAYA ( Alternate ) Wireless Planning & Co-ordination Wing SHRI A. F. C~OUDHURY ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI V. N. DIZSIKAR Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay SHRI M. V. DHEKNX DIRECTOR ( TELECOMMUNICATION ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRBCTOR ( TE~ECOMMUNICATION) ( Alternate ) SHRIS.N.I)UTTA Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta SHRI T. C. B~IOWMICE( Alternate ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI P. JAYARAM SHRI S. K. RAMASUBRAMANIAN ( Alternate ) SHRI S. R. MEHTA Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. P. SHIRODKAR ( Altertiate ) SHRI NIRMAL SWARUP Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, New Delhi SHRI P. N~LZE Siemens India Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. S. SIKANZ) ( Alternate ) REPRESENTATIVE Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI S. R. ARVIND ( Alternate) SHRI M. D. SANTHANAM Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI N. GANESH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1980 Tata Consulting Representing Engineers, Bombay

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Cofiyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

1!4:9528(PartI)-1980
( Confiaaedfrom page 1 ) Members Representing
Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SIXCRETARY ( POWER ) DEPUTY SECRETARY ( POWER ) ( Alternate) West Bengal State Electricity Board, Calcutta SHRI S. N. SENQUPTA &RI s. PAL ( AlternUts ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI R. K. SRIVASTAVA SRRI M. S. VASUDEVA ( Al&crnalc ) U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow SHRI R. K. TANDON Power Systems & Projects Pvt Ltd, Palghat SHRI K. P. VISWANATE SHRI K. P. JACOB ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o#icio Member ) SRRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) Senctagv SHRI HARCHARAN SINQH Deputy Director ( Electronics ), IS1

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980

Indian Standard
MANUAL FOR PLANNING OF (SSB ) PLC SYSTEMS
PART I PLC SYSTEMS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 June 1980, after the draft finalized by the Power Line Carrier Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The transmission of electrical energy from the production plants to the load centres and the interconnection of plants for reasons of economy and security has resulted in the development of complex national and international networks. Such systems require extensive telecommunications facilities for speech and data, such as telegraph, telemetering, telecontrol and protection signals extending between control centres and generating stations, switching stations and supply points. The electricity industries use a variety of transmission media for their communication system depending on the required information bandThe electrical width, the economic and various technical factors. industries are unique in that they have available to them very reliable physical paths, namely, the power lines which interconnect the points of generation and supply and between which the signals can be transmitted by means of HF carrier. Amongst the systems in extensive use in addition to power line carrier are rented circuits ( public telephone company, national telecommunications authority ) buried and overhead cables, and privately owned radio links. Power line carrier with the public telephone (utility-owned ) systems. 0.3 This manual designing power telephone network systems are not normally interconnected and are therefore considered as juiuate

is intended line carrier

to be used as a guide to good practice when systems and also to the use of the following

3

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980 Indian Standards: Is : 8792-1978 1s : 9348-1979 Is : 8997-1978 Is : 9482-1980 IS : 3156 (Part Is : 5802 IV)-1978 Line traps Coupling divider Coupling capacitor devices and capacitor

for PLC systems

Characteristic values of inputs and out. puts of single sideband PLC terminals Voltage transformers : Part IV Capacitor voltage transformers `Flexible coaxial radio frequency cables with characteristic impedance 75Q

0.4 This standard ( Part I ) covers PLC systems, namely, PLC frequencies, Part II of applications, communication paths and coupling equipment. this standard covers PLC systems planning. assistance has been derived from 0.5 While preparing this standard, Dot : 57 ( Central Office ) 16 ` Manual for the planning of ( SSB ) power by the International Electrotechnical line carrier systems ' issued Commission, 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 21960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should. be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) is intended to provide information regarding the application of single side band ( SSB ) power line carrier ( PLC ) systems to electricity supply networks.
are now almost universal, this NOTE 1 - As single side band ( SSB ) systems standard is concerned with amplitude modulated systems of this type; however other types of systems such as double side band and frequency modulated systems exist ( see14 of Part II of this standard). NOTE 2 - Figure 1 illustrates Indian Standards for PLC systems. *Rules for rounding off numerical a typical PLC system along with the associated

values

(revised):

i

4

iS : 9528 ( Part I ) I 1980

CAPACITOR

VOLTAGE

f

COUPLING

DEVICE

CONNECTING

PLC TERMINAL IS : 9482 -1980 POWER -4 SUPPLY

t

\'

APPLICATIONS

NOTE -The

dotted

line completes

an alternative

arrangement.

FIG. 1

EXPLANATORY FIGURE - CO-ORDINATING THE ASSOCIATEDINDIAN STANDARDS 5

IS I 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980 2. POWER LINE CARRIER 2.1 Sections (PLC) SYSTEMS

I, II and III give a brief description of the use of PLC systems together with the basic means of coupling. Variations of the basic methods outlined exist. Consideration of high voltage and telecommunications engineering, economic and other factors will decide which method is employed in a given case.

SECTION
3.

I

PLC FREQUENCIES

RANGE OF FREQUENCIES

3.1 The range of frequencies suitable for conventional power line carrier transmission extends from about 30 kHz to 500 kHz and sometimes up to 1 MHz, the lower limit being fixed by the limitations and cost of coupling equipment, the upper limit by line attenuation.
For insulated extends from about cation earth wire transmission, 5 kHz to 500 kHz. the range of frequencies communi-

PLC systems shall not cause interference to priority radio services within the frequency bands adopted in India*.

The actual range of frequencies available for use within the country shall take account of the needs of various radio services and broadcasting services, including aeronautical and maritime navigation systems, together with any local or national restrictions or regulations affording them the appropriate protection.

SECTION 4. TYPES OF USAGE 4.1 General a) either Power analogue

II

APPLICATIONS

line carrier information

systems are principally in the form of speech;

used to carry: or

b) digital or analogue information, termed ( signals ' representing telegraph, telemetering, telecontrol, teleprotection, data, etc, or both. depending upon requirements, transmitted at 4.1.1 ` Signals ' are, modulation rates from 50 to 1200 Bauds ( Bd ), mainly by Voice Frequency Telegraph ( VFT ) c h annels located in the speech band or superimposed on a reduced speech band ( ` speech-plus signals ' operation ), but direct keying, of the carrier may also be employed.
*WPC is the appropriate recommendations in India. authority for enforcing ITU radio regulations and CCITT

6

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1988 4.2 Telephony - PLC systems may be used to provide speech facilities ranging from a simplex party line system to integrated private automatic sometimes equipped with priority subscriber trunk dialling networks, facilities for operationally important subscribers. Four-wire tandem switching is normal practice.

Considering the size and the number of tandem-operated trunk sections in such private networks an effectively transmitted speech frequency band of 300 to 2 400 Hz may be regarded as desirable for the required grade of service. However, in order to accommodate even more superimposed signalling channels or wider band channels, the upper limit may sometimes be further reduced to about 2 000 Hz. 4.3 Telegraphy and Facsimile - Private lities are also operated over PLC circuits. in&de facsimile transmission. telegraph ( teleprinters ) faciSuch applications may also

Some power utilities favour the teleprinter in operational management due to the fact that hard copies of the information exchanged are Both point-toproduced both at the command and at the execute levels. point and switched circuits are used. The modulation rate is usually 50 to 75 Bd, depending printers used, and facsimile may require higher rates. In general VFT channels Governmental regulations*. should conform to the on the teleappropriate

4.4 Telecontrol and Teleindication - For the purpose of providing telecontrol and teleindication facilities, PLC systems generally use coded signals in order to achieve a high degree of security over the PLC systems and avoid maloperation or loss of information. The transmission speed for single systems may be as low as 50 Bd but in complex multi-point time-shared systems, bit rates of up to 2 400 bits/s or more are in use. In general, VFT channels Governmental regulations*. should conform to the appropriate

4.5 Teleprotection - In order to prevent danger to life, damage to plant and also to ensure the best possible continuity of supply, any power In order to do this, high speed system shall be protected against faults. signals are transmitted between the ends of a line.
*WPC is the appropriate authority for conforming to ITU CCITT recommendations in India.

radio regulations and

,7

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980
4.5.1 Three types of protection systems are in general use: from a protection device

a) for direct tripping of a circuit-breaker at the other end of the line;

b) for transferring discrete information from the protection relays at one end of the line to those at the other, for example, to perform an accelerate or blocking function; and c) for transmitting analogue information between the protective devices at each end of the line to control the operation of the reIays. Protection signalling shall be capable of being received during power system fault conditions which may introduce additional noise and attenuation in the circuit at time of transmission. The permissible maximum overall signalling channel is quite small, typically less than 50 ms. time of a protection

Protection equipment may share a channel in the utility telecommunications system ( for example, a VF channel ) in a multipurpose PLC system, or may require a complete carrier frequency channel. The choice will depend on the security required, time for operation and on economic and/or bandwidth availability considerations. Protection signalling equipment is characterised by the limited time available for the transmission and the recognition of the teleprotection signal transmitted very infrequently ( a few times per annum ) at unpreThey invariably require an extremely high probability of dictable times. achieving ` wanted ' operation, and an extremely low probability of ` unwanted ' action ( for example, false tripping due to noise ) and s missing ' action ( delay or total failure to trip or to block, whichever is appropriate, when required to do so ). In certain PLC systems ( used for teleprotection ) the carrier signal is normally quiescent and it is only sent for the brief and infrequent time when a protection signal is required to be transmitted. Often a clock test facility is included whereby a brief test signal is sent through the complete system at regular intervals of, say, 30 minutes to prove the equipment as being healthy. In questions of frequency assignment where the risks of possible interference from PLC transmitters require to be considered, it is clear that different considerations apply to such quiescent carrier systems as opposed to the conventional PLC systems in which speech and other signals necessitate continuous transmission of carrier. In PLC systems when protection signals are included, it has become common practice in some parts of the world to disable the speech circuit 8

IS I 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980 and all or some predetermined tection signals are transmitted may be boosted accordingly. superimposed channels while active proso that the level of the protection signal

SECTION III COMMUNICATION PATHS AND COUPLING EQUIPMENT
5. METHODS OF COUPLING

of a high voltage line to be 5.1 General - To enable the conductors employed for communication purposes, some form of coupling equipment is required which will permit the injection of the high frequency carrier signal without undue loss, and at the same time decouple the communication equipment from the power line in so far as the power system powerfrequency voltage, switching surges, lightning surges, em, are concerned. The coupling system is also required to minimise the shunt loss caused by the substation equipment, and to render the impedance at carrier frequencies reasonably independent of switching conditions at the substation. The value of line impedance to be assumed for designing the coupling system is, in the case of single conductor phase wires, about 400 ohms for phase-to-earth coupling and about 600 ohms for phase-toIf the phase conductors are of the bundle type, values of phase coupling. 300 ohms and 500 ohms respectively are assumed. It should be noted that the figures quoted are mean values calculated over the entire frequency range and for all possibIe terminations of the Thus the actual values may differ considerably from uncoupled phases. the mean but this is generally not significant from the system design point of view, as it only increases the overall loss by some tenths of a dB, however excessive mismatch may introduce intermodulation in the final amplifier. 5.1.1 Essentially Coupling Equipment Comprises of the Following:

voltage widths and 5.1.1.1 A ` coupling capacitor ' of suitable properties which is inserted between the coupling device and the high voltage conductor. Values are of the order of 1 000-10 000 pF ( see Fig. 2 and 3 ). Consideration shall be given to the choice of the coupler design to ensure an optimum selection based on capacitor cost versus bandwidth requirements. Reference should also be made to IS : 9348.1979*. *Specification for coupling capacitor and capacitor divider.

9

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1989

NOMINAL

LINE

SIDE

IMPEDANCE

.7,z600 a,

n

PHASE-TO-PHASE LOSS LOSS

ac=COMPOSITE ZRETURN

ROING

TO lS:8997-1976

-------.-.---

., I. .,

., ,, ,,

I. .. ,,

II ,, I.

FIG. 2

GRAPH OF BAND WIDTH AVAILABILITY FOR TYPICAL HIGH PASS FILTERS

5.1.1.2' A device known as a ` line trap ' ( or ` wave trap ' ) which is connected in series with the power line between the point of connection of the coupling capacitor and the substation, or at the line traps. Basically the line trap consists of a choke coil rated to carry the full line current, a tunning and protective device. The value of line trap inductance is of the order of 0. I-2.0 mH ( see Fig, 4 ). Reference should also be made to IS : 8792-1978*. Various power system elements such as transformers, busbars, lines, etc, represent an impedance connected beyond the line trap, between the line and earth. This impedance, in series with the impedance of the line trap, constitutes a shunt across the carrier frequency signal path. The loss in signal power resulting from this shunt depends upon the vectorial sum of the two constituent impedances. In the most unfavourable case, the reactive components of the two impedances may neutralise each other and *Specification for line traps. 10

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980

500 L80 460 C&O&20LOO360360340 320 300 260; Y 2602&O220200180 160 ILO120 100 -

CC

NOMINAL

LINE SIDE

lh4PEDANCE

Z, : 3OOn FOR COlJPLlNG

PHASE-TO-EARTli

20

30

A0

50

60

70

80

90

100

110 120 130

l&O

150

560

f,

kHz FIG. 3
GRAPH OF BANDWIDTH AVAILABILITY FOR TYPICAL BAND-PASS FILTERS WITH-A RETURN Loss a, =: 12 dB

11

IS I 9528( Part I ) - 1980

p2
500 -

Lao ,560 LLO L20 -

I I
I

/ I I I a z.1 I I I

LOO 380 360 3f.o 320 300 200 N z 260 2LO220 200 --

"I /
I I

3

160 140 120 100 80 60 IIIIIIIIIIIIIII* 20 30 LO 50 60 70 80 -----FOR FOR RATED Z,,N .6OOn RATED zbN LbOOn 100 110 120 BLOCKING BLOCKING IMPEDANCE IMPEDANCE

90

130

l&O

150

160

f1

kHz FIG.

4 GRAPH

OF BANDWIDTH BAND -TUNED

AVAILABILITY

FORTYPICAL

LINETRAPS

22

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980
thus reduce the total shunt impedance to an unacceptable low value. In order to eliminate this possibility, and the further possibility of varying shunt effects arising out of the changes in the network configuration due to System switching, the tuning devices of the line traps includes a resistive element. The tuning devices, used to improve the blocking efficiency of line traps, may be off different types. Those with narrow band characteristics assure a high blocking impedance for one carrier frequency ( cf ) channel. Those with double band characteristics present a high blocking impedance for two non-adjacent of channels, and those with broad band characterist2cs present a blocking impedance for several of channels. The latter is recommended when tuned for a specified minimum resistive component. 5.1.1.3 A ` coupling device ' is inserted between the low voltage terminal of the coupling capacitor and the of connection to the carrier terminal and comprises a drain coil, matching transformer and surge arresters. The requirements for coupling devices are covered by IS: 8997-1978". The ftinction of the drain coil is to offer a low impedance at power frequency and high impedance at carrier frequencies. It is designed to provide a path to earth for the power frequency current through the capacitor and so limit the potential of the capacitor terminal at the point of connection to the carrier equipment, in the interest of safety. As the coupling device is inserted between the low voltage terminal of the coupling capacitor and earth, an earthing switch ( blade earthed ) is provided to ensure direct earthing of the coupling capacitor during maintenance or commissioning. Statutory safety rules may require different procedures for the operation of this earthing switch and typical arrangements are as follows: a) An earthing switch which earths the capacitor when the coupling device housing is opened. b) A manually operated switch interlock which does not allow the cover to be removed before the switch is operated to the earthed position. c) A pole operated earthing switch with suitable warning notice. Whichever arrangement is used, it is recommended that an indication of the earthed position of the earthing switch should be clearly visible. *Specificatian for coupling devices for PLC systems.

13

IS I 9528 ( Part I ) T1980 With regard to the type of coupling, coupling phase-to-earth, or of the phase-to-phase types. devices may be of the

In the case of the latter, the coupling may be made with either a single phase-to-phase device or with two phase-to-earth devices, connected via a balancing transformer ( decoupling of the two paths ) and not If the first arrangement is used, the distance between the low directly. voltage terminals of the capacitors and the coupling device is generally greater than with the second with a greater possibility of damage and interruption. Consequently in order to achieve higher security use of phase-to-phase coupling may be made with two phase-to-earth units, with the connection between them made on the secondary side of the matching transformer. 5.1.1.4 A Lconnecting nals of the coupling device cable ' inserted between and the carrier terminal. the secondary termi-

This connection may be made with either a balanced or unbalanced ( coaxial ) cable depending on the impedance of the carrier terminal. Commonly for the balanced screen used values for the impedance of the cable are cable and 75 ohms for the coaxial type. different methods 150 ohms the

When coaxial cable is employed, may be employed.

of earthing

For cables lying within the same earth mesh, two methods namely, earthing the screen of the coaxial cable at both ends, carrier equipment end only.

are used, or at the

The first method ensures the safety of maintenance personnel, as there will never be potential differences between local earth and the cable screen. Obviously, during faults, this connection may allow power freIf quency currents to circulate in the screen and in the ` hot ' conductor. this causes secondary problems, for example, with coils and windings This having magnetic cores, earthing at one terminal only may be used. practice whilst eliminating power frequency current circulation may cause high voltage across the windings of the coupling transformer which will Moreover maintenance personnel will need to be designed for this duty. need to take precautions against the possibility of potential differences during faults between cable screen and local earth. When the coupling device and carrier terminal are not part of the same earth mesh, earth potential differences may be high in case of a fault and circulating currents in the screen of the coaxial cable may be dangerous. Therefore, it is common practice in this case to earth only one Similar problems may side of the screen at the carrier equipment end. 14

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) -1980 arise in the case of armoured cables except that secondary problems are unlikely to occur and the same considerations apply. By the use of balanced cables some of the above problems may be avoided. 5.2 Phase-to-Earth Coupling - In this type of coupling the carrier equipment is connected between one phase conductor and earth as shown in Fig. 1. Only one coupling capacitor and one line trap is required at each coupling point, so that this system offers economies in coupling equipment but it normally results in higher attenuation than phase-tophase coupling and less security, in the event of an earth fault on the coupled phase. It is to be noted that although the coupling takes place between one phase and earth, the actual transmission involves the two remaining phase conductors in a complex manner. Because of the economic advantages phase-to-earth coupling may be employed where high reliability in the presence of line faults is not essential. 5.3 Phase-to-Phase Coupling - In this case two coupling capacitors and two line traps are required at each coupling point, so the cost of the coupling equipment will be approximately twice that of phase-to-earth coupling. Interphase working, however, offers a number of important advantages, including lower attenuation, greater security against communication failure due to line faults, and less interference, both radiated and picked up. As approximately 80 percent of all line faults are single phase, this arrangement may be expected to give higher security. 5.4 Inter-Circuit Coupling - When two parahel high voltage circuits are run without discontinuity on the same poles or towers, it is possible to utilise one phase on each of the circuits to provide the equivalent of phaseto-phase coupling on a single circuit line or two phases on each circuit to provide a double differential form of coupling. With this form of coupling, communication is maintained even if one power circuit is taken out of service and earthed. 5.5 Insulated Earth Wire Coupling - It is customary on high voltage lines, particularly those above 110 kV, to provide one or two earth wires above the phase conductors. These are intended primariiy to protect the lines against lightning strokes, but they also serve to reduce the step voltage which would otherwise exist at the towers and substations under In addition the earth wires help to earth fault conditions on the lines. minimise induction effects on nearby telecommunication circuits during earth faults on the power lines. The earth wires are normally in metallic contact with the line towers, but it is known that their efhciency as lightning protectors is not 15

IS : 9528 ( Part I ) - 1980 affected if they are insulated from the passed by spark gaps rated to flash over has led to the utilisation of insulated purposes, the principal advantage being since although coupling capacitors and need not be rated for the full operating 5.5.1 towers, the insulators being byat about 15-30 kV. This discovery earth wires for communication the saving in coupling equipment choke coils are still required they voltage and current of the line.

The method has, however, the following disadvantages:

a) The attenuation at carrier frequencies is in general appreciably greater than that of the power line, where multi-strand steel conductor is employed for the earth wire. However, where composite conductors ( ` Alumoweld `, etc ) are used for the earth wire(s) the attenuation is more acceptable. b) The need for insulating the earth wires at each tower and at the terminal points adds to the costs, and for the longer distances the additional costs may exceed the savings in coupling equipment. ' c) The effectiveness of the earth wires in their protective role under line fault conditions is reduced to some extent by the insulation at each tower. Because of these drawbacks, the use of insulated earth wires for carrier communications has so far found only limited application. 5.6 Coupling to Power Cables - In general, coupling carrier frequency signals to power cables is carried out in the same way as to overhead lines, both in the case of a three phase cable or three individual single phase Phase-to-earth or phase-to-phase coupling is possible, the latter cables. generally resulting in lower attenuation figures at the expense of higher costs. In comparison to overhead lines the impedance of power cables is smaller by a factor of 10 to 20. Consequently the inductance of the line traps decreases, the capacitance of the coupling capacitors increases by the same figure for equal frequency bands compared to overhead lines.

16

