**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 767 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to water [TXD 5: Chemical Methods of 
Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 767 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS 

OF TEXTILE MATERIALS TO WATER 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 677016-474 : 535-6851 



® Copyright 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI U0002 

Gr 1 January 1989 



IS : 767 ^ 1988 



Indian Standard 



METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF COLOUR FASTNESS 

OF TEXTILE MATERIALS TO WATER 

( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
31 August 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1956 and 
has been revised to align it with ISO 1 05/ E- 1978 
Textiles — Tests for colour fastness EOI — 
Colour fastness to water, issued by the Inter- 
national Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) 
and also to incorporate changes in line with other 
standards on colour fastness tests. 



0-3 Colour fastness of textile materials is of 
considerable importance to the consumer. The 
fastness depends not only upon the nature and 
depth of shade of the dyestuff used but also upon 
the nature of the fibre and the method of dyeing 
or printing employed; the same colouring matter, 
when used in dyeing or printing different fibres 
or when applied by different methods upon the 
same fibre, may give vastly different results. 
Formulation of standard methods of test for 
determining colour fastness of textile materials 
to different agencies, likely to effect change in 
colour is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for the 
determination of colour fastness of textile mate- 
rials of all kinds and in all forms to immersion 
in water. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with 
adjacent fabrics is immersed in water, drained 
and placed between two plates under a specified 
pressure in the testing device. The specimen and 
the adjacent fabrics are dried separately. The 
change in colour of the specimen and the staining 
of adjacent fabrics are assessed with grey scales, 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the rele- 
vant material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fast- 
ness of the material in the lot shall be representa- 
tive of the lot. 

4. APPARATUS 

4.1 Testing Device — consisting of a frame of 
stainless steel into which a weight-piece of mass 
5 kg and base 11*5x6 cm is closely fitted so 
that a pressure of 12*5 kPa can be applied on 



test specimens measuring 10x4 cm placed 
between glass or acrylic resin plates. If the weight- 
piece is removed during the test, the testing device 
shall be so constructed that the pressure of 12*5 
kPa remains unchanged. 

Note — Suitable testing devices are the hydrotest, 
the perspiration tester and the pcrspiromcter. If the 
dimensions of the composite specimen differ from the 
size of 10x4 cm, such a weight-piece has to be used 
that a pressure of 125 kPa is applied to the speci- 
men. Other devices may be used provided that the 
same results are obtained as with the apparatus des- 
cribed in 4.1. 

4.2 Oven — maintained at 37 ± 2*'C 

4.3 Two Adjacent Fabrics — each measuring 
10x4 cm, one piece made of the same kind 
of fibre as that of the textile to be tested or that 
predominating in the case of blends, the second 
piece made of the fibre as indicated below, or in 
the case of blends, of the kind of fibre second in 
order of predominance, or as otherwise specified. 



Tf the First Piece is 


Second Piece to be 


Cotton 




Wool 


Wool 




Cotton 


Silk 




Cotton 


Linen 




Wool 


Viscose 




Wool 


Acetate or 


triacetate 


Viscose 


Polyamide 




Wool or cotton 


Polyester 




Wool or cotton 


Acrylic 




Wool or cotton 



IS: 767 -.1988 

4.4 Grey Scales 

OUT and staining. 



For assessing change in col- 7. PROCEDURE 



5. REAGENT 

5-1 DistiUed Water 



5eelS : 1070-1977* 



6. PREPARATION OF COMPOSITE 
SPECIMEN 

6.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, place a 
specimen 10x4 cm between the two adjacent 
fabrics ( 4.3 ) and sew along one of the shorter 
sides to form a composite specimen. 

6.2 If the textiles to be tested is yarn, knit or 
weave it into fabric and treat it as in 6.1 or form 
a layer ol parallel lengths of it between the two 
adjacent fabrics ( 4.3 ), the amount of yarn taken 
being approximately equal to half the combined 
mass of the adjacent fabrics ( 4*3 ). Sew along 
two opposite sides to hold the yarns in place and 
to form a composite specimen. 

6.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 
and compress an amount approximately equal to 
half the combined mass of the adjacent fabrics 
(4.3) into a sheet 10x4 cm. Place the sheet 
between the two adjacent fabrics and sew along 
all four sides to hold the fibre in place, and to 
form a composite specimen. 



7.1 Thoroughly wet the composite specimen in 
distilled water at room temperature. Pour ofi" 
the water and place the composite specimen bet- 
ween two glass or acrylic resin plates, measuring 
about 11 '5 X 6 cm under a force of 50 N. 

7.2 Place the apparatus containing the composite 
specimen in the oven for 4 h at 37 i TC. 

7.3 Open out the composite specimen and dry it 
by hanging it in air in shade at a temperature not 
exceeding 60°C with the three parts in contact 
only at the remaining line of stitching. 

7.4 Assess the change in colour of the specimen 
and the staining of the adjacent fabrics with grey 
scales by the methods prescribed in IS : 768-1982* 
and IS :769-1982t. 

Note I — Treated test specimen and the pieces of 
adjacent fabrics should have cooled after drying and 
should have regained its normal moisture content 
before evalution. 

NoTB 2 — In cases of doubt in the colour fastness 
rating as assessed by an observer, the assessment should 
be done by at least three observers and the overall 
average rating should be reported. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 Report the numerical rating for change in 
colour of test specimen and the numerical rating 
for staining of each kind of adjacent fabric used. 



*Specification for water for general laboratory use 
(second revision ). 



^Method for evaluating change in colour (first 
revision). 

tMethod for evaluating staining (first revision ). 



Printed at Saioi Printers, Delhi, India 



