SNA Alte IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


qitet : FATE HTS starter Ae 
SaaS hern 
ant 1 ata mais Ge 
( TET FIAT ) 


SCOSTA : Smart Card Operating 
System Template Architecture 


Part 1 Basic Command Set 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 35.240.15 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 10 


Identification and Data capture techniques, Cards and Security Devices Sectional Committee, LITD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) may be adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Identification and Data capture techniques, Cards and Security Devices Sectional Committee, had been approved 
by the Electronics and Information Technology Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 2018 and is being revised now in order to provide support for the 
following algorithms in the standard: 


a) AES-128, AES-192 and AES-256 based cryptographic operation. 

b) SHA-256 algorithm to compute hash. 

c) HMAC (Hash-based Message Authentication Code) with SHA1 algorithm to compute hash. 
d) HMAC with SHA-256 algorithm to compute hash. 


The SCOSTA specification was initially prepared and presented by Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 
National Informatics Centre and C-DAC, Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, Government 
of India. 


This project was initiated with the following objectives: 
a) Standardization of card layout, data fields and other relevant information stored in the card, 
b) To ensure interoperability and multivendor support, and 
c) To ensure security and integrity of data. 


In general SCOSTA compliant operating system based Integrated Circuit Card (ICC) will work with an Interface 
Device (IFD) using one or more of the protocols, namely ISO/IEC 7816-3 T=0 or T=1; ISO/IEC 14443-3/-4 
type A, or type B. Certain examples included here are for illustrative purposes only for better understanding 
and do not suggest any particular implementation. 


This standard describes the minimum support for the application using the ICC. Operating systems with extra 
features not listed here will be SCOSTA compliant only if they support all the features listed in this standard and 
the extra features are non-conflicting with the functionality as provided in this standard. 


The standard was developed under the sub-committee, LITD 16 : 1 ‘Cards and personal Identification’. The 
composition of the sub-committee, LITD 16 : 1 responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
Annex B. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


CONTENTS 
Page No 

SCOPE 1 
REFERENCES 1 
SYMBOLS AND TERMINOLOGY 1 
APPLICATION PROTOCOL DATA UNIT (APDU) 2 
TRANSPORT PROTOCOL DATA UNIT (TPDU) 3 
BASIC DATA STRUCTURES 3 
6.1 Elementary Files 3 
6.2 File Referencing Methods 3 
6.3 Data Referencing Methods 4 
6.4 File Control Information 4 
SECURITY ARCHITECTURE 4 
7.1 Security Status 5 
7.2 Security Attributes 5 
7.3 Security Environments 5 
7.4 Security Algorithms 6 
7.5 Security Mechanisms 6 
7.6 Access Rule References 6 
APDU MESSAGE STRUCTURE 7 
8.1 Coding Conventions for Command Headers 7 
PASSWORD AND KEY REPOSITORIES 8 
9.1 Password Repository 8 
9.2 Key Repository 9 
COMMANDS 10 
10.1 File Related Commands 10 
10.2 Security Related Commands 12 
10.3. Other Commands 16 
DATA OBJECTS 16 
SECURE MESSAGING (SM) 17 
SESSION KEY DERIVATION 18 
13.1 Authentication along with Session Key Derivation 18 
13.2 Session Key Derivation using Manage Security Environment Command ey 18 
13.3 Key Derivation for Authentication 18 
SETTING INITIAL VALUE (IV) FOR CRYPTOGRAPHIC METHODS 19 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


15 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS 


15.1 
15.2 
15.3 
15.4 


Algorithms for Confidentiality 
Algorithms for Integrity 
Algorithms for Authentication 
Algorithm for Hash 


ANNEX A REFERENCES 


A-1 LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


A-2 LIST OF REFERRED INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS / PUBLICATIONS 


ANNEX B COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig. 1 Basic Encryption and Decryption Mechanisms in 3 DES Algorithm 
Fig.2 3 Des Encryption of Large Messages Using CBC Mode 
Fig.3 ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC Algorithm 2 Using DES 
Fig.4 Authentication and Key Establishment Protocol 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Security Algorithms 
Table 2. Coding for the Class Byte in OS 
Table 3 File Control Parameters for Files in the OS 
Table 4 P2 Byte for the VERIFY Command 
Table 5 P2 Byte for Various AUTHENTICATE Commands 
Table 6 Interpretations of P1 and P2 for Various AUTH Commands 
Table 7 Interpretation of Various CRDOs in CRTs for an OS 
Table 8 Interpretation of P1, P2 for PSO Commands 
Table9 SM Fields for Secure Messaging 


Indian Standard 


SCOSTA : SMART CARD OPERATING SYSTEM 
TEMPLATE ARCHITECTURE 


PART 1 BASIC COMMAND SET 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) specifies the requirement of an 
operating System that may be put into an integrated 
circuit that provides a contact, or a contact-less, or a 
combination of the two interfaces. Such an integrated 
circuit may be embedded in applications that use 
contact-less operations such as in an e-passport or may 
be deployed in a contact-less ID application. It may also 
be used in a contact interface based applications. This 
standard also provides details on the Operating System 
that shall be inter-operable and provide interface for the 
personalization and initialization. 


The following are out of the scope of this standard: 
a) The implementation of the operating system, 


b) Processor for the smart card and other such details, 
and 


c) The physical communication interface details 
between the ICC and IFD. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A and Annex B contains 
provisions which, through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All Standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated in Annex A and 
Annex B. 


3 SYMBOLS AND TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the terms and 
definitions given in IS 14202 series of standards shall 
apply, in addition to the following: 


"as A number in hexadecimal 
representation (for example, ‘30° is 
same as 48) 


AM Access mode byte 
Access Mode Data Object 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


A number in hexadecimal 
representation (for example, ‘30° is 
same as 48) 


APDU 
AT 
AT (AUTH) 


AT (USER) 


CC 
CCT 
CLA 

CT 

DATA 

DF 
DST 

EF 

EFiEF 
FCP 

HT 

ICC 


ID 
IFD 


INS 
KAT 


MAC 


Application Protocol Data Unit 
Authentication template 


AT template with usage byte to 
indicate internal and/or external 
authentication 


AT template with usage byte to 
indicate user-knowledge based 
authentication 


Cryptographic Checksum 
Cryptographic Checksum Template 
Class byte for the APDU 
Confidentiality template 

Data for the command APDU 
Dedicated file 

Digital signature template 
Elementary file 

with SFID of i. 30> il 

File control parameters 

Hash template 


Integrated Circuit Card (aka smart 
card) 


Identity/Identifier 


Interface Device (aka smart card 
reader). 


Instruction code for the APDU 
Key agreement template 
Key for Derivation use 


Coding for Length of DATA in 
APDU 


Coding for Maximum length of 
RESPONSE expected in APDU 


Message Authentication code 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


les A number in hexadecimal 
representation (for example, ‘30° is 
same as 48) 


Message A one-way function to calculate 
Digest MIC from a message 
MF Master File 
MIC Message integrity code (aka MAC) 
OS Operating system 
P1 First parameter byte for the APDU 
P2 Second parameter byte for the 
APDU 
PCD Proximity Coupling Device used for 
interactions with contact-less ICC. 
RESPONSE Response data from the ICC for 
command APDU 
RFU Reserve for Future Use 
SC Security condition 
SCOSTA Operating System Compliant to this 
Compliant OS part of the standard 
SC_DO Security condition data object 
SE Security environment 
SFID Short file ID 
SHA1 Message Digest Algorithm (Secure 
Hash Algorithm variant 1) 
SM Secure messaging 
SW1 First byte of the status word in the 
response ADPU 
SW2 Second byte of the status word in 
the response APDU 
tAPDU Transport layer APDU. 
tCLA Class byte for the tAPDU 
tDATA Data for the command tAPDU 
tINS Instruction code for the tAPDU 
tLe Coding for Length of tDATA in 
tAPDU 
tLe Coding for Maximum length of 
tRESPONSE expected in tAPDU 
tP1 First parameter byte for the tAPDU 
tP2 Second parameter byte for the 
tAPDU 
TPDU Transport Protocol Data Unit. 
tRESPONSE Response data from the ICC for 
command tAPDU 
tSW1 First byte of the status word in the 
response tADPU 
tSW2 Second byte of the status word in 


the response tAPDU 


SECTION I: OPERATING SYSTEM 
INTERFACE 


4 APPLICATION PROTOCOL DATA UNIT 
(APDU) 


For the purpose of this standard, the following two 
kinds of APDUs are defined. APDU for interface to the 
transport layer (T=0, T=1, or contact-less type A or type 
B as defined in IS 14202 (Part 3), ISO/IEC 14443-3 
and ISO/IEC 14443-4) is called transport APDU or 
tAPDU in this standard. The application level APDU 
shall represent the interface between the application 
and the OS tAPDU shall have a command header, 
an optional data field and an option expected length 
parameter. The command tAPDU shall contain the 
following: 

a) tCLA: CLA byte for the transport APDU; 

b) tINS: INS byte in the transport APDU; 

c) tP1: P1 byte in the transport APDU; 

d) tP2: P2 byte in the transport APDU; 

e) tLe: Le byte related to the transport APDU will 
be present only when the tAPDU needs command 
bytes; 

f) tDATA: Transport layer data bytes (of size 1.tLc); 
and 

g) tLe: Field in the transport APDU to indicate 
number of bytes expected in the response tAPDU 
(transport layer response APDU). 

Related fields in the application level command APDU 
are CLA, INS, P1, P2, Lc, DATA (1..Lc) and Le. 


The response tAPDU in the transport layer shall contain 
the following fields: 


a) tRESPONSE: Transport layer response (of size 
1..tLe or less); and 


b) tSW1, tSW2: transport layer status bytes. 


Related fields in the application level response APDU 
are the following: 


a) RESPONSE (1..Le or less). RESPONSE may be 
absent in the response APDU. 

b) b) SW1, SW2. 
tAPDU and APDU will have relationship based on 
certain parameters. If the Secure Messaging is not 
used, the tAPDU shall be identical to the APDU. If the 
secure messaging is used, tAPDU shall encapsulate the 
confidentiality and integrity of the application APDU 
as is indicated by tCLA. 


From the application view point, the maximum size of 
the Le and tLe will never exceed 255. The maximum 
size of the Le and tLe will never exceed 256. All such 
fields shall be coded in one byte only. The ICC therefore 
must support short-field Lc and Le and optionally may 
support extended-field Lc and Le. 


5 TRANSPORT PROTOCOL DATA UNIT 
(TPDU) 


Transport Protocol Data Unit (TPDU) shall be used 
to carry the tAPDU from the IFD to the ICC for 
command and from ICC to the IFD for the response. 
Conversion from tAPDU to the APDU shall be carried 
out completely by the ICC (for the commands) and IFD 
(for the response) locally. The conversion from APDU 
to the TPDU shall be based on the transport protocol. 
For T=0 and T=1 protocols, such conversions are 
defined in the IS 14202 (Part 3) and for contact-less 
protocols, such conversions are defined in the ISO/IEC 
14443-3, ISO/IEC 14443-4 and IS 14202 (Part 3). 


6 BASIC DATA STRUCTURES 


The OS shall support the following two categories of 
the files: 


a) Dedicated Files (DF), and 
b) Elementary Files (EF). 


The file system shall have a tree structure with 
minimum 4 nodes, so that it will be possible to have 
one MF, at least one DF under the MF, at least one DF 
under this DF and one or more EFs under the last DF. 
At each node of the tree, there can be several children 
nodes, either of type DF, or of type EF. The root of the 
tree shall be the Master File (of type DF). At any node 
of type DF it should be possible to create any number 
of children nodes (both DF and EF put together). The 
restrictions on the tree structure, if any will be only 
because of the limited size of the storage. Under this 
condition, a CREATE FILE command may fail with an 
error. 


The size of the files will be static and will depend upon 
the values provided implicitly or explicitly through the 
File Control Parameters (FCP) declared at the time of 
CREATE FILE command. 


Initially there will be no MF in a fresh, never-powered 
ICC compliant to this part. At this time, the ICC shall 
execute no commands except the following: 

a) CLA= ‘00’, 

b) INS=‘E0’, 

c) Pl = ‘00’, and 

d) P2 = ‘00’. 
Data field for the command shall indicate the FCP 
related to the MF. 


All commands except CREATE FILE (MF) shall return 
identical error conditions and fail to execute till the MF 
is created. MF once created, cannot be deleted. 


The ICC shall support data layout for multiple 
applications each of which may be identified by a DF. 
The files under the MF will be global for all applications. 
The files specific to an application shall be stored under 
a DF node in the file system tree. An application may 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


have sub-applications each represented by an individual 
DF under the parent DF. In such a case, the application 
may organize the files as global within the application 
and local for each sub-application. 


6.1 Elementary Files 


The elementary files (EF) will be used to keep the data 
pertaining to an application. An EF can be one of the 
following types as defined in IS 14202 (Part 4): 

a) Transparent EF, 

b) Linear EF with fixed size records, 

c) Linear EF with variable size records, and 

d) Cyclic EF with fixed size records. 
The OS may use some EFs internally as well. A few 
pre-determined and fixed short EF identifiers may 
be used to identify such EFs. There is however no 
restriction on the 16-bit identifiers for the same. In 
particular the OS uses short EF identifiers 1 and 
2 internally. Clause 9 of this standard describes 


their use. A file whose contents may be used by the 
OS internally shall be declared as INTERNAL EF. 


6.2 File Referencing Methods 


Each file (an EF or a DF) will have one 16-bit file 
identifier. The following restrictions shall apply on the 
16-bit file identifiers. 
a) ‘0000’ and ‘FFFF’ shall be reserved and shall not 
be used as identifiers; 
b) ‘3FO00’ will be reserved for the MF and shall not be 
used for any other file; 
c) ‘3FFF’ will be reserved to indicate the current DF 
and shall not be used for any file; 
d) ‘2F00’ and ‘2F01’ shall not be used for any 
general file under the MF where they are reserved 
for specific use as defined in IS 14202 (Part 4); 
and 
e) 16-bit File Identifiers will be unique among the 
identifier for EFs and DFs under a single DF. 
The EFs can also be referenced using another short EF 
identifier (5-bits) given at the time of CREATE FILE 
command. The following restrictions will apply on 
5-bit short file identifiers. 
a) Short EF identifiers shall be used only for the files 
under the currently selected DF. 
b) Short EF identifier of ‘00’ and ‘1F’ will be reserved 
and will not be used for any EF. In particular, short 
EF identifier of 0, when used, will refer to the 
currently selected EF. Short EF identifier of ‘1E’ 
under the MF will also be a reserved one as per 
IS 14202 (Part 4) and shall not be used for any 
other general file by the applications. 


c 


ma 


Short EF identifier may not be unique among the 
EFs under a DF. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


d) Short EF identifiers will not be assigned to a file 
when tag ‘88’ with length 0 is used in the FCP for 
the file during CREATE FILE command. 


Short EF identifier will be assigned to the file 
when tag ‘88’ with length 1 is used in the FCP 
and the value field indicates a number between 
1 and 30. If the value field is a number other than 
between | and 30 (both inclusive), an error shall 
be returned by the CREATE FILE command. 


f) Short EF identifier will be assigned to an EF, when 
tag ‘88’ is not used in the FCP, as a value given 
in the least significant five bits of the 16-bit file 
identifier provided it falls between 1 and 30 (both 
inclusive). In case, this value is 0 or 31, the short 
EF identifier shall not be assigned. 


e 


wa 


wa 


While selecting a file using short EF identifier, the 
results will be unpredictable if two or more files 
exist with the same short EF identifier. 


g 


h 


wm 


Under any DF, there can be a maximum of one EF 
which is of type internal and has an SFID=‘01’. 
Same restrictions will also apply for an internal 
EF with SFID=‘02’. 


Each DF in the file system may also have a DF name 
that shall be unique among all DFs in the file system. 
This DF name can be specified in the FCP during the 
CREATE FILE command. It will be possible to refer 
to a DF with its name irrespective to its location in the 
file system when the name was specified during the 
CREATE FILE command. When the DF name is not 
specified, it will not be possible to refer to that DF by 
its name. 


Files can be referenced using the following four 
methods as described in IS 14202 (Part 4). 


a) Referencing by the file identifier. The values 
*3F00’, ‘3FFF’ and ‘FFFF’ are used for special 
purposes as given in IS 14202 (Part 4) standard. 
In addition to this, the file IDs ‘2F00’ and ‘2F01’ 
under the MF shall also be reserved. 


Referencing by path. The path starting with ‘3F00’ 
shall refer to the absolute paths (that is starting 
from the MF) while the paths starting from any 
other file identifier will refer to the relative paths 
(that is starting from the current DF). Paths starting 
from ‘3FFF’ will also refer to the paths starting 
from the current DF. ‘3F00’ and ‘3FFF’ can occur 
only in the beginning of a path. For example, a 
path such as ‘3F003F00’ shall be considered as a 
wrong path. 


Referencing by short EF identifier. Valid SFID will 
be a value in the range 1 to 30 (that is ‘01’ to ‘1E’) 
and will be coded appropriately in the commands. 
An SFID of 0 will refer to the currently selected 
EF. There may be multiple files with the same 
SFID. 


b 


ma 


c 


wa 


d) Referencing by DF name. DF name referencing 
will be possible only for the DFs which were 
created with the name given in the FCP. The file 
name shall be unique among all DFs in the ICC. 
In case, two DFs are given the same name, the 
behaviour of the SCOSTA compliant OS is not 
specified. 


6.3 Data Referencing Methods 


The OS shall implement at least the following data 
referencing methods as defined in IS 14202 (Part 4). 


a) Record referencing: 
1) Referencing by one byte record number; and 
2) Referencing by one byte record identifier. 


It is implied in this standard that the maximum size of 
a record shall not exceed 255 bytes. 


b) Data Unit referencing 


The data unit referencing shall be available for the 
transparent EF. The operating system may implement 
data unit referencing mechanism for the record 
structure files as well primarily intended to debug the 
applications. However, in such a case, the data returned 
may include the structural information (meta-data) as 
well. An application to interface with an OS shall make 
no assumptions about the structure of the meta-data. 


The ICC may support variable data unit size (among 
these support for 8-bits wide data units is mandatory 
for all OS) as defined in IS 14202 (Part 4). 


6.4 File Control Information 


File control parameters shall be supported for 
CREATE FILE command as well as for SELECT FILE 
command. 


The OS shall support the FCP templates to be returned 
to the application during the SELECT FILE command 
execution. In case SELECT FILE command demands 
other templates, meaningful default information should 
be supplied if the other templates are not supported. 


7 SECURITY ARCHITECTURE 


In the OS, resources may be protected against 
various operations. These resources include files, 
DOs and commands. While checking for the security 
applicability, first the command level security shall be 
applied and only if successful, the individual resource 
level security will be applicable. For example, if a file 
is permitted to have a read access but the execution 
of READ BINARY command is subjected to certain 
security condition, the file can only be read if the 
READ BINARY security condition is met. This part 
supports the secure messaging and therefore it will be 
possible for a resource to be utilized only under SM 
commands if such an access condition is specified. 


The OS shall support the security architecture as 
defined in IS 14202 (Part 4), IS 14202 (Part 8) and 
IS 14202 (Part 9). 


7.1 Security Status 


The OS shall support the following three kinds of 
security status. 


a) Global security status 
authentication processes), 


b) File-specific security status (related to the DF 
authentication processes), and 


(related to the MF 


c) Command specific security status (related to the 
command authentication processes which are 
specific to the currently selected DF). 


7.2 Security Attributes 


It shall be possible to attach security attributes to the 
files using the FCP [as given in IS 14202 (Part 4)]. Both 
compact and expanded forms of security attributes must 
be supported. 


The OS shall support the access mode bytes (AM bytes) 
as defined in IS 14202 (Part 4) for EF and DF. Other 
kinds of AM bytes (for example AM bytes for DOs 
and tables etc.) are optional for the OS. No proprietary 
coding shall be used in AM/SC bytes. 


There may be several SC bytes for each AM byte when 
the security attributes are specified in the compact form 
(tag ‘8C’ in the FCP). The number of SC bytes depends 
upon the number of bits set to 1 in the corresponding AM 
byte. Under tag ‘8C’ there may be several groups of AM 
and associated SC bytes. In case, an operation is covered 
by more than one such group, an OR condition shall 
prevail, that is any of the conditions may be satisfied. 
In a similar manner, when the security attributes are 
specified using expanded form (tag ‘AB’), there may be 
several groups of AM_DO and SC_D0Os. In such cases 
when an operation is covered by several of these groups, 
an OR condition shall prevail. 


In a group if the AM _DO provides an AM byte, the 
number of SC_DOs shall be equal to the number of 
bits set to 1 in the AM byte. In all other cases, an AND 
condition shall prevail if multiple SC_DOs are specified. 


Security attributes of the command can only be specified 
using the expanded form. Security attributes of the file 
operations can be specified using the compact form 
and when it refers to a particular SE, the SE shall be 
looked for the CT and CCT tag(s) for the SM related 
security and AT tag(s) for the authentication (entity or 
user authentication). The usage qualifier bytes shall be 
consulted for the considered CRT. 


Security attributes of command shall be applicable 
based on the currently selected DF only. That is only 
the security attributes for the currently selected DF 
shall be applicable for the access control related to the 
commands. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


If a DF or EF is in the terminated state, the only 
operations possible on it are selection and deletion. Ifa 
DF or EF is in the deactivated state, the only operations 
possible on it are selection, activation, termination, and 
deletion. Further, no commands are permitted if a DF 
in the terminated or deactivated state is the current DF. 
Any command that specifies a file (EF or DF) by path 
shall fail if a terminated or deactivated DF is one of the 
components but not the final component in the path. 


7.3 Security Environments 


The security environments (SEs) shall be stored either 
in an EF or in the FCP of the DF with a tag ‘7B’. In 
case the SEs are stored in an EF, the 16-bit file id of 
the EF shall be notified with tag ‘8D’ in the FCP of the 
corresponding DF. Such an EF can only be under the 
DF for which the SEs are being defined. When a DF 
is selected, the SE#1 for that DF will be selected as 
current SE automatically. In case, there is no definition 
of the SE#1, the current SE in force will be all empty. 
When the DF is created first and the corresponding SE 
file is not yet created, the current SE will be all empty 
(since the created DF becomes the current DF). Upon 
selection of such a DF, the current SE will also be 
all empty. The current SE will not be modified when 
the SE file is created and written into. It shall only be 
modified when the DF is selected again. 


The SEs are also selected using MANAGE SECURITY 
ENVIRONMENT (MSE) command. When a DF is 
selected or when the current SE is changed using MSE: 
RESTORE command, the definition of the previously 
selected SE will not be in force. In this case, the IV, 
IV update mode, derived keys, challenge, etc. shall 
be derived from the values provided in the new SE 
definition, or reverted to the default in case they are 
unspecified in the new SE definition. OS shall support 
at least the following CRTs in the definition of the SEs. 


a) Confidentiality Template (CT) — CT shall be 
identified by tag ‘B8’. CT will be subjected to the 
usage qualifier byte. If the usage qualifier byte is 
not specified the CT template will be applicable 
for all operations under all conditions. 


b 


wm 


Cryptographic Checksum Template (CCT) — 
CCT shall be identified by tag ‘B4’. CCT shall be 
subjected to the usage qualifier byte. If the usage 
qualifier byte isnot specified, the CCT template 
shall be applicable for all CC operations under all 
conditions. 


c) Authentication Template (AT) — AT shall be 
identified by tag ‘A4’. AT can be defined for 
the cryptographic authentication and/or user 
knowledge (PIN/Password) based authentication 
based on the usage qualifier. If the usage qualifier 
is not specified the AT template shall be applicable 
for all authentication related operations under all 
conditions. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


d) Hash Template (HT) — HT shall be identified by 
tag ‘AA’. 
OS may support additional optional CRTs (for example, 
DST etc.) 


7.4 Security Algorithms 


The OS shall support algorithms given in Table 1 
for message digest, confidentiality, integrity and 
authentication. Details about these algorithms are given 
in 15. 


7.5 Security Mechanisms 


The OS shall support the following security mechanisms 
[see IS 14202 (Part 4)]. 


a) Entity authentication with password (VERIFY 
command); 


b) Entity authentication with key (EXTERNAL 
AUTHENTICATE, INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE 
and MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE commands). 
These mechanisms will be subjected to the 
algorithms as defined in 7.7 and may also include 
the facility to be able to establish a session key; 


c) Data authentication (computation/verification of 
cryptographic checksum). These mechanisms will 
be subjected to the algorithms as defined in 7.4; 


d) Data encipherment and decipherment. These 
mechanisms shall be subjected to the algorithms 
as defined in 7.4. 


e) Computation of message digest (Hash) code for 
the data. The mechanism for the computation 
of hash shall be subjected to the algorithms as 
defined in 7.4. 


f) Secure messaging with confidentiality and 
Integrity requirements. Secure messaging for the 
OS is explained later in this document. These 
mechanisms shall be subjected to confidentiality 
and integrity algorithms as defined in 7.4. 


7.6 Access Rule References 


The access rule (in expanded or in compact format) 
for a file can be stored in the file’s FCP. These rules 
shall specify under what security conditions certain 
operations on that file are permitted. The access rules for 
the DOs can be stored in the FCI of the corresponding 
DF. The access rule referencing mechanisms shall be 
according to IS 14202 (Part 4). 


Table 1 Security Algorithms 
( Clauses 7.4 and 9.2 ) 


Algorithm Reference CRT Template to which Algorithm 
Byte Value Applicable 

00 (Default) and 01 CT 3DES (Enc and Dec) 

82 CT AES-128 (Enc and Dec) 

83 CT AES-192 (Enc and Dec) 

84 CT AES-256 (Enc and Dec) 

01 CCT 3DES based CBC Residue (CC Computation and Verification) 
ISO/IEC 9797-1 Algorithm | for MAC using TDES 

00 (Default) and 02 CCT ISO/IEC 9797-1 Algorithm 2 for MAC using DES 

83 CCT AES-128 based CBC Residue (CC Computation and Verification) 
with ISO/IEC 9797-1 Algorithm 1 for MAC using AES-128. 

84 CCT AES-192 based CBC Residue (CC Computation and Verification) 
with ISO/IEC 9797-1 Algorithm 1 for MAC using AES-192. 

85 CCT AES-256 based CBC Residue (CC Computation and Verification) 
with ISO/IEC 9797-1 Algorithm 1 for MAC using AES-256. 

00 (Default) and 01 AT (AUTH) 3DES based challenge response 

02 AT (AUTH) ISO/IEC 11770-2 Key Establishment Mechanism 6 using 3DES 

83 AT (AUTH) AES-128 based challenge response 

84 AT (AUTH) AES-192 based challenge response 

85 AT (AUTH) AES-256 based challenge response 

00 (default) and 01 HT SHA-1 as defined in FIPS-140 

02 HT SHA-256 as defined in FIPS-140 

03 HT HMAC (Hash-based Message Authentication Code) with SHA-1 

04 HT HMAC with SHA-256 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 2 Coding for the Class Byte in OS 
( Clause 8.1.1 ) 


Class Byte Meaning 
b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 bl 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Commands in plain with no secure messaging 
0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 SM with authenticated command header 
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 SM without authenticated command header 


Other 


8 APDU MESSAGE STRUCTURE 


The OS shall support at least the normal 1-byte fields 
for coding Le and Lc (tLe and tLe for tAPDU) fields 
in the command APDU/command tAPDU [as defined 
in IS 14202 (Part 4)]. An APDU can be communicated 
with or without secure messaging. In case of secure 
messaging the corresponding tAPDU received shall 
contain one or more security mechanisms applicable 
to the command and the ICC shall send the response 
tAPDU with applicable secure messaging as defined 
by the received command for which the response is 
generated. 


8.1 Coding Conventions for Command Headers 


The command header has four bytes (CLA, INS, P1 
and P2 for the APDU and tCLA, tINS, tP1 and tP2 for 
the tAPDU). 


8.1.1 Class Byte (CLA and tCLA) 


The class byte coding as given in Table 2 shall be 
applicable to the OS. 


In particular tCLA will have a value of ‘00’ or 
‘08’ or ‘OC’. The CLA will have support only for the 
‘00’ value. 


8.1.2 Instruction Byte (INS, tINS) 


Instruction bytes shall be coded as defined in 
IS 14202 (Part 4), IS 14202 (Part 8) and IS 14202 (Part 9), 
in the appropriate places. In this part, only even INS 
bytes are to be used. Provision of odd INS byte codes 
shall not result in non-compliance to this part. The 
instructions that shall be implemented as mandatory 
instructions in an OS are described in this part of the 
standard. 


In case the secure messaging data objects contain the 
command header (under tag ‘89’), the INS byte shall 
be taken from that data object and not from tINS. 
Otherwise the INS byte shall be same as the tINS. In 
the former case, the command may be protected from 
the eavesdropper wherein the transport layer instruction 
byte (tINS) has no resemblance to the command being 
executed. 


RFU for this part 


8.1.3 Parameters to the Instructions (P1, P2, tP1 and 
tP2) 


P1 and P2 bytes shall be coded as described for the 
individual instructions in IS 14202 (Part 4), IS 14202 
(Part 8) and IS 14202 (Part 9). The further interpretation 
of these bytes and restrictions if any are given in this 
standard at appropriate places. In case the SM data 
objects contain the command header (under tag ‘89°), 
the tP1 and tP2 bytes shall be ignored and the P1 and 
P2 bytes shall be taken from the command header in 
the SM data objects. Otherwise the P1 and P2 shall be 
identical to tP1 and tP2. 


8.1.4 Data Field (DATA, tDATA) 


The data fields of the command APDU and command 
tAPDU shall be coded as per the transport protocol 
of ISO/IEC 14443 (Part 4). When there is secure 
messaging in force, tDATA field shall be a collection of 
SM data objects which shall be made from one or more 
of the following fields of the APDU. 

a) Command Header (CLA, INS, P1 and P2), 

b) DATA, 

c) Le, and 

d) Cryptographic checksum of one or more fields. 
If secure messaging is not used, the tDATA field shall 
be identical to DATA field. 


8.1.5 Response Data Field (RESPONSE, tRESPONSE) 


The data fields in the response APDU and response 
tAPDU shall be coded as per the transport protocol of 
the ISO/IEC 7816 or ISO/IEC14443 standards as the 
case may be. In case secure messaging is used, the 
tRESPONSE shall be a collection of SM DOs and will 
be derived from the following fields of the response 
APDU. 


a) RESPONSE, 
b) SW1 and SW2, and 
c) Cryptographic checksum of one or more fields. 


In case, secure messaging is not used, the (RESPONSE 
field shall be identical to the RESPONSE field. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


8.1.6 Status Bytes (SW1, SW2, tSW1 and tSW2) 


These bytes are coded as described inIS 14202 (Part 4), 
IS 14202 (Part 8) and IS 14202 (Part 9) and suitably 
interpreted in this standard at appropriate places. If 
secure messaging is used, the tSW1 and tSW2 shall 
carry only the secure messaging related status (that is 
‘6987’: Expected secure messaging DOs missing; and 
‘6988’: Incorrect secure messaging DOs). An SM data 
object in the response of tAPDU will provide the SW1 
and SW2 (processing status of the command). If SM is 
not used, tSW1 and tSW2 shall provide the SW1 and 
SW2. 


9 PASSWORD AND KEY REPOSITORIES 


In an OS, PIN and passwords are generally stored in 
identical manner and therefore are indistinguishable. In 
this standard, terms “password” and “PIN” are used in a 
generic manner to indicate PIN as well as password and 
will be used for User-knowledge based authentication. 
Passwords and keys are stored in elementary files in the 
OS. The following rules shall apply: 


a) The passwords are stored in an elementary file 
EF 1 (file with a short file id of 1) at various levels 
of directories. 


b) Avalid password repository will be an INTERNAL 
record file (variable or fixed size). 


c) There can only be one password repository under 
any DF (There can bemultiple files with short file 
id of 1 but only one of them can be an internal 
record file). 


d) The global passwords are stored in password 
repository (EF1) under the MF. 


e) When the current directory is MF, global and local 
passwords will mean the same. 


f) There can be up to a maximum of 31 records in 
any password repository (that is EF1). A password 
repository can store passwords whose identifiers 
can have a value between | and 31 (both inclusive). 


g) The keys are stored in a key repository in an 
elementary file EF2, a file with a short file id of 2 
at various levels of directories. 


h) A valid key repository will be a record file 
(variable or fixed size) and will be an INTERNAL 
EF. 

j) There can only be one key repository under a DF. 
There can be multiple files with short file id of 2 
but only one of them can be an internal record file. 

k) The global keys are stored in EF2 under MF. When 
the current DF is the MF, the local and global keys 
will be the same. 

m) There can be a maximum of 31 keys in a key 
repository with key identifiers carrying unique 
values from | to 31 (both inclusive). 


n) The OS and/or applications may choose any 
16-bit file ids for password and key repositories. 


As passwords are verified, the OS shall maintain the 
status of those passwords (verified/not-verified) at 
each level from the MF to the currently selected DF. 
Similarly as keys are authenticated, the OS shall 
maintain the status of those keys (authenticated/non 
authenticated) at each level from the MF to the currently 
selected DF. The statuses of the keys and passwords 
for a DF are maintained when currently selected DF 
is modified (possibly due to the SELECT FILE or any 
other command) if the DF lies in the common part 
of the paths from the MF to the old DF and from the 
MF to the new DF. The status of keys and passwords 
for all other DFs are treated as “not-verified” and 
“non-authenticated”. 


A password corresponding to password reference 
specified in the password related commands such as a 
VERIFY command, or in an SE under the AT template 
with User-knowledge based key reference, may not 
be found. Similarly, a key reference specified in a key 
based command such as in INTERNAL/EXTERNAL/ 
MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE command, or in an SE 
under any of the CRT that refers to the cryptographic 
keys may not be found. This condition may happen due 
to one of the following reasons: 


a) The corresponding password or key repository 
does not exist; and 


b) The repository exists but no record is found 
corresponding to the referred key or password. 


In such a case, the corresponding commands shall 
return a failure condition (‘6A88’, for “reference data 
not found”) whenever applicable. 


The changes in the password/key may or may not be 
permitted depending upon the security attributes for 
that file. 


9.1 Password Repository 


The password repository shall be a variable/fixed 
record file (up to a maximum of 31 records) with the 
following data items (in the same order): 


a) | Pin identifier 1 Byte 
4 Bits (see below) 
4 Bits (see below) 


Variable length 


b) | Retry counter 


c) | Max retry count 
d) | Pin 

The pin identifier shall be coded as follows. 

b8 b7 |b6 [b5 {b4 |b3 |b2 ibl 
V RFU Ref Data Number 


V bit represents if the corresponding entry is valid 
(1) or not (0). The password related commands such 
as VERIFY command for the invalid data will return 


a failure (‘6984’, “Reference data not usable”) in the 
status bytes. For the purpose of security attributes of 
a file operation, an invalid password or a non-existent 
password is considered as “VERIFIED”. 


V bit is manipulated using the ENABLE 
VERIFICATION REQUIREMENT and DISABLE 
VERIFICATION REQUIREMENT commands. 


Records in the EF1 will have one byte containing the 
Retry counter and Max retry count. The bits b,: b, of 
this byte will provide the Retry counter while bits b,:b, 
will provide the Max retry count. Bits b, and b, will be 
the MSB of their respective fields. A value ‘F’ for the 
Max retry count with non-zero retry counter mean that 
there is no limit on the retries. 


If Max retry count is a value other than ‘F’, then 
upon a successful verification, retry counter for that 
reference data is set to the Max retry count. Also upon 
unsuccessful verification, Retry counter decrements by 
1 and when it reaches a value of 0, subsequent VERIFY 
commands return a failure without any verification. 


If Max retry count is ‘F’ (but the Retry counter is non 
zero) then no limit will be set on the number of retries. 
In such a case, the Retry counter shall not be changed 
after a successful or unsuccessful verification. 


If the Retry counter is zero, then VERIFY command 
returns a failure without any verification irrespective of 
the value of the Max Retry Count. 


9.2 Key Repository 


The key repository is an internal EF containing variable/ 
fixed records (up to a maximum of 31 records) with the 
following data items (in the same order) in each record: 


a) | Key identifier 1 Byte 
b) | Key Type 1 Byte 
c) | Key Specific Information | Variable length 
d) | RFU Byte 1 Byte 
e) | Key Variable length 


The key identifier shall be coded as follows. 


b8 | b7 b6 |b5 |b4 |b3 | b2 | bl 
V | RFU 


V bit is used to denote if the corresponding key is 
valid or not. (0: invalid; 1: valid). The key number (by 
which the key is referred to in various security related 
operations) shall be unique for all keys. There can be 
only up to 31 keys in EF2. No two keys shall have the 
same key number even if they are used for two different 
purposes. 


Key Number 


The key type field provides the operations for which the 
key can be used. The value is coded as follows. 
b8 b7 |b6 |b5 |b4 |b3 | b2 bl 


CC | RFU RFU | RFU | RFU | Int Ext 
Auth | Auth 


Enc 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


Ifthe CC bit is set to 1, the key can be used for computation 
and verification of the cryptographic checksum. 


If the Enc bit is set to 1, the key can be used for symmetric 
encryption and decryption. 


If the KD bit is set to 1, the key will be known as a master 
key and can only be used for derivation. A master key is 
not intended for direct use. In the case of a master key 
record, all other bits and information refer to the derived 
key and not for the master key. 


If the Int Auth bit is set to 1, the key can be used for the 
internal authentication. 


If the Ext Auth bit is set to 1, the key can beused for the 
external authentication. 


If the key is to be used for the Mutual Auth, bit b, and 
b, both should be set to 1 in the key type field. The type 
specific information is of variable length and is defined 
as per the key type field. The value is made available 
for each bit set to 1 in the key type field. The values are 
provided in the order of the bits in the key type field. 
Thus if the CC bit is set to 1, the type specific information 
will first contain the information regarding the usage 
of the key for the CC. The following type specification 
information is used. 


Operation | Information 

CC None (0 bytes) 

Enc Usage Counter (2 Bytes) 

KD None (0 bytes) 

Int Auth Usage Counter (2 Bytes) 

Ext Auth | Retry Counter (4 bits) and Max Retry 
Count (4 bits) 


The following rules shall apply for the usage counters: 


a) Usage counters for the Enc, and Int Auth are 
monotonically decreasing counters. 


b) The counter if set to ‘FFFF’, means that the 
counter is not used (and therefore is not changed 
by the usage of the key — count treated as infinity). 


c) Values other than ‘FFFF’ refer to the number of 
times that the key can be used by the respective 
operations. 


d) The Int Auth counter will be decremented each 
time INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE command is 
used unless it is ‘0000’ or ‘FFFF’. 


e) The Enc counter is decremented each time 
a PSO:ENCRYPT or PSO: DECRYPT, 
SM:ENCRYPT or SM:DECRYPT operation is 
performed using this key as long as it is not ‘0000’ 
or ‘FFFF’. 

f) The key can be used only if the Usage Counter is 
non-zero. 

g) The initial value of the counter is set at the time 
of writing the record in the EF2. The value can be 
changed by UPDATE RECORD command if its 
execution is permitted by the security conditions. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


The retry counter and max retry count are coded as 
per the coding given for the password repository. Bits 
b8:b5 provide the Retry Counter value while bits b4:b1 
provide the max retry count. These values are used only 
upon the use of the EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE/ 
MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE commands. If the value 
of the retry counter is 0, the relevant command results 
in a failure. If the retry counter is other than 0, it is 
decremented by 1 (only if the max retry count is not ‘F’) 
upon each unsuccessful authentication. Retry counter 
is set to max retry count after each successful 
authentication. 


The RFU byte in the key record will always be ‘00’. 


The changes in the EF2 may or may not be permitted 
depending upon the security attributes for that file. 
However, this file will be referenced for validating the 
keys internally by the operating system. 


An invalid key will result in a failure for all commands 
that may use this key. However for the security 
conditions, an invalid key is assumed to have been 
satisfied. For example, if a file read operation is subject 
to the condition of proving the knowledge of a key 
which is marked invalid, the read operation shall be 
permitted. 


The appropriate algorithm will be chosen for the 
operation as given in Table 1. If the key is not permitted 
to be used for the operation (as per the key-type 
information), SW1-SW2=‘6985’ (“Condition of use 
not satisfied”) will be returned. 


10 COMMANDS 


An ICC has two kinds of storage, volatile and non- 
volatile. All instructions that update the non-volatile 
storage shall execute automatically. The effect of all 
such commands will be either due to the complete 
execution or due to no execution. The ICC may use 
the subsequent power up to finish the last command. 
The commands described in this part are categorized 
as follows: 


a) File related commands, 

b) Security related commands, and 

c) Other commands. 
All of these commands are appropriately referred in 
various parts of IS 14202. 
10.1 File Related Commands 


The OS shall support the commands given in below as 
per the standard given in the last column. 


Command Reference Standard 
a) | READ BINARY IS 14202for INS = ‘BO’. 
command 
b) | READ RECORDS | IS 14202 for INS = ‘B2’. 
command 


10 


Command Reference Standard 
c) | WRITE BINARY | IS 14202 for INS = ‘DO’. 
command 
d) | WRITE RECORD | IS 14202 for INS = ‘D2’. 
command 
e) | UPDATE BINARY | IS 14202 for INS = 
command ‘D6’ (Also see ERASE 
BINARY command for 
some details on UPDATE 
BINARY.) 
f) | UPDATE IS 14202 for INS = ‘DC’. 
RECORD 
command 
g) | APPEND IS 14202 for INS = ‘E2’. 
RECORD 
command 
h) | ERASE BINARY | IS 14202 for INS = ‘OE’. 
command 


AnFFis either created with the CREATE FILE command 
or is available in the ICC initially. The maximum size 
of the EF is fixed in the beginning. The EF will have the 
initial state of data as ‘invalid’. Data added in the EF 
makes its state as ‘valid’. ERASE BINARY command 
is used to delete the contents previously added using 
WRITE BINARY command. Such a command for 
the EF with a record structure is not needed as the 
record structures themselves may have a status byte 
(valid/invalid) and the applications can manipulate 
them by UPDATE RECORD command. 


Depending upon the attributes of the file, ERASE 
BINARY command will initialize the file data to all 
1’s (for write-and files) or to all 0’s (for write-or files). 
For write-once files, the flags shall be maintained at the 
level of each data-unit and it will be possible to erase 
data in units of one data-unit. Upon ERASE BINARY, 
the flags will be set to appropriate values. 


The UPDATE commands will only modify the data and 
disregard the flags. Thus it will be possible to UPDATE 
data and later WRITE into a write-once file, if the file 
has not been written into. 

For maintaining the atomicity, the OS may assume that 
an application shall not issue an erasure of more than 
255 bytes at a time. In case, the application issues an 
erasure of more than 255 bytes, the command shall still 
be carried out even though atomicity for the command 
may not be guaranteed. 


10.1.9 CREATE FILE Command 


Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘E0’. 


The CREATE FILE command in the OS will require 
the file control parameters as given in Table 3. 


The OS shall support P1 and P2 bytes of the command 
to be all Os. Implementation with other values of the P1 


and P2 is not mandatory in an SCOSTA compliant OS. 
If such cases are implemented, a default value of the 
FCP may be assumed. 


The default value for the LCSI of a file created 
using CREATE FILE command (if not explicitly 
specified in the command) will be ‘0S’ (operational 
state-activated). 


At most one PIN repository (internal EF with SFID of 
‘01°) can be created within a DF. Similarly, at most one 
key repository (internal EF with SFID of ‘02’) can be 
created within a DF. If an attempt is made to create a 
PIN repository (or a key repository) in a DF that already 
contains one PIN repository (or one key repository), the 
command should return an error. 


10.1.10 DELETE FILE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for even INS = ‘E4’. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


a) The DELETE FILE command can be used 
to delete an application/sub-application in a 
multi-application ICC or delete an EF within a 
single application. For deleting a file, the following 
two security conditions are applicable; 


b) “DELETE FILE (child)” of the parent DF of the 
EF/DF to be deleted; and 


c) “DELETE FILE (self)” of the EF/DF to be deleted. 


If the DELETE FILE command is used to delete a DF, 
the entire sub-tree under that DF is deleted. However, 
this command cannot be used to delete the MF. After 
successful execution of this command, the parent DF 
of the deleted EF/DF becomes the current DF. If as a 
result of the execution of the command, the current DF 
changes, then after the execution of the command, the 
current EF of the card is undefined; otherwise, it remains 
the same as before. If the current DF is changed, the 
current SE and related data are also changed. 


Table 3 File Control Parameters for Files in the OS 
( Clause 10.1.9 ) 


Tag Value Applicable to 
‘80° Size of the file in bytes Transparent EF 
“82” Depending upon the length 
(L=1) File descriptor byte-FDB (Mandatory field All files 
(L=2) FDB + data coding byte-DCB Transparent EF 
(L=5) FDB + DCB + MRL (2 bytes EF of records 
(L=6) FDB + DCB + MRL (2 bytes EF of records 

NOTE — Tag ‘82’ with length 3 and 4 is defined in IS 14202 (Part 4) but is not used with these values 
of the length in this part. Tag ‘82’ with length 1 and 2 is defined in IS 14202 (Part 4) for any file. In an 
SCOSTA compliant OS, these can be used only for the DF and transparent EF respectively. 
‘83? File identifier (Mandatory field Any file 
84’ DF Name DFs 
“88” Short EF identifier (1 SFID 30 EFs 
NOTE — If this tag is not present, least five bits of the File identifier (tag ‘83’) be used as short EF 
identifier (unless they represent 0 or ‘1F’). If this tag specifies no value (length 0), the corresponding 
EF will have no short EF identifier. In case, multiple files are found with same SFID, the behavior of the 
subsequent commands with implicit selection based on SFID is undefined. In case, it results in a conflict 
with the key or password repository, CREATE FILE command shall fail. 
‘8A? Life Cycle Status Integer (LCSI Any file 
‘8C? Security attributes in compact form Any file 
‘AB’ Security attributes in expanded form Any file 
NOTE — If the security attributes are not defined in expanded or in compact form, default security 
attributes of ‘no security’ will be used. Thus the information in a file with no security attribute can be 
operated upon by an application. 
‘7B’ SEs as defined in IS 14202 (see also 7.3). SEs may be contained in an EF in which case tag ‘8D’ is to be DFs 
used to provide the file id. 
‘8D’ File id of the EF under the DF containing SE templates. The SEs can be specified using ‘7B’ tag also. DFs 


11 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


10.1.11 SELECT FILE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘A4’. 


It should be possible for the SELECT FILE command 
to return FCP of the selected file depending upon the 
value in parameter P2. If Le field is empty, no value 
will be returned by the SELECT FILE command. The 
ICC must indicate the number of byte available using 
‘61 XX’ status. These can be retrieved by the IFD with 
the help of a GET RESPONSE command. When P2 is 
between ‘OC’ to ‘OF’, no value shall be returned and 
indication of the number of bytes using ‘61 XX’ shall 
not be given. 


When the current DF is changed, the current SE and 
related data are also changed. 


10.1.12 ACTIVATE FILE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘44’. 


Similar to the SELECT FILE command, it will be 
possible for the application to get the FCP of the file 
depending upon the value in the parameter P2. The 
LCSI byte in the returned FCP will represent the status 
of the file after the execution of the command. 


10.1.13 DEACTIVATE FILE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘04’. 


Similar to the SELECT FILE command, it will be 
possible for the application to get the FCP of the file 
depending upon the value in the parameter P2. The 
LCSI byte in the returned FCP will represent the status 
of the file after the execution of the command. In case 
of a DF, this command will execute successfully only 
if all EFs and DFs that exist immediately within the 
DF to be deactivated are already in the deactivated or 
terminated state. 


10.1.14 TERMINATE DF Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘E6’. 


Similar to the SELECT FILE command, it will be 
possible for the application to get the FCP of the file 
depending upon the value in the parameter P2. The 
LCSI byte in the returned FCP will represent the status 
of the file after the execution of the command. This 
command will execute successfully only if all EFs 


and DFs that exist immediately within the DF to be 
terminated are already in the terminated state. 


10.1.15 TERMINATE EF Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘E8’. 


Similar to the SELECT FILE command, it will be 
possible for the application to get the FCP of the file 
depending upon the value in the parameter P2. The 
LCSI byte in the returned FCP will represent the status 
of the file after the execution of the command. 


10.1.16 TERMINATE CARD USAGE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘FE’. 


This command is functionally the same as terminating 
the MF using the TERMINATE DF command and 
can only be executed if all EFs and DFs that exist 
immediately within the MF are already in the terminated 
state. 


10.2 Security Related Commands 


The OS shall support the commands given in 10.2.1 to 
10.2.11. 


10.2.1 VERIFY Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘20’. 


VERIFY command in the OS is used to verify the 
password with the password stored in the ICC. The 
reference data number as provided in P2 should be 
interpreted as given in Table 4. 


When the value of P2 is 0, the PIN number shall be 
taken from the AT template of the currently selected 
SE for which the usage qualifier indicates the user 
knowledge based authentication. The error conditions 
shall be returned as if the reference data is not found if 
any of the following conditions are true: 
a) No CRT with AT template is found in the current 
SE; 
b) Key reference (to be interpreted as PIN reference) 
is not specified in the AT template; 
c) Usage qualifier does not permit the user knowledge 
based authentication; and 
d) The PIN is not found in the repository or the 
corresponding record is an invalid one. 


Table 4 P2 Byte for the VERIFY Command 
( Clauses 10.2.1 and 10.2.9 ) 


b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 X X X X 
1 0 0 X X X X 


All other values 


12 


bl Meaning 

0 No information is given 

X PIN number in the global PIN repository 
X PIN# (lower 5 bits) in the local repository 


RFU 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 5 P2 Byte for Various AUTHENTICATE Commands 
( Clause 10.2.2 ) 


b8 b7 b6 b5 b4 b3 b2 bl Meaning 

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No information is given 

0 0 0 X X X X X Key Reference in Global Key Repository 
1 0 0 X X X X X Key Reference in local Key Repository 


All other values 


If the most significant bit of the PIN number is 1, then 
the PIN number coded in the lower five bits shall refer 
to the PIN in the local repository. If the most significant 
bit of the PIN number is 0, then the PIN number shall 
refer to the PIN in the global repository. 


10.2.2 INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘88’. 


The description for the INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE 
command is also valid for the MUTUAL and 
EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE commands and is 
indicated explicitly. 

The INTERNAL/EXTERNAL/MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE command requires an algorithm 
reference in P1 anda key reference in P2 as per Table 5. 


Depending upon the values of Pl and P2 for 
INTERNAL/EXTERNAL/MUTUALAUTHENTICATE 
commands, key reference and algorithm references may 
be taken from the current SE, P1 or P2 as per Table 6. 
When the references are taken from the current SE, the 
AT template shall be used for which the usage qualifier 
permits the selected operation. 


Table 6 Interpretations of P1 and P2 for Various 
AUTH Commands 


( Clause 10.2.2 ) 


PI P2 Value of Algo Ref Value of Key Ref 
0 0 From current SE From current SE 
0 40 From current SE P2 

#0 0 Pl From current SE 


An error (‘6A88’: REFERENCE DATA not found) shall 

be returned when any of the following conditions are true: 

a) If there is no CRT with AT template in the current 
SE; 

b) The key reference is not specified in the AT template 
of the current SE. (When the Algorithm Reference 
is not specified in the AT template, it shall be taken 
as 0). See also 10.2.4 for MUTUAL AUTH specific 
details; 

c) The usage qualifier in the SE does not indicate the 
use for the command; 

d) The key is not found in the key repository; and 


e) The indicated algorithm is not supported. 


RFU 


The value of AlgoRef as indicated in Table 6 when 2, 
the INTERNAL and EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE 
commands equals will fail and only MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE command shall be allowed to 
proceed to establish session key along with the 
authentication. 


The INTERNAL/EXTERNAL/MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE commands shall return error when 
any of the following conditions are true (but for the 
exceptions as listed below): 


a) Ifthe key is found in the repository but is an invalid 
one. In this case the behaviour for the EXTERNAL 
AUTH command shall be as indicated in 10.2.3. 
Otherwise an error code ‘6984’ (Reference data 
not usable) shall be returned. 


The key type byte in the key repository (or for 
the derived key in case of master key usage) does 
not permit the command. An error code (*6985’: 
condition of use not valid) shall be returned. 

If the key is found to be expired (that is, the 
usage counter is 0). An error code “6985” shall be 
returned. 


b 


wm 


c 


wm 


The response is not as expected for the challenge (in 
case of MUTUAL/EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE). 


If the indicated key reference is provided under tag ‘84’ 
(key for the derived key usage) then the derived key 
shall be used rather than the master key itself. In this 
case, the key repository must also indicate the key to 
be a master key by the KD bit set to 1. The key must 
have been derived for the appropriate use (for internal 
authentication in case the command is INTERNAL 
AUTH; for external authentication in case the 
command is EXTERNAL AUTH; and for both in case 
the command is MUTUAL AUTH) using MANAGE 
SECURITY ENVIRONMENT command. 


For the INTERNAL AUTHENTICATE command, 
corresponding 16-bit usage counter shall be 
decremented by 1 unless it is 0 or ‘FFFF’. 


10.2.3 EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE Command 


Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘82’. 


The EXTERNAL AUTHENTICATE command will 
be subjected to the behavior as described in 10.2.2. In 
addition the following shall apply: 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


a) If the body of the command is empty, 
SW1-SW2 = ‘63CX’ (where X is the value of 
further allowed retries) will be returned if the 
record corresponding to the referenced key is 
valid. In this case, no counters will be modified. 


If the body of the command is empty, 
SW1-SW2 = ‘9000’ will be returned if the record 
corresponding to the referenced key indicated key 
to be invalid. No counters shall be modified in this 
case. 


b) 


c 


wa 


If the reference data is invalid and the body is 
non-empty, ‘6984’ (REF DATA NOT USABLE) 
shall be returned. 


When the authentication is successful (the response 
is as expected for the issued challenge), retry counter 
shall be set to the maximum retry count, otherwise the 
counter shall be decremented by 1. 


10.2.4 MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘82’. 


The MUTUAL AUTHENTICATE command will be 
subjected to the behavior as described in 10.2.2. In 
addition the following shall apply: 


a) The behavior of this command shall be same as an 
EXTERNAL AUTH followed by an INTERNAL 
AUTH. This command may be used for the 
derivation of session keys as described later in 
13.1. When the MUTUAL AUTH command 
is used for key derivation and authentication 
purposes as outlined in section 2.1 of Part I, the 
command needs to perform operations related 
to confidentiality as well as integrity. For this 
purpose, the confidentiality and integrity keys 
shall be taken from the CT and CCT templates. In 
such a case, valid values of P2 must only be 0. 

b) When the mutual auth is used only for the 

authentication, the key reference for this 

command (as given in Table 6) will be valid only 
if the key type indicates that the key can be used 
for Internal Authentication as well as for External 

Authentication. 


c) When the mutual auth is used for key derivation as 
well, the key for confidentiality must be valid for 
encryption and decryption (in the CT template of 
the SE) and the key type must permit encryption. 
The key for the integrity must be valid for 
computation and verification of crypto-checksum 
(in the CCT template of the SE) and the key type 
must permit crypto checksum. The usage counters 
shall be handled as usual. 


14 


The size of DATA and RESPONSE will depend upon 
the algorithm reference. 


10.2.5 GET CHALLENGE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘84’. 


The GET CHALLENGE command will return a 
random number that may be derived from the session 
counter (but not the session counter itself). This 
challenge can be used implicitly only for the very next 
command issued by the interface device. The challenge 
will not be valid for the subsequent commands. The 
quality of the random numbers generated shall be as 
per prevailing international standards 


10.2.6 MANAGE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT (MSE) 


Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘22’. 
The MSE command will be subjected to the following: 


a) MSE SET command can only change the attributes 
of the current SE. Only those attributes that are 
listed as changeable in the table given below are 
permitted to be modified; 


b) MSE RESTORE command can select a specified 
SE as the current SE. It shall operate on the SE 
stored in the file or as DOs in the DF; and 


c) MSE STORE and MSE ERASE commands shall 
not be permitted. 


Upon a MSE SET if the component identified by 
tag ‘94’ is to be changed and it has a length 0 in the 
command body, then the previously obtained challenge 
by the GET CHALLENGE command will be used as 
data to derive the key. For this method to work, the 
MANAGE SECURITY COMMAND must be the 
immediately next command to execute after the GET 
CHALLENGE command. 


The OS shall have the interpretations of the CRT as 
given in Table 7. The same interpretations will also be 
applicable for the secure messaging if applicable. In 
an SE (or in the argument to MSE SET) multiple tags 
for the changeable components might be specified. In 
that case, they shall be processed in the sequence of the 
occurrence. 


When a key is derived using tag ‘94’, its use shall be 
restricted only for the operations given as an argument 
to the MSE SET command provided the key type of the 
master key permits it. If the master key is not valid for 
the operation for which key is being derived, MSE SET 
command shall return an error. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


Table 7 Interpretation of Various CRDOs in CRTs for an OS 


( Clause 10.2.6 ) 


and are not of permanent nature) 


Tag Meaning Applicable CRTs 
Non-changeable components of an SE with MSE SET command 
‘80° | Algorithm Reference (One byte value) (7.4) AT, CT, CCT, HT 
‘83? | Key Reference for direct use. Use in cryptographic authentication AT, CT, CCT 
with AT is described under INT/EXT/MUTUAL AUTH commands. 
For User Authentication, this tag provides the PIN identifier. 
‘84’ | Key Reference for computation of session key (tags ‘83’ and ‘84’ to AT, CT, CCT 
be used in mutually exclusive manner). ‘84’ is not applicable for user 
auth in AT template. 
‘95’ | Usage qualifier AT, CT, CCT 


Changeable components of an SE with MSE SET command (Changes are valid only for the current session 


reference). 


Data for key derivation for 3DES/AES-128 shall be minimum 16- 
byte wide. 


Data for key derivation for AES-192shall be minimum 24-byte wide. 
Data for key derivation for AES-256 shall be minimum 32-byte wide. 


‘85° | (Length = 0). Set IV to zero. This may happen at the time of MSE CT, CCT. For AT related 
RESTORE if this tag is used in the SE. (also the default value) commands, IV is always 0. 
‘86’ | (Length = 0). Set the IV to zero and its update at the end of the CT, CCT 
operation, to the value of the last block (cn) of the cipher text. 
‘87? | (Length = k) where k is the block size of the cipher for CT and CCT CT, CCT, HT 
and value is used to set the IV.For HT (valid only for HMAC), the 
value is used to set the Secret Key for HMAC. 
(Length = 0) Increment the IV by 1 for CT and CCT. 
‘94’ | Data for key derivation (valid only when ‘84’ tag is used for key AT, CT, CCT 


10.2.7 PERFORM SECURITY OPERATION (PSO) 
Command 


Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘2A’. 


All the security operations relevant for the symmetric 
key cryptography will be applicable inthe OS. Therefore, 
computation of the cryptographic checksum, calculation 
of a hash code, verification of the cryptographic 
checksum, encipherment, and decipherment will be 
required in the OS. These commands can be performed 
only if the security status satisfies the security attributes 
needed for the operation. Table 8 explains the P1 and 
P2 parameters specific to the PSO command. Further 
in this version, command chaining is not necessarily 
implemented. Hence reference to command chaining in 
the associated documents is not relevant. 


The Encipher and Decipher operations may also 
implement tag ‘82’ and ‘84’ for the cryptogram. These 
tags for Encipher and Decipher operations are not 
mandatory in an OS. However if tag ‘82’ is supported, 


15 


the value of plaintext for the encipher operation shall 
be a DO as <‘80’ Lc DATA Padding_if_needed>. The 
value returned by the decipher operation shall be only 
the value of tag ‘80’ in decrypted DATA. 


10.2.8 ENABLE VERIFICATION REQUIREMENT 


Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘28’. 


The enable verification requirement command will 
update the valid bit in EF1 for the record corresponding 
to the specified reference data. If P2 is given as 0, then 
the PIN identifier shall be taken from the current SE 
with the AT template for which the usage qualifier 
indicates the USER AUTH. The value of P1 can be 
0 or 1. However, if the value of P1 is 0, the verification 
data present in the command body will be ignored. The 
command shall be executed only if the PIN repository 
permits update operation on the basis of current security 
status. Otherwise an error shall be returned. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


10.2.9 DISABLE VERIFICATION REQUIREMENT 
Command 


Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘26’. 


This command will update the valid bit in EF1 for the 
record corresponding to the specified reference data. 
The value of the P2 shall be interpreted as given in 
Table 4. The command shall be executed only if the 
PIN repository permits update operation on the basis 
of current security status. Otherwise an error shall be 
returned. 


10.2.10 CHANGE REFERENCE DATA Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘24’. 


In order to change reference data, the command may 
also choose an option of providing old reference data. 
The reference data will be updated only if one of the 
following conditions is satisfied (unless the reference 
data is invalid). 

a) PIN repository permits update operation based on 
the current security status. 

b) If the old reference data is specified in the body 
and its verification with the stored reference data 
is satisfied. The security status is also updated 
accordingly. 

€ 


wa 


If the reference data is not specified in the body and 
the security status indicates an earlier satisfactory 
VERIFY command with reference to the same 
PIN. 


The value of the P2 shall be interpreted as given in 
Table 4. 

10.2.11 RESET RETRY COUNTER Command 

Ref: As in IS 14202 for INS = ‘2C’. 


The command will modify a record in the PIN 
repository subject to the IFD proving the knowledge 


of the reference data through a VERIFY command 
successfully completed earlier or if the PIN repository 
permits update operation on the basis of the current 
security status. If the resetting code is provided, the 
retry counter is set to minimum (resetting code, Max 
retry count). If the resetting code in not provided, the 
retry counter is set to the Max retry count. The resetting 
code will be one byte. 


The value of the P2 shall be interpreted as given in 
Table 4. 
10.3 OTHER COMMANDS 


The OS shall support the commands given in 10.3.1 to 
10.3.3. 


10.3.1 GET DATA Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 (Part 4) for INS = ‘CA’. 


10.3.2 PUT DATA Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 (Part 4) for INS = ‘DA’. 


10.3.3 GET RESPONSE Command 
Ref: As in IS 14202 (Part 4) for INS = ‘C0’. 


11 DATA OBJECTS 


In an OS, certain data objects may be made available. 
These shall be in compliance to the IS 14202 (Part 6). 
For example, some of the relevant DOs may be used 
to represent the Card’s Sequence Number, Primary 
Account Number, and Cardholder’s Name etc. The data 
objects shall be accessed using GET DATA and PUT 
DATA commands. DOs will be attached to a DF. GET 
DATA/PUT DATA commands will operate on the DOs 
attached to the selected DF. 


The OS shall support a DO with tag ‘46’ for pre-issuing 
data. This DO shall be available in the life time of the 


Table 8 Interpretation of P1, P2 for PSO Commands 
( Clause 10.2.7 ) 


Security operation P1 and P2 Tags 


Description 


Compute Cryptographic (P1= ‘8E’; P2=’80’) 


Checksum 


Cryptographic Checksum will be at least 4 bytes. The length of the returned 
value will depend upon the Le field. Also see the next row below for the 


description on the algorithm, IV and key references. 


Verify Cryptographic Checksum (P1 = ‘00’; P2= ‘A2’) 


Data field will contain plain text (tag ‘80’) and crypto checksum (tag ‘8E’). 


The CRT, for the operation will be known from the current SE. Algorithm 
reference and Key reference will be present in the SE in CCT template. The 
IV and IV mode update shall be as described by tags ‘85°, ‘86’ and ‘87’ in the 
CCT template. CCT shall be subjected to the key usage DO. 


Encipher (P1 = ‘86’; P2 =‘80’) 
Decipher (P1=’80’; P2 = ‘86’) 
Hash (P1=*90’; P2=*80’) 


Padding indicator byte will be ‘01’ or ‘02’ only. 


Algorithm reference will be taken from HT template. If not present, ‘00’ 


(default) shall be taken as algorithm reference. 


ICC and shall be used to return the chip serial number 
of the chip embedded in the ICC and as provided by 
the chip manufacturer. The embedded chips for the 
OS must support the way of providing a unique chip 
serial number which will be returned by GET DATA 
command. PUT DATA command for DO ‘46’ will not 
modify the value and return an appropriate error. The 
DO ‘46’ shall be available at least in the MF and shall 
have variable length. 


SECTION Il : CRYPTOGRAPHIC 
INFRASTRUCTURE IN SCOSTA 


12 SECURE MESSAGING (SM) 


The SM for OS shall be indicated by tCLA byte being 
‘08’ or ‘OC’ in the tAPDU. The SM may incorporate 
confidentiality, integrity, both or none. When an SM 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


does not incorporate the integrity, the only possible 
value for the tCLA shall be ‘08’ and the command 
header will not be authenticated. 


The following fields of the APDU shall be subjected to 
the SM while computing tAPDU. 


a) Command Header (including CLA, INS, P1 and 
P2), 


b) Command Data Field (DATA), 

c) Le field, 

d) Response Data Field (RESPONSE), and 
e) Response Status Bytes (SW1, SW2). 


Under the SM, the command data field in the 
tAPDU(tDATA) shall be consisting of collection of the 
SM related DOs which can include the fields given in 
Table 9. 


Table 9 SM Fields for Secure Messaging 
( Clause 12 ) 


Explanatory Notes 


SM Tags Meaning of Value 

‘80°, ‘81’ DATA field of APDU in case of command and 
RESPONSE field of APDU in case of response. 

“82”, 83” Data fields provide a cryptogram. After decryption 
of the cryptogram, the plaintext provides the 
SM_Dos with tags as listed in this table (and will 
not include DOs with tags ‘82’, ‘83’, ‘BO’ and 
‘BIF: 

‘86, 87 Padded if necessary and encrypted DATA field of 
the command APDU and RESPONSE field of the 
response APDU. 

‘89° Command Header of the APDU (CLA-INS-P1-P2) 

‘8E’ Crypto-Checksum 

‘96°, ‘97’ Provides the value of the Le. 

“99” Provides the SW1 and SW2 

‘BO, ‘BI’ Plaintext DOs whose values include the SM fields 
as described in this table and shall not include 
SMDos with tags ‘82’, ‘83’, ‘BO’ or BI’. 

‘B4’, ‘BS’ CCT template 

‘B8’, ‘B9’ CT template 


17 


There shall be only a maximum of one field each of the DATA, Le, 
command header in the command APDU and only a maximum of one 
field each of the RESPONSE and SW1-SW2 in the response APDU. 
Thus a tag ‘80’ or ‘81’ may be found in the plaintext corresponding 
to tag ‘82’ or as a DO in the tDATA field. The value field of this DO 
is a context by itself and may include crypto-checksum (tag ‘8E’). 
The key and algorithm shall be from the CT template in the SM field 
or from the current SE (if not specified in the SM field). 


The Lc field and Le field shall be known after decryption and removal 
of padding as length of the data. The key and algorithms shall be 
taken as described in the explanting notes for SM tags ‘82’/’83’. 


Command Header may be given in the tAPDU data field. In that 
case, the Command Header of the tAPDU (tCLA-tINS-tP1-tP2) 
shall be ignored for the command execution. tCLA shall be used 
to formulate the response APDU only. If this tag is used, the use of 
integrity mechanism is mandatory. 


When used, this shall be the last field in the context. If used in 
under the plaintext corresponding to SM-DOs with tags ‘82’ and 
‘83’ or value field in corresponding to tags SM-DOs ‘BO’ and 
‘Bl’, ‘8E’ shall be the last DO. When used in the context of the 
tDATA or tRESPONSE, it shall be the last field of the tDATA or 
tRESPONSE. The crypto-checksum shall be computed/verified 
using the CCT template (‘B4’/‘B5’) provided in the SM field in the 
same context, or the CCT template of the current SE. 


This SM field is valid only in the command tAPDU. 
This SM field is valid only in the response tAPDU. 


The value field is a context by itself and may include cryptochecksum 
(tag ‘8E’) of relevant DOs in the value. 


In the context where this DO is found, the crypto-checksum is 
computed using the values of this DO. 


In the context where this DO is found, the encryption/decryption is 
carried out using the values of this DO. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


The following shall be applicable for the secure 
messaging: 
a) If the CCT and/or CT templates are not provided 
in the SM data fields, then the CCT and/or CT 
templates of the current SE shall be used. 


The DATA and RESPONSE fields may be found 
in one of the following places: 


1) As a plaintext value with tags ‘807/81’; 


2) As the decrypted and de-padded cipher text 
from tags ‘867/87’; 

3) While processing the DOs for the value fields 
of plaintext DOs ‘B0’/‘B1’; and 

4) While processing the DOs for the values fields 
of the decrypted and de-padded cipher-text 
from tags ‘82’/‘83’. 

The Le and SW1/SW2 fields may be found in one 

of the following places: 


1) As value in DOs with tags ‘96’/‘97’ for Le and 
‘99° for SW1-SW2. 


Under tags ‘82’/‘83’ whose value field when 
decrypted and de-padded provides collection of 
DOs which may include DOs with tags ‘96’/‘97’ 
for the Le and ‘99’ for SW1-SW2. 


The tDATA field and tRESPONSE fields of the 
tAPDU may include several contexts. Each context 
provides a collection of SM DOs. A new context 
starts in SM DOs with tags ‘82’/‘83’/‘B0’/‘B1’. 
Each context may include zero or one CCT 
template, zero or one CT template and zero or one 
crypto-checksum. The crypto checksum if present 
shall be the last DO in its context. 


When the CCT and CT templates are usedin the 
SM fields, these may refer to the derived keys. 


b 


wm 


c 


<~ 


d 


wa 


e 


wm 


wa 


In a context, the crypto-checksum shall be 
computed for all DOs which have an odd tag. The 
computation of the checksum shall be subjected 
to the padding as defined in ISO/IEC 7816-4 and 
to the crypto-checksum algorithms as described in 
this standard. 


Each time an encryption/decryption is performed, 
the key usage counters shall be updated as defined 
for the PSO command. 


Keys and Algorithms used for formulating the 
tRESPONSE will be determined on the basis of 
following in the given order: 


1) The CRTs given in the command APDU which 
are applicable for SM response and 


2) The CRTs in the current SE applicable for SM 
response. 


8 


h 


wm 


wm 


j 


13 SESSION KEY DERIVATION 


The OS shall maintain at least two session keys, one for 
the confidentiality and another for the integrity. In case 


18 


the derived keys are to be used for the authentication 
purposes as well, these may share space with the session 
keys for the confidentiality (that is, there may be only 
one derived key for authentication and confidentiality). 
When the keys are derived, the OS shall have to maintain 
the usage for which the key is derived and permit only 
that use. 


The OS shall be able to derive the session keys using 
one of the methods given in 13.1 to 13.3. 


13.1 Authentication along with Session Key 
Derivation 


Session key can be derived along with the authentication 
using GET CHALLENGE and MUTUAL 
AUTHENTICATE command. This has been described 
in 15.3 when the algorithm reference is 2. Two keys shall 
be derived in this manner, one for the confidentiality 
and another for the integrity. The confidentiality key 
shall be usable for encryption and decryption (this 
can be restricted further by the CRT usage tag ‘95’ in 
the CT template in the current SE). The integrity key 
shall be usable for the computation and verification of 
cryptographic checksum (this can be restricted further 
by the CRT usage tag ‘95° in the CCT template). 


13.2 Session Key Derivation using MANAGE 
SECURITY ENVIRONMENT Command 


The MANAGE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT can 
be used for the key derivation of the session keys. For 
this tag ‘94’ in the appropriate CRT shall be used. For 
example, if the CT template of the current SE is selected, 
the key shall be derived for the confidentiality as per 
the key usage qualifier in that SE. The key derivation 
method shall use the tag ‘84’ (in theappropriate CRT) 
to find the key reference of the master key. It shall also 
check if the key is permitted as a master key in the 
key repository. The key derivation shall use algorithm 
reference for the algorithm for generation. 


Based on algorithm used for key derivation, the derived 
key shall be taken as higher order bytes of length equal 
to the size of the key from the cryptogram generated by 
encryption of data under ‘94’ tag using the corresponding 
encryption algorithm. The padding on the data (plain 
text) under ‘94’ tag shall be ‘80’ followed by zero or 
more bytes of all zeroes if applicable. 


The IV shall be taken as 0 (and it shall not modify the 
IV for confidentiality/integrity maintained separately 
by the OS). The encryption mode will be CBC. The 
resulting key shall be subjected to the key usage based 
on the key type parameter in the key repository. Thus a 
key derived using the CT template for example, can be 
made to work only for encryption or only for decryption 
or for both. 


13.3 Key Derivation for Authentication 


Keys may be derived for the authentication purposes 
if the corresponding master key reference is provided 


in the AT template in the current SE. The algorithm 
for the key derivation is the same as that for the 
session key derivation using MANAGE SECURITY 
ENVIRONMENT command as described in 13.2. 


14 SETTING INITIAL VALUE (IV) FOR 
CRYPTOGRAPHIC METHODS 


Many cryptographic algorithms require an initial value 
(IV), size of which usually depends upon the algorithm. 
Each cryptographic operation may in turn update the IV 
at the end. There are the following possibilities for the 
IV value and IV update: The value of the IV is set as 
per the details given in Table 7. IV is also updated at the 
end of the cryptographic operation as given in Table 7. 


Initial value of the IV may also be determined as 
defined in 15.3 for authentication and session key 
establishment. 


The OS shall maintain two different IVs and IV 
update modes, one each for the confidentiality and 
integrity. IV for integrity shall be updated at the end of 
computation/verification of cryptographic checksum 
and IV for confidentiality shall be updated at the end of 
encryption/decryption by means of a PSO command or 
by means of a secure messaging. 


15 CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS 


The OS shall support all cryptographic algorithms as 
described in 7.4 (Table 1). In this section, the algorithms 
are described in details. 


Plaintext °°". 
8-byte block 


Cipher-text @#@---+.. J -byte block 


| 8-byte 


a 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


15.1 Algorithms for Confidentiality 


Algorithms for the confidentiality include algorithms 
for Encryption and Decryption. The OS shall support 
3DES along with AES-128/192/256 algorithm. These 
algorithms shall be subjected to padding (as defined in 
ISO 9797-1 padding method 2) as well as CBC mode 
of encryption/decryption. The algorithm reference of 
‘00’ and ‘01’ in the CT template in a CRT shall mean 
the 3DES algorithm. The algorithm reference of ‘82’, 
‘83° and ‘84’in the CT template in a CRT shall mean 
the algorithms AES-128, AES-192 and AES-256 
respectively. 


The IV for the algorithms and the method to update the 
IV at the end of encryption/decryption can be set by 
MANAGE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT command. 


Only one IV need be maintained by the OS for the 
confidentiality which shall be different from the IV 
maintained by the OS for the integrity. 


The 3DES algorithm is explained pictorially in 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The implementation in Fig. 2 shall be 
applicable to AES algorithms as well with 3DES blocks 
replaced by AES-128 or AES-192 or AES-256 blocks. 


Depending upon the value of the IV related tags, the 
new value of the IV may be set automatically to cn (the 
last cipher-text block) when the chaining mode is used 
for the IV. 


The IV must be initialized whenever the current 
SE is changed (for example, because of SELECT 
FILE command or by MANAGE SECURITY 
ENVIRONMENT command). 


Cipher-text ==- . 


Plaintext @--~.. 


Fic. 1 BAsic ENCRYPTION AND DECRYPTION MECHANISMS IN 3 DES ALGORITHM 


19 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


Fic. 2 3 DES ENCRYPTION OF LARGE MESSAGES USING CBC MopE 


15.2 Algorithms for Integrity 


The OS shall support five algorithms for the integrity. 
The first algorithm (known as 3DES based CBC 
residue) is ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC algorithm 1 and 
shall be indicated by algorithm reference of ‘01’ in 
the CCT template of the CRT. The second algorithm 
is ISO/IEC 9797-1 algorithm 2 for MAC using 
DES shall be indicated by algorithm reference of 
‘00’ or ‘02’. The third through fifth algorithms are 
ISO/IEC 9797-1 algorithm 1 for MAC using AES-128, 
AES-192 and AES-256 respectively and shall be 
indicated by algorithm references of ‘83’, 84’ or ‘85’. 
The algorithms may need an IV which shall be taken as 
IV for the integrity template. 


15.2.1 CBC Residue based Integrity (ISO/IEC 9797-1 
MAC algorithm 1) 


In this mode, the 3DES algorithm shall be used for 
large messages. The integrity code (or cryptographic 
checksum) shall be derived from the cn (the last block 
of the encryption as shown in Fig. 2). It is recommended 
that an application should not use identical keys for 
confidentiality and integrity. 


The cryptographic checksum (or the integrity code) 
shall be at least 4 bytes long and at most 8 bytes long 
(the size of the cn in 3DES). Incase, smaller than 8 bytes 
are used for the integrity code, those many bytes from 
the least significant bytes onward shall be returned out 
of the CBC residue. The IV and the method to update 
IV shall be governed by the appropriate tags in the CCT 
template of the CRT. The operations will be similar to 
the ones described earlier. 


20 


15.2.2 ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC Algorithm 2 


This algorithm shall be indicated by the algorithm 
reference of 2 in the CCT template of the CRT to an 
OS. In this mode, IV shall be first incremented by 
1 and shall not be updated at the end of the computations. 
This algorithm is represented in Fig. 3. 


15.2.3 CBC Residue based Integrity Using AES-128 
(ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC algorithm 1) 


This algorithm (known as CBC residue based 
integrity using AES-128) is ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC 
algorithm 1 with AES-128 and shall be indicated by 
algorithm reference of ’83’ in the CCT template of CRT. 
The cryptographic checksum (or the integrity code) 
shall be atleast 8 bytes long and maximum 16 bytes 
long (the size of the cn in Fig 2 with 3DES replaced 
by AES-128). In case, less than 16 bytes are used for 
the integrity code, those many bytes from the least 
significant bytes onward shall be used out of the CBC 
residue. The IV and the method to update IV shall be 
governed by the appropriate tags in the CCT template 
of the CRT. The operations will be similar to the ones 
described earlier. 


15.2.4 CBC Residue based Integrity Using AES-192 
(ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC algorithm 1) 


This algorithm (known as CBC Residue based integrity 
using AES-192) is ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC algorithm 
1 with AES-192 and shall be indicated by algorithm 
reference of ‘84’ in the CCT template of CRT. Other 
details shall be same as for AES-128 based residue. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


1 


6 bytes 


+ 


Fic. 3 ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC ALGORITHM 2 UsING DES 


15.2.5 CBC Residue based Integrity Using AES-256 
(ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC algorithm 1) 


This algorithm (known as CBC Residue based 
integrity using AES-256) is ISO/IEC 9797-1 MAC 
algorithm 1 with AES-256 and shall be indicated by 
algorithm reference of ‘85’ in the CCT template of 
CRT. Other details shall be same as for AES-128 based 
residue. 


15.3 Algorithms for Authentication 


There shall be at least five algorithms for cryptographic 
authentication (INTERNAL, EXTERNAL and 
MUTUAL AUTH). 


The algorithm reference of ‘00’ or ‘01’ shall refer to the 
3DES based challenge response method. In this method, 
a challenge of 8 bytes shall be given by the challenger 
(IFD or ICC) to the subject (ICC or IFD). The subject 
shall encrypt the challenge using the indicated key and 
provide 8-byte response obtained as cipher-text from 
the 3DES encryption as described in Fig. 1. 


The algorithm reference of ‘02’ shall refer to the 
3DES based authentication as well as session key 
establishment of ISO/IEC 11770-2 key establishment 
mechanism and as described in Fig. 4. 


The algorithm reference of ‘83’ shall refer to AES-128 
based challenge response method. In this method, a 
challenge of 16 bytes shall be given by the challenger 
(IFD or ICC) to the subject (ICC or IFD). The subject 


21 


shall encrypt the challenge using the indicated key and 
provide 16-byte response obtained as cipher-text from 
AES-128 encryption. 


The algorithm reference of ‘84’ shall refer to AES-192 
based challenge response method. In this method, a 
challenge of 16 bytes shall be given by the challenger 
(IFD or ICC) to the subject (ICC or IFD). The subject 
shall encrypt the challenge using the indicated key and 
provide 16-byte response obtained as cipher-text from 
AES-192 encryption. 


The algorithm reference of ‘85’ shall refer to AES-256 
based challenge response method. In this method, a 
challenge of 16 bytes shall be given by the challenger 
(IFD or ICC) to the subject (ICC or IFD). The subject 
shall encrypt the challenge using the indicated key and 
provide 16-byte response obtained as cipher-text from 
AES-256 encryption. 


15.4 Algorithm for Hash 


The OS shall use the SHA-1 algorithm as described 
in FIPS-140 (ISO/IEC 19790) for message digest 
operations when algorithm reference ‘00’ and ‘01’ 
are used in the HT template. OS shall use SHA-256 
algorithm when algorithm reference ‘02’ is used in 
the HT template. OS shall use HMAC algorithm with 
SHA1 when algorithm reference is ‘03’. OS shall use 
HMAC algorithm with SHA-256 when algorithm 
reference is ‘04’. The maximum size of the data to be 
hashed shall not exceed more than 255 bytes. 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


1. Issue GET CHALLENGE command (8 Byte) 


2. Response as r1 CC 


3. IFD generates 8-byte long random rIFD and 16-byte long random 
KIFD. 


4. IFD generates a 32-byte cipher text obtained by encrypting (using 
the CT template of the current SE) the concatenated 32-byte rIFD, 
rICC and KIFD. It also computes an 8-byte cryptographic checksum 
using CCT template of the current SE. A total of 40 byte long 
response is constituted as concatenation of cipher-text and 
cryptographic checksum. 

5. Issue MUTUAL AUTH cmd (40 Bytes as computed) 


6. ICC verifies the crypto checksum of data. Decrypts and 
extracts rICC and verifies it against its own value. It then 
extracts rIFD and KIFD. ICC 

generates KICC (16-byte random number). 

7. ICC creates a cipher-text obtained by encrypting the 
concatenated rICC, rIFD and KICC as 32-byte plaintext. It also 
computes an 8-byte crypto checksum using CCT template of 
the current SE. A total of 40 byte (ciphertext concatenated with 
crypto-checksum) is sent as a response. 


8. IFD verifies the crypto checksum of data. Decrypts and extracts 
rIFD and rICC and verifies it against its own value. It also extracts 
KICC. 

9. Both IFD and ICC compute a session seed key as KICC KIFD. 
They then compute session integrity key and session confidentiality 
key as upper 16 bytes of SHAI(KICC KIFD || 232bits) and 
SHAI(KICC KIFD || 132bits) respectively. 

10. Both IFD and ICC set the IV for confidentiality as 0 and IV for 
integrity as an 8-byte number obtained by concatenation of 32 
leastsignificant bits of rICC and rIFD. 


Fic. 4 AUTHENTICATION AND KEY ESTABLISHMENT PROTOCOL 


22 


A-1 LIST OF 
STANDARDS 
IS No. 


14202 (Part 1) : 2014/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-1 : 
2011 


14202 (Part 2) : 2014/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-2 : 
2007 


14202 (Part 3) : 2013/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-3 : 
2006 


14202 (Part 4) : 2021/ 
ISO/IEC7816-4 : 
2020 


14202 (Part 6) : 2018/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-6 : 
2016 


14202 (Part 8) : 2013/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-8 : 
2004 


14202 (Part 9) : 2013/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-9 : 
2004 


14202 (Part 15) : 2021/ 
ISO/IEC 7816-15 : 
2016 


IS/ISO/IEC 11770-2 : 
2018 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
REFERENCES 
REFERRED 
Title ISO/IEC No. 
Identification cards — ISO/IEC 14443-3 


Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 1 cards with contacts — 
Physical characteristics 
(second revision) 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit 
cards: Part 2 cards with 
contacts Dimensions 
and location of the contacts 
(second revision) 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 3 Cards with 
contacts Electrical 
interface and transmission 
protocols (first revision) 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 4 Organization: 
Security and commands for 
interchange 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 6 Interindustry data 
elements for interchange 
(second revision) 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 8 Commands for 
security operations 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 9 Commands for card 
management 


Identification cards 
Integrated circuit cards: 
Part 15 Cryptographic 
information application 


IT security techniques — 
Key management: Part 2 
Mechanisms using 
symmetric techniques 
(first revision) 


23 


: 2011 


ISO/IEC 14443-4 
: 2008 


ISO/IEC 7501-1 : 
2008 


ISO/IEC 9797-1 


ISO/IEC 19790 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


INDIAN A-2 LIST OF REFERRED INTERNATIONAL 
STANDARDS / PUBLICATIONS 


Title 


Identification cards 
Contactless integrated circuit 
cards — Proximity cards — 
Part 3: Initialization and 
anti-collision 


Identification cards — 2008 
Contactless integrated circuit 
cards Proximity cards: 
Part 4 Transmission protocol 


Identification cards 
Machine 2008 readable travel 
documents — Part 1: Machine 
readable passport 


Information 
Security techniques 
Message Authentication 
Codes (MACs) — Part 1: 
Mechanisms using a_ block 
cipher 


technology 


Information 
Security techniques 
Security requirements 
cryptographic modules 


technology 


for 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Computer Hardware, Peripherals & Identification Cards Sectional Committee, LITD 16 


Organization 


In personal capacity 
All India Radio, New Delhi 


Canon India Private Limited, Gurugram 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology, Murthal 


Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, 
Noida 


Centre for Railway Information Systems, New Delhi 


Computer Society of India, New Delhi 


Delhi Integrated Multi-Modal Transit System Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Electronics Regional and Test Laboratory (North), 
New Delhi 


e-Smart Systems Limited, New Delhi 


Fime India, Bengaluru 
HP India Sales Private Limited, Bengaluru 


In personal capacity 
Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Bhilai 


Infineon Technologies India Private Limited, Noida 


Manufacturers Association for Information 
Technology, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology-Standardization Testing and Quality 
Certification (STQC), New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 
National Informatics Centre, New Delhi 


National Payments Corporation of India, Mumbai 


NXP Semiconductors India Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


Dr MAHESH CHANDRA (Chairman) 


MR S. K. SRIVASTAVA 
MR PRADEEP MEHRA (Alternate) 


MR ASHISH KHAANA 
MR SATOSHI HIRABAYASHI (Alternate) 


DR SMITA MOHANTY 
Dr M. R. Biswat (Alternate) 


Ms SAVITA KASHYAP 
MR RaJEsH KUsHwana (Alternate) 


Mr G. K. Marsni 
MR Visay K. DEVNATH (Alternate) 


ProF M. N. HODA 


MR ALOK SETHI 
MR ABHISHEK SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


MR V. P. SINGH 
MR M. P. SHARMA 


MR ANURAG ASHOK 


MR HARDIK MIRANI 
MR ANGAJ BHANDARI (Alternate) 


Ms ANUBHUTI 
Ms UPASANA CHOUDHRY (Alternate) 


MR ViINAY BHUSHAN TANEJA 
PROF RAJAT MOONA 


MR MADHUSUDHANAN SAMPATH 
MR Azay HANYALU (Alternate) 


MR GEORGE PAUL 


MR MANISH SELAL 


MR MUKUL KUMAR YADAV 
MR U. K. NanDwaNI (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI ASHA NANGIA (Alternate II) 


MR N. KISHOR NARANG 
MR RAJDEEP CHOUDHURY 


MR NALIN BANSAL 
MR SANJAY CHANDAK (Alternate) 


MR AJESH KAPOOR 
MR AcuIN JAIN (Alternate) 


24 


IS 16695 (Part 1) : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
Samsung India Electronics Private Limited, Mr DEEPAK BHARADWAJ 
New Delhi MR SANJAY KUMAR BANSAL (Alternate) 


ST Microelectronics Private Limited, Greater Noida Mr PRASHANT PANDEY 


Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi MR R. SAJI KUMAR 
Mr UTTAM CHAND (Alternate) 


The Institution of Electronics and Pror WG CD P. PRABHAKAR 
Telecommunication Engineers, New Delhi Dr JYOTSNA KUMAR MANDAL (Alternate) 
UL India Private Limited, Bengaluru Mr AsHIsH MATHUR 


MR V. MANJUNATH (Alternate) 


BIS Director General Ms REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI MANIKANDAN K. 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


Panel involved in the Finalization — LITD 16: 1 Cards and personal Identification 


Organization Representative(s) 

Indian Institute of Technology Bhilai, Bhilai ProF Rasat Moona (Convener) 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, Ms SAVITA KASHYAP 

NOIDA 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, MR ADARSH PILLAI 

NOIDA 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, MR MANISH KUMAR VERMA 

NOIDA 
e-Smart Systems Limited, New Delhi MR ANURAG ASHOK 
Infineon Technologies India Private Limited, Noida MR MADHUSUDHANAN SAMPATH 
Manufacturers Association for Information MR GEORGE PAUL 

Technology, New Delhi 
NXP Semiconductors India Private Limited, MR AJESH KAPOOR 

Bengaluru 
National Informatics Centre, New Delhi MR RAJDEEP CHOUDHURY 


ST Microelectronics Private Limited, Greater Noida MR DEEPAK AGARWAL 


ST Microelectronics Private Limited, Greater Noida MR PRASHANT PANDEY 


25 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 16 (16518). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


