RAT AAF IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 
Indian Standard 


aai À ara oH waT — ofa fear 
AMT 4 AAS WTA À Haifa AAT 
( Teel TREAT ) 


Use of Glass in Buildings — 
Code of Practice 


Part 4 Safety Related to Human Impact 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 81.040.20 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH APT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2019 Price Group 7 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Glazing is an important item in building construction, and glass, the primary glazing element, has to be selected 
to cater to several requirements. Fixing of glass is a specialized operation, when properly done, shall avoid the 
hazards of broken glass. Growing trend in use of glazed windows and doors in buildings; and structural glazing on 
exterior of buildings and structures has considerably increased the importance of glazing and the need for proper 
workmanship. This standard was, therefore formulated to provide required guidance and provisions on the subject 
matter. 


This Indian Standard is published in four parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part 1 General methodology for selection 
Part 2 Energy and light 
Part3 Fire and loading 
This standard (Part 4) was first published in 2014 to cover provisions on safety related to human impact. 


Correct selection of materials to be used in glazing for buildings depends on many factors. Therefore, provisions 
in this standard should be used in conjunction with those in other parts. 


Use of organic coated films including safety films on glass (say annealed) shall not be construed as safety glass as 
per this standard, and hence users should exercise caution in choosing their options. 


This revision of the standard is aimed at bringing the provisions at par with the provisions of the SP 7 (Part 6/ 
Sec 8) : 2016 ‘National Building Code of India 2016: Part 6 Structural Design, Section 8 Glass and Glazing’. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 
a) Use of glass in critical locations have been elaborated. 
b) Manifestation procedure to make glass visible has been included in detail. 
c) Testing requirements for safety glass have been detailed including on shot bag impact test. 
d) Definitions of various terms have been updated as per the prevailing engineering practices. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


Indian Standard 


USE OF GLASS IN BUILDINGS — 
CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 4 SAFETY RELATED TO HUMAN IMPACT 
( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 4) covers provisions for the 
selection and manifestation of glass in buildings, and 
safety with respect to human impact of the occupants. 


1.2 This standard does not cover the following: 


a) Glazing system including frameless glazing 
system, and 

b) Patent glazing. 
NOTE — The provisions of this standard pertain to selection 
of glass and associated materials. However, parties, as per 
their mutual agreement, may appropriately utilize the relevant 
provisions for installation of alternative sheeting materials 
used for similar purposes such as plastic glazing sheets/ 
polycarbonate sheets taking also into account requirements of 
safety issues as applicable with the specific material. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subjected 
to revision, and parties to agreement based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
2553 Specification for safety glass: 
(Part 1) : 1990 Part 1 General purpose (third 
revision) 
14900 : 2018 Specification for transparent float 
glass (first revision) 
16231 Code of practice use of glass in 
building: 
(Part 1) : 2018 General methodology for 


selection (first revision) 


(Part 3) : 2018 Fire and loading (first revision) 


17004 : 2018 Testing methods for processed 
glass 
SP 7 : 2016 National building code of India 


2016 


3 APPLICATION 


While selecting the glass for application, the structural 
performance and required glass thickness shall satisfy 
the following criteria: 


a) Glazing thickness calculation subjected to wind 
load is calculated in accordance to IS 16231 
(Part 3); and 

b) For a given application, the type and thickness 


of glass selected shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of IS 16231 (Part 1). 


4 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 14900 and IS 2553 (Part 1) and the following shall 


apply. 


4.1 Annealed Glass (see Glass) — Also known 
as ‘normal’ glass, which has not been subjected to 
toughening, lamination and heat strengthening. It is the 
product obtained from the process of slow and steady 
cooling of hot glass in order to relieve internal stresses 
or thermal induced stresses. 


NOTE — This term is most commonly used for flat glass. 


4.2 Aspect Ratio — The ratio of a longer side of glass 
pane to its shorter side. 


4.3 Balustrade — A low barrier forming a parapet to 
a stair, ramp, balcony, raised level or a change in level. 


4.4 Bite — The minimum distance by which the inner 
edge of a frame (or a stop) overlaps the edge of the 
glass panel. 


4.4.1 Glazing Bite — The dimension by which the 
framing system overlaps the edge of the glazing infill. 


4.5 Chair Rail — A fixed rigid bar that provides 
protection from human impact. 


4.6 Clear Glass — A transparent glass with neutral/ 
near colourless appearance. 


4.7 Curtain Wall — Non-load bearing structure/ 
partition of glass attached to the building frame, usually 
on the exterior face. Curtain wall vertical framing 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


members runs past the face of floor slabs, and provision 

for anchorage is typically made at vertical framing 

members only. 
NOTE — In contrast to combination assemblies and composite 
units, curtain wall systems often need to meet additional 
performance requirements for inter-storey differential 
movement, seismic drift, dynamic water infiltration, etc. 
Operating vents and entrance doors are provided as separate 
Inserts. 


4.8 Door or Shutter Assembly Door-set —A pedestrian 
door-set or industrial type door-set including any frame 
or guide, door leaf or leaves, rolling or folding curtain, 
etc, which is provided to give a fire resisting capability 
when used for the closing of permanent openings in 
fire resisting separating elements, which includes any 
side panel(s), vision panel(s), flush over panel(s) and/or 
transom panel(s) together with the building hardware 
and any seals (whether provided for the purpose of fire 
resistance or smoke control or for other purposes such 
as draught or acoustics) which form the assembly. 


4.9 Double Glazing — Glazing formed by an assembly 
of two glass panes separated by a spacer and the 
gap may be filled by vacuum, air or inert gases and 
hermetically sealed along the periphery to improve the 
thermal insulation. 


4.10 Exposed Edge — A glass pane’s edge that is not 
covered. 


4.11 Faceted Glazing — It is a type of glazing in which 
flat panes of glass are installed vertically at an angle to 
each other to form a faceted surface. 


NOTE — While no frames are used normally, in special cases, 
frames may also be used to achieve/maintain the curve. 


4.12 Fenestration — All area (including frame) in the 
building envelope that let in light, including window, 
plastic panels, clerestories, skylight, fanlight and glass 
doors that are generally more than one-half the floor 
height, and glass block walls. 


4.13 Fin — A piece of glass positioned and fastened to 
provide lateral support. 


4.14 Fire Separation — The distance, in metres, 
measured from the external wall of the building 
concerned to the external wall of any other building 
on the site, or from other site, or from the opposite 
side of street or other public space for the purpose of 
preventing the spread of fire. 


4.15 Float Glass — Flat, transparent, clear or tinted 
soda-lime silicate glass having parallel and polished 
surfaces obtained by casting and floatation on a metal 
bath. 


NOTE — Flat glass is a general term covering sheet glass, 
float glass and various forms of rolled and plate glass in 
which shape of the glass is flat and commonly used for 
windows, glass doors, transparent walls and other architectural 
applications. 


4.16 Flush Over Panel — A panel which is incorporated 
within a door-set or openable window and fitted above 
the leaf or leaves within the frame head and the jambs 
and with no transom. 


4.17 Frame — An element made of timber/metal/ 
aluminium or other durable material/combination of 
materials, such as glass fins and structural sealant, 
supporting the full length of a glazed panel edge. 


4.18 Frameless Glazing — An unframed glazing 
which maintains the integrity through pointed support 
structures. 


4.19 Fully Framed Glazing — The glazing whose 
panels have all its four edges framed. 


4.20 Gap — A clearance between two adjacent surfaces 
and/or edges, for example between the edge of the leaf 
and the reveal of the frame or between the face of 
the leaf and the frame stop. It also refers to the space 
between two glasses in double glazing. 


4.21 Glass — An inorganic, non-metallic material 
produced by the complete fusion of raw materials at 
high temperatures, into a homogenous liquid which is 
then cooled to a rigid condition without crystallizing. 
It is typically hard and brittle, and has a conchoidal 
fracture. It may be colourless or tinted and transparent 
to opaque. The term glass refers to monolithic glass 
unless specified otherwise. 


4.22 Glazing — Act of securing of glass or other 
glazing material into a building in prepared openings 
in windows, door panels, partitions, curtain wall, etc. 


4.23 Heat Strengthened Glass — Glass within which 
a permanent surface compressive stress has been 
induced by a controlled heating and cooling process 
in order to give it increased resistance to mechanical 
and thermal stress and prescribed fracture 
characteristics. 


4.24 Hermetic Seal — A complete seal (especially 
against the escape or entry of air which is impervious 
to outside interference or influence) done on insulating 
glass units. 


4.25 High Activity Area — An area where multiple 
and major human activity takes place. 


4.26 High Risk Area — An area prone to human injury 
and causality. 


4.27 Infill Balustrades — The balustrades in which the 
supported glass resists an infill pressure and/or point 
load applied to the glass panel. 


4.28 Insulating Glass Unit (IGU) — An assembly 
consisting of at least two panes of glass, separated 
by one or more spaces, hermetically sealed along the 
periphery, mechanically stable and durable. 


4.29 Interlayer — Layer or material acting as an 
adhesive and separator between plies of glass and/or 
plastic glazing sheets. 

NOTE — It can be designed to give additional performance 


to the finished product, for example impact resistance, fire 
resistance, solar control and acoustic insulation 


4.30 Internal Partition — An interior dividing wall 
or such portion of an interior dividing wall that is not a 
door, side panel, shop front or atrium wall. 


4.31 Laminated Safety Glass — It is a glass made of 
two or more pieces of glass which are held together by 
an interleaving layer or layers of plastic materials. 


4.32 Manifestation — Any technique (employed 
on glass) for enhancing a person’s awareness of the 
presence of transparent glass. 


4.33 Maximum Thickness — The thickness of a pane 
of glass at the maximum thickness tolerance. 


4.34 Minimum Thickness — The thickness of a pane 
of glass at the minimum thickness tolerance. 


4.35 Monolithic Glass — A single sheet of flat glass 
which could be either annealed, toughened or heat 
strengthened. 


4.36 Nominal Thickness — A numeric designation 
that indicates the approximate thickness of glass. 


4.37 Organic Coated Glass — A sheet of glass coated 
on one or both sides with an applied organic coating or 
sheeting. 


4.38 Pane — A single piece of glass or plastic glazing 
sheet material in a finished size ready for glazing. 


4.39 Panel — An assembly containing one or more 
panes of glass. 


4.40 Partition — It means an interior non-load bearing 
divider, one storey in height or part. 


4.41 Partly Framed or Unframed Glazing — The 
panels that have one or more edges unframed. 


4.42 Patterned Glass — A rolled glass having a 
distinct pattern on one or both surfaces. 


4.43 Rebate — The part of a surround; the cross- 
section of which forms an angle into which the edge of 
the glass is received. 


4.44 Reflective Coated Glass — It is a glass 
with reflective coating which uses the principle of 
increasing the direct reflection to maximize solar 
energy attenuation. In comparison with clear glass, its 
absorption of solar energy is also increased. 
NOTE — In comparison with float glass surface, these 
reflecting coatings (due to their composition) exhibit lower 
level of emissivity which improves their U-value. 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


4.45 Residual Protection — It is the protection 
provided to avoid the human impact on glass. It is 
provided on the side of glass where there are chances 
of human impact. It can be achieved by providing a sill 
structure or a grill inside. 


4.46 Sheet Glass — Glass made in large sheet directly 
from furnace or by making a cylinder and then flattening 
it. 

NOTE — These transparent glass have a glossy, fire- 


finished, apparently plane and smooth surfaces, but having a 
characteristic waviness of surface. 


4.47 Skylight — A fenestration surface having a 
slope of less than 60° from the horizontal plane. Other 
fenestration, even if mounted on roof of a building is 
considered as either a vertical glazing or sloped glazing 
depending upon the angle of the glazing. 


4.48 Sloped Overhead Glazing — A glazing that is 
inclined at less than 75° to the horizontal and located, 
wholly or partially, directly above an area that may be 
used by people. 


4.49 Spandrel — A non-vision portion of the exterior 
wall of a building. 


4.50 Tempered or Toughened Glass — Flat glass 
within which a permanent surface compressive stress 
has be induced by a controlled heating and cooling 
(quenching) process in order to give it greatly increased 
resistance to mechanical and thermal stress and 
prescribed fragmentation characteristics. 


4.51 Tinted Glass — A normal flat glass to which 
colourants (normally metal oxides) are added during 
manufacturing process to achieve tinting and solar 
radiation absorption properties. It is also referred to as 
body tinted glass. 


4.52 Toughened Safety (Tempered) Glass — A single 
piece of specially heat-treated glass, with a stress 
pattern such that the piece when fractured reduces to 
numerous granular fragments, with no large jagged 
edges. 


4.53 Transom — A horizontal cross bar connecting 
two vertical members in a glazing frame. 


4.54 Unframed Glazing — A glazing with one or more 
edges unframed. 


4.55 Vertical Fenestration — All fenestration other 
than skylights. Trombe wall assemblies, where glazing 
is installed within 300 mm ofa mass wall are considered 
walls and not fenestration. 


4.56 Wired Glass — It is a type of glass into which a 
wire mesh is embedded during production. Wired glass 
has an impact resistance similar to that of normal glass, 
but in case of breakage, the mesh retains the pieces of 
glass. 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


5 CRITERIA FOR HUMAN IMPACT SAFETY 


5.1 General 


The provisions herein are limited to the behaviour of 
glass when subjected to various kinds of human impact, 
precautions against risk of fall and falling glass. 
Conditions outside of ‘human impact’ are not covered 
under the scope of this standard. 


This standard does not assume that the glass used in 
accordance with this standard will not be broken under 
all human impact conditions, rather: 


a) it will not be broken under most likely forms of 
human impact; and 


b) even if it breaks, the likelihood of cutting or 
piercing injuries will be minimised by virtue of 
the protection given to the glass, or by the limited 
size, or by the fracture characteristics of the glass. 


Further, this standard does not deal with the safety and 
security of people or goods in relation to risks of: 


1) Vandalism, riots, burglary or break in protection; 
2) Fire arm protection; 
3) Protection from explosion (terrorist attack); 


4) Natural disasters like earthquake, cyclone, fire, 
etc; and 


5) Plastic glazing material, safety and security 
glazing, etc. 


In circumstances wherein the requirements of any 
referred standard(s) exceeds the requirements of this 
standard, in such cases the higher requirement shall 
become applicable. 


The use of this standard shall also be in conformity with all 
other relevant standards on fire safety, structural stability, 
natural disasters, safety and security, etc, in force. 


5.2 Safety Glass 


Glazing material that are constructed, treated, or 
combined with other materials so as to reduce, in 
comparison with ordinary sheet/float/plate glass, the 
likelihood of injury to persons by objects from exterior 
sources or by these safety glasses when they may be 
cracked or broken. 


The following are the products in the scope of this 
standard that may be used in safety glazing provided 
they meet the conformity requirements of IS 2553 
(Part 1). Safety glass according to this standard shall be 
of following types: 


a) Toughened safety (Tempered) glass, and 
b) Laminated safety glass. 


5.2.1 All other glasses such as heat-treated/ heat 
strengthened glasses, coated glasses and annealed 
glasses are not classified as safety glasses unless 
laminated to meet the requirement of tests specified in 
IS 2553 (Part 1) for safety glass. 


5.2.2 In atria where there is no impact loads above 
10 m, suitable toughened glass is adequate. When glass 
fins are used as a decorative member, it can be either 
toughened (tempered) or laminated glass. 


When glass fins are used as a structural member, it shall 
be toughened and laminated. The depth and thickness 
may vary as per elevation and wind load requirements. 
Design should also accommodate movements. It 
is recommended to use finite element analysis to 
determine the appropriate glass fin sizes. 


5.3 Critical Location 


5.3.1 Where any glazing is within 1.5 m above the 
floor level of a building, it is considered likely 
to be subjected to human impact and hence, shall 
comply with the human impact safety requirements 
of this standard. Safety glazing should also be 
used, 

a) where there is danger of falling infill glass 
material(s) from overhead glazing; 

b) the danger of falling due to a change in floor level; 
and 

c) in case of balustrades, stairs and floors. 

Based on typical accidents in glazed buildings, 
certain locations in buildings are found to be more 
vulnerable to human impact than others. Some of such 
critical locations are shown in Fig. 1 where, necessary 
precautions including those given below have to be 
followed: 

1) In-and-around doors, low windows; 

2) Door side panels; 

3) Panels mistaken for a doorway or opening; 

4) Panels at low levels in walls and partitions; 

5) Bathrooms; 

6) Building associated with special activities, for 
example, gymnasia, enclosed swimming pools, 
etc; 

7) Schools and child care facilities; and 


8) Nursing homes and care facilities for the aged and 
infirmed. 


5.3.2 Suitable precautions should be taken to reduce the 
injuries that can result from glass breakage and/or its 
subsequent fall-out by, 


a) selecting glass of a suitable type, thickness and 
size; 

b) selecting interlayer of a suitable type and 
thickness; 

c) enhancing a person’s awareness of presence of 
glass by making glass visible (manifestation of 
glass); and 

d) minimizing manual handling of large pieces of 
glass during installation. 


5.3.3 Based on the above, a comprehensive Table | is 
provided for information. The following shall also be 
considered: 


a) ‘H; corresponds to ‘height of fall’ of human 


b 


Cc 


d 


e 


wm 


wa 


wm 


WN 


being or glass, in case of change in level and ‘H? 
corresponds to ‘sill height’ with reference to floor 
height. 


In case of mirror glazing, it should conform to the 
requirements of other safety glasses unless it is 
fully backed by a solid material. 


In Case 2 and Case 3 of Table 1, if the smaller 
dimension of the pane is 250 mm or less and its 
area is 0.5 m’ or less, glass other than safety glass 
may be used, provided that its nominal thickness is 
not less than 6 mm (applicable to vertical glazing). 


Toughened or laminated safety glass should meet 
test requirements as given in respective Indian 
Standard specifications. 

The effective toughened safety glass thickness 
and/or laminated safety glass configuration shall 
be determined case by case with regard to, 

1) other solicitations (wind load, snow load, dead 

load, and human load); 


2) the overall dimension (length, width of 
surface); 

3) the aspect ratio of the glass; and 

4) the glazing fixing type (framing, bolted system, 
structural system, etc). 

Precautions against chances of injuries due 


to broken glass falling on people include the 
following: 


1) Broken annealed glass falling on people can 
cause grievous or even fatal injuries; hence it 
is recommended to use safety glass in locations 
other than defined in Case 1 where the risk of 
people getting hurt by falling glass is high. 


2 


wa 


Toughened safety (tempered) glass has a safe 
breakage pattern, as it breaks and disintegrates 
into small and relatively harmless particles. 
However, thick toughened glass particles may 
stay interlocked, and fall as lumps of these 
multiple particles and can cause a minor or 
medium injury mainly due to the weight of the 
cluster. 


8 


h 


) 


wm 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


3) Laminated safety glass shall generally not 
fall out of fixing. However, where laminated 
glass with both glasses toughened, is used for 
horizontal or sloped glazing, in case of failure 
of both toughened glasses, it may crumble as a 
blanket and fall out of fixing. This factor needs 
to be considered while designing horizontal 
and sloped glazing. Further, when the slope 
is acute, inner pane facing the floor should be 
laminated; and when the slope is obtuse, the 
outer pane facing the ground/floor should be 
laminated and all obtuse angle sloped glazing 
shall be continuously capped for safety 
reasons. 

4) Any broken glass in any glazing should be 

removed immediately on breakage. 


5) Strength of the glazing system should be such 
that it has the ability to hold the glass in place 
and prevent it from falling out as a whole. 

6) For over-head applications like skylights 

and canopies, for the safety of maintenance 

workers and people underneath, the broken 

laminated glass shall be capable of sustaining a 

load of 100 kg for a minimum duration 30 min. 


In case of external laminated glass facades, 
openable portions have to be left at regular 
distances for fire fighting and smoke exhaust. This 
portion should be of toughened (safety tempered) 
glass and clearly indicated by suitable visible 
marking. See also Part 4 ‘Fire and Life Safety’ of 
SP 7. 


If insulating glass unit (IGU) is used in situations 
mentioned in IS 16231 (Part 3), then one of the 
following shall apply: 


1) If IGU is installed in areas subjected to human 
impact on either side, then both the panes of 
the unit shall meet the requirements of this 
standard. 

2) In situations where access is restricted to one 

side of the unit, then only the accessible side 

should meet the requirements of this standard. 


j) Enhance person’s awareness of presence of glass 


k) For 


by making visible manifestation. 


specific provisions relating to smoke 
evacuation, Part 4 ‘Fire and Life Safety’ of SP 7 
may be referred. 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


| 


500 HHHH 


LEGEND 


= High Risk 


= Medium Risk 


= Low Risk 


= No Risk or Not Considered 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 CRITICAL LOCATIONS 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


Table 1 Type of Glass Suggested for Use at Different Critical Locations/Cases in Buildings 
( Clause 5.3 ) 


Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 
Vertical Walls with Vertical Walls Vertical Walls Horizontal or Glass Acting as a 
Residual Protection or H < 0.75 m and H < 0.75 m and Sloped Glazing Balustrade/Railing 
H, 2 0.75 m (Not H,< 1.5 m (Human H,> 1.5 m (Human Glass (Risk of Fall) (Human Impact and 
Likely to be Subjected Impact but no Risk Impact and Risk Risk of Fall) 
to Human Impact) of Fall) of Fall) 
(2) (3) (4) (5) 
GLASS 
FACADE GLASS 
Hs < 0.75 m RAILING 
Hf < 1.5m a orom 
Hf >1.5 m GLASS 
SHELTER 
PROTECTION GLASS 
SKYLIGHTS 
GLASS 
WINDOW 
| Hs < 0.75 m 
Hs > 0.75 m Hf >1.5 m 
Type of ý 5 Laminated Laminated 
las Any glass Safety glass Safety glass safety glass safety glass 
Example Residual protection is a) Doors a) Curtain walls a) Roof (Skylights) a) Balustrades 
the safeguard provided b) Side panels b) Façade b) Ceilings b) Balcony 


to avoid the impact of 
human being on glass. 
It is provided on the 
side of the glass where 
there are chances of 
human impact. It can be 
achieved by providing 
protection in the form 


of a sill structure or e) 
transom, chair rail or f) 


grill work inside 


c) Glazed area 


d) Doors in bathroom: 


1) Fully framed 


2) Partially 
framed 


3) Frameless 
Façade 


Windows 


g) Internal partitions 


and doors 
h) External façade 
and doors on 


D Safety glass is not mandatory. 
*) Laminated float safety glass is preferred. 


ground floor, above 
floors with terrace 
outside 


c) Spandrels 

d) High activity area 
e) High risk area 

f) To avoid risk 


c) Bus shelters 


d) Floors (not 
structural floors) 


e) Stairs 
f) Sloped façade 


c) Railings 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


5.4 Manifestation (Making Glass Visible) 


5.4.1 Presence of glass in a door, side panel or a 
panel capable of being mistaken for a doorway or 
opening, which is not made apparent by transoms, 
colonial bars, door frames, large door handles, stall or 
other components of glazing system, should be made 
apparent by some form of manifestation. Decorative 
treatment, such as being opaque, or patterned are the 
other common manifestation options. 


The manifestation employed should be of a sufficient 
size to make it immediately obvious. The manifestation 
should preferably be permanent, for example etching of 
the glazing; alternatively, if applied materials are used, 
they should be durable and not easily removed. 


Manifestation of glass doors shall be in the form of an 
opaque band in accordance with 5.4.2. 


5.4.2 Glass Doors 


The presence of a glass door shall be made apparent, 
with permanent uninterrupted visual manifestation 
at two levels (hand and eye level), within 800 mm 
to 1 000 mm from the floor and within 1 400 mm to 
1 600 mm from the floor, contrasting visually with 
the immediate background with a difference in light 
reflectance value (LRV) of 30 points seen through the 
glass in all light conditions (see Fig. 2). The width 


o I 


JEE 
|| 


\\\ 
\\ 
a 


KEY 


of the manifestation shall be minimum 75 mm. The 
edges of a glass door shall also be apparent when 
the door is open. An additional visual manifestation 
placed at a height of 100 mm to 300 mm is recommended 
(see Fig. 2). Visual manifestation consisting of 
two separate colours with a minimum difference 
in LRV of 60 points is recommended to enable 
lighting conditions and backgrounds to be taken into 
account. 


Ifa glass door is adjacent to, or is incorporated within, 
a fully glazed wall, the door and wall shall be clearly 
differentiated from one another, with the door more 
prominent. To achieve this, the door may be framed 
on both sides and also on the top by an opaque high- 
contrast strip at least 25 mm wide. 


Glass that is silvered or highly reflective should be 
avoided and any free-standing edges of glazed screens 
should have a strip contrasting visually with the 
surroundings against which they are seen. 


5.4.3 A band or marking may not be required, where 
any one of the following applies: 


a) Width of the glass is not greater than 500 mm 
at any part (this applies to overall panel 
assembly — not individual glass pieces as in 
faceted glazing); 


1 VISUAL MARKING ( MANIFESTATIONS ), MINIMUM WIDTH 75 mm, TWO SEPARATE COLOURS 


WITH A MINIMUM DIFFERENCE IN LRV OF 30 POINTS 


2 VISUAL MARKING ON DOOR FRAME, MINIMUM WIDTH 50 mm 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 PERMANENT MANIFESTATION ON GLASS Door 


b) Glass is provided with at least one fixed glazing 
bar, firmly attached to the styles to locate and 
protect each face of the glass. At least one transom 
(glazing bar) shall be located with its upper edge 
not less than 500 mm and its bottom edge not 
more than 1 000 mm above the floor level. The 
glazing bar shall have a face of width 40 + 3 mm; 
and 


c) Alternatively, patterns may be used as an 
acceptable form of marking provided it meets the 
other criteria in this standard. 


5.5 Identification 


All safety glasses shall be procured from certified 
manufacturers and the product shall conform to 
relevant Indian Standards and shall carry all relevant 
information through the approved label/permanent 
(indelible) markings on the glass surface. 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


5.6 Test Requirements 


5.6.1 Safety glass shall conform to all the test methods 
mentioned in IS 2553 (Part 1), and IS 17004 or as listed 
in Table 2. 


5.6.2 Mechanical Strength 


The required mechanical strength values (see Table 3) 
apply to quasi-static loading over a short time like 
wind loading relate to 5 percent probability of 
breakage at the lower limit and 95 percent confidence 
intervals. 


If the glass satisfy the relevant impact test performance 
requirements (or fragmentation test for toughened 
glass), in addition to all other appropriate tests 
mentioned in available Indian Standards or as listed 
in Table 3, these materials can be classified as safety 
glass. 


Table 2 Test Requirement 
( Clause 5.6.1 ) 


SI No. Testing Parameters Toughened Safety Glass Laminated Safety Glass 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Physical Properties 
a) Thickness and dimension Yes Yes 
b) Flatness 
1) Overall bow Yes Yes 
2) Wave and roller wave Yes 
3) Edge lift Yes 
4) Local distortion Yes 
ii) Mechanical Properties: 
a) Fragmentation test Yes 
b) Resistance to shock test Yes 
c) Fracture and adhesion test Yes 
d) Four point bending Yes 
e) Resistance to human impact Yes Yes 
f) Surface compression Yes 
g) Shot bag impact test Yes Yes 
(see Annex A) 
ili) Durability Properties: 
a) High temperature test: 
1) Boil test Yes 
2) Bake test Yes 
b) Humidity test: 
1) With condensation Yes 
2) Without condensation Yes 
c) Radiation test Yes 


d) UV light test 


Yes (for glass used in the exterior 
portions and subject to natural 
light) 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


Table 3 Minimum Mechanical Strength Required for Fully Toughened Glass 
( Clause 5.6.2 ) 


SI Type of Mechanical Strength 
No. Glass N/mm? 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Float (Clear/Tinted/Coated/Mirror) 120 

ii) Enameled flat (Based on enamelled surface in tension) 75 

iii) Patterned glass 90 


10 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


ANNEX A 


( Table 2) 
SHOT BAG IMPACT TEST 


A-1 OBJECTIVE 


The shot bag impact test addresses the capability of 
glass rails, guards, and balustrades in one, two, three 
and four sided support systems to continue in their 
function as a barrier by remaining in the designed 
framing system after impact or glass breakage. 


A-1.1 Glazing Retention 


The property of maintaining the glass or glazing 
material, post breakage, in a system, such that the glass 
is held in the framing system with no opening sufficient 
to pass a 75 mm solid steel sphere through the system 
using a horizontally applied force of 25 N. 


A-2 APPARATUS 


A-2.1 Instrumentation 


Load and time-measuring devices with an accuracy 
of 62 percent or the full scale shall be incorporated 


in the test setups. The scale ranges used shall assure 
that the performance levels are within an accuracy of 
65 percent. 


A-2.2 Load Attachments 


Brackets, fasteners, or other devices used in performing 
these tests shall be designed and attached so as to 
minimize their influence on the test results. 


A-2.3 Shot Bag, Traction and Release System 


The test apparatus shall be capable of supporting a 
45.4 kg shot bag and allowing unimpeded swinging 
of the shot bag from a drop height of 1 220 mm. The 
impactor system consists of the impactor, traction, 
release, and suspension devices. The impactor shall 
consist of the leather bag described in Fig. 3, a 
commercial punching bag with its bladder left in place, 
or any other leather bag of nominally identical shape 
and size. The bag shall be filled with lead shot of 


z 
A \ 


ROD MAY BE 
BENT AS SHOWN 
OR EYE NUT MAY 
BE THREADED 
ONTO ROD 


75 mm +25 mm 


wy 


REMOVE HANGING STRAP 


25 mm +6 mm 


WORM-DRIVE HOSE CLAMP LLI 
(INSTALL BEFORE BAG IS TAPED) 


75 mm 


3 
3 


E s e 


6 mm OR 10 mm 
TREADED METAL ROD 


25 mm LONG X 32 mm 
DIAMETER METAL 


SLEEVE (SERIES OF METAL 
WASHERS MAY BE USED) 


330 mm + 12 mm 


EYE NUT FOR LIFTING 
BRIDLE 


O 


METAL WASHERS 
5mm 1.5 mm 


Fic. 3 SHOT BAG Impactor 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


24")! mm diameter and taped. After filling with lead 
shot, the top shall be either pulled over the metal sleeve 
and tied with a cord; or twisted around the threaded 
eyebolt shaft and tied below the metal sleeve, or both. 
To reduce bag damage during testing, the exterior of the 
leather bag surface shall be completely covered with 
glass filament reinforced pressure sensitive polyester 
adhesive tape, 12 to 15 mm in width and 0.15 mm thick. 
Tape the entire bag, using three rolls or 165 m total 
length, and taping in a diagonal overlapping manner. 
Tape the neck of the bag separately, with additional 
glass filament reinforced tape of the same kind. 
The total mass of the impactor assembly shall be 
45.4")! kg, excluding traction system attachments. 
A traction system shall be used which enables the 
impactor to be brought into its launch position. The 
launch position depends on the drop height selected. 
The traction cable shall be connected to the impactor 
traction system by a release mechanism, with provisions 
for rotating the impactor. 


A-3 SHOT BAG IMPACT TEST 


A-3.1 Procedure 


Any protective masking or decorative component shall 
be removed from the glazing material. To position the 
impactor at the selected drop height, a traction force 
shall be applied to raise the impactor such that the axis 
of the impactor shall be aligned with the suspension 
cable, with the cable remaining taut. To ensure this, the 
top and bottom ends of the impactor shall be connected 
to the release device by a suitable link. To reduce bag 
deformation during testing, the bag shall be rotated about 
the axis of its suspension device before each specimen 
or sample set, by no less than 30°, and by no more 
than 90°. To reduce bag damage during testing, a thin 
homogeneous or non-woven plastic film no more than 
0.13 mm thick or a loosely draped woven cloth towel 
weighing no more than 0.005 kPa shall be permitted 
to be suspended vertically from its top edge directly 
in front of the surface of the specimen at a distance no 
more than 10 mm. When at rest, the maximum diameter 
of the impactor shall be located no more than 12 mm 
from the surface of the specimen and no more than 
50 mm from the centre of the specimen. The impactor 
shall be suspended from an overhead support, located 
so when at rest, it will, at its maximum diameter, be no 
more than 12 mm from the surface of the specimen and 


(1) UNBROKEN 


12 


no more than 50 mm from the centre of the specimen. 
Raise the impactor to the required height (460 or 
1 220 mm) and stabilize it. The suspension device shall 
be taut and the axes of the impactor and cable shall be 
aligned. The impactor, stabilized in the launch position 
in a vertical plane normal to the test specimen, shall 
be released and falls without initial velocity or axial 
rotation. One impact with a force of 1.8 KN shall occur 
on each glazing configuration of the test specimen. 
Each test specimen shall be inspected after each impact 
and report condition of specimen. 


A-3.2 Reporting of Results 

Impact performance shall be classified as: 
a) Unbroken, 
b) Broken and retained, or 


c) Infill broken and not retained (see Fig. 4). 


Retention of the product in the frame is based on the 
definition of glazing retention as given in A-1.1. 


Lo 


p 


Lossa 


@ 
A 


oa — 


t 


-E 


(2) BROKEN AND 
RETAINED GLAZING 


(3) INFILL BROKEN 
AND NOT RETAINED 


Fic. 4 GLAZING RETENTION 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector - 18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products 
and Services, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and 
Technology, Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board, 
New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 
Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 
Indian Plywood Industries Research & Training Institute, 


Bengaluru 
Larsen & Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


13 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. S. SACHDEV (Chairman) 


SHRI SHOBHIT UPPAL 
SHRI PRADEEP KuMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. N. PRAKASH 
SHRI SATISH V. SALPEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
Suri H. E. Iver (Alternate) 


SHRI SUROJIT SAMANTA 
SHRI RAM Avtar (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDI NATH JHA 


ADDITIONAL PPA cum SEcRETARY (CIB & RC) 
Jont Director (ENTOMOLOGY) (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TAS) (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SHASHI Kant (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. NEGI 
Dr Azay Cuovurasia (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DIRECTOR 
Dr P. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (SZ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (P) -1 (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr KIsHAN Kumar V. S 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI S. C. BHATIA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


VICE PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAVA SIL 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN VENKATESWARAN 
SHRI V. SUKUMAR HEBBAR (Alternate) 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD, (Army), New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Pest Control (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Gujarat, Gujarat 
Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 


New Delhi 


Research, Designs and Standards Organization, 
Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation, 
New Delhi 


The Energy and Resources Institute, 
New Delhi 


The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 
In personal capacity (Pratap Nursery Lane 


Near Gurudwara, Panditwari, Dehradun) 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Jr DG (ARCHITECTURE) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (ENGG) 
GENERAL MANAGER (ENGG) (Alternate) 


Suri R. L. Das 
SHRI ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR M. GHUGE 
Suri Nitin B. Jactap (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER, DESIGN (R&D) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Director (Works) 
ADE (Works) (Alternate) 


Pror ANIL DEWAN 
Pror Jaya Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SETH 
Ms Mecua Bena (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI SHAMIT MANCHANDA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. ADLAKHA 
SHRI DEVENDRA GILL (Alternate) 


Suri K. S. PRUTHI 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, 
SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S ARUN KUMAR 
SclENTIST ‘D’ (CivIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Panel for Use of Glass in Buildings, CED 13/P1 


Organization 


In personal capacity, (Flat A2/16, Sri Agrasen 
Society, Sector 7, Dwarka, New Delhi 110075) 


Central Public Works Department, 
New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products 
and Services, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Glazing Society of India, Chennai 


Kuraray India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Suri R. N. DANDEKAR (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER (CSQ) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (TAS) (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
SHRI SHASHI Kant (Alternate) 


Dr ASHOK KUMAR 


SHRI GOHUL DEEPAK 
SHRI SUBIN CALVIN Geo (Alternate) 


SHRI MALVINDERSINGH ROOOPRAI 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 


Organization 
Saint-Gobain Glass India Ltd, Chennai 


The All India Glass Manufacturers’ Federation 
Association, New Delhi 


The Energy Resources Institute, New Delhi 
The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 


The Institution of Engineers (India), New Delhi 


15 


IS 16231 (Part 4) : 2019 


Representative(s) 


SHRI A. R. UNNIKRISHNAN 
Suri N. Murau (Alternate) 


SHRI SOMASUNDARAM SENTHIL 
Suri Prem Dutt (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SETH 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI ASHUTOSH AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. ADLAKHA 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 13 (12376). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern :1/14C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


