INATA Ah IS 11780 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Tiedt tH ara Use (r-ea) A 
TET Va uao Shes hl ASAT 


(TETI TART ) 


Code for Selection and Testing of 
Rotary Screw Air Compressor 
(Oil-Flooded) 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.140 


© BIS 2023 


anda Aah at 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM YAA, 9 TEAK Me TH AMT, AE feet - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Ve TG: TUNES 


May 2023 Price Group 5 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Compressor, 
Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1986. The present revision has been taken up with a view to incorporating the 
modifications found necessary as a result of experience gained in the use of this standard. Also, in this revision, 
the standard has been brought into latest style and format of Indian Standards, and references to Indian Standards, 
wherever applicable have been updated. In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 


a) Clause 3.13 has been modified; and 
b) A new clause 7.10.5 has been added on cartridge-type oil filters. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11780 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CODE FOR SELECTION AND TESTING OF ROTARY SCREW 
AIR COMPRESSOR (OIL-FLOODED) 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the general method of selection 
and testing of rotary screw air compressors 
(oil-flooded) up to 25 bar pressure. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to the agreement 
based on this standard are encouraged to investigate 
the possibility of applying the most recent editions 
of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 1367 (Part 1): Technical supply conditions 

2014/ISO 8992 : for threaded steel fasteners: 

2005 Part 1 General requirements 
for bolts, screws, studs and 
nuts (fourth revision) 


IS 2825 : 1969 Code for unfired pressure 


vessels 


3 COMPRESSOR 


3.1 All equipment shall be suitable for specified 
operating conditions and shall work under 
continuous full load duty for at least one year. 


3.2 Number of compression stages, compressor 
arrangement, type of drive, prime mover, free air 
delivery, energy consumption, coolant arrangement, 
etc, shall be as per agreement between the 
manufacturer or the supplier and the purchaser 
before the order is placed. 


3.3 The purchaser has to provide adequate space for 
erection, maintenance, and operation. 


3.4 In the case of a liquid injection system, the type, 
and characteristics of liquid shall be given to the 
purchaser. 


3.5 Coolant characteristics, pressure, and flow shall 
be given to the purchaser. If it is not given fresh 
water at suitable pressure shall be used. Flow rates 
shall be specified by the manufacturer. 


3.6 Critical parts working under pressure, such as oil 
coolers, pressure pipes, hoses, and couplings, 
critical castings shall be hydraulically tested at 
1.5 times the operating pressure. 


3.7 Studs and bolts used on compressor be 
heat-treated and shall conform to IS 1367 (Part 1). 


3.7.1 All the fasteners shall be so designed that they 
shall not get loose during the service. 


3.8 In all pipe connections, flanges are necessary for 
pipe sizes 50 mm NB and above. In pipe connection 
below 50 mm NB threaded connections shall be 
used. 


3.9 Rotor and shaft shall be made of one piece. 


3.10 All bearings shall be of a replaceable type. 
Radial and thrust bearings shall be adequately 
lubricated. 


3.11 Lubricant seals shall be provided to prevent 
leakages. 


3.12 Compressor rotors shall be dynamically 
balanced. 


3.13 Name plate of the compressor shall give the 
following data: 


a) Manufacturer’s name or trade-mark (if any); 
b) Model designation and serial number; 

c) Capacity; 

d) Discharge absolute pressure; and 

e) kW (Horsepower). 


3.14 Direction of rotation of the compressor drive 
shaft shall be clearly shown by an arrow on the 
compressor casing. 


4 PRIME MOVER AND DRIVE EQUIPMENT 


4.1 Prime mover shall be sized considering 
transmission losses, power used for cooling fans, 
frictional losses, etc. 


4.2 Electric Motor 


An electric motor shall be rated for continuous 
output power of at least 110 percent of the maximum 
power required at any specified operation point, 
under balanced voltage conditions. 


4.3 Combustion engine rating shall be as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


4.4 Where the prime mover is of the reciprocating 
type, a torsional analysis of the complete system 
shall be carried out and this shall be the 
responsibility of the party supplying the prime 
mover. 


IS 11780 : 2023 


4.5 Transmission Gears 


4.5.1 Main transmission gears shall be capable of 
continuously transmitting the rated prime power 
multiplied by the application factor as given below: 


SI No. Prime Mover Application 
Factor 

0) (2) (3) 

i) Electric motor 1.3 

ii) Engine with 4 to 7 1.3 
cylinders 

iii) Engine with 8 or more 1.4 
cylinders 

iv) Steam turbine 1.3 

v) Gas turbine 1.3 


4.5.2 The main transmission gears shall be rated to 
transmit the maximum torque available from the 
prime mover under all operating conditions 
including starting torque. 


4.5.3 Lubricant shall be specified by the 
manufacturer as compatible with ambient 
temperature — 5 °C to 55 °C. 


4.6 Coupling 


4.6.1 The connections between the prime mover and 
compressor shall make allowance for misalignment 
between the shafts. If the compressor and gearbox 
are mounted on a base frame and the prime mover 
mounted separately, a coupling shall be used to take 
up any differential expansion. The coupling 
arrangement between the prime mover and the 
compressor shall be such as to avoid undue 
vibration. 


4.6.2 If the peripheral speed of the coupling exceeds 
25 m/s, the metallic parts of the coupling shall be of 
suitable material. 


4.6.3 It shall be capable of continuously transmitting 
the rated drive power multiplied by the application 
factor as given in 4.5.1. 


4.6.4 Coupling shall be rated to transmit the 
maximum torque under all operating conditions 
including starting torque. 


4.6.5 Gear type coupling with proper lubrication or 
of proven design shall be used, if maximum shaft 
speed is above 3 600 rev/min. 


4.6.6 Coupling shall be designed to allow the prime 
mover to be uncoupled. 


4.6.7 Suitable guards shall be provided for coupling 
and shafts which are exposed. 


5 INSPECTION — 
COMPRESSOR 


TESTING OF 


5.1 The purchaser may be present during the testing 
of the compressor with a prior appointment. 


5.2 If required by the purchaser, test certificates 
shall be provided by the manufacturer for the tests 
carried out. 


5.3 Hydrostatic pressure test shall be carried out at 
1.5 times the pressure designed for the component 
prior to assembly. The certificate shall be issued by 
the manufacturer for critical components such as 
pressure vessels, coolers, etc at the time of delivery. 


5.4 Performance Test 


a) Performance test shall be carried out on air, 
but the manufacturers shall provide 
equivalent air performance for the 
purchaser’s contract usage; 


The test shall be carried out with the 
manufacturer’s equipment and test prime 
mover as far as possible. It is not necessary 
that the same equipment or prime mover is 
fitted on the compressor; 


b 


S 


c) Each stage of the multistage compressor 
may be treated individually or as a complete 
unit; 

d 


wm 


Testing shall be done at least for 4 h as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the 
supplier; and 


e 


wm 


The test shall be carried out at a specified 
speed. If it is not possible to operate the 
compressor on the test bed at the actual 
specified conditions, due to power or other 
limitations, simulated testing shall be 
carried out. 


6 COOLERS, SEPARATORS, TRAPS, AND 
TANKS 


6.1 All the pressure vessels, shall be as per IS 2825. 
6.2 Material 


Materials shall be suitable for weldings and 
electrodes shall be compatible with the base 
material. 


6.3 Coolers shall be designed to work under severe 
operating conditions (maximum coolant 
temperature, maximum flow rate, and maximum 
pressure) to be specified by the manufacturer. 


6.4 Coolant 


If coolant is not specified by the manufacturer and if 
no information is available, fresh water at specified 
pressure and temperature declared by the 
manufacturer shall be used. 


6.5 Separators and Traps 


Liquid separators shall be provided (if required). 
The separator shall be fitted with a drain trap and 
blow-off valves. Manually drained separators shall 
have the holding capacity to permit continuous 
full-duty utilization without drainage for 16 h. 


6.6 Pipe Works 
6.6.1 Pipe Work 


The manufacturer shall define the location, size, and 
type of terminal connections. 


6.6.2 The designed pressure of all pipework, flanges, 
and fittings shall be at least the highest pressure 
which may occur during the operating condition. 


6.6.3 The pipe diameter shall be such that air or gas 
velocity shall not exceed 25 m/s. 


6.6.4 All pipe work shall be arranged with proper 
access for operation, maintenance, and cleaning. 


6.6.5 All pipe work and auxiliary piping shall be 
properly supported to avoid damages due to 
vibrations, thermal expansion, and self-weight. 


6.6.6 Air and lubricant lines shall be of seamless 
carbon steel tubes and coolant lines shall be of seam 
welded pipe. Special or corrosion-resistant materials 
may be used, if required by the customer. Copper 
and plastic pipe are permissible for measuring and 
control lines and scavenging lines. Suitable 
high-pressure rating hoses and pipes may also be 
used. 


6.6.7 A nominal effective pressure of 7 bar shall be 
taken as the minimum pressure rating for all 
connections on the delivery side. 


6.6.8 Lubricant pipes running horizontally shall 
have a slope of at least 20 mm per linear metre 
(1 to 50) towards oil reservoir. 


6.6.8.1 In the case of pressure operated lubrication 
system, it may not be necessary. Drain lines except 
instrument and control lines shall be of 10 mm 
internal diameter. 


6.6.9 Pipe systems shall be made by bending or 
welding. Flanges shall be butt welded. Threaded 
connections may be used up to 50 mm internal 
diameter, and 12 bar pressure. Use of threaded 
connection shall be minimum. 


7 LUBRICANT AND LIQUID SEAL SYSTEMS 


7.1 A complete pressure lubricating system shall 
lubricate the following parts of the compressor (if 
applicable). 

a) Gearbox and bearings; 

b) Main drive bearings; 

c) Couplings; 

d) Turbine governor, trip, and throttle valve; 

e) Shaft seal system; and 

f) Timing gear. 
7.2 If an external pump lubrication system is 


provided, then the manufacturer shall give 
lubricatingqualities, pressures, flows, etc. 


IS 11780 : 2023 


7.2.1 Manufacturer shall supply another stand-by 
pump fitted on the compressor which shall take over 
automatically if the main pump fails and a trip 
arrangement is not provided. An accumulator shall 
be provided to maintain the pressure till the takeover 
is complete. 


7.3 Grease nipples shall be easily accessible. 
7.3.1 Lubricant Reservoir 


If a separate lubricant reservoir is provided, the drain 
pipe shall have a slope of 75 mm/m. 


7.3.2 Reservoir shall be sealed against dirt, water, 
etc. Opening at the top shall be raised. It shall have 
a drain plug at the bottom-most position. All pipe 
connections to the reservoir other than drain or 
control shall be flanged. 


7.4 Size of the Tank 


For safety in case of leakages or breakdown, the 
column between minimum operating level and 
pump inlet bottom-most position shall at least have 
oil sufficient for 2 min of operation or a suitable 
safety device shall be provided to protect the system. 
This is applicable if a pump is provided for oil 
circulation and pressurized lubrication. 


7.5 Pressure control valve to be provided to maintain 
and control the lubricant pressure. When the main 
pump and standby pump both are working, the 
pressure shall be controlled within 15 percent. This 
is applicable, if a pump is provided for pressurized 
lubrication. 


7.6 All exposed rotating parts shall have guards. 
7.7 Lubricant Coolers 


Minimum one cooler shall be provided and shall be 
able to take total heat load. Twin coolers may also 
be used. 


7.8 Cooler shall be suitable for lubricant pressure. If 
coolant is not specified then fresh water so that 
suitable pressure and flow is taken as the cooling 
medium. 


7.9 Inlet and draining connections shall be provided 
on the cooler. 


7.10 Filters 


7.10.1 Full flow lubricant filters capable of 
removing 25 um particles shall be used. The filter 
element shall be of a replaceable type. Alternatively, 
throw-away filters shall be provided. 


7.10.2 Filter casing and filter element shall be 
suitable for operating above the maximum discharge 
pressure of the lubricant pump. 


7.10.3 Filters shall be located downstream of the 
cooler. 


IS 11780 : 2023 


7.10.4 Filling and draining connections shall be 
provided for filters. 


7.10.5 The requirements given above shall not apply 
to cartridge-type oil filters. 


7.11 Liquid Injected Screw 


7.11.1 A liquid may be injected into the gas being 
compressed in the screw. The purpose of the liquid 
injection is to improve performance, temperature 
control, and lubricating cooling of rotors and 
casings. The liquid may pass on along with gas or 
may be separated and recycled to the compressor 
after cooling and filtering. The requirement of 6 
shall apply to liquid injected compressors also. 


7.11.2 If the injected liquid is used as the compressor 
lubricant (as in the case of oil-injected compressor), 
the lubricant system pressure is related to discharge 
pressure. The compressor shaft seals and integral 
gearbox shall be lubricated by the compressor 
lubrication system. 


7.11.2.1 Separate gearbox and main drive shall be 
lubricated by an independent system. 


7.11.3 In liquid injected compressors, liquid 
(lubricant) is injected into the air or gas during 
compression. The mixture of compressed air or gas 
and lubricant is passed to a separator where air or 
gas is separated from the lubricant. Lubricant is fed 


to the cooler and filter and then to the compressor. 


7.11.4 The oil content in supply air or gas shall be 
specified by the manufacturer. 


7.11.5 Reservoir for lubricant injected compressor: 


a) The reservoir may be combined with a 
separator or may be a separate vessel; 


b 


ma 


The reservoir shall have a drainage point for 
complete drainage; 


c) Pipe connections above 50 mm to the 
reservoir shall be flanged except for control 
or indicator connections. Inlet connection 
shall be of 50 mm diameter minimum as far 
as possible; and 


d) The level indicator shall be provided. 
8 SAFETY SWITCHES 


A suitable safety device shall be provided to trip or 
to give the audio-visual alarm to the equipment in 
case of an abnormal temperature rise as specified by 
the manufacturer. 


9 MAINTENANCE AND 
INSTRUCTIONS 


OPERATING 


The manufacturer shall supply the literature such as 
the user handbook (operating manual), part 
identification manual, and maintenance manual to 
the purchaser. 


IS 11780 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


Organization 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Boldrocchi Indian Private Limited, Gurugram 


Burckhardt Compression India Private Limited, 
Noida 
CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


CSIR - National 
Bengaluru 


Aerospace Laboratories, 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 


of Defense, New Delhi 


Dresser-Rand India Private Limited, Pune 


ELGI Equipments Limited, Coimbatore 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Gail (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Ahmedabad 


Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune 


Representative(s) 
SHRI K. RAVI (Chairperson) 
SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 


SHRI PRASAD YADAV 
SHRI ATUL GAIKWAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. DURAIRAJ 
SHRI Y. V. RAMA LAKSHMI (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN V. V. 


SHRI NOKESH AGGARWAL 
SHRI PIYUSH GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. GUNAJI 
SHRI A. BHASKAR PRABHUNE (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH KUMAR 
PROF DR M. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI THENNAVARAJAN S. 
LT COL DEEPAK SHARMA 
SHRI U. R. RAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. H. VYAS 
SHRI J. B. RAVAL (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYARAJ B 
SHRI S. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. DUGGAL 
SHRI MAHESH EASWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH GEDA 


SHRI V. V. RAJSEKHAR 
SHRI MUNESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM MISRA 


SHRI SUNEET DIGIKAR 
SHRI KARTHIK S. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH K. V. 
SHRI DILEEP PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR YADAV 
SHRI AMIT SAXENA (Alternate) 


IS 11780 : 2023 


Organization 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Fertilizers Limited, Noida 


Neuman and Esser Compressor Application Centre 
Private Limited, Pune 
Oil 


and Natural Gas 


New Delhi 


Corporation Limited, 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 


(RDSO), Lucknow 


TLT Engineering India Private Limited, Indrad 


Tata Chemicals Limited, Mumbai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SUJOY BANERJEE 
SHRI A. K. MODI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANUJ KUMAR SHAHI 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V (Alternate) 


SHRI M. N. GOYAL 
SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL AGARWAL 
SHRI MAHESH DIxIT (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJ KISHOR RAI 
SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MANDILWAR 
SHRI AJAY K.S. RUHEL (Alternate) 


SHRIS. K. GARYALI 
SHRI RANJIT S. MUNDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATNAM SINGH 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GOEL(Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH K JAIN 
SHRI SANJAY MAKWANA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. PRASAD 
SHRI AJOY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI 
SHRI ASLAM BASHA B. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 22 (20152). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


