fS:6S55>l972 

(Reaffirmed 1998) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DENTAL LABORATORY PLASTER 


UDC 6l51(l3:S16-31l-;4 



© CafjTight iy7L» 


INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
\fAVAK BHAVAN. 9 a.VHAl)UR SHAH ZAFAK MARO 
KLW DELHI 1 






18:6555-1972 


Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DENTAL LABORATORY PLASTER 

Dental Materials Sectional Committee, CDG 52 

Chairman Representing 

Col N. N. Bery Ministry of Health & Family Planning 

Members 

Dr N. K. Aorawal In personal capacity ( Dental College & Hospital, 

Lucknow ) 

Dr P. K. Ba 30 Dr Ahmed Dental College & Hospital, Calcutta 

ShriJ. B, Gibbons Dental Products of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Desmonp De Beynac 
Sheen ( Alternate ) 

Dk ( Mrs ) T. M, S. Ginwalla Nair Hospital & Dental College, Bombay 
Dr F. D. Mirza ( Alternate) 

Dr R. C. Kakar In personal capacity ( 31 South Patel Nagar, Neu> Delhi ) 

Dr G. N- Kothare Unichem Laboratories .Ltd, Bombay 

SuRi P. G. VyaS ( Alternate ) 

Shri Bhupenhra B. Patel Dental Corporation of India, Bombay 

Shri Narendra M. Patel ( Alternate ) 

Shri D. G. Patwardhan Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 

Dr G. B, Shankwalkar Government Dental College and Hospital, Bombay 

Brio Wardev Sinqh Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence) 

Shri D. Das Gufta, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Dr G. M. Saxena 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 

Demure Materials Subcommittee, CDC 52:2 

Convener 

Brio Wardev Sinoh Directorate General, Armed Forces Medical Services 

( Ministry of Defence ) 

Members 

Dr N. K, Aorawal In personal capacity {^Dental College & Hospital, 

Lucknow ) 

Shri J. B. Gibbons Dental Products of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S, R. Sethna ( AliernaU ) 

Dr iNPERJiT Singh Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi 

Dr G. N. Kothare Unichem Laboratories Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. G, Vyas ( Alternate ) 


INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANaK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI I 



lS:6Sft5-1972 


Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DENTAL LABORATORT F^LASTER 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 5 April 1972, after the draft finalized by the Dental 
Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has 
been obtained from the following publications: 

T.5-19s')l Dental laboratory plaster. Australian Standards Asso¬ 
ciation. 

BS 4722:1971 Dental laboratory plaster, British Standards 
Institution. 

0.3 For particle size, the use of IS Sieves conforming to IS : 460-1962* is 
prescribed. Where IS Sieves are not available, other standard sieves 
as judged from aperture size may be used. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express¬ 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


1. ^COPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements and the methods of sampl¬ 
ing and test for plaster of paris generally required in a dental laboratory. 
The material is suitable for use in processing acrylic resins, 

2. REQ,UIREMENTS 

2.1 Description—The plaster shall consist essentially of high quality 
calcined gypsum. It shall be white in colour, dry, uniform and free 
from lumps and undesirable foreign matter. 

^Specification for test sieves ( revisid ). 

tRules for rounding off numerical values ( wistd ). 

2 



IS; 6555-1972 


2.2 Clinical Requirements 

2.2.1 When mixed with water in the manner prescribed in A-2 the 
piaster shall readily produce a uniform paste. It shall have no deleterious 
effect on artificial denture materials processed in it in accordance with 
recognized dental practice. 

2.2.2 The mixed plaster, prepared in the manner prescribed in A-2, 
shall accurately reproduce detail and shall, after setting, break with a 
clean fracture so that the pieces may be accurately reassembled. 

2.3 Particle Size — The particle size shall be such that when the plaster 
is tested in the manner prescribed in A-3, no material is retained on 
600-micron IS Sieve and not more than 5 percent is retained on 
ISO-micron IS Sieve. 

2.4 Setting Time — The initial setting time of the mixed plaster, 
determined in the manner prescribed in A-4, shall be not less than 5 
minutes nor more than 20 minutes, and shall not differ by more than 
2 minutes from the setting time certified by the manufacturer. 

2.5 Linear Expansion on Setting — The mixed plaster, when tested 
in the manner prescribed in A-5, shall exhibit a linear expansion of 
not less than 01 percent nor more than 0'35 percent, 2 h after it has 
developed its initial set. 

2.6 Compressive Strength — The ultimate compressive strength of the 
mixed plaster, 2 h after the commencement of the mixing procedure, 
determined in the manner prescribed in A-6, shall be not less than 
70 kg/cm^. 

2.7 Behaviour on Boiling — When boiled for 1 h in the manner pres¬ 
cribed in A-7, the cubes shall show no signs of significant disintegration, 
cracking or undue softening. 

3. PACKING AND MARKING 

3.1 Packing — The material shall be packed as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 

3.2 Marking — The packages shall be mark-ed with the following 
information: 

a) Name of the material; 

b) Instructions for proportioning and mixing; 

c) Instructions for safe storage of the material; 

d) Mass of contents in the package; 

e) Setting lime; and 

f) Manufacturer’s name or recognized trade-mark, if any. 


3 



IS:6555.1972 

3.2.1 The packages may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark, 

Note — The iise of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks) Act, and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements 
of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated 
by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are 
continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, 
under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution, 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 The method of preparing samples of the material and the criteria for 
conformity shall be as given in Appendix B or as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 


APPENDIX A 

(Clauses 2 . 2 . 1 , 2 . 2.2 and 2.3 to 2.7 ) 

METHODS OF TEST FOR DENTAL IMPRESSION 
PLASTER 


A-l, TEST CONDITIONS 

A-1.1 Carry out always the mixing and testing of plaster in a room free 
from draughts and in which the ambient atmosphere conditions are as 
follows: 

a) Temperature 27 ± 2®C 

b) Relative humidity 55 to 75 percent 

A-2. PREPARATION OF PLASTER FOR TESTING 

A-2.1 Materials and Apparatus — All apparatus and instruments shall 
be clean, dry and free from particles of hardened plaster. Before mixing 
of the plaster is begun, bring the materials and apparatus to a temperature 
of 27 ± 2°C. Maintain the freshly prepared specimens at a temperature 
within this range until testing is commenced. 

A-2.2 Method of Mixing —Within a period of approximately 10 s, 
sprinkle, from a suitable container, 200 g of plaster contained in a rubber 
bowl of approximately 13 cm dia, into the determined quantity of water 
{see A-2.3), in such a manner that the entrapment of air is avoided as far 
as possible. During the next 20 s vibrate the bowl slightly to facilitate 
wetting of the plaster and to remove as much entrapped air as possible. 


4 



IS; 6555-1972 


Mix the ingredients using a spatula with stainless steel blade approximately 
25 mm in width at the rate of 2 to 3 c/s for 30s (a total of 60 to 
90 cycles) using a circular stirring motion. Immediately transfer 
the mixed plaster to the moulds or testing apparatus. 

A-2.3 Determination of PJaster/Water Ratio Producing the 
Standard Testing Consistency 

A”2.3,l Apparatus 

A-2.3.1.1 Falling plate consisiometer— 3,s illustrated in Fig. 1. The 
metal cylinder A has an internal diameter of 30 mm and a height of 
50 mm, and rests on a horizontal metal spread plate, C, The metal 
cylinder is held by a clamp B separately from the spread plate, which can 
be allowed to fall at a constant rate of approximately 10 mm per second 
(unloaded) by operating the stopcock D. 

A-2.3.1.2 Calipers — for measuring diameter of spread. 



5 



IS!6555a972 
A-2*3.2 Reagent 
A-2-3.2.1 Trisodium citrate 

A-2*3,3 Procedure — Place 130 ml of water in the rubber bowl and add 
0*4 g of sodium citrate to act as a retarder. Stir until this has completely 
dissolved, then add the plaster and mix, as described in A-2-2. Pour the 
mixed plaster into the cylinder, resting on the spread plate of the consisto- 
meter, and strike off level. Ninety seconds after initial contact .of plaster 
and water allow the plate to fall away from the cylinder by opening the 
stopcock. Measure the maximum and minimum diameters of the spread 
and record the mean. 

A-2.3.3,1 Repeat this procedure varying the amount of water used 
until a spread of 78 to 80 mm is obtained. Note the amount of water 
required to produce this spread, when mixed with 200 g of plaster, as that 
producing the standard testing consistency. Use this ratio, and 200 g of 
plaster (but omitting the sodium citrate) for all the tests, even if, in 
some procedure, the full amount is not required. 

Note 1 — If after the initial test a large adjustment of plaster-water ratio is required 
when determining consistency, this can be carried out by adding more water to the 
gauged plaster, remixing and redetermining the spread. When the correct spread has 
been reached, repeat the test using the determined plaster/water ratio and confirm the 
spread. 

Note 2 — Maintain the spread plate in a dry polished condition between tests. 

Note 3 — Only use the sodium citrate when determining the plaster/water ratio. 

A-3. DETERMINATION OF RESIDUE ON SIEVING 

A-3.1 Procedure — Place 100 g of plaster on a 600-micron IS Sieve 
{^see 18:460-1962*) and shake through on to a 150-micron IS Sieve. 
Wash through the material on this sieve by agitating the sieve in a vessel 
containing absolute alcohol {see Note). Wash the residue with a stream 
of fresh alcohol until the washings are clear. Dry the sieve at room 
temperature. When the residue is dry, shake the sieve gently by hand for 
approximately I min to remove fine particles adhering to the sieve. 

Note —- Denatured spirit is satisfactory for this purpose. 

A-3.2 Remove any residue remaining on the respective sieves, weigh and 
report as the percentage retained. 

A-4. DETERMINATION OF SETTING TIME 
A-4.1 Apparatus 


♦Specification for test sieves ( revised ). 


6 



18:6555-1972 


A-4,L1 Gillmore ‘ Initial ’ Needle — conforming to the following require¬ 
ments: 

a) Mass 110*0 ± 0*5 g 

b) Diameter 2‘10 ± 0 05 mm 

The needle tip shall be cylindrical for a distance of approximately 5 mm. 
The needle end shall be plane and at right angles to the axis of the rod 
and shall be maintained in a clean condition. 

A-4,1.2 Metal Ring —cylindrical, of internal diameter 20 mm and 

height 5 mm. 

A-4.2 Procedure—Carry out the test described in triplicate. Place the 
metal ring mould on a flat plate and fill it with plaster mixed in the 
manner prescribed in A-1 and A-2. Carefully lower vertically the 
Gillmore needle on to the horizontal surface of the plaster and allow to rest 
thereon under its own mass. Repeat this at frequent intervals. The 
plaster shall be deemed to have developed its initial set when the needle 
fails to leave a perceptible circular indentation on the surface of the speci¬ 
men, It is essential to select a fresh area of the plaster surface for each 
indentation and to keep the needle clean. Record the time from the 
moment of first contact of plaster with water to the nearest 1/2 min. 

A-4.2.1 Report the setting time as the mean of three determinations. 
If any result diverges by more than 20 percent from the mean, repeat the 
whole test. 

A-5. DETERMINATION OF LINEAR EXPANSION ON SETTING 
A-5.1 Apparatus 

A-5.1.1 Extensometer — as illustrated in Fig. 2, the dial gauge of which 
is essentially free-moving with no internal -mechanism or springs which 
could effectively influence the expansion of the plaster in the cradle. To 
prevent plaster sticking to the sides of the cradle, grease the interior 
surface before use and line with thin nomatmorbent paper which has a 
glazed surface. Renew the paper lining for each test. 

A-5.1.2 Container — into which the extensometer may be placed and 
stored in an atmosphere of high relative humidity. It is suggested that a 
plastics box with an air-tight lid, containing water to a depth of approxi¬ 
mately 2 to 3 mm, be used, but any enclosed space which will effectively 
prevent dehydration of the specimen during the test procedure may 
be used. 

A-5.2 Procedure — Carry out the test in triplicate. Fill the cradle of the 
extensometer with plaster of standard consistency and strike off level. 
Ensure that the movable end plate is slightly clear of the cradle and that 
the plaster is in close contact with this plate. Zero the dial gauge, place 

7 



18:6555-1972 


the extensometer in the container {see A-5.1.2 ), add the water and close 
the lid. Leave undisturbed at a temperature of 27 db 2'’G for a period 
of 2 h, measured from the first contact of plaster and water, and then take 
a dial reading. 

A-5.2.1 Calculate the test result as follows: 

^ , dial reading in 0 01 mm 

Setting expansion, percent =--* 

A-5.2.2 Report the setting expansion as the mean of three determi¬ 
nations. If any result diverges by more than 20 percent from the mean, 
repeat the whole test. 



Fio. 2 Apparatus for Determining Linear Expansion on Setting 

A-6. DETERMINATION OF COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH 

A-6,1 Apparatus —Any device for the testing of compressive strength. 

A-6.2 Preparation of Test Specimens — The specimens of plaster used 
for this test shall be cubes of 25 mm side. Prepare five such specimens by 
casting plaster, mixed in the manner described in A-1 and A-2, into split 
moulds set vertically on metal or glass plates. Do not cast the cubes 


8 



ISs6555-1972 


successively but move the containing vessel back and forth over the 
moulds while pouring is in progress. Work the plaster in the moulds 
slightly to remove air bubbles and then level oh' flush with the top of the 
moulds. After the specimens have become sufflciently hard to handle 
remove them from the moulds, 

A-6.3 Procedure—Two hours after the commencement of the mixing 
procedure determine the compressive strength of the specimens by means 
of the testing machine. Record the mean of the compressive strength of 
the five specimens as the compressive strength of the plaster; except that if 
the compressive strength of one or two of the specimens differs by more than 
15 percent from the mean of the five, discard them and report the 
compressive strength as the mean of the remaining specimens. If the 
compressive strength of three or more of the specimens differs by more than 
15 percent from the mean, discard all the results and repeat the test. 

A-7. TEST FOR BEHAVIOUR ON BOILING 

A-74 Test Specimens — Use three specimens prepared as prescribed 
in A-6-2. 

A-7.2 Procedure — Two hours after the commencement of mixing, place 
two test specimens in a suitable container and boil in water for 1 h. 
Remove the specimens from the water and examine visually for signs of 
disintegration, cracking or undue softening, using the unboiled specimen 
for comparison. 


APPENDIX B 

[Clause 4.1) 

SAMPLING OF DENTAL LABORATORY PLASTER 

B-l- GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF SAMPLING 

B-1,0 In drawing, preparing, storing and handling test samples, the pre¬ 
cautions and directions given in B-1.1 to B-1.7 shall be observed. 

B-1.1 Samples shall not be taken in an exposed place. 

B-L2 The sampling instrument shall be clean and dry. 

B-1.3 Precautions shall be taken to protect the samples, the material being 
sampled, the sampling instrument and the containers for samples from 
adventitious contamination. 


9 



IS:6555-1972 


B-1.4 To draw a representative sample, the contents of each container 
selected for sampling shall be mixed as thoroughly as possible by suitable 
means. 

B-1.5 The samples shall be placed in clean, dry,^ air-tight glass or other 
suitable containers. 

The sample containers shall be sealed air-tight with a suitable 
stopper after filling, and marked with full details of sampling, the date 
of sampling and the year of manufacture of the material. 

B-2. SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2.1 Lot — All the containers in a single consignment of the material 
drawn from a single batch of manufacture shall constitute a lot. If a 
consignment is declared or known to consist of different batches of 
manufacture the containers belonging to the same batch shall be grouped 
together and each such group shall constitute a separate lot. 

Samples shall be tested from each lot for ascertaining 
conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification. 

B-2*2 The number of containers (n) to be chosen from the lot shall depend 
on the size of the lot (jV) and shall be as given in Table 1. 


TABLE 1 NUMBER OF CONTAINERS TO BE SELECTED FOR SAMPLING 


Lot Size 


Number of Containers 
TO BE Selected 


N 


(1) 


(2) 

3 lo 

50 

3 

51 

200 

4 

201 „ 

400 

5 

401 „ 

650 

6 

651 „ 

1000 

7 


B-2.3 The containers to be selected for sampling shall be chosen at random 
from the lot and for this purpose, random number tables shall be used. 
In case such tables are not available, the following procedure may be 
adopted: 

Starting from any container, count them as 1, 2, 3,. , r and so 

on in a systematic manner, where r is the integral part of Njn. 
Every rth container thus counted shall be withdrawn from the lot. 

10 




ISi6555-1972 


B.3. TEST SAMPLES AND REFEREE SAMPLE 

B-3.1 Preparation of Test Samples 

B-3.1.1 Draw with an appropriate sampling instrument, a small portion 
of the material from different parts of each container selected Table 1 ). 
The total quantity of the material drawn from each container shall be 
sufficient to conduct the tests for all the characteristics given under 2 and 
shall be not less than 250 g. 

B-3.L2 Thoroughly mix all portions of the material drawn from the 
same container. Out of these portions, equal quantities shall be taken from 
each selected container and shall be well mixed up together so as to form 
a composite sample weighing not less than 0*5 kg. This composite 
sample shall be divided into three equal parts, one for the purchaser, 
another for the supplier and the third for the referee. 

B-3.2 Referee Sample — The referee sample consists of a composite 
sample marked for this purpose and shall bear the seal of the purchaser and 
the supplier. It shall be kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier and shall be used in case of dispute between the two. 

B-4. TESTS 

B-4,1 Tests for all characteristics given in 2 shall be conducted on the 
composite sample. 

B.5. CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

B-5.i A lot shall be declared as conforming to this specification if the 
composite sample satisfies the requirements for each of the characteristics 
listed in 2. If the requirements for any of the characteristics are not met, 
the lot shall be declared to have not satisfied the requirements of the 
specification. 


11 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 FEBRUARY 1974 

TO 


IS: 6555-1972 SPECIFICATION FOR DENTAL 
LABORATORY PLASTER 


Gorrigendu m 

( Page 4. Title of Appendix A) — Substitute ‘ LABORATORY ’ 
for ‘ IMPRESSION 


( Cf)C 52) 


Printed at Neelkamal Printers, Delhi, India 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 


Dental Materials and Allied Products 


IS: 

3571-1966 

3578-1966 

3610-1966 

4705-1968 

4799-1968 

5954-1970 

6035- 1970 

6036- 1970 

6037- 1970 

6038- 1970 

6039- 1970 
6043-1970 

6555- 1972 

6556- 1972 


Dental gold solders 

Dental gold alloy wire 

Dental gold foil 

Dental mercury 

Dental casting gold alloys 

Dental white gold alloys 

Zinc phosphate dental cement 

Alginate dental impression material 

Zinc oxide-eugenol dental impression paste 

Dental impression compound 

Zinc oxide-eugenol dental cement 

Copper phosphate-zinc phosphate dental cement 

Dental laboratory plaster 

Dental impression plaster 



