IS 12147 : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2014) 


ARAN AAP (Reaffirmed 2020) 
se gapa Huy wen pl aisi Sid 
(Tec gero ) 
Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR WET MAGNETIC 
PARTICLE EXAMINATION 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 77.040.20 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


September 2013 Price Group 3 


Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1987. While reviewing this standard in the light of experience gained during 
these years, the Committee felt to revise this standard. While revising this standard international practices have 
been duly considered along with Indian scenario. 


Examination according to this standard may be carried out on all ferromagnetic objects in the raw material stage 
as well as in the semi-finished/finished stages of the components/assemblies made out of such raw materials. 


This method of flaw detection is not recommended in such case where the subsequent process/end-use of the 
objects does not permit the presence of even slightest residual magnetism. 


In this revision following modifications have been made: 


a) Some of the values, that is ultraviolet light intensity, bath temperatures, etc, have been changed according 
to latest practices being followed in the country. 


b) Guidelines for selection of strength for circular magnetization have been made elaborate. 


c) Field strength according to form fill factors has been introduced. A consolidated table has been made for 
quick reference. 


d) More detailed information has been added in sections like demagnetization and field strength selection. 
In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


ASTM A 275/A 275M-07 Standard method for magnetic particle examination of steel forgings, issued 
by the American Society of Testing Metals, USA. 


ASTM E 709-08 Standard guide for magnetic particle testing, issued by the American Society of Testing 
Metals, USA. 

ASTM E 1444-05 Standard practice for magnetic particle testing, issued by the American Society of 
Testing Metals, USA. 

ASME Boiler and pressure vessel code, Section V, issued by the American Society of Testing Metals, 
USA. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compiled with, the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12147 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR WET MAGNETIC 
PARTICLE EXAMINATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the method of wet magnetic 
particle examination, using colour contrast (visible) as 
well as fluorescent particles held in suspension in a 
carrier liquid, for detection of surface as well as sub- 
surface discontinuities in ferromagnetic materials. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in the text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreement based on this standard 
are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent editions of the standards indicated 
below. 


IS No. Title 
3703 : 2004 Code of practice for magnetic 
particle flaw detection (second 
revision) 
Specification for magnetic flaw 
detection inks and powders (first 
revision) 


6410: 1991 


3 SURFACE PREPARATION 


3.1 This method of examination is most suitable for 
objects having smooth surface, namely, machined, 
ground, polished, etc. Very rough surface is not 
desirable since it increases the background effect thus 
reducing contrast of flaw indications. 


3.2 The surface to be examined shall be free from 
foreign materials, such as oil, grease, dirt, loose rust/ 
scales, etc, so that the detection and interpretation of 
flaw indications during the examination is not 
adversely affected. The methods used for cleaning and 
surface preparation, such as degreasing and solvent/ 
mechanical cleaning, shall be compatible with the 
material and finish of the objects. 


4 MAGNETIZATION OF OBJECTS 
4.1 Generation of Magnetic Fields 


The following methods may be used for generating 
the magnetizing field: 


a) Permanent magnet/electromagnetic yoke; 


b) Current carrying coils of known number of 
turns; 


c) Wrap around coils; 
d) Central conductor carrying current; and 


e) Direct passage of current through the part by 
contact (clamp) method. 


4.2 Type of Magnetizing Currents 


Alternating current (ac), half-wave (HW) or full-wave 
rectified direct current (HWDC) shall be used for 
generation of magnetizing field. While is suitable for 
detecting only surface discontinuities (such as fatigue 
cracks), dc/HWDC shall be used for detecting surface 
as well as sub-surface discontinuities. 


4.3 Method of Magnetization 
4.3.1 Residual Method 


In this method, the magnetic particles suspension shall 
be applied to the surface after the magnetizing field or 
magnetizing current is turned off. This method is 
recommended only for material having high retentivity 
where the residual magnetism is sufficient to give rise to 
a leakage flux which is strong enough to facilitate the 
formation of flaw indications. If the formation of the 
particle patterns is not clear enough, it will be necessary 
to resort to continuous method as given in 4.3.2. 


4.3.2 Continuous Method 


In this method, the magnetizing field or the magnetizing 
current remains continuously present during the 
application of magnetic particles suspension. To avoid 
washing away the lightly held indications by the force 
of bath stream, the magnetizing current shall be 
continuous for a few seconds even after the bath is 
withdrawn from the part being tested. In the case of 
materials with low retentivity the continuous method 
is recommended in preference to the residual method. 


4.4 Directions of Magnetization 


4.4.1 In order to obtain a leakage flux of maximum 
intensity from a certain discontinuity, the magnetizing 
field lines shall have to intersect the discontinuity at 
90°. The maximum leakage flux intensity thus obtained 


IS 12147 : 2013 


gives rise to a strong and clear magnetic particle pattern 
leading to the detection and characterization of the 
flaws. Therefore, the direction of magnetization shall 
be so chosen that the anticipated discontinuities in the 
vulnerable locations are oriented perpendicular to the 
magnetizing field. 


4.4.2 Each component or its portion thereof, shall be 
examined by magnetizing in a minimum of two 
mutually perpendicular directions, achieved by a 
suitable method including the use of wrap-around coil 
(the coil being oriented in two directions such that the 
axis of the coil in one direction is perpendicular to the 
axis of the coil when it is positioned in the other 
direction), yoke, etc. 


4.4.3 For generating the magnetic field in different 
directions, the following methods shall also be used: 


a) Circular magnetization — The circular 
magnetization can be achieved by passing 
current through the object (adequate care has 
to be taken in clamping the contact to prevent 
arcing) or through a central conductor (in the 
case of hollow tubular components). For prod 
method, non-flammable carrier liquid is used. 

b) Longitudinal magnetization — Longitudinal 
magnetization can be achieved by holding the 
test part in the field of a current carrying coil 
(with the part being positioned parallel and/ 
or perpendicular to the axis of the coil). The 
field is effective on both sides of the coil up 
to an axial distance equal to the radius of the 
coil measured from the edge of the coil on 
either side. Therefore, longer parts shall be 
examined by magnetizing in suitable number 
of portions with overlap of at least 10 percent. 


4.4.4 Magnitude of Magnetization (see also IS 3703) 


Instruments such as Hall probes, shims and gauss meters 
may be used for determining the strength of the field. 
The magnitude of magnetization shall be chosen such 
that, 


a) a minimum leakage field of 40 gauss is 
induced on the surface being examined, or 

b) the strength of the magnetic field is arrived at 
as detailed in Annex A, or 

c) the artificial defect (such as slot etc, of known 
depth, in the reference block, prepared by 
simulating the specific object being 
examined), is detected. 


5 MAGNETIC PARTICLES 


5.1 The following types of magnetic particles meeting 
the requirements of IS 6410 shall be used for the wet 
magnetic particle examination. 


5.1.1 Colour Contrast (Visible) Type 


This type shall consist of particles having different 
colours that give rise to the indications providing 
sufficient contrast with respect to the background/ 
colour of the surface being examined. The colour of 
the particle shall be so chosen that a good contrast is 
obtained with respect to the background when observed 
in white light. The flaw indications developed by these 
particles are seen by virtue of the quantity of the 
accumulated particles aided by the colour contrast. 


5.1.2 Fluorescent Type 


This type shall consist of magnetic particles coated 
with fluorescent dye. Such dyes when excited by 
ultraviolet radiation undergo electromagnetic 
absorption and subsequently emit light in the visible 
spectrum. Thus, when illuminated by an ultraviolet 
source, these particles exhibit a yellowish green glow. 
Therefore, even when only a minute quantity of the 
particles are attracted by the leakage flux due to a 
flaw, its presence is revealed aided by luminescence 
of the particles. As a result, the detection of minute 
particles patterns arising out of very fine defects can 
be achieved which thus culminate in an enhanced flaw 
sensitivity. 


5.1.3 The magnetic particles of correct size range shall 
have high permeability and low retentivity. 


5.2 Particle Bath Constitution 
5.2.1 Carrier Fluid 


A carrier fluid, such as water or a light petroleum 
distillate like kerosene, shall be used for making the 
suspension of the particles. Fluid used as a carrier for 
fluorescent particles, shall neither exhibit any 
fluorescent phenomenon nor shall have impurities 
exhibiting or quenching fluorescence, in the ultraviolet 
excitation range. The medium shall be non-toxic. 


5.2.1.1 Whenever light petroleum distillate is used as 
carrier fluid, it shall conform to IS 6410. 


5.2.1.2 The carrier liquid should not affect the 
component to be tested. Whenever water is used as 
carrier liquid, suitable rust preventives should be added 
in water. 


5.2.2 Bath concentration shall be according to IS 3703 
and as detailed in Annex B. 


5.3 Application of the Particle Suspension 


The suspension shall be applied to the surface either 
by spraying or pouring it over the areas to be 
examined. In the residual method, the magnetized part 
may be dipped in a well agitated bath of the particle 
suspension. 


5.4 Bath Temperature 


The temperature of the wet particle suspension and the 
surface of the part being examined shall not exceed 
57°C (135°F). 


6 VIEWING CONDITIONS 


6.1 Colour (Visible) 
Examination 


Contrast Particles 


The area of the examination facility shall be well lit 
either by natural lighting or by using suitable bright 
light sources so as to facilitate a comfortable viewing. 


6.2 Fluorescent Particle Examination 


6.2.1 The examination facility shall be suitably enclosed 
to provide a dark area on the surface being examined. 
The level of visible ambient light should not be more 
than 20 lux. The personnel carrying out the examination 
shall have to undergo dark adaptation before the 
examination has begun. 


6.2.2 The ultraviolet source used for the examination 
shall have a spectra with its peak intensity at a 
wavelength of 3 650 A. The ultraviolet source shall be 
capable of providing black light having a minimum 
intensity of 1 000 uW/cm? on the surface to be 
examined. 


7 INTERPRETATION AND EVALUATION OF 
INDICATIONS 


7.1 Areas on the surface showing an accumulation of 
the particles shall be regarded as the indications that 
are to be interpreted and evaluated. The intensity of 
the particle pattern, its shape and orientation, the nature 
of the material from which the part is made and its 
process history, etc, help in arriving at a proper 
interpretation of the indications. 


7.2 Relevant Indications 


The particle patterns which have resulted from material 
discontinuities shall constitute the relevant indications. 
The indications due to surface discontinuities are 
normally characterized by sharp distinct and tightly 
adhering particle patterns. The sub-surface 
discontinuities, on the contrary, produce less distinct 
patterns which form rather broad and relatively loosely 
held particle patterns. The width of the sub-surface 
discontinuity indications varies with the depth of its 


IS 12147 : 2013 


location below surface. Correct interpretation of the 
pattern requires a certain skill on the part of the operator. 


7.3 Non-relevant Indications 


These indications are particle patterns that arise out of 
extraneous factors than due to material discontinuities. 
Such non-relevant indications are due to magnetic 
writing, changes in sections/threaded areas/grain 
boundaries/drainage lines/edge effect, etc. 


7.4 Any indication that is believed to be non-relevant, 
shall be regarded as a relevant indication until the 
indication is eliminated by surface conditioning or it is 
re-examined by the same or other non-destructive 
means and demonstrated to be non-relevant. A basic 
knowledge of material, processing and component 
design is essential to arrive at a proper decision. 


8 DEMAGNETIZATION 


The components after magnetic particle examination 
are likely to retain some amount of residual magnetism. 
The requirement of demagnetization, if any, and the 
level of residual magnetism shall be specified in 
advance and the demagnetization shall be carried out 
wherever called for, by suitable means. After 
demagnetization the absolute value of magnetic field 
should not be more than 3 Gauss at any point on the 
surface of the test part. As it is difficult to check for the 
removal of the residual magnetism from the 
circumferentially magnetized parts, reorientation of the 
circular field into longitudinal field shall have to be 
achieved by longitudinal magnetization, prior to 
demagnetization. 


9 CLEANING 


After the magnetic particle testing is completed, the 
components shall be cleaned of magnetic particles by 
suitable methods. 


10 ACCEPTANCE STANDARD 


10.1 The level of acceptance of the discontinuities 
detected by this method of examination shall be decided 
by the concerned purchaser and the supplier, based on 
the functional requirements of the parts and the 
feasibility of their manufacturing. 


10.2 Wherever necessary an indication can be preserved 
by the use of photography, adhesive tape, clear shellac, 
etc. 


IS 12147 : 2013 


ANNEX A 
[Clause 4.4.4 (b)] 
GUIDELINE FOR SELECTION OF STRENGTH OF THE MAGNETIZING FIELD 


A-1 GENERAL 


A-1.0 In order to produce satisfactory indications, the 
magnetic field induced in the part must have sufficient 
strength. The factors such as size, shape, material of 
the part and the method of magnetization affect the 
strength of the induced field. The exact strength of the 
magnetizing field required to induce the requisite field 
for revealing a certain defect can be best arrived by 
experimenting with parts having known defects. 
However, the following general rules shall be useful 
in most of the occasions. 


A-1.1 Circular Magnetization 


a) For an overall circular magnetization the 
amperage varies with the diameter/thickness 
of the part being magnetized. For all solid and 
hollow sections value of FWDC and HW 
current shall be as given below: 

1) For diameter/thickness : 28 to 36 A/mm 
up to 125 mm 


2) Fordiameter/thickness : 20 to 28 A/mm 
above 125 to 250 mm 


3) For diameter/thickness : 12 to 20 A/mm 
greater than 250 mm 
NOTES 


1 ac will be used at approximately one half these 
values. 


2 For parts with geometric shapes other than 
round, the diameter shall be considered as the 
diagonal of the greatest cross-sectional plane at 
right angles to the current. 


b) For Prod method, the distance between the 
prods is generally limited between 100 to 
200 mm. For test parts with thickness less than 
20 mm the current requirement is in the range 
of 3.5 to 4.5 A/m per mm of prod distance. 
For test parts with thickness greater than 20 
mm the current requirement is in the range of 
4.0 to 5.0 A/m per mm of prod distance. 


A-1.2 Longitudinal Magnetization 


The field strength in a part being magnetized in a coil 
is determined by the ampere-turn of the coil and the 
length (L) to diameter (D) ratio of the object. The field 
strength can be calculated as per Table 1. 


Table 1 Table of Formulas to Determine Current Values for Coils 
(Clause A-1.2) 


Sl Fill Factor Position of Object Field Strength (NI) Ampere Turns 
No. (+ 10 percent) 
i) Low Near/close to inside surface of coil 45 000 
LID 
ii) Low At the centre of the coil 1690 R 
(6 LID)-5 
iii) Intermediate Cross-section of the coil greater than twice and less than 10-a a-2 
ten times the cross-section of the object (ND ) + (NI) | ) 
8 8 
iv) High Cross-section area of the coil less than twice the cross- 35 000 
section area of the object —— 
(L/D) + 2 
where 
I = current supplied to magnetizing coil A; 
N = number of turn of coil; 
L = length of the object, in mm; 
D = diameter of the object, in mm; 
R < radius of the coil, in mm; 
(ND, = value of NI, calculated for high fill factor coils, using formula (iv); 
(ND, = value of NI, calculated for low fill-factor coils, using formula (i) or (ii); and 


a — 


ratio of the cross-section area of the coil to the cross-section area of the object. 


For calculating L/D ratio for a hollow or partially hollow part, first effective diameter D should be calculated used by below mentioned 
formulas and then value of D should be substituted as D in appropriate formulas in the table. 


D=2,(Al-ah)/x 


4 


where 


Al 
Àh 


IS 12147 : 2013 


Table 1 — (Concluded) 


total cross-sectional area of the part, and 


total cross-sectional area of the hollow sections of the part 


For hollow cylindrical parts: 


ID 


Das = [OP -007 | 


outside diameter of the cylinder, and 


inside diameter of the cylinder. 


NOTE — Calibration of the equipment shall be done in accordance with Annex C. 


ANNEX B 


(Clause 5.2.2) 
PROCEDURE FOR ESTIMATING THE BATH CONCENTRATION 


B-1 PROCEDURE 


B-1.0 The following procedure shall be adopted for 
ascertaining the strength/concentration of the bath. 


a) Churn the bath thoroughly by suitable means 


b) 


so that the settled particles, if any, are 
dispersed into uniform suspension. 

Collect 100 ml sample of the suspension, by 
the same process with which the suspension 
is applied on the component, into a tapered 
graduated centrifuge tube. 


c) Demagnetize and allow the above sample to 


d) 


remain undisturbed for 30 min and note the 
volume of the particles settled into the bottom 
of centrifuge tube. For colour contrast 
(visible) particles, the recommended settling 
volume is 1.2 to 2.4 ml and for the fluorescent 
particles, the recommended settling volume 
is 0.1 to 0.4 ml. 

If the bath concentration does not confirm to 
the above range, add either the particles or 
the carrier liquid to make up the difference 
and repeat the procedure as above till the 
concentration is within the required range. 


IS 12147 : 2013 


ANNEX C 


(Table 1) 


CALIBRATION OF EQUIPMENT 


C-1 FREQUENCY OF CALIBRATION 


Each magnetizing equipment shall be calibrated as per 
the time interval mentioned for each equipment below 
or after each time it has been subjected to a major 
electrical repair, periodic overhaul, or damage. 


C-2 CALIBRATION OF AMMETER 


The ammeter of the equipment shall be calibrated by 
comparison to that of a control test meter with shunt 
or current transformer arrangement connected so as to 
monitor the output current. The reading in the ammeter 
of the equipment shall not deviate by more than 
+10 percent full scale relative to the actual current value 
as shown in the test meter. The frequency of calibration 
should be after every 6 months. 


C-3 CALIBRATION OF YOKES 


The magnetizing force of the yoke shall be calibrated 
by determining their minimum lifting power after an 
interval of every six months. Each alternating current 
electromagnetic yoke shall have a lifting power of at 
least 4.5 kg at the maximum pole spacing. The direct 
current electromagnetic yoke shall have a lifting power 
of at least 18 kg at the maximum pole spacing. 


C-4 CHECKING OF ULTRAVIOLET LAMPS 


Ultraviolet lamps shall be checked daily for consistency 
in output light intensity. The minimum intensity should 
be 1 000 UW/cm? at a distance of 380 mm from front 
of the source filter to the face of the sensor. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (4995). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


