(Reaffirmed 2003)

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY RELATING
PART IV (

OF TERMS AND STEEL
AND STRIP

TO IRON
STEEL,SHEET

First Revision )
Sectional Committee,
Representiq Ministry of Railways

Metal
Chairman SHRtA.K.

Standard5

SMDC

1

&IATTACIIARKVA

Members JOINT DIRECTOR(M & C) } (Alt ernntes to Shri A. K. Bhattacharyya) ASSISTANT DIRECTOR (MS) Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, SRRI M. ANJAN~YUISJ Durgapur SHRI N. V. RA~IIAVAN (Altern&) National Test House, Calcutta DR A. S. BHAL~URI Indian Tube Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. D. BIIIIPTXNI SHRI 0. N. AGAR\TT. (Alternate) The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpnr SHRt P. K. GFIAURAVART'.' SHRI M. C. KUMARASWAMY (Alternate1 Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI G. CHATTERJZB SHRI K. C. So\r (Alternate) Ministry of Defence (DGI) SHRI P.K.CIIATTERI~ Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRIN.S.CHAUDII~RY SHRIJ. S. SEHMI (Alternate) International Nickel (India) Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. V. CKINNAPFA Laboratory (CSIR), Metallurgical National SHRI B. N. DAS Jamshedpur Ministry of Defence (R & D) SHRIN.T.GEORMZ Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI A. K. GUHA (Inspection Wing), New Delhi SHRI P. C. Musr.4~1 (rlltpmnte) DR S. S. KHANNA Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI A. N. R40 (Alternate) Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur DR D. M. LAKHIANI SHRI T. K. DUTT,~ (Alternate) Heavy Electricals (India) Ltd, Bhopal SHRI U. MOH.4N ~<AO ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN This publication is protected Copyright 1976 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS under the Indian

Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 ( Continuedfrom fiage 1 )
Representing B. K. MURTHY Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. GOPAI.KRISIINAN (Alternate) SHRI S. K. OHRI Bharat Heavv Electricals Ltd. Hardwar DR S. R. PRAMANIK Ministry of &eel and Heavy `Engineering SHRIM. K. RAO The Binani Metal Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI A. K. CHATTERJEE (Alternote) SHRI S. ROY Indian Non-Ferrous Metals Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta SHRI A. K. BASER (Alternate) SHRIV. K. WAZ.IR Institute of Indian Foundrymen, Calcutta HON SECRETARY(Alternate) SARI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director General, ISI (Ex-ofFcio Member) Director (Strut & Met)
SHRI

Members

Secretary Assistant Director (Metals), IS1

SHR~VIJAYKUMAR

Subcommittee Onuenrr

for Terminology, Classification of Steels, SMDC! 1 :l

and Designation

SITRIK. V. CFIINNAPPA Mem ber.c STIR1 R. M. BXANT

International Nickel (India) Pvt Ltd, Bombay

Directorate Genrral of Technical Developme.% New Delhi SHRI B. G. BASAVRAT Mysare Iron & Steel Ltd, Bhadrarati SHRI K. B. D. BEERARISH (Alternate) SHRI S. K. BASU Guest, Keen, Williams Ltd, Howrah SHRID. D. BHUPTANI Tndian Tube Co Ltd, .Jamshedpur SHRI P. K. CHAXRAX~ARTY The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamrbedpur SHRI M. G. KIJMARASWAMY (Altemnte) SHRIP. K. CHATTCRJLE Ministry of Defence (DGI) Ministry of Railways CHEMIST AND METALLURIXST SHRI M. K. DUTTA Hindustan Steel Ltd, Durgapur Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Burnpur SHRI R. DUTTA SHRIT. K. D~~TTA(Alternate) Central Board of Excise and Customs (Miniqtry of SHRI S. K. GHOSIIAL Fin ante) , New Delhi General of Supplies & Disposals SHRI A. K. GIIFIA Directorate (Inspection Wing), New Delhi SHRI P. C. MUSTAFI (A1ternat~) Iron & Steel Control, Calcutta SHRI R. M. KRISHNAN Research & Development, Hindustan Steel Ltd, DR V. RAMASWAMJ Ranchi SHRI S. R. MEDIRAT~A (AlfPmnte) Hindustan Steel Ltd, Calcutta SHRI M. M. SHFXOY Mahindra Uqine Steel Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. N. S1xr.11 Directorate General Ordnance Factories (Ministry SHRI Y. C. %J~RAVANYA of Defence), Calcutta
n L

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO IRON AND STEEL
PART IV STEEL SHEET AND STRIP

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (Part IV) (First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 November 1975, after the draft finalized by the Metal Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1962. As a result of experience gained during these years, certain modifications have been made in some of the meanings of the various terms. The Sectional Committee while issuing this revision felt it desirable to issue the standard in separate parts. This part covers terms relating to steel sheet and strip. The following are other parts of this standard: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part I II III V VI VII VIII General metallurgy, heat treatment and testing Steel making Hot-rolled steel products (excluding sheet and strip) Bright steel bar and steel wire Forging (including drop forging) Wrought iron Steel tubes and pipes

0.3 This standard has been prepared for the guidance of the manufacturers and users to assist them in the uniform interpretation of the common terms used in the iron and steel industry. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part IV) is intended to convey the meanings of the terms commonly used in the field of steel sheet and strip. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Acid Brittleness - Brittleness induced in sheet and strip pickled in This is commonly acid solution to remove scale or during electroplating. attributed to absorption of hydrogen. 3

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 2;2 Bar Weight Weight per unit length

ofsheet bar.

2.3 Billet - A semifinished product obtained by forging, rolling or continuous casting, usually square and not exceeding 125 x 125 mm in cross section with rounded corners and is intended for further processing into suitable finished products by forging or re-rolling. 2.4 Black Annealing - Annealing without any protective covering It is also termed as open annealing. using a controlled atmosphere. or

2.5 Black Edges - The black colouration at the edges of annealed sheets and strips caused by oxidation or due to soot deposit. 2.6 Black Patches - Patches of scale left on sheet and strip surface due to unsatisfactory pickling. 2.7 Black Sheet or Strip Hot-rolled sheet or strip that is not descaled.

2.8 Black Softened - Hot- or cold-rolled sheet and strip softened by black annealing, but not yet descaled (and usually refers to stainless variety). 2.9 Blank Holder - The device used to hold the blank to prevent wrinkling of the edges during pressing or drawing. 2.10 Blanking or strip. Shearing out flat pieces of any desired shape from sheet gas

2.11 Blister -- Local separation of a layer of steel due to accumulated causing a protuberance on the surface, underneath which is a cavity.

2.12 Blued Edges - Blue or bluish-black oxidation colouration at the edges of sheets and strips arising during heat treatment in the absence ~of any protective medium. 2.13 Bow - The greatest deviation from a straight line along a longitudinal edge in a sheet or strip. 2.14 Budkling The bending~of sheet or plates under a compressive load. 2.15 Burnt Edges - Broken edges occurring during hot-rolling and caused by overheating or burning (see also 2.27). 2.16 Burr -- The sharp fringe of metal left on a sheared or saw cut bottom edge (see also 2.45). 2.17 Burst rolling. Edges Edges of sheet or strip ruptured due to excessive cold

2.18 Camber - The curvature observed in long rolled products caused by differential cooling or faulty setting of the rolls. It is measured by the maximum deviation of the middle region from the straight line joining the corresponding points on the two bounding sides or edges (see Fig, 1). 4

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975
r CAMBER

--____-_-__ ==d
FIG. 1 CAMBER 2.19 Cast (Heat Melt) - Usually the product of a single furnace charge. Sometimes the furnace contents are tapped into two or more ladles when the product of each ladle may be called a separate cast. 2.20 Checked Edges - Cracked edges in sheet bars and strips (occurring during hot-rolling) (see also 2.27). 2.21 Coil Breaks (Cross Breaks) - The transverse kinks developing during straightening of coils of strips (hot-rolled or annealed). 2.22 Coiled Strip A strip supplied in coil form. the product (usually 2.23 Coiling -The process of laying or winding wire rods and wires) in the form of coils.

h

2.24 Cold-Reduction - Reduction in thickness of sheet and strip by coldrolling (see also 2.25, 2.26 and 2.104). 2.25 Cold-Rolling (Cold-Reduction) - Rolling steel (generally sheet or strip) below its recrystallization temperature with the degree of reduction being usually above 5 percent (see also 2.26). 2.26 Cold-Working - Substantial mechanical working (usually above 5 percent)., for example, drawing, rolling, forging, etc, of a metal or alloy below its normal recrystallization temperature. 2.27 Cracked Edges - Cracks across the edges (that is, at right angles to the direction of rolling) of rolled products. The term `broken corners' is used in connection with large sections, such as blooms, billets and slabs (see also 2.15). 2.28 Cropping - Shearing off discard from the ends of an ingot, bloom or forged products prior to further working. End discard shearing of semifinished or finished product is also called cropping (see also 2.36), 5

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 2.29 Cross Breaks See2.21.

2.30 Cross Rolling - Rolling in the direction transverse to the longitudinal axis of the ingot or slab, as in the production of plate or sheet. 2.31 Cutting - Shearing into ~desired length or width of coiled strips after straightening. This also refers to the cutting of the edges of sheets. 2.32 Deep-Drawing Steel - A high quality low carbon steel possessing high ductility, desirable grain size, etc, which permits deep drawing (see IS : 1079-1973" and IS : 513-1973t). 2.33 Descaling - Removal of surface scale from a hot-worked or heattreated product by pickling, shot-blasting, etc. Also removal of scale during hot working by the application of steam under high pressure, water, coal dust, brushwood, oil, etc. - The removal of surface defects from ingots 2.34 Deseaming (Scarfing) or semifinished products by an oxy-gas flame. 2.35 Dings Kinks on sheet surface. 2.36 Discard - Those portions corresponding to the top and bottom of the ingot which are removed to ensure that the remainder of the material is of satisfactory quality. Also defective material produced in rolling or forging, to be cut off from one or both ends of the semifinished or finished product (see aZso2.28). 2.37 Dog Leg - `Bow-legged' strip, that is, a strip which has been curved in opposite directions in two adjoining portions. 2.38 Doubles Sheets hot-rolled after doubling.

2.39 Doubling - Folding a sheet or sheet-pack on itself, about the middle, before rolling further. 2.48 Dressing - Removing surface defects of -an ingot, bloom or slab by chipping, scarfing, grinding or other methods. 2.41 Ears - The wavy projections formed in deep-drawing which normally occur in geometric positions either at 45" or at O"~and~90' to the direction of rolling. These are caused by directional properties in the sheet. application of rolls to the edges of a flat product, for 2.42 Edging -The example, slab, plate, strip or flat, etc, with the object of controlling the width, and giving a smooth edge of desired contour during the rolling process. 2.43 Extra Deep Drawing Steel - A superior quality low carbon deep drawing steel (see IS : 1079-1973* and IS : 513-1973t). *Specificationfor hot-rolled carbon steel sheet and strip (t&f ~euision).
tspecification for cold-rolled carbon steel sheets (second recision).

6

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 2.44 Extra Lattens - Hot-rolled sheets having thickness under 0.4 mm, that is, thickness under those for lattens. 2.45 Fash (Burr, Flash) sawing (see also 2.16). Sharp and jagged edges left after shearing or

2.46 Finished Products - Rolled or forged products whose transformaTheir cross section is uniform tion in an iron and steel plant is completed. and is often defined by a standard which fixes the ranges of nominal dimenThe outline of the sions as well as the tolerance of form and dimensions. cross section and the surface finish is such that quite often the user has only to cut to the required dimensions. 2.47 Finishing Temperature is completed. The temperature at which hot-working

2.48 Flatting (Kinking) - The sudden ~yielding, with simultaneous appearance of stretcher strain markings, taking place in hot-roIled or annealed sheet or strips when deformed. 2.49 FuU Strip - Strip in which the edges are shorter than the middle, thus causing distortion of the cross section. 2.50 Gauge accepted unit. Thickness in terms of a standard ~gauge number or in any

2.51 Ghost - A segregated streak, usually containing a concentration of sulphide, phosphide, oxide, etc, which have become elongated during rolling or forging. This looks different in colour than the rest of the sheet when sheet is tarnished. 2.52 Grease Mark of grease patch. Marking on the rolled surface caused by the presence

2.53 Guide Mark (Guide Score, Guide Scratch, Guide Shearing) A surface defect resulting from abrasion between the steel/iron and a guide used for ensuring location in rolling. 2.54 Hydraulic Flattening using hydraulic pressure. Levelling effected by means of stretching

2.55 Inclusion (Non-metallic Inclusions) - Particles of oxides, sulphides, silicates, refractories, etc, embedded in the metal. These are the products of deoxidation. 2.56 Inverse 2.57 KiUing Segregation (Skin Passing) See 2.93. See 2.IO4.

This results 2.58 Kisser - Patches of scale left on sheets after pickling. from two sheets having remained in close contact during pickling. 7

IS f 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 2.59 Laminations - A defect in rolled materials, characterized by a tendency to split into layers along the direction of rolling usually due to the presence of non-metallic inclusions or other discontinuity in the steel. 2.60 Lattens - A measure of thickness, and refers to those hot rolled sheets having thickness from O-56 to 0.4 mm. 2.61 Matching - The operation in pack-rolling, of placing parted sheets together to form a new pack in order that it can be so rolled that all the sheets in the pack are of the required gauge. 2.62 Mill Coil -- The long narrow hot-rolled strip produced from one single billet or slab. 2.63 Mill Edge - The edge as obtained from the normal practice of rolling without the use of edge rolls (see 2.42). 2.64 Mill Finish - The surface finish on sheets corresponding to the ground finish of rolls used. 2.65 Mill Pack 2.66 Mill Shearing 2.67 Off Gauge 2.68 Oiling Sheets from pack-rolling. Edge shearing of sheet-pack to approximate size.

Outside the permissible tolerance in thickness.

Coating with oil as a temporary rust preventive. Separating individual sheets processed by pack-rolling.

2.69 -Opening

2.70 Orange Peel - Characteristic roughening over the surface of coldrolled or cold-deformed sheet or strip due to coarse grain size. 2.71 Over-Pickled nounced chemical 2.72 Pack-Rolling 2.73 -Pairs - Pickled longer than necessary, resulting in proattack causing pitting and roughness on the surface. Rolling two or more sheets at a time, in one pack. together. area of segregated phosphides

Two sheets hot-rolled

2.74 Phosphide Streak-An which is revealed on etching. 2.75 Pickle Stain and drying.

elongated

Surface stain after pickling due to inadequate washing

2.76 Pickling - The removal of scale by chemical or electrochemical treatment with dilute acids or other chemicals followed by washing. 2.77 Pinch - An overlap in a sheet caused by uneven heating of a pack of sheets prior to pack-rolling. 8

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 2.78 Pinchers - Surface disturbances which result from the rolling process and which ordinarily appear as fernlike ripples running diagonally across the direction of rolling. 2.79 Pipe (Contraction Cavity, Shrinkage Cavity) - An axial cavity caused by contraction during solidification of an ingot. Also the defect arising from the axial cavity in semifinished or finished products. 2.80 Primes Sheets or plates of good quality, free from harmful defects. Shearing sheets to desired, finished

2.81 Resquaring (Reshearing) dimensions with right-angled edges.

2.82 Roke (Roak) - A longitudinal surface defect (an elongated fissure), caused by a blow-hole which is not welded up during rolling and has perforated the surface and become oxidized. 2.83 Rolled Edge - Edge which is finished accurately using rolls at the edges. 2.84 Rolled-in-Scale stock during rolling. to desired shape by

Local areas of scale pressed into the surface of the Flattening of sheets by passing them

2.85 Roller Levelling (Mangling) through staggered rolls. 2.86 Rolling rolls.

The shaping of metal by passing it between two rotating on

2.87 Roll Marks - Periodic surface defects due to some imperfection the surface of a roll or due to particles of matter picked up by rolls.

2.88 Roll Pass (Pass) - Openings of definite shapes formed between a set of rolls through which hot steel passes for taking up the given shape or undergoing a desired amount of reduction in sectional area. This term also applies to a single passage through a pair of rolls for the purpose of altering the shape and/or reducing the cross-sectional area. 2.89 Sand Marks - Patches of furnace refractory material embedded on the surface of hot steel and rolled subsequently. 2.90 Scale Breaking - Breaking up of scale layer on slabs, blooms or billets during rolling by the application of water jets under pressure. Breaking the scale by repeated reverse bends by passing the hot steel through a suitable machine, a procedure which helps to minimize the kinks during subsequent processing, is also practised. 2.91 Scraped Edge setting of guides. 2.92 Seam An edge with abrasion markings due to incorrect

Long shallow groove or striation formed during rolling by the 9

IS : 1956 (Part] IV) - 1975 elongation of oxidized surface or subsurface blow-holes. Seams may aho be caused by rippled surfaces or by recurrent teeming laps. 2.93 Segregation - A non-uniform distribution of some constituents and/or impurities, in a cast product characterized by the mode of solidification of alloys. Segregation usually persists through subsequent hot and cold working. Generally the concentration of low melting constituents tend to be higher in the centre than the surface. Sometimes, the reverse of this phenomenon takes place and is known as inverse segregation (see also 2.56). 2.94 Sheared Edges wheel). 2.95 Shearing shears (see 2.28). Edges detached-by shearing (and at times by slitting

This term is often used for `cropping' which is done with

2.96 Sheet - A hot or cold-rolled flat product, rolled in rectangular section of thickness below 5 mm and supplied in straight lengths. The width is at least 100 times the thickness and the edges can be mill, trimmed, sheared or flame cut. A sheet can also be obtained by cutting of strips. 2.97 Sheet Bars (Slab Bars) - Semifinished products of rectangular section, of a thickness not less than 6 mm, width not less than 150 mm and of such dimensions that the thickness does not exceed one quarter of the width. This term also includes the product tin plate bars. 2.98 Sheet Bar, Multiple - A sheet bar of such length as to give a desired number of smaller sheet bars after shearing or cutting with minimum wastage (due to short length). 2.99 Shell (Scab, Sliver, Spill) - A relatively thin film or tongue of metal imperfectly attached to the surface of steel. The defect on the sides of the ingot, caused by metal splashed during teeming, having solidified and struck to mould wall is also called shell or splash. 2.100 Short (Cut Bar) - The portion left out after specified lengths are cut out or sheared from a long length of hot-rolled product. 2.101 Side Shearing (Edgitig) desired width. 2.102 2.103 Singles Skelp Sheets hot-rolled Shearing off the edges to obtain that is, not in pack. the

individually,

Skelp is strip (see 2.111).

NOTE- Skelp is historically coined from the word `skelping', an operation in which long narrow strip was beaten into the shape of a tube which was heated to a very high temperature and rolled, resulting in forge welding of the seam.

2.104 Skin Passing (Pinch Passing) - Passing hot-rolled, annealed or normalized sheets in cold state through rolls for removing kinks, stretcher 10

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 strains light. or similar surface Usually reduction conditions only, the cold deformation is less than 5 percent. being very

2.105 Slab - A semifinished rolled, forged or continuously cast product The cross section is rectangular. The intended for re-rolling or forging. thickness does not exceed one third of the width. 2.106 Slitting of rotary cutters. 2.107
also

Cutting -

a strip into a number

of narrower

strips by means (see

Soft Temper 2.113).

In a soft condition

(as induced

by annealing)

2.108 Sticking-The welding of pack-rolled

joining up of two adjacent or batch-annealed sheets.

surfaces,

due to partial

2.109 Stretched Levelling (Patent Flattening, Stretcher Flattening) Flattening of sheets and thereby taking away buckles, warpage, kinks, etc, by applying uniform tension at the ends gripped along the entire edge in a stretching machine. 2.110 Stretcher Strains (Luder Lines) - The roughening and somewhat furrowed appearance on the surface of low carbon sheets or strips as a result of uneven spreading in the initial stages of cold-deformation after annealing, normalizing or after hot-rolling, though being not so marked in the last two cases. 2.111 Strip - A hot- or cold-rolled flat product and rolled approximately in rectangular cross section of thickness usually 10 mm and below with mill, rolled, trimmed or sheared edges and supplied in coil or flattened coil Usually an arbitrary width is chosen to demarcate (straight length) form. between narrow and wide strip. The width chosen for such demarcation varies from country to country. 2.112 Sweep - Controlled deviation in dimensions in any particular region or place with respect to the remainder of the material. In rolls, sweep In sheets, sweep refers to controlled refers to the camber at the middle. dishing of a load of sheets for annealing to ensure flatness in the finally processed sheets (see 2.13 and 2.18). 2.113 Temper - A characteristic condition, associated with the mechanical properties and structure which are induced by mechanical or thermal A given product may be fully annealed (that is, of treatment (or both). soft temper) or subjected to a very drastic cold-deformation (hard temper), or treated to a condition intermediate between these two extremes to bring about the desired temper (namely, quarter hard, half hard and three-quarter hard) depending on treatment. 2.114 Temper Rolling - Cold-rolling for removing in sheet steel and for preventing stretcher strains. 11 the yield point effect

IS : 1956 (Part IV) - 1975 2.115 Tolerance - The permitted deviation from a specified weight usually expressed as plus or minus on that quantity. dimension or

2.116 Trickle Scale (Tail Scale) - Loose scale which flakes off from the ends during hot-rolling or packs ofpairs ofsheets, and finds its way in between the sheets, and is rolled in during further pack-rolling. 2.117 Twisted Strip A strip with deformed in a coil. Shape) A strip with gradual change in and irregular cross section.

2.118 Wrap -

The single'turn

2.119 Wedge Section (Wedge thickness along the width.

2.120 White Pickling (Bright Pickling) - The second annealing, of sheets intended for tinplate and terneplate.

pickling,

after

12

TO IS:1956(Part 41-1975 GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO IRON AND STEEL PART 4 ST~EEL SHEET AND STRIP (First Revision)

(lkl/\C 4, clause 2.17) - Add the following now the subsequent clause after 2.17 and renumber clauses accordingly: '2.10 Butt - Short-ingot or portions removed by shearing, cutting or punching from rolled, forged or pressed products for obtaining near correct size or shape.' 2.100) (Page 10, clause following for the existing clause: Substitute the

'2.100 Short (Cut Bar) - The portion left out after, 1 specified length width are cut out or sheared from hot/cold rolled products.' (Page 10, clause 2.1Q4) following, for the existing clause: Substitute the

'2.104 Skin PoesinE (Pinch Passin&) - Cold ro.l.:L:Ln of hot ',rolled annealed or normaliacd steel sheet/ surface quality, removing strip for improving kinks, . formation of stretcher strains or similar eurfaec conditions only, tha cold reduction being very light, usually less than 5 percent.1

i ;" 1:

..).C)
1

(Page 11, clause 2.111) following for the existing clause:

Substitute

the

'2.111 Strip - A hot/cold rolled flat product and .` rolled approximately in rectangular cross-section ' of thiclcness normally 12 mm and below with mill, rolled, trimmed or sheared edges and supplied in coil form. '2.111.1 Wide StriE - Not/cold width normnlly equal to or ~IXAtCr rolled strip tllnn GO0 mtn. of'

2.111.2 Narrow Strip - Ilot/cold rolled strip of width normally leas than GO0 mm.' (Page 11, clause 2.1141, following for the existing clause: Substitute the

'2.114 Temper Rollinn - Cold rolling operation following annealing to produce ,different tempers.'

(SMDC 1)

Reprography Unit, MS,

Ilcw Dcllli, India

NO. 3 MARCH 2006 TO IS 1956( PART 4 ) :1975 GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO ~ON AND STEEL
PART 4 STEEL SHEET AND STRIP ( Erd R&wn)

AMENDMENT

( Page 5, clause 2.22) -- Substitute the following for the etisting
`Coiled Strip mot Rolled or Cold Rolled)

A rolled flat strip product which is wound into re~arly superimpo~ laps so as to form a coil with ahnost flat side. It shall have at least 50 laps.'

(~D4)

Repm#aphy Utit, BIS, New Delhi, In&

