IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003

Iiuiian Standard GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO TRANSPORT TRACTORS AND TRAILERS
PART 2 DIMENSIONS

(First Revision )

ICS 01.040.43,43.080.10

0 BIS 2003

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Sep~ember 2003

Price Group

7

Transport Tractors and Trailers Sectional Committee,

TED 22

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of lndian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Transport Tractor and Trailer Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. IS 7774 has been published tractors and trailers. in two parts. Part 1 of this standard covers the basic terms relating to transport

This standard was first published in 1975. The revision of this standard has been updated based on present usage. Definitions pertaining to weights have not been included since IS 9211 :1979 `Denominations and definitions of weights of road vehicles', already exists on the subject. In order to achieve harmony vehicles -- Dimensions of International Organization formulation of this standard with the international practices, this standard is based onISO612 : 1978(E) `Road motor vehicles and towed vehicles -- Terms and definitions' published by the for Standardization (1S0). The composition of the committee responsible for is given in Annex A.

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003

Indian Standard GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO TRANSPORT TRACTORS AND TRAILERS
PART 2 DIMENSIONS

(First Revision )
1 SCOPE
3

1.1 This standard (Part relating to dimensions trailers.

2) defines different terms of transport tractors and

DEFINITION OF THE LONGITUDINAL MEDIAN PLANE (OF THE VEHICLE)

1.2 The terms defined in this standard do not include industrial!, agricultural and crawler type tractors or trailers. 2 GENERAL Unless otherwise stated with regard to one or more of the items mentioned below, it should be understood that:

Longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle): The vertical plane Y passing through the mid-points of AB, perpendicular to All, A and B indicated in the figure given below.and being defined as follows: -- for each wheel, the veitical plane passing through its axis cuts the mid-plane of the wheel [(see 2(g)] following a straight line A which meets the supporting surface of the vehicle at one point; and
A and B are two points thus defined

-- a) the supporting surface is horizontal; lengths and widths are measured in the horizontal plane, and heights in the vertical plane; the total weight of the vehicle is the maximum authorized total weight, the load distributed according to the being manufacturer's instructions; the tyres are inflated to the pressure corresponding to the maximum authorized total weight of the vehicle; the vehicle is stationary; its doors and windows are closed, and its wheels and articulated elements are in positions corresponding to movements in a straight line; the vehicle is new from normally equipped; the factory and

b)

which correspond to two wheels, both of which are either steering or powered wheels, situated respectively at the two ends of the same real or imaginary axle.
(Y)

(A)

I

(A)

c)

d)

B

e)

0

all wheels of the vehicle are resting on the ground; the expression `mid-plane of the wheel', that occurs in a number of definitions, designates the plane equidistant from the inner edges of the rim.

g)

NOTES 1 The longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) is also called the `longitudinal plane of symmetry or zero Y plane' 2 In case of dual wheels the mid-plane of the dual wheels is equidistant from the inner edge of one wheel and the outer edge of the other. The straight line A is in this particular case, the intersection of the mid-plane of the dual wheels and the vertical plane passing through the axis of the axle pin.

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003

4 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS No. 1.1 1.1.1 Term dehicle Length Motor Vehicle .ength

OF MOTOR VEHICLES Definition

AND TOWED VEHICLES Drawing

;ee 4.1.1 to 4.1.3 rhe distance between two ~ertical planes perpendicular to he longitudinal median plane (of he vehicle) (see 3) and touching he front and rear of the vehicle espectively
{OTE -- All parts of the vehicle, ncluding any parts projecting form front ~r rear (towing-hooks, bumpers, etc) are :ontained between these two planes.

L1.2

rrailer Length

rhe lengths with and without irawgear, defined as in 4.1.1, the ;econd value being placed in parentheses ~xample :5500 (3 700)

QOTE -- To determine the length with irawgear, the drawbar is assumed to be ocated so that the axis of the drawbar :ye or coupling head is vertical and lies ~ithin the foremost vertical plane.

t-

qjq

4.1.3

Semi-Trailer Length

The length of the semi-trailer defined as in 4.1.1 and the distance between kingpin axis and rear end of semi-trailer, the second value being placed in parentheses: Example : 10 800 (7 800) t"

4.2

Vehicle Width

The distance between two planes parallel to the longitttdina! median plane (of the vehicle; (see 3) and touching the vehick on either side of the said plane.
NOTE -- All parts of the vehicle including any lateral projections of tixet (wheelhubs, parts door-handles bumpers, etc) are contained betweel these two planes, except the rear-viev mirrors, side marker lamps, tyre pressurt indicators, direction indicator lamps

F=!
I

2

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003

`

3

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003 No. 1.4.2 Term Semi-Trailer Wheel Space Definition The distance from the axis of the fifth wheel kingpin in a vertical position to the vertical plane through the axis of the semitrailer's first axle.
NOTE -- In the case of a semi-trailer with two or more axles, the same rule should be applied as for vehicles with three or more axles.

Drawing

-

t~

L5

Track

The track corresponding to a real or imaginary axle is the sum of the two distances AH and BH in relation to the two wheels connected to this axle, AH and BH being the distances from points A and B defined in 3 to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle).
NOTES 1 Practical brief definition : In tbe case of two single wheels corresponding to the same real or imaginary axle, the track is represented by the distance between tbe axes of the traces left by the wheels on the supporting surface. 2 Case of dual wheels (see Note 2 of 3).

0
H H

+
A

(A)

(A)

<

4.6

Front Overhang

The distance between the vertical plane passing through the centres of the front wheels and the foremost point of the vehicle taking into consideration lashing hooks, registration number plate, etc, and any parts rigidly -attached to the vehicle. The distance between the vertical plane passing through the centres of the rearmost wheels and the rearrnost point of the vehicle, taking into consideration the towing attachment, registration number plate, etc, and arty parts rigidly attached to the vehicle.

Llo
1 + @

4.7

Rear Overhang

9

4

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003 No. 4.8 Term Ground Clearance Definition The distance between the ground and the lowest point of the centre part of the vehicle. The centre part is that pari contained between two planes parallel to from the and equidistant longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3) and separated by a distance which is 80'XOof the least distance between points on the inner edges of the wheels on any one axle. Drawing

T f

-

!),8 b .-- .~ b

4.9

Ramp Angle

The minimum acute angle between two planes, perpenlongitudinal dicular to the median plane of the vehicle tangential, respectively, to the tyres of the front and the rear wheels, static loaded, and intersecting at a line touching the lower part of the vehicle, outside these wheels. This angle defines the largest ramp over which the vehicle can move. The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and planes tangential to the static loaded front wheel tyres, such that no point of the vehicle ahead of the axle lies below these planes and that no part rigidly attached to the vehicle lies below these planes. The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and planes tangential to the static loaded rear wheel tyres, such that no point of the vehicle behind the axle lies below these planes and that no part rigidly attached to the vehicle lies below these planes.

4.10

.4pproach Angle

md

4.11

Departure Angle

m

q

5

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003 No. L12 Term Height of Chassis Above Ground (Commercial Vehicles) Definition The distance from the horizontal line to the longitudinal (of the vehicle) touching the upper chassis measured centre line. NOTES
1 In the case of vehicles with more than two axles. the distance is measured at the outermost axles (excluding lifting axles). 2 The height of the chassis above the supporting surface should be determined not only with the vehicle loaded to its maximum permissible weight, but also with the vehicle unladen.

Drawing

the ground to perpendicular median plane (see 3) and surface of the at the axle

4.13

Maximum Usable Length of Chassis Behind Cab (Vehicle with Cab)

The distance between two vertical planes C and D perpenthe longitudinal dicular to median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3) -- plane C is the foremost plane which can be used for the bodywork; plane D touches the rear end of the chassis.

e

4.14

Bodywork Length

E and

The distance between two planes F perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3) defined as in 4.14.1 to 4.14.3. NOTE-- The bodywork length does not
include lashing hooks, towing attachments of trailers, rear registration number plates, bumpers, etc, unless these are an integral part of the body.

4.14.1

Chassis Without Cab and Without any Enclosure for the Engine or Other Components which are Intended to form an External Part of the Vehicle

-- plane E passes through the foremost part of the body; -- plane F passes through the rearmost part of the body.

~

.

F

Zlrlclclclnclo J * (

6

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003 No. 1.14.2 Term Chassis Without Cab but with an Enclosure for the Engine Intended to form an External Part of the Vehicle Chassis Supplied Compiete with Driver's Cab -- Definition plane E touches the back of the foremost predominatrng surface of the dash panel in the area directly ahead of the driving position of the vehicle, disregarding flanges and localized depressions; -- plane F is defined as in 4.14.1. -- plane E passes through the foremost part of the body which is behind the driver's cab; F is defined as -- plane in 4.14.1. ~ Drawing .F

L14.3

E,

F

$.15

Maximum Internal Dimensions of Body (Commercial Vehicles)

The interior length, width and height of the body without taking into account internal projections vehicle) (wheelboxes, ribs, hooks, etc). NOTES
1 However, the presence of internal projections should be noted. 2 If the walls or roof are curved, each dimension is measured between the planes (vertical or horizontal, depending on the case) tangential to the apices of the the curved surfaces concerned, dimensions being measured inside the body.

-H

4.16

Drawgear Length

The distance between the axis of the drawbar eye (in a vertical position) and the vertical plane passing through the axes of the front wheels of the trailer

I

I

4.17

Drawbar Length

The distance between the drawbar eye (in a vertical position) and the vertical plane passing through the axis of the pin fixing the drawbar to the trailer [plane perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (see 3) of the trailer].

n m}

7

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003
No.

Term Position of Towing Attachment

Definition This attachment assumes as its plane of symmetry the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3). Its position is defined by the dimensions defined in 4.18.1 to 4.18.9. The distance from the attachment to the vertical plane perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (see 3) and passing through the axis of the rearmost axle (plane V), that is, the distance to plane K a) b) for a ball, from the centre of the ball; for a jaw, from the vertical plane passing through the axis of the pin.and parallel to plane K for a hook, from the centre of the meridian section of the corresponding toroidal ring, the axis of the section being vertical.

Drawing

L18

L18.1

Overhang of Attachment

v

(

e

-

c)

4.18.2

Height of Attachment

The distance from the attachment to the supporting plane, that is, the distance from the supporting plane: a) b) for a ball, to the centre of the ball; for a jaw, to the horizontal plane equidistant from the two inner faces of the shackle with the pin vertical; for a hook, to the centre of the meridian section of the corresponding toroidal ring, the axis of this section being vertical. `4

c)

4.18.3

Distance of Towing Attachment in Front of Rear of Vehicle

The distance from the attachment as defined in 4.18.1 (a), (b) or (c) to the vertical plane W perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (see 3) and passing through the rear of the body. NOTE -- In determining the position of
plane W. minor projections such as tailgate hinges, latches, etc, are disregarded.

w

+ Q~
--

y
--

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003
No.

Term Fifth Wheel Lead

Definition See 4.19.1 and 4.19.2 NOTE-- For towing vehicles with two or
more rear axles, the distance is measured to the vertical plane passing through the centre line of the rearrnost wheel.

Drawing

1.19

1.19.1

Fifth Wheel Lead for Calculation of Length

The distance from the vertical axis passing through the centre of the seating on the towing vehicle for the fifth wheel coupling pin to the vertical plane passing through the axis of the rear wheel of the towing vehicle, perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3).

f (

-- L19.2 Fifth Wheel Lead for Calculation of Load Distribution The distance from the horizontal axis of the pivot of the fifth wheel on the towing vehicle to vertical plane passing the through the axis of the rear wheel of the towing vehicle, perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3), -- 4.20 Height to Coupling Face The maximum distance from the centre of the seating of the fifth wheel coupling pin to the bearing plane. This point is situated in the horizontal plane touching the upper part of the seat. See 4.21.1 and 4.21.2

+ w

4.21

Distance Between Towing Device and Front End of Towing Vehicle Distance Between Jaw and Front End of Towing Vehicle

4.21.1

The distance from the axis of the pin in the jaw or centre of the ball or, for a hook, from the centre of the meridian section of the corresponding toroidaI ring, to a vertical plane perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3) and touching the front part of the towing vehicle.

d

9

1S 7774 (Part 2) :2003

10

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003

F
No. 4.26 41.27 41.27.1

Term Kingpin Offset

Definition The distance from the extension of the swiveling axis of the stub axle onto the supporting surface to the extension onto the same plane of the mid-plane of the wheel. The kingpin offset shown on the drawing is positive. %

Drawing

\ \

Toe-in Toe-in (Length)

See 4.27.1 and 4.27.2 The length defined as follows: The ends of the horizontal diameters of the interior contours of the rims corresponding to the same axle are the apices of an isosceles trapezium. The difference between the length of the rear base and that of the forward base of the trapezium is the toein, the difference being positive when the wheels are closer together in front than behind, and negative in the contrary case.
DRIVING DIRECTION

&+

`L27.2

Toe-in (Angle)

The angle formed by the horizontal diameter of the wheel and the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3) or the acute angle formed by the vertical plane G passing through the axis of the axle-pin and a vertical plane H perpendicular to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle). The distance between two points and q : this distance is the projection onto a plane parallel to the longitudinal median plane (of the vehicle) (see 3) of the acute angle formed by the vertical and the real or imaginary swiveling axis of the stub axle.

DRIVING

DIRECTION

& .-

4.28

Castor

p

I

P

q ~

DRIVING

DIRECTION

It is positive when p is ahead of q in the direction of normal travel.

@

11

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003 No. $.29 Term Vertical Clearance Definition The vertical displacement of a wheel in relation to suspended part of the vehicle from the position corresponding to the maximum permissible load to the position from which any `he additional vertical travel is impossible. ,--Drawing

\\ [w \ \L \

\ 4 \

`/,/) ,/ /

,'

~---

4.30

Lift

The height to which a wheel-may be lifted without any other wheels leaving their supporting surface. b

f

4.31

Turning Circles

The diameters of the circles circumscribing the extensions on the supporting plane of the midplanes of the steered wheels (the steering wheel being turned to full lock).
NOTES 1 The smaller diameter of the circle circumscribing the extension on the supporting plane of the mid-plane of an inner non steered wheel is also of practical interest. 2 Each vehicle has left-hand and righthand turning circles.

- -

-~~_

1

e%'
`\ \ ----./q>

4.32

Turning Clearance Circles

The turning clearance circles (the steering wheel being turned to fill lock) are: 1) The diameter of the smallest circle enclosing the projec tions onto the supporting plane of all points of the vehicle. 2) The diameter of the largest circle beyond which are located the projections onto the supporting plane of all the points of the vehicle. I

\ \

I

NOTE -- Each vehicle has right-hand
and left-hand turning clearance circles.

12

IS 7774 (Part 2) :2003

ANNEX A

(Foreword)
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION TED 22 Transport Tractors and Trailers Sectional Committee,
Organization
PL Haulwel Trailers, Chennai

Representative(s)
SHN S. RAktAsut3RAMANIAN (Chairman) Shri B. RAMESH (Alternate) SHRIP. DHANASEKARAN of India, Pune SHRIS. RAW SHRIH. DESAI(Alternate I) (Aherna:e II) SHRIB. GHOSH SHRIM. P. SRUtAM SHRIT. SRIRAM(Alternate) SHRIK. N. BALAJI SHRJ K. KANABIRAN(Ahernafe) SHRIV. R. JALGAONKAR SHRIB. K. CHAPRA(Alternate) SHRITILAK CHANDMANGATRAMOBHAN SHRIHARKIRATSINGHKHOLI (Alternate) SHRIV. ABWHAM SHRIT. FALCO(Alfernate) SHRINIRMALJEET SINGH SHRIG. P. ROY T. K. DUTJ_A (Alternate) SHRJ SHRIK. K. MANCHANDA SHRIA. C. KHURANA(Alternate) SHRIKAMAL KHOSLA SHRIRAMAN ANAND (Alternate) SHRIB. K. GHOSH SHRIS. V. KULKARNI(Alternate) DR S. S. MANTHA SHRIV. ASHOKKUMAR SHRIA. R. GULATI, Director & Head (TED) [Representing Director General (Ex-oflcio)]

Ashok Leyland Ltd. Chennai Autonlotive Research Association

Llharat Earthmovers

Ltd, Bangalore

Brakes India Ltd, Chennai

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune

indian Federation of Transport Operators, Mumbai

Indian Tyre Technical Advisory Committee, New Delhi

Ministry of Surface Transport (Road

Wing),New Delhi
Wing), New Delhi

Ministry of Surface Transport (Development

Standard Castings Pvt Ltd, New Delhi

TRATEC Engineering Pvt Ltd, New Delhi

Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, Pune

Veermata Jeejabai Technological Volvo India Ltd, Bangalore BIS Directorate General

Institute, Mumbai

Member Secreta~
SHRIM. M. BANSAL Joint Director (TED), BIS

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This "Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. of comments. Standards are also reviewed such review indicates that no changes are up for revision. Users of Indian Standards or edition by referring to the latest issue of
of Indian Standards Act,

marking

and quality

1936 to promote certification of goods

TED 22 (300).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 603843 { 609285 22541216,22541442 22542519,22542315

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1I 14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113 {

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 `MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Detbi-2

