Wada Wah IS 12218 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


Taal ASAl Gh WAM, VLA AT 
Ta alu c AA at gA 
(Feel FRITT ) 


Method of Measurement of 
Approach, Departure and Ramp 
Angles of Automotive Vehicles 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 17.040.01;43.020 


© BIS 2018 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 aeae AHL Í, as feeeit-110002 
mag aese MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2018 Price Group 3 


Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, 
TED 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Automotive Braking and Steering System, Vehicle Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


The overall performance of vehicle is a function of performance of its various components, systems, 
instrumentation, etc. This standard specifies a uniform method for measurement of the approach, departure 
and ramp angles. 


This standard was first published in 1987 and reaffirmed many times until 2012. In this revision of the standard, 
following changes have been made: 
a) Definitions of approach angle, departure angle and ramp angle included for better clarity. 


b) Illustrations to determine approach, departure and ramp angles were corrected with modified 
illustrations. 


c) Requirements for off road vehicles included. 
Annex A is given for information. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12218 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF APPROACH, 
DEPARTURE AND RAMP ANGLES OF 
AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the method of measurement 
of approach, departure and ramp angles for M and N 
category vehicles as defined in IS 14272. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
9435 : 2004 Terms and definitions relating to 
dimensions of road vehicles other 
than 2 and3 wheelers (first revision) 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 


Terminology (first revision) 
3 DEFINITIONS 


The following definitions in addition to those given 
in IS 9435 shall apply. 


3.1 Approach Angle 


The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and 
planes tangential to the static loaded front wheel tyres, 
such that no point of the vehicle ahead of the front 
axle lies below these planes and that no part rigidly 
attached to the vehicle with the exception of any 
steps, lies below these planes. When measuring the 
approach angle (see Fig. 1), no account is taken of 
under-run protective devices. 


Fic. 1 APPROACH ANGLE 


3.2 Departure Angle 


The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and 
planes tangential to the static loaded rear wheel tyres, 
such that no point of the vehicle behind the axle lies 
below these planes and that no part rigidly attached 
to the vehicle, lies below these planes. When 
measuring the departure angle (see Fig. 2), no 
account is taken of under-run protective devices. 


Fic. 2 DEPARTURE ANGLE 
3.3 Ramp Angle 


The minimum acute angle measured between two 
planes, perpendicular to the longitudinal median 
plane of the vehicle, tangential, respectively, to the 
tyres of the front and the rear wheels, static loaded, 
and intersecting at a line touching the rigid lower 
part of the vehicle, outside these wheels. This angle 
defines the largest ramp over which the vehicle can 
move. When measuring the ramp angle (see Fig. 3), 
no account is taken of under-run protective devices 
and exhaust system parts. 


Fic. 3 RAMP ANGLE 


4 FEATURES OF TEST TRACK 


Test track shall be a plane level and hard ground. 


IS 12218 : 2018 


5 PREPARATIONS OF VEHICLES 


5.1 The vehicle shall conform in all parts, 
components and sub-systems to the design and/or 
production series as applicable. 


5.2 The vehicle shall be loaded to the maximum GVW 
as declared by the manufacturer and load distribution 
between the axles shall be as per the manufacturer’s 
recommendation. 


5.3 The vehicle shall be fitted with tyres, which shall 
have a tread depth of not less than 90 percent of 
tread depth on new tyre. The tyres shall be inflated 
to the pressure recommended by the manufacturer. 


5.4 The vehicle shall be parked on the test track in 
such way that all its wheels are resting on the same 
horizontal plane. The engine shall be switched off 
and parking brake applied. The wheels shall be 
pointing towards the straight ahead condition. 


6 MEASUREMENTS 
6.1 Approach Angle (a ) 


The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and 
planes tangential to the static loaded front wheel 
tyres (see Fig. 4) shall be calculated as follows: 


distance between least favourably point 
in front of the front axle and centre line of 
front axle, 


Y, = height of least favourably point from the 
ground, and 


r, = front tyre radius. 


The least favourably placed points which shall not 
include the number plate may be chosen by visual 
judgment and in case of doubt, measurements may 
be done for the various possible points and the 
smallest angle may be reported. 


The approach angle shall be expressed in degrees, 
rounded off to the nearest half degree. An approach 
angle not less than 12° recommended. 


6.2 Departure Angle (f) 


The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and 
planes tangential to the static loaded rear wheel tyres 
(see Fig. 5) shall be determined as follows: 


Fic. 5 DEPARTURE ANGLE 


. r in y, 
6 = sin’) = - tan? + —® 
X’ot -YY Xp 
where 
p= distance between least favourably point 
in rear of the rear axle and centre line of 
rear axle, 

Y, = height of least favourably point from the 


ground, and 


rear tyre radius. 


The least favourably placed point which shall not 
include the number plate may be chosen by visual 
judgment and in case of doubt, measurements may 
be made for various doubtful points and the smallest 
angle may be reported. 


The departure angle shall be expressed in degrees, 
rounded off to the nearest half degree. A departure 
angles not less than 10° is recommended. 


6.3 Ramp Angle 


The minimum acute angle measured between two 
planes, perpendicular to the longitudinal median 
plane of the vehicle, tangential, respectively, to the 
tyres of the front and the rear wheels, static loaded, 
and intersecting at a line touching the rigid lower 
part of the vehicle, outside these wheels shall be 
determined as follows: 


While determining the ramp angle (see Fig. 6) for 
multi axle vehicles, innermost wheels of front or front 
combination axles and rear or rear combination axles 
shall be considered. 


where 


IS 12218 : 2018 


-Y, 


r 


ô= sin tan Resin” 1 
Xr+- YR)? Xg JX? +0 -Y Y 
t -Y 
— tan” r R 


= distance between least favourably point 
between the axles and centre line of front 
axle, 


= distance between least favourably point 


between the axles and centre line of rear 
axle, 


= height of least favourably point between 


the axles from the ground, 


= rear tyre radius, and 


= front tyre radius. 


The least favourably placed point may be chosen by 
visual judgment and in case of doubt, measurements 
may be made for various points and the smallest 
angle may be reported. 


The ramp angle shall be expressed in degrees and 
rounded off to the nearest half degree. A ramp angles 
not less than 15° is recommended. 


7 OFF ROAD VEHICLES (CROSS COUNTRY 
VEHICLES) 


Approach angle, departure angle and ramp angle 
requirements for off road vehicles of categories M 
and N shall meet the requirements of IS 14272. 


IS 12218 : 2018 


ANNEXA 
(Informative) 


A-1 MEASUREMENTS OF APPROACH 
ANGLE (a) 


The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and 
planes tangential to the static loaded front wheel 
tyres shall be determined as follows: 


Vehicle front 


where 


X, = the distance between least favourably a=B-2r 
point in front of the front axle and centre sinp =r,/ X,+ r,- Y) 
. f A f a 
line of front axle, 


| + (r -yY 905 
Y, = the height of least favourably point from po veal) I 


the ground, and tan =(7,- Y,)/X, 
r, = the front tyre radius. x = tan'[(7,-Y,)/X,] 
a=ß-À 
a=sin" fi -tan 4 
X’a +r, -Yy A 


A-2 MEASUREMENT OF DEPARTURE ANGLE 
P) 


The greatest angle between the horizontal plane and 
planes tangential to the static loaded rear wheel tyres 
shall be determined as follows: 


B 


IS 12218 : 2018 


Vehicle rear 


X, = distance between least favourably point 
in rear of the rear axle and centre line of 
rear axle, 


Y, = height of least favourably point from the 
ground, and 


r, = rear tyre radius. 

The least favourably placed points which shall not 
include the number plate may be chosen by visual 
judgement and in case of doubt, measurements may 
be done for the various possible points and the 
smallest angle may be reported. 


B=a-~7 
r, 
sin g= 
X’ot(%,-Y) 
pom 
tan À = i Yo 
D 
B=sin"' h — tan” (=> >) 
XD tO- Yy) Xp 


IS 12218 : 2018 
A-3 MEASUREMENT OF RAMP ANGLE (ò) 


The minimum acute angle measured between two 
planes, perpendicular to the longitudinal median 
plane of the vehicle, tangential, respectively, to the 
tyres of the front and the rear wheels, static loaded, 
and intersecting at a line touching the rigid lower 
part of the vehicle, outside these wheels shall be 
determined as follows: 


X= distance between least favourably 
point between the axles and centre line 
of front axle, 

X,,= distance between least favourably 
point between the axles and centre line 
of rear axle, 

Y = height of least favourably point 
between the axles from the ground, 

r,= rear tyre radius, and 

r, = front tyre radius. 


The least favourably placed points which shall not 
include the number plate may be chosen by visual 
judgment and in case of doubt, measurements may 


R E d=sin" f 
amp angle = A + a = 


JX? re +; -Y,) 


— tan 


be done for the various possible points and the 
smallest angle may be reported. 


=a- 
lg 


a 
J Aaa Gp RY 


sii 


tan g =R 
Rf 
A-sin' ; is - — tan” (=>) 
NX + (% Yr) Xr 
a=b-C 
sinb = f =>b =sin”! = f% 
Xe tq -RY VX tm -RY 
tanc = 228 = c = tan” 22 
Rr Rr 


pe r. fr- 
a=sin™ r an|” 2) 


VXat(4—ye) x 


Rr 


Y zai r ar -Y 
Risin”! 3 — tan" +—8 


Rf X’r +- NY Xe 


al hT 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 04 (0996). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ee 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


