UDC 820*178,322

(

First Reprint APRIL 1998 )

IS:12614-1988
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

METHOD FOR TORSIONAL I. scope

STRESS FATIGUE TESTING

for carrying out torsional stress fatigue tests on test pieces having a nominal diameter between 6 and 12'6 mm without deliberateby introduced stress concentrations. The tests are carried out at room temperature in air, by applying to the test piece a pure couple about its longitudinal axis. 1.2 The form, preparation and testing of test pieces of qircular cross-section are specified but zomponent testing and other specialized form of tests are not included. Similarly. high strain torsional fatigue Jests. which lead to failure in a few thousand cycles, are also excluded. 2. Principle 2.1 Nominally identical test pieces are mounted in a torsional fatigue testing machine and subjected to the loading conditions required to induce cycles of torsional stress having the form of any one of the stress cycles illustrated in diagrams 4 to 7 of Fig. 1. . C

1.1 This standard specifies the conditions

2

Note - Diagrams 1 to 3 of Fig. 1 are not relevant rince in an axially symmetrical test piece, change of direction mean torque does not induce a different type of stress ryrtem, and mean stress in torsion can always be regarded poritive in sign.

of as

fl.UCt

UATING

COMPRESSION

REVERSED

SYMMETRICAL
I

fl.UCTUATlNG TENSION

REVERSED ASYMMETRICAL
FIG. 1

REVERSED ASYMMETRICAL
TYPES OF

CYCLIC STRESS

2.2 The purpose of the test is to determine fatigue properties, such as, the S/N curve. The test being continued until the test piece fails by complete fracture or until a pre-determined degree of cracking has been achieved or a predetermined number Of stress CyCl9S has been exceeded.
Note 1 - The form of cracking experienced as a result of torsional fatigue testing may be of different configurations, Cracks may be parallel to the longitudinal axis of the test piece, or perpendicular to the longitudinal axis, or at any angle between these two. Note 2 - Results of fatiguetests may be affected by atmospheric conditions, the$e shall be agreed to between the purchaser and the sUPPlier. and if Controlled Conditions are required,

Adopted 15 November IS88 I

@ July lS89, BIS

Gr 3

I OF INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

BUREAU

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

MANAK BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI 1 iDDO

,

~~5~12514~1988
3. Symbols-The
Symbol D following symbols (see Fig. 2 and 3 ) have been used in this standard: Definition Diameter or width across flats of the gripped ends of the test piece. The value of D may be different for each end of the test piece. . `, Diameter of the test piece where the stress is a maximum. Parallel length of the test piece. Transition blending radius at the ends of the test section which starts the transition from the test diameter d to the end diameter D [see Fig. 2(a)] or the single radius between the gripped ends [see Fig 2(b)].

4 , .* . , .

'

d lo I

FIG. 2 FORMS OF TEST PIECE 4. Test Pieces 4.1 Form 4.1.1 The test section shail be either: blending radii at each end of a parallel length: its surface formed by a single radius r, there

a) cylindrical with tangentially fC [see Fig. 2( a )I, or

b) of continually varying circular cross-section, being no central parallel portion.

4.1.2 The ends of the test piece shall be of a form to suit the holders Of the machine being used and the material being tested. Screwed and plain cylindrical ends are not recommended. Typical test piece ends are shown in Fig. 3.

FIG.

3

TYPICAL

TEST

PIECE

ENDS

2

IS:12514-1988
4.2 Dimensions

.

4.2.1

The nominal

value of diameter

d shall

be between 5 and 12'5 mm; the tolerance

on diameter

d shall be 2 0'05 mm.

4.2.2 For the purpose of calculating the torque to be applied to obtain the required stress, the actual diameter of each test piece shall be measured to an accuracy of 0'01 mm. Care should be taken during the measurement of the test piece prior to testing SO that the surface is not damaged. ,* 4.2.3 In the case of a cylindrical test piece having a parallel test section, this test section shall blending have a length not greater than 5 d and it shall be parallel within 0'02 mm. The transition radius at the end of the parallel test section shall have a radius not less than 3 d. 4.2.4 In the case of a test shall be not less than 5 d.
5. Preparation

. ;

piece having

a test section

formed

by a continued

radius, this radius

of Test Piece

5.1 General
5.1 .l It is essential that any cutting or machining operation required, piece from the blank, or to finish it to size, shall not alter the metallurgical properties of test piece or induce substantial residual surface stress.

either to rough out the test structure or the mechanical

5.1.2 Care should be taken in the preparation requirements of 6 can be met. 5.2 Turning It is recommended that the following

of the ends of the

test piece

to ensure

that the

procedure

be adopted.

5.2.1 In rough turning the test piece from a diameter X f 5 mm (X will generally be the diameter d, plus a suitable allowance for surface finishing ) to X -I- 0'5 mm, a succession of cuts of decreasing depth should be made, the recommended depths of cuts being: 1'25, 0'75 and 0'25 mm. 5.2.2 From a diameter of X -I- 0'5 mm to X, a further should be made, the recommended depths of cuts being: 0'125, 0'075 and 0'05 mm. using for these finishing 5.3 Grinding
5.3.1 For test pieces in material which cannot be readily turned, it is recommended that the If the strength properties of the material are finishing operations be carried out by grinding. developed by heat treatment, this heat treatment may be carried Out after rough turning to a diameter of X i- 0'5 mm.

succession

of cuts of decreasing

depths

cuts a feed not exceeding

0'06 mm per revolution.

5.3.2 The test piece should then be ground to size. should be made, the recommended values being: a) 0'030 mm depth of cut to 0'1 mm oversize, b) 0'005 mm depth of cut to 0'025 mm oversize, c) 0'002 5 mm depth of cut to size. 5.4 Surface
Finishing

A succession

of cuts Of decreasing

depth

and

5.4.1 After the testing section has been machined or ground to nominal dimensions, it shall be polished either by hand or by machine, using successively finer grades of abrasive pzpers or cloths. The pclishing should generally be in a circumferential direction although intermediate stages may be done in any direction to ensure that scratches made by the coarser grades of abrasive papers or cloths are removed. The direction of final polishing should mainly be circumferential,

5.4.2 The polishing sequences employed should be such that the finished roughness Ra of less than 0'025 pm. It will usually be found satisfactory of polishing so that the paper used is 600 grade. 3

test section has a surface to arrange the sequence

IS:12514

-1988

5.5 Storage Prior to Testing 5.5.1
repolished

If deterioration to remove

of the surface has taken place during storage, any surface defects, for example, COrrOSiOn pits.

the test

piece shall be

Note-The procedures given in 6.2. 6.3 and 6.4 represent standard Practice for a wide range of materials. It should not be inferred that they are wholly applicable t0 all materials and t0 all heat-treated conditions of these materials. For example, the allowance of 0'5 mm on diameter X. for heat treatment prior to final grinding to size msy not be adequate. the removal Of surface phenomena associated with the heat treatment The purpose of this allowance iS to Permit procedure such as decarburization, distortion, etc. and the allowance should be such es to ensure the complete removal of any features associated with such effects. 5.5.2 SOme fatigue

investigations

may be undertaken

particular

condition,

surface finishes, for example, rotigh machined in which case special conditions would apply.

to study the behaviour of material with or fine machined, or in the `as received

6. Mounting

of Test Piece

6.1 Tt,e test piece shall be mounted in the testing machine in such a manner that stresses at the test section other than those imposed by the applied load are avoided and such that n'o bending stresses are introduced at the test section. 6.2 Care should be taken such that testing machine. 7. Speed of Testing 7.1 The frequency of the stress cycle will depend upon the type of testing many cases, upon the stiffness of the test piece. machine employed and in the axis Of the test piece lies along the axis of torsion of the

7.2 The testing speed chosen should be that which is most suitable for the particular combination of material, test piece and testing machine. having regard to the heating which can occur due to rapid dissipation of strain energy in the test piece. 8. Application 8.1 The general test piece. of Torque procedure for attaining
full

torque

running

conditions

should

be the same for each

8.2 If frequencies are determined from dynamic characteristics of Ihe test piece and the testing machine combination, it may be necessary tO measure the stiffness of the test piece before the commencement of testing. 8.3 In general,
torque.

the application of the mean torque

is followed

by adjustment

of the fluctiating

8.4 During

the early stages of the test, check the torque frequently to ensure Then adjust and set the torque-maintaining devices conditions are maintained. fracture cut-off switches.

that the required and the test piece

8.5 At frequent intervals throughout conditions have not changed.

the test period,

monitor

the torque

to ascertain

that the torque

8.6 The mean torque and the torque range, as determined by a suitable method of calibration, shall be accurate to within 3 percent of their nominal values or to within 0.5 percent of the maximum torque of the machine range employed, whichever is greater.
Note -- Some users of torsional stress fatigue testing machines rely entirely on dvnamlc response of the machine may be appreciably difterent from the static behaviour rhe fluctuating torque, a dynamic calibration is to be preferred. It is not considered ;:Tlemptlo standardize a method of calibration.
static
calibration. However, the and for verifying the accuracy of feasible at the present time to

The S/N curve for certain materials shows a distinct change of slope after a given the curve becoming parallel to the horizontal axis. For other materials, the shape of the SIN curve may be continuous. becoming asymptotic with the horizontal axis. If S/N curves of the first type are experienced, it is recommended that the endurance used as a criterion of failure be 10: cycles. For S/k curves of the second type, the endurance should be lOa cycles.
number of cycles,

9. Endurance

-

10. Test Report

-The

test report sh,all include dimensions

the following

information:

a) The type and nominal

of the test piece and the surface finish of the test section; 4

18:12514-1988

b) d d) e) f) 9)

The material tested, its metallurgical condition the references of any Indian Standard to which The frequency and the type of stress cycle, of testing machine used: Where practicable, the temperature of the test environment;

including details of any heat treatment the material was produced; and maximum

and

the minimum

stress and the type higher than that

of the test piece,

if this is significantly

The range of relative humidity if this is outside the range of 50 to 70 percent ( the range oi relative humidity should be measured everyday throughout the duration of the test ); Any deviation from the specified conditions during the test; and failure of the test piece, for example, 10'

The criterion of failure, or 10% cycles.

if other than the cor)$lete

Note 1 - In the majority of fatigue determinations. the criterion of failure is elther the occurrence of visible lailgue It should be noted, however, fhal for particular appllcalions, other crlterie. for example, cracks or a complete fracture. plastic deformation of the test piece or rate of crack propagation. may be adopted to determine the end of the test.
If required, and particularly Subject of agreement. if low frequencies and high stresses are employed. ihe criterion of fatlure shall be the

Note 2 -Test

results

may be presented

graphically.

EXPLANATORY
In the preparation Torsional stress fatigue

NOTE
`Steel ( IS0 ).

of this standard, assistance has been derived from IS0 1352-1972 testing', issued by the International Organization for Standardization 5

Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurp. India

