IS 14690 : 1999
( Reaffirmed 2004 )

Indian Standard
QUALITY CONTROL DURING CONSTRUCTION EARTH AND ROCKFILL DAMS RECOMMENDATIONS OF

ICS 93.160

0

BIS 1999

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

August 1999

Price Group 7

Dams (Overflow

and Non-Overflow)

and Diversion

Works Sectional

Committee,

RVD 9

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized (Overflow and Non-Overflow) and Diversion Works Sectional Committee had been approved Valley Division Council. by the Dams by the River

The skill, experience and judgment required of the engineer-in-charge of construction, is in no way lesser than that of the designer. The competency of the field engineer is as important if not more, than that of the designer, whereas a field engineer may damage a good design by not referring to the requirements ofplans and specifications or by not noting the changed conditions, a competent engineer may improve a design by noting errors and changed conditions. The performance of an earth or rocktill dam depends upon the control exercised during construction, supervision and inspection. An entirely safe design may be ruined by careless and shoddy execution. Proper quality control during construction is as important as the design. The necessity for proper quality control exists at all stages of dam construction and commences at the earliest with foundation treatment. Since this work is done when both the engineering and construction forces are relatively unorganised, the resources and judgment of the engineers are required from the beginning of construction. Very rigid procedures cannot be laid down for quality control in dam construction as every work has, its own problems and therefore, procedures should suit the conditions. Quality control measures should be adopted according to the relative importance of work. For the purpose of deciding whether observed or calculated, expressing IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off the rounded off value should be the a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14690 : 1999

Indian Standard QUALITY CONTROL DURING CONSTRUCTION EL4RTI-I AND ROCKFILL DAMS RECOMMENDATIONS
1 SCOPE This standard covers details of quality control measures required to be adopted during construction of earth and rocktill dams. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards given in Annex A contain provisions which through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated in Annex A. 3 QUALITY 3.1 Personnel The number of personnel required for quality control depends on the size and difficulty of the job. As a minimum, even on a small job, one inspector should work continuously on the construction site for each shift. Larger jobs should have a number of inspectors, each with responsibility for some specific aspect of the construction, such as, the control of compaction at abutment contracts or the supervision of foundation grouting. On projects where large volumes of material are to be moved, a full time inspector should be assigned to each borrow area to inspect the excavation and moisture control operations. If construction is to continue at night, the same close inspection is required as during the day shifts. Good lighting is essential, both in the borrow areas and at the construction site. Even so, it may be desirable to confine certain critical works to daylight hours, such as, compaction of the impervious embankment against concrete and masonry structures. The task force in charge of quality control supervision should not be under the charge of an officer who is directly responsible for construction and payment. 3.2 Laboratory Facilities CONTROL SUPERVISION

OF

detailed testing can be carried out. The size and the number of laboratory personnel should vary with the size of the dam and the control measures required to be adopted. 3.3 Reports and Records Detailed written records should be kept of all activities and observations made during construction. The records should include all pertinent observations made, such as, depth of excavations, type of strata excavated, details of dewatering and foundation treatment, drains installed and description of the material and construction methods used for different embankment zones. These records are of primary value for deciding the need for change in design as also for understanding the post construction behaviour. These, therefore, need to be preserved and documented into reports. A formal report should be prepared by the inspection unit at the end of the job so that not only are the records kept properly during construction, but the behaviour of the dam can also be evaluated later on according to the type of work executed during construction. 3.4 Geological Features

For large dam, as defined in IS 8826, a full time resident engineering geologist should be available for inspection and advice. Records, drawings and photographs of all conditions exposed by excavation in the foundations of the dam and appurtenant structures shall be maintained. The geologist should keep detailed records of the rocks including clay seams, faults of all kinds, and the joint systems. This information is unavailable, since once covered up, the conditions observed during construction may never be exposed for inspection. 4 QUALITY 4.1 General The placement of fill within the embankment should proceed in an orderly sequence so as to produce, within each zone, fills having specified density, strength and permeability. 4.1.1 No fill material should be placed on any part of the foundation until foundation surfaces in that part have been inspected/geologically mapped and approved as ready for fill placement. The prepared 1 CONTROL OF CONSTRUCTION

Even for the smallest of projects, a soil laboratory should be provided in the field for carrying out tests, such as, density, water contents and gradation. This should be supplemented by a soil laboratory where

IS 14690 : 1999 foundation surface should enable proper bond with fill material to be placed on it. In the zone of impervious material, the surface of each foundation, should be moistened and sufficiently cleaned and scarified to obtain a proper bond with the embankment, immediately prior to receiving any material for the impervious zone. No fill should be placed in any part of the foundation for the impervious zone until that part has been completely dewatered. In the zone of pervious material, in addition to the stripping of top soil, the stripping operation should also remove cohesive materials which can cause pore pressure development unless the design provides for retaining such material. Similarly, the abutments, should be stripped of talus deposits and loose surface materials. Local overhangs of rock should also be removed. 4.1.2 Only materials conforming to the specified properties should be placed within the relevant zones of the dam. No bush, roots, top soil or other perishable or unsuitable material should be placed on it within the embarkment. The fill should be free from lenses, pockets, streaks or layers of material differing substantially in texture or gradation from the surrounding materials. The combined dumping, spreading and compacting operations should be such that the material when compacted, will be sufficiently blended to achieve the most homogeneous fill. Successive loads of material should be deposited parallel to the axis of the dam at proper spacing, in order to obtain a uniform spread thickness with minimum amount of dozing, and to avoid any possibility of formation of layer of unsuitable material across the dam. The differential elevation at the contracts between the core zone and the adjacent zones should not exceed 0.8 m. Where practicable, the core should be higher than the casing. At contacts between zones where any height differential has been kept, sufficient embankment width should be maintained to provide at least one roller lane width for proper compaction of the fills at the contact lines. Each zone of the dam embankment should be constructed in continuous and approximately horizontal layer. In the turning area of the rollers, compaction perpendicular to the normal rolling pattern should be ensured. 4.2 Impervious Material water required should be decided. The required additional moisture, so decided should be introduced into the borrow area by watering well in advance of the excavation to ensure uniformity of moisture content. If in any location of a borrow area, before or during excavation, there is excessive moisture, steps should be taken to reduce the moisture to secure material with moisture content closest to the optimum by excavating drainage ditches, by allowing adequate time for drying after ripping, or by any other means. To avoid formation of pools in the borrow areas during excavation operations, drainage ditches from borrow areas to the outlets should be excavated wherever necessary. Material should be placed only when the foundation surfaces have been prepared as stipulated and conditions are satisfactory to permit accurate control of moisture content. The moisture content during fill placement should be maintained at optimum moisture content (OMC). However, this may not always be possible due to practical difficulties in the field. Therefore, a variation within 2 percent on either side of OMC may have to be permitted. It is advisable to compact the tills near foundations, abutments and the top few meters (10 to 20 percent of dam height on wet side of OMC and the remaining portion on dry side of OMC. The OMC value needs to be revised as and when there is significant variation in properties of soil from different borrow areas. During shut-down on accotint of rains or impending rains, the surface of compacted impervious layers should be rolled with smooth wheel roller to facilitate drainage. Prior to resuming work after shut-down, the top surface should be scarified and moisture adjusted, if necessary. 4.2.1 Compaction Control ofImpervious High Gravel Content Material with

For impervious fill the important factors are the control of moisture content and density achieved. The moisture-density relationship should be first established in the laboratory and limits of density and moisture content should then be specified for the fill to be placed. The initial moisture content of material in the borrow area should be estimated with the help of laboratory tests. From the optimum moisture content and initial moisture content the amount of additional 2

For the materials less than 30 percent by weight coarser than 4.75 mm, the compaction of the finer fraction is not affected by the presence of gravels. For materials with gravel content in the range between 30 to 50 percent, the presence of gravel interferes with the compaction of fines to some extent and consequently the maximum density of materials finer than 4.75 mm is likely to be lower and the optimum moisture content higher than if the gravels were not present. The difference is, however, small and laboratory compaction method may be used with gravel correction for field control. Generally, the higher the plasticity of the fines, the higher the percentage of coarser material that could be tolerated without appreciably influencing the compaction of finer fraction. For soils with gravel content more than 50 percent, the presence of gravel has a large influence on the moisture content and the density of material finer than 4.75 mm and conventional laboratory tests should no longer be used for field control. The most practical method for

IS 14690 : 1999 developing laboratory moisture-density relationship for field control is to use a compaction cylinder of as large a dimension as may permit adequate compaction of the entire gravelly material. Another method is to establish a set of standard curves for soil in each borrow area, correlating the maximum laboratory dry densities of the total material and that of material finer than 4.75 mm material to the percentage of gravel. A set of such typical curves is shown in Fig. 1. After establishing these curves, field control may be exercised by measuring field density of total material by conventional tests, determining the percentage of moisture and gravel present in the sample and computing the field dry density. The laboratory maximum dry density is then read out from the standard curves knowing the gravel percentage and compared with the density actually being achieved in the field. compacted till shall be conducted. content determination

4.2.2.3 Moisture

The water content of the samples taken during the field density tests should be lower than the water content of the material before rolling, due to the time lag between compacting and testing the material, during which adequate protection against moisture loss is not possible. The moisture content of the material before compaction should be determined by one of the procedures suggested in IS 2720 (Part 2). 4.2.3 Acceptability Criteria

FINER ii

THAN 6.75mm)

.

Materials represented by the test samples having a moisture content which exceeds the limits mentioned in 4.2 by more than 1 percent on the drier side and more than 0.5 percent on the wetter side should be rejected and removed or reworked. It should be ensured that not more than 20 percent materials should fall beyond the limits mentioned in 4.2. The average density of all accepted earthfill in core portion should not be less than 98 percent in general and preferably should be 100 percent of maximum dry density. Not more than 20 percent of the samples tested should be less than 97 percent of Proctor density. Material represented by samples having density less than 96 percent of Proctor density should be rejected and re-rolled till acceptable density is achieved. At least, 80 percent of the test sample should be within the tolerance limits of *2 percent of OMC as specified in 4.2. The remaining may be beyond this limit but within +2.5 percent of OMC and -3 percent of OMC. 4.3 Pervious Materials Permeability, shear strength and gradation are the prime considerations in case of pervious fills. The general consideration for control of permeability should be that the permeability of the material increases towards the outer slopes of the dam embankment. Larger of the rock pieces should be placed towards the outer slopes of the zone and embedded in the Ii11 in such a manner as not to leave excessive surrounding voids. The control of compaction is generally determined by relative density test which is a measure of the compactness of a pervious material with respect to the loosest and most compact states at which it can be placed. 4.3.1 Field Test The tests mentioned carried out. 4.3.1.1 Density tests Field density of the pervious fill material should be determined by water replacement method in accordance with IS 2720 (Part 33). 3 in 4.3.1.1 and 4.3.1.2 should be

\

\

\"

1 0

'

'

I

t

,

I

10

20

30

LO

50

60

70

80

go

100

GRAVEL CONTENT

(PLUS 1.75mmlPERCENT

FIG. 1 TYPICALRELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN MAXIMUM DRY DENSITYAND PERCENTGRAVEL CONTENT

4.2.2 Field Tests 4.2.2.1 Density tests Any of the following determination: a) b) c) d) methods may be used for density

Water replacement method with IS 2720 (Part 33),

in accordance

Sand replacement method in accordance with IS 2720 (Part 28), Core cutter method in accordance IS 2720 (Part 29), and Nuclear density and moisture gauges. with

The quicker and more accurate method out of these should be selected based on experience of the test results made on the impervious test fills. 4.2.2.2 Shear Shear tests tests of undisturbed samples taken from

IS 14690 : 1999 4.3.1.2 Permeability tests density/relative density/relative compaction tests at a frequency of one test for every 1 000 cubic metres of shell material. After placement procedures have proved satisfactory and no significant changes in borrow area material gradation occur, one test for every 10 000 cubic metres of shell materials or each shift, whichever is more frequent, would suffice. In the event of significant gradational changes in the borrow area material, increased frequency of field test would be necessary; and b) For filters and transition zones, tests for gradation, field density/relative density may be carried out more frequently, that is for every 1 000 cubic metres and preferably for every 500 cubic metres. KEEPING AND REPORTING

Field permeability tests should be performed at suitable locations to check the in-place permeability of the compacted embankment material in accordance with IS 5529 (Part 1). 4.3.1.3 Acceptability criteria

For pervious zones the average relative density should be more than 70 percent. Not more than 20 percent of the samples shall have a relative density between 65 to 70 percent. However, no sample shall have a relative density less than 65 percent. 4.3.2 Laboratory Tests

Tests should be carried out in the laboratory to determine the gradation, shear strength and permeability of the embankment materials in accordance with IS 2720 (Part 4), IS 2720 (Parts 12 and Part 13) and IS 2720 (Part 17). Density determination for relative density tests should be carried out, respectively where necessary. 5 TESTING FREQUENCY

6 RECORD

5.1 Testing frequency refers to the specified interval in terms of time or quantity of material placed, after which the tests mentioned in 5.2 and 5.3 should be carried out. * 5.2 For impervious materials, the testing frequency should be as under: a) Gradation and moisture content (before compaction) and field density (after compaction) tests for every 2 000 cubic metres of embankment fill or per shift, whichever is more frequent; At least one in-situ density tests should be conducted for (i) every compacted layer, (ii) for every 60 m length of the dam. Where vertical filter is provided separate test for upstream and downstream zones should be conducted; Permeability and shear tests for every 15 000 cubic metres of fill placed or at least one sample per week. Consolidation test for every 30 000 cubic metres of fill placed or at least one sample in a fortnight; and Additional from areas locations, abutments, samples may also be collected such as embedded instrument junctions with masonry dams, conduits, etc. the testing frequency

6.1 The data of various tests should be recorded in the relevant proformas given in the Indian Standards referred. A consolidated statement of all the test results for impervious and pervious fills should be reported in Proforma 1 and 2 given in Annex B. Results of relative compaction for pervious fills (if specified) should be reported in Proforma 3 given in Annex B. 6.2 Daily reports should be submitted by the officers covering the activities of each shift, giving the progress of construction for the facility of the officers of the next shift, in Proforma 4 given in Annex B. 6.3 Periodic progress reports pertaining to the methods and procedures of achieving satisfactory control should be compiled as a normal part of inspection and scrutinized by the officer-in-charge of quality control. These reports should include the following informations:

b)

4

Location--Of operation type of work, quantity and type of material; of the initial percentage of moisture and the percentage added in the borrow area along with the average maximum and minimum percentage of moisture in the soils when compacted in the embankment and the methods employed for adding moisture to the materials; brief description of mixing methods used in the borrow area and on the dam and success of each method;

b) Moisture Content-Record

c)

d)

c> Mixing-A
4

5.3 For pervious materials, should be as under: a)

During initial placing operations, it should be necessary to carry out gradation, field 4

Material-The variation in the type of materials, thickness and characteristics of each stratum encountered in borrow area etc; and Rolling Operation-The observed behaviour

4

IS 14690: 1999 of embankment during process of rolling namely, formation of waves ahead of rolling, whether the fill acts as a spongy or stable mass; types of roller used and number of coverages thereof. 6.4 Proforma 5 given in Annex B should be used for reporting the above information along with a descriptive report. Proforma 6 given in Annex B should be used for reporting the roller data. 7 COMPACTION EQUIPMENT 7.2 One coverage of the area by the compaction equipment is defined as the action achieved when the entire surface of a layer has been traversed at least once by the compacting surface of the compactor. One pass of the compaction equipment is defined as the continuous motion of the compactor in one direction only. 7.3 Various types of equipment are available for compaction of materials. For impervious and semiimpervious materials either sheepfoot or padfoot rollers or rubber tyred rollers are generally used and for pervious materials, the compaction is achieved by sluicing by crawler type tractor, rubber tyred rollers or vibratory rollers. The selection or equipment should be made on the basis of test fills, keeping in view the economics and the rate of compaction. 7.4 For compaction of fill material, when the fill areas are not accessible to rollers, such as junction of fill with concrete/masonry, around rock outcrops within the fill area, pits/trenches excavated for instrumentation, pneumatic tampers or vibrating rammers should be used. The thickness of layers for compaction by such type of compactors should be determined by field trial tests.

7.1 All compaction equipment, together with their accessories should be maintained in proper operating condition during all periods in which they are required for work on the dam embankment. When compacting rollers are operated in sets or in tandem or sets of rollers are operated one behind the other, in the same track, all rollers should be of the same general dimensions, same widths, essentially the same weights and having the same operating characteristics. Tractors used to pull rollers should be of sufficient power to operate the units at full capacity and maximum efficiency under the most adverse conditions to be encountered.

ANNEX A (Clause 2)
LIST OF REFERRED IS No. 2720 (Part 2) : 1973 (Part 4) : (Part 8) : Title Methods of test for soils: Determination of water content (second revision) 1985 Grain size analysis (second revision) 1983 Determination of water contentDry density relation using heavy compaction (second revision) 1981 Determination of shear strength parameters of soil from consolidated undrain triaxil compression test with measurement of pore water pressure first revision) 1986 Laboratory determination permeability (first revision) INDIAN STANDARDS IS No. Title

(Part 12)

(Part 17)

(Part 28) : 1974 Determination of dry density of soils in place, by the sand replacement method (fkst revision) (Part 29) : 1975 Determination of dry density of soil in place by the core cutter method Cfirst revision) (Part 33) : 1971 Determination of dry density in place by the ring and water replacement method Code of practice for in-situ pexme5529 (Part 1) : ability test : Part 1 Test in overbur1985 den @-St revision) Guidelines for design of large earth 8826 : 1978 and rockfill dams

IS 14690 : 1999

ANNEX B (Clauses 6.1, 6.2 and 6.4)
PROFORMAS Proforma 1 Feature Remarks Date of Report Equipment _ (Use separate sheet for reporting tests mode in different zones) Period of Report Zone Project

SUMMARY Test No.

OF FIELD AND LABORATORY Layer Thickness

TESTS OF COMPACTED

IMPERVIOUS

FILL

Location of Test on Embankment

Station and offset

Elevation

Source of Material (Borrow Area, Required Excavation, etc)

Method of Compaction (No. of Tamper Passes or if Power Tamped)

Field Dens@ Needle and Cylinder Correlation Wet Density of Earth and Rock g/cm3 Percent, +4.75 mm by Dry Weight Water Content of Earth and Rock (percent of Dry Weight) (9) Plasticity Needle kg/cm* Fill

Test at Fill Moisture - 4.75 mm Water Content Percent of Dry Weight (12) - 4.75 mm dry density, g/cm3 Compaction cylinder (13) Fill

Compaction cylinder (11)

(7)

(8)

(10)

(14)

6

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma Characteristics at Standard Laboratory Compaction Optimum water content (percent of dry weight) Proctor needle kg/cm2 Optimum water content minus till water content (percent) (18) 1 (Continued) Rapid Control Values Ratio of fill d to cyl d at fill water content (percent) Ratio of d to laboratory maximum d (percent) Specific Gravity +4.75 mm fraction - 4.75 mm fraction

Maximum dry density g/cm3

(15)

(16)

(17)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

Percolation Before Saturation

-

Settlement

Test Saturated Miscellaneous Data Percolation cm/set

Dry
density as placed g/cm3

Water content as placed (percent ofdry weight) (24)

Applied pressure kg/cm*

Percent settlement of placed sample

Plasticity needle kg/cm*

Water content (percent of dry weight)

Percent settlement of placed sample

(23)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

7

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma SUMMARY Feature Test No. .____.. Dry Density Fill Cylinder (3) Fill (4) Plasticity Cylinder (5) (6) (7) OF COMPACTED 1 (Concluded) DENSITIES

FILL AND LABORATORY Project Moisture, percent

Fill Roller Coverage

Laboratory Blows/ Layers (8)

Location of Test

(1)

(2)

(9)

Borrow Pit Location

Rolled (R), Power Tamped (P.T.)

Remarks

(10)

(11)

(12)

8

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma 2 Feature _ _ To Remarks OF FIELD AND LABORATORY TEST OF COMPACTED PERVIOUS FILL Project

Equipment

Period of Report Date of Report SUMMARY Test No. Lift Thickness

Location of Test on Embankment Station and off set Elevation

Source of Material (Borrow Area Required Excavation, etc) (5)

Method of Compaction (No. of Coverages of Compaction Equipment Used) (6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Wet Density of Total Material g/cm3 (Field)

Mechanical Percent +75mm by dry weight (8)

Analysis Percent - 75 micron by dry weight (IO)

Specific Gravity +75mm - 75 mm

Percent + 4.75 mm by dry weight (9)

(7)

(II)

(12)

Maximum Dry Density, kg/m3 -75mm -~ (13)

Minimum Dry Density g/cm3 -75mm

Fill Dry Density g/cm3 -75mm Laboratory

Relative Density - 75 mm

Miscellaneous Data

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

Permeability 9

results.

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma 3 RESULTS OF FIELD TESTS ON SHELL MATERIALS RELATIVE COMPACTION Feature Zone Sl No. Channel Location of Test Station . Elevation Project Compaction Equipment Observed Reduction in Layer Thickness in cm Test fill Fill placed in dam (8) CONTROLLED BY

Average Layer Thickness in cm Before compaction (5) . After compaction (6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(7)

Density g/cm3 Test fill (9) Fill placed in dam (10)

Relative Compaction

=

Density of till placed Maximum density test fill ' loo

Remarks (No. of Coverages)

(11)

(12)

NOTE -Maximum density on the test shall be deemed to have been achieved when additional coverages produce no appreciable increase in density. Maximum test fill density shall be determined afresh when there are significant gradational changes in borrow area material.

10

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma 4 DAILY REPORTS OF SHIFT OPERATIONS Feature Zone -.__ No. of Coverage Following Inspector Excavation Borrow Area Material Shovel Number Working of Location -ch. to ch. -sta to -sta (4) Depth of Cut Date Project Compaction Shift Equipment Inspector

(1)

(2)

(3)

(5)

Embankment Number of Layers Placed (6) Hauling to Location -ch. to ch. -sta to -sta (7) Elevation / Moisture (8) (9) Condittion Spread (10) Rolled (11) of End of Shift Test Taken (12)

Remarks

(13)

NOTE - Condition of embankment at the end of the shift (a general layout of the area indicating be given). This form of daily report may vary to suit the requirement ofeach job.

different operations

being carried out to

11

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma 5 PROGRESS REPORT Feature Date Proforma No. 1 and 2 attached Report of operations: 1) Location a) b) 2) of operations: From Project To

In borrow areas: Prints of each borrow area map showing daily areas worked, attached Location and elevation content: percent. percent. percent. of every low section on the embankment

Moisture a) b) c)

In borrow areas Added in borrow areas Added on dam in soil when compacted percent, kg/cm*) ii) Maximum (Needle

Total moisture i) Average (Needle 3) Mixing: a) b) 4) Description

percent, kg/cm2)

iii) Minimum (Needle

percent, kg/cm2)

of mixing methods, if any, in borrow area and on dam homogenity of soil as compacted

Success of methods or resulting of materials

Description a) b) c) Variation

in borrow areas:

within the current borrow areas with thickness and characteristics of each

Strata encountered

Depth of shovel cutting in each area : Average Maximum of rolling operations: during process of rolling Minimum

5)

Description a)

Observed action of embankment

b)

Roller numbers (Data of rollers that have not been submitted should be reported on Proforma No. 6)

Signed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

IS 14690 : 1999 Proforma 6 EMBANKMENT Project Roller No. Feature 1 2 ROLLER DATA Date 3 4 5 6

a) b) c) 4

Make of roller Number of drums Length of drums Diameter of drums (outside) Knobs (K) Sheeps foot (S.F.) or square (sq) No. of horz. rows of feet No. of feet per row per drum Total No. of feet per drum (f) x (g) Length of feet Dimensions of bottom of feet

4 0' g)
h)

j)
k) 4 n)
P) s) r) s) 9 4

Area of bottom feet Weight of roller (empty) Ballast capacity (all drums) Weight of rollers as used Ballast used (material) Weight of roller (all feet) Cleaners (Yes or No) Type of frame (rigid or oscillating) Total area

Remarks

13

Bureau of Indian Standards BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Ittdiurt Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the lwsis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addilions' This Indian Standard has been develcped from Dot: No. NO. RVD 9 (2 197).
Issued Since Publication

Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS Telegrams: Manabanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 1 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA
: SC0 335336,

700054 Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 600113

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAI

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHGPAL. L BUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZJABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAlPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Simco printing Press, Delhii India

