( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 7146 ( Part III ) - 1974 ( Reaffirmed 1995 )

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON PHOTOSENSlTIVE DEVICES
PART III PHOTOCONDUCTWE CELLS FOR USE IN THE VISIBLE SPECTRUM
Tubes Sectional Committee, ETDC 39

Electron

Chairman

PaoF S. SAMPATH Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Members DR S. S. S. AGARWALA
DR N. C. VAIDYA ( Alternate ) SHRI H. K. L. ARORA

Representing Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani Research Institute

SHRI R. G. KE~WANI (Alternate ) ( BOMBAY) SHRI A. K. GHOSH ( Alternate ) ( CALCUTTA ) SHRI S. SINGARAVEL ( Alternate )

All India Radio and Electronics Association, Bombay

SHRI (B"?6",",l~~v,n, . .

SHRI P. SETH ( Alternate ) Naval Headquarters DIRECTOR, ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING DIRECTOR, ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING ( MATERIAL ) ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR, ELECTRONICS & RADAR Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) DEVELOPMENT ESTABLISHMENT SHRI B. P. GHOSH National Test House, Calcutta Electronic Components Standardization OrganiSHRI P. K. JAIN zation ( Ministry of Defence ) Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' SHRI R. K. JAIN Association ( RETMA), Calcutta Directorate of Technical Development & Production SHRI E. G. NAGARAJAN ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi SHRI R. C. PANDEY ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, New SHRI K. M. RAMASWAMY Delhi SHRI BALRAJ BHANOT ( Altsrnatc )

Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi

of

( Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Zndiun Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in~whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement -of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 7146 ( Part III ) - 1974
(Continuedfrom page 1 ) Representing Direetorate General of Inspection (Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad All India Radio, New Delhi Posts & Telegraphs Board (Telecommunication Research Centre ), New Delhi Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bang&x-e Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojjcio Member)

Members
SHRI P. K. RAO SHRI E. V. R. RAO RESEARCH ENGINEER SHRI P. S. SARAN SHRI G. H. VAZE DR R. P. WADHWA SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,

Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secretary )

Panel for Special
Convener
SHRI G. H. VAZE

Purpose

Tubes,

ETDC

39 : P6

Bhabha Atomic Research

Centre, Bombay

Members
SHRI P. K. PATWARDHAN

SHRI E. V. R. RAO SHRI K. S. SREE PRAKASH

Atomic Energy Establishment, Bombay Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

IS : 7146 ( Part III ) - 1974

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS ON PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES
PART Ill PHOTOCONDUCTIVE CELLS FOR USE IN THE VISIBLE SPECTRUM

0.
0.1 This Indian

FOREWORD

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 11 December 1974, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council.

0.2 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 306-3(1970) ` Measurement of photosensitive devices, Part 3 Methods of measurement of photoconductive cells for use in the visible spectrum ' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.3 This is one of a series of Indian Standards on photosensitive Other standards so far published are given on 4th cover page. devices.

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960+. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part III ) describes measuring methods conductive cells for use in the visible spectrum shall apply.
2. TERMINOLOGY for photo-

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 1885 ( Part IV/Set 8 )-1973t.
3. MEASURING

the terms

and definitions

covered in

METHODS

3.1 Luminous
a prescribed is suggested

Sensitivity - Prior to measurement, the cell shall attain light exposure history. Average room light ( minimum 250 lx ) as a standard history.
devices.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes, Section 8 Photosensitive

3

IS : 7146 ( Part III ) - 1974 3.1.1 Infinite dark history is proposed as a secondary reference history due to its importance in existing applications. The duration of life history shall be sufficient to attain equilibrium or stability. 3.1.2 Measurements shall be made at room temperature ( 25 f 5% ).

3.1.3 The cell under measurement shall be exposed to known illuminance of 2854 K [ ser! 4.1 of IS : 7146_( Part I )-1973* 1. 3.1.4 Current shall be measured which non-linearity or temperature 3.1.5 Extreme care is required at an applied potential rise becomes appreciable. below that at

to keep the overall error below 5 percent.

3.1.6 At low illuminance ( where response tends to be slow ), a duration of time shall be allowed, which is long enough for stable conditions to be attained but short enough to avoid the effect of drift to equilibrium at the illuminance level, beacuse of memory effect. 3.1.7 The-measurement results may be presented as a curve representing the current ( or the conductance or resistance with applied voltage stated ) versus illuminance over the range for which the cell is suitable. Owing to the wide ranges involved, logarithmic co-ordinates are to be preferred. 3.1.8 Dark current stated history. shall be measured under the same conditions, after a

3.1.9 The area of the sensitive surface to be illuminated, aperture, shall be indicated on the outline drawing.

or the window

3.2 Rise Time and Fall Time - An energy modulator or mechanical shutter is used to form specified incident energy pulses. A specification for the energy pulse shall include the amplitude, duration, rise time, fall time and frequency of the excitation pulses. The spectral distribution of the source shall be specified together with the energy level for the `on' condition. The `off' condition shall be dark or that no-energ,y condition which cannot be altered by further shielding ( see Fig. 1 for a typical set-up for measurement ).

FIG. 1

I-SOURCE OF ILLUMINATION ~MODULATED OR. UNMOOULATEO)

CURRENT INOICATOR (AMMETER OSCILLOSCOPE OR

SUPPLY

-

TYPICAL SET-UP FOR MEASUREMENT OF RISE TIME AND
FALL TIME on photosensitive 4 devices, Part I Basic considerations,

*Methods of measurements

IS : 7146 ( Part III ) - 1974 3.2.1 Single step pulse or pulse train methods are permitted, provided the appropriate precautions are taken. Switching times of energy pulses shall be appropriately small compared with those being measured.

3.2.2 This may necessitate monitoring by an auxiliary detector of stated characteristics. Energy pulse duration shall be sufficiently long to allow characteristic stabilization before fall time measurements. It is desirable, because of the non-linear response to incident energy of some devices, that the response time be stated at two or more levels of energy. 3.2.3 The illumination shall be directed along the viewing axis of the device and uniformly distributed over the active surface. Values of ambient temperature, bias and load, and the orientation and masking or aperture arrangement used in the measurement shall be described. Where applicable, the history of the device, time in operation and time in storage shall be stated. 3.2.4 The maximum resistance in the measuring circuit shall be less than one percent of the lowest value of the cell resistance during the measurement. 3.3 Relative Spectral Sensitivity - In determining the relative spectral sensitivity of a photoconductive cell, the radiation from a monochromator ( see Note ) is allowed to fall on the cell and the output is noted. A calibrated thermopile detector with a flat response in the region of interest is used to monitor the radiation from the exit slit.
NOTE -In many monochromator. cases, a set of filters may be used, calibrated against a

3.3.1 If the measurement is made at equal energy levels, the radiant energy falling on the cell shall be maintained the same at all wavelengths. The values obtained will hold only for that specific level. 3.3.2 To obtain values of the relative spectral sensitivity which are not dependent on the signal level, the measurement shall be made at a specific level of photocurrent or photoresistance by adjustment of the value of radiant energy at each wavelength. 3.3.3 The bandwidth of the incident radiation shall not exceed a stated percentage of the wavelength concerned. 3.3.4 Both ac and dc methods of measurement are permitted, provided the appropriate precautions are taken. With the former, the chopping frequency and, where significant, the amplifier bandwidth shall be stated. 3.3.5 If the absolute value of spectral sensitivity, for example, in amperes per watt, for any wavelength is given, the value of absolute spectral sensitivity at any other wavelength may be derived from the values of relative spectral sensitivity. 3.3.6 The~ambient temperature at the time of measurement shall be stated.
5

IS : 7146 ( Part III ) - 1974 3.4 Temperature Dependence - Illumination sensitivity over a range of ambient temperatures may be measured, as in 3.1, and plotted as a set of curves for various incident light levels. 3.5 Illumination Resistance - The illumination resistance is calculated asthe quotient of the voltage across the device by the current flowing through Other conditions of operation and the history of the device shall the device. be stated. 3.6 Illumination Current - The device is subjected to a stated illumination and a stated voltage is applied to the device. The illumination current is measured after a stated time under the stated conditions. The history of the device shall be given. 3.7 Dark Resistance - The dark resistance is calculated as the quotient of the voltage across the device and the current flowing through the~device at a stated time after removal of the stated illumination. 3.3 Dark Current-The device is subjected to certain stated operating Immediately after stopping the stated illumination, a stated conditions. voltage with a stated series resistance is applied to the device. The dark current is measured at a stated time after the instant of stopping the illumination.

6

