NAT Alan IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


HUT ch Te Ta AST 
s'et srer site — faterts 
ant 2 disci ec 
( TT JAGET ) 


Rubberized Coir Sheets for 
Cushioning — Specification 
Part 2 Needle Felt 
( Third Revision ) 


ICS 55.040; 59.060.10; 59.080.40 


© BIS 2020 


anda get tt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4$ ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 6 


Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


This standard was originally published in 1977 and subsequently revised in 1987 and 2018. On the basis of 
experience gained during use and as per the demand of the coir industry and other stake holders, the second 
revision of this standard was published in three parts. The other three parts in the series are: 


Part 1 Curled 

Part 3 Sandwiched 
Further, it has now been revised to incorporate the additional requirements for Ecomark. 
The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India has instituted a scheme for labelling environment 
friendly products known as ‘Ecomark scheme’. This standard is based on the criteria as notified by the Government 


of India vide Gazette Notification No. 893(E), dated 18 September 2018 for labelling Coir and Coir products as 
environment friendly. 


The Ecomark scheme is being operated by the Bureau of Indian Standards. However, to obtain the licence to use 
the Ecomark on a product, it is also essential to obtain BIS licence to use the Standard Mark as per the relevant 
Indian Standard for that product. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex L. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


RUBBERIZED COIR SHEETS FOR 
CUSHIONING —SPECIFICATION 


PART 2 NEEDLE FELT 
( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) prescribes the requirements 
and methods of test for rubberized needle felt coir 
sheets for cushioning. 


1.2 It does not cover articles made from shredded 
rubberized coir, rubberized needle felt coir sheets or 
fabricated articles consisting of a cover of rubberized 
coir sheets enclosing springs or other cushioning 
material, or industrial and packaging material. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards.. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Needle Felt Coir Mats — A resilient product of 
porous structure containing needle felt coir (non- 
woven process) suitably coated and bonded with 
natural rubber or synthetic rubber or a combination of 
both types of latex containing suitable ingredients and 
vulcanized for the final set to the desired size and shape 
(see IS 15340). 


3.2 Indentation Hardness Index — The indentation 
hardness index is the load in kilogram required to 
produce an indentation in the sample equivalent in 
depth to 40 percent of the original thickness of the 
sample of a cross section of 1 square decimeter. 


3.3 Original Thickness — The thickness determined 
by needle gauge method for the whole sample will be 
termed as original thickness. 


NOTE — For sample having thickness less than 38 mm, 
the original thickness shall be determined by superimposing 
minimum number of pieces to give a total thickness of about 
38 mm and the average taken as the original thickness of the 
sample. 


4 GRADES 


The needle felt rubberized coir sheets for cushioning 
shall be graded on the basis of the indentation hardness 
index and density as given below: 


Grade Indentation Density, Min 
Hardness Index g/dm3 
Medium 6.00-8.99 60.0 
Firm 9.00-11.99 70.0 
Extra firm 12.00-15.00 80.0 
NOTE — The tolerance on indentation hardness index 


has beenprovided to take care of the agreement between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer in respect of this 
requirement when it is desired to have different value in any 
portion of the coir sheet. 


5 MANUFACTURE, WORKMANSHIP AND 
FINISH 


5.1 Coir fibres manufactured by mechanical process as 
per IS 9308 (Part 2) or IS 9308 (Part 3) are processed 
through needled felt plant (non-woven system) to 
make uniform mat of different densities according 
to the requirement. The non-woven mats produced 
are bonded with natural rubber or synthetic rubber 
or a combination of both containing compounding 
ingredients of such nature and quality. Thus the fleeces 
of mats are pressed into pad by passing into a press 
under controlled temperature, pressure and time that 
the finished product complies with the requirements 
of this specification. The side walls of the sheets after 
cutting to the desired dimensions shall be bonded by 
latex compound with hessian cloth or tapestry or any 
other suitable material so as to provide additional 
support, if necessary. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


5.2 Rubberized needle felt coir sheets shall be of resilient 
nature and porous structure, in the form of sheeting or 
in fabricated sheets. Any special characteristics other 
than those prescribed in this specification which may 
be desired for specific application shall be as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


5.3 The rubberized needle felt coir sheets shall present 
a uniform appearance throughout the structure and 
shall not contain loose fibres or voids. 


5.4 Due to manufacturing conditions, the material may 
have to be altered or repaired. The repaired or altered 
material shall be acceptable provided the material used 
in such repairs or alterations is of the same composition 
and quality as the original product and provided such 
alterations do not affect the requirements given in this 
specification. The odour of rubberized needle felt coir 
sheets shall be as mild as possible and shall not be 
objectionable. 


5.5 Toppings of natural foam or synthetic foam or 
combination of both may be bonded to rubberized 
needle felt coir sheets for a smoother surface as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


6 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


6.1 Rubberized needle felt coir sheets may be supplied 
in fabricated shapes or in sheet form as specified by the 
purchaser. 


6.2 The dimensions of rubberized needle felt coir 
sheets, when tested according to the method prescribed 
in Annex B, shall be as specified by the purchaser 
subject to the tolerance given below: 


Permissible 
Length or Width Tolerance 
mm 
Uptolm + 
1mtol.5m £9 
Over 1.5 m +12 
Thickness Permissible tolerance 
Up to 12 mm +3 
-0 
Over 12 mm up to 38 mm +6 
-3 
Over 38 mm up to 100 mm +12 
-6 
Over 100 mm +15 
-6 


7 REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 Density 


Density requirement is optional and has been given for 
guidance only. Density corresponding to various grades 
is as given in 4. The method of test shall be as given in 
Annex C. 


7.2 Indentation Hardness 


When tested according to method given in Annex D, 
different grades of rubberized coir products shall have 
the indentation hardness as prescribed under 4. 


7.3 Resistance to Ageing 


When tested according to method prescribed in 
Annex E, the indentation hardness of the sample after 
ageing shall not vary by more than +18 percent of the 
value obtained with un-aged sample. 


7.4 Resistance to Flexing 


When tested according to the method given in Annex F, 
the indentation hardness of the test specimen shall not 
vary by more than +18 percent. This shall be calculated 
on the resultant thickness. 


7.5 Compression Set (Aged) 


The compression set of the sample, when determined 
by the method prescribed inAnnex G, shall not exceed 
+ 18 percent. 


7.6 Compression Set (Un-aged) 


The compression set of the sample, when determined by 
the method prescribed in Annex G, under atmospheric 
conditions without the elevated temperature, shall not 
exceed +15 percent. 


7.7 pH Value 


The pH value of the aqueous extract of the material 
when determined by the method prescribed in Annex H 
shall be within 5 to 8.5. 


7.8 Chloride Content 


The chloride content of the aqueous extract of the 
material calculated as ‘Cl’ when determined by 
the method prescribed in Annex J shall not exceed 
0.3 percent by mass. 


7.9 Sulphate Content 


Sulphate content of the aqueous extract of the material 
prepared as in H-2 and tested by the method prescribed 
in Annex K, shall not exceed 0.2 percent by mass. 


8 TESTS 


8.1 Preparations and Conditioning of Samples 


8.1.1 Wherever practicable, the tests shall be conducted 
on the whole rubberized needle felt coir sheet. 


8.1.2 The specimen shall be cut from the centre of the 
sample piece as far as possible and the specimen shall 
be subjected to test, preferably within 24 h of cutting. 


8.1.3 When the finished product does not lend itself 
to testing or to the preparation of test pieces because 
of complicated shape, small size or other reasons, 
standard test slabs shall be prepared. 


8.1.4 When difference due to the difficulty in obtaining 
suitable test pieces from the finished product arises, the 
manufacturer and the purchaser may agree on acceptable 
deviations. This can be done by comparing results of 
standard test pieces and those obtained on actual product. 


8.1.5 Test shall be carried out not before 24 h after 
vulcanization of the sample. Sample and test pieces 
shall be protected from direct light as far as possible 
and from any stress or strain whenever they are not 
actually in the process of being tested. 


8.1.6 Conditioning 


Each sample selected for test shall be conditioned for a 
minimum period of 24 h at 27 + 2°C and 65 + 5 percent 
relative humidity (see IS 6359) prior to testing and 
testing shall be in the same atmosphere; when the testing 
cannot be carried out in the same atmosphere then the 
testing shall be commenced within 2 min of withdrawal 
of specimen from the conditioning atmosphere. 


9 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 


ECOMARK 


9.1 The product shall meet the requirement specified in 
this Indian Standard. 


9.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consentclearance 
as per the provisions of Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act,1981 and the authorization(s), if 
required under the rules notified under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the rules made there under 
while applying for the Ecomarkas per Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 2016. 


9.3 The product(s) or product packaging(s) may display 
in brief the criteria based on which the product(s) has/ 
have been labeled environment friendly. 


9.4 The material used for product packaging(s) shall be 
recyclable, reusable or biodegradable. 


9.5 The product shall meet the specific requirements as 
given in Table 1. 


10 SAMPLING 


10.1 Lot 


All rubberized needle felt coir sheets of the same grade, 
size and shape manufactured under similar conditions 
shall constitute a lot. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


Table 1 Specific Requirements for Ecomark 
( Clause 9.5 ) 


SI No. Parameter Requirement Method of Test 
(UI (2) (3) (4) 
i) Residual pesticides 1.0 IS 15651 

(Sum parameter) 
(ppm) (Max) 
ii) pH of aqueous 6-7 IS 8391 (Part 1) 
extract 
10.2 Sample 


That part of the lot, which is drawn randomly to 
represent the lot. 


10.3 Test Specimen 


An appropriately shaped piece taken from the sample 
for use in physical and chemical tests. 


11 MARKING OR LABELLING 


11.1 Each rubberized needle felt coir sheets for 
cushioning shall be attached with a label bearing the 
following information: 


a) Name of the material; 


b) Manufacturer's name, initials, trade-mark or any 
other identification mark; 


c) Grade; 
d) Dimensions; and 


€) Criteria for which rubberized coir sheets has been 
labeled as Ecomark. 


11.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


12 PACKING 


The rubberized needle felt coir sheets shall be packed 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


13 INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE 


Rubberized needle felt coir sheets shall be kept in 
well-ventilated store in an atmosphere free from the 
products of combustion from any heating appliance 
and free solvent vapours, out of contact with damp 
surfaces. Under no circumstances shall the products be 
stored in direct sunlight or exposed to ultraviolet light. 
When products are stacked in stores, care shall be taken 
to avoid undue compression or distortion. Special care 
shall be taken when stacking fabricated products of 
irregular shape. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 

1070 : 1992 Reagent ` grade wien’ = 6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles 
Specification (third revision) 15651: 2006 Textiles — Requirements for 

2711 : 1979 Specification for direct reading environmental labelling— 
pH meters (second revision) Specification 

9308 Specification for mechanically 8391 (Part 1) : Rubberized coir sheets for 
extracted coit fibre 2018 cushioning — Specification: Part 1 

: . . Curled (second revision) 
Part4:1999 ` Machine twisted curled coir fibres 
ANNEX B 


( Clause 6.2 ) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR MEASUREMENT OF DIMENSIONS 


B-1 DETERMINATION OF LENGTH AND 
WIDTH 


Measure the length and width of the sample using a 
steel rule nearest to 1 mm, ensuring the measurement 
along a line perpendicular to opposing faces of the 
sample. 


B-2 DETERMINATION OF THICKNESS 


B-2.1 A test specimen 100 x 100 mm cut out from 
thesample shall be placed between two larger horizontal 
plates with a load of 200 g on its upper surface. The 
distance between the plates is determined at about the 
middle on each side correct to the nearest mm and the 
average of the four readings taken as the thickness of 
the sample. 


B-2.2 Determination of Thickness of the Whole 
Sample 


The instrument for measuring the thickness consists 
of a 250 mm long, rigid, narrow measuring needle 
made out of the suitable material and finished to 
give a smooth polished surface, one end of which is 
fixed vertically to the centre of a polished plate of 
3mm thickness and 50x50mm size, the other end 
being tapered to a point, to facilitate insertion of the 


rod through the rubberized coir sheet. The needle is 
calibrated in millimeter all along its length starting with 
the point fixing it with the plate as 0, every 5 and 10 
mm from this point being prominently marked out. A 
disc of 35 mm diameter, weighing 200 g with a central 
hole to facilitate movement of the weight all along the 
length of the calibrated needle also forms part of the 
measuring instrument. 


B-2.2.1 Procedure 


For measuring the thickness ofthe sample, the calibrated 
needle measuring instrument is inserted through the 
bottom side of the rubberized needle felt coir sheets, 
so that the needle is in a plane perpendicular to the free 
surface of the rubberized needle felt coir sheets and 
the base plate of the instrument is in contact with the 
bottom side of the rubberized needle felt coir sheets. 
Thereupon, the sliding weight is introduced on the 
projecting part ofthe needle and the combined thickness 
of the rubberized needle felt coir sheets and that of 
the sliding weight read directly, correct to the nearest 
] mm, on the calibrated needle. The thickness of the 
sliding weight is deducted from this reading to obtain 
the thickness of the test sample. The measurements 
are recorded at last at four points at random on the test 
piece and the average value taken as the thickness of 
the test material. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 7.1 ) 


C-1 METHOD FOR DETERMINATION 
DENSITY 


OF 


C-1.1 Determine the length, width and thickness of the 
sample as described in Annex B. 


C-1.2 Weigh the test specimen correct to 0.1 g. 


C-1.3 Determine the density of the sample by dividing 
the mass, in grams by the volume, in cubic decimetres. 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 7.2 ) 


METHOD FOR DETEMINATION OF INDENTATION HARDNESS INDEX 


D-1 TEST SPECIMEN 


Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm, 
leaving a space of 25 mm from the edges of the whole 
piece. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 The testing apparatus shall be capable of 
applying an indentation in such a way that the load is 
applied on the sample at a uniform rate through a load 
measuring device of suitable capacity for measuring the 
load required to produce the specified indentation. The 
sample shall be placed on the smooth flat horizontal 
surface of the platform of the load measuring device, 
the surface of the platform being larger than the size of 
the sample. 


D-2.2 The essential parts of the testing apparatus 
(see Fig. 1) are an adjustable indentor of the dimension 
specified in D-2.2.1, which can be moved vertically 
up or down by a threaded shaft, working through a 
sleeve of same pitch and dimension, operated by a 
hand wheel. The sleeve is fitted to a framework which 
rests on the horizontal surface of a table without having 
contact with the load measuring device of minimum 
20 kg capacity with accuracy of 10 g. The thickness 
of the sample can be measured by means of a pointer 
mounted on the indenter with suitable guides and 
sliding in front of a vertical scale graduated in 
millimetre. The pointer is so adjusted that when the 
indentor touches the platform of the balance, the 
reading of the pointer on the scale is zero. 


D-2.2.1 Indentor 


A 105 mm square mild steel plate of 3 mm thickness 
shall constitute the indentor, fitted to the threaded 
shaft by a ball and socket joint, so that the surface of 
the indentor can adjust itself to the contour of the test 
specimen. 


The test specimen shall be of size minimum 100 x 
100 mm raise the indentor to a height greater than 
the thickness of the sample and place the sample over 
the platform of the load measuring device below the 
indentor. Note the weight of the sample recorded by 
reading on the load measuring device (x g). Lower the 
indentor by rotating the handle so as to press the sample 
against the platform of the load measuring device. 
When the load measuring device reads (200 g + x g), 
note the reading of the pointer on the scale to record 
the thickness of the sample (¢,). Gradually lower the 
indentor to apply a load at the rate of 0.5 kg/min until 
the sample is pressed to a thickness of 60 percent of 7. 
The load recorded on the load measuring device for this 
indentation is taken as the indentation hardness index 
of the specimen. 


DIAL SCALE 
BALANCE 


HAND WHEEL 


SPINDLE 
(SQ. THREAD) 


TABLE 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR IDENTATION TEST 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 7.3 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO AGEING 


E-1 PRINCIPLE 


The ageing test consists of subjecting samples to 
controlled deterioration by air at elevated temperature 
and atmospheric pressure after which the physical 
properties are measured and compared with those 
of un-aged samples. The deterioration is measured 
and compared with those of un-aged samples. The 
deterioration is measured by the observed change in 
indentation hardness index. 


E-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


From each sample cut out two test specimens of 
size 100 x 100 mm and measure the indentation 
hardness index (/,) as specified in Annex D. 


E-3 PROCEDURE 


E-3.1 Arrange for an air oven of such size that 
the total volume of test specimens does not exceed 
10 percent ofthe free space in the oven. Make provision 
for suspending specimens so that they are not within 
12 mm of each other or the oven sides. Control the 
temperature of the oven thermostatically so that the 
test specimens are kept at 70 + 2°C. Place thermometer 


near the centre of the oven to record the actual ageing 
temperature. 


E-3.2 Adjust the oven to 70 + 2?C. Place the test 
specimens in the oven adjusted as indicated in E-3.1. 
Arrange the test specimens so that they are stationary, 
free from strain, freely exposed to air on all sides and 
not exposed to light. Continue the ageing for 48 h. At 
the completion of the ageing period, remove the test 
specimens from the oven and place on a flat surface to 
cool to room temperature. Allow them to cool for not 
less than 24 h. Measure the indentation hardness index 
(L) of the aged specimens as in Annex D. 


E-3.3 Compare the indentation hardness index of both 
aged and un-aged test specimens. 


E-4 CALCULATION 


Calculate the resistance to ageing as follows: 
Resistance to ageing, percent = (/.— ,)/ I, x100 
Where, 
p. 


í indentation hardness index of the original 


sample, and 


I, = indentation hardness index of the aged sample. 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 7.4 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF RESISTANCE TO FLEXING 


F-1 METHOD 


The method involves subjecting a sample to continued 
flexing with an indentor for 250 000 cycles at 4 cycle/s 
and measuring the loss/gain in indentation hardness. 


F-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


Cut out a test specimen measuring 100 x 100 mm, 
leaving 25 mm from the edges of the whole piece. 


F-3 APPARATUS 


F-3.1 The essential parts of the apparatus (see Fig. 2), 
which has been found suitable, consists of an indentor 


of dimensions specified in F-3.2, connected through a 
threaded adaptor and held by a locking nut to a push 
rod. This push rod is constrained to move vertically 
by fixed sleeves and is driven vertically by a motor 
which rotates a crank disc, the crank disc and push rod 
being joined by a connecting rod. This connecting rod 
is adjustably mounted in a radial slit in the crank disc, 
the length of the strokes, therefore, being adjustable. 
The motor is mounted upon a steel beam above the 
table upon which the specimen to be tested is placed. 
A square frame made of mild steel angles with a clear 
internal dimension of 107 x 107 mm is positioned 
on the table just below the indentor to prevent lateral 
movement of the specimen in the course of its repeated 


REVOLUTION COUNTER 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


CRANK DISC 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS For FLUXING TEST 


flexing by the indentor. The fixtures are adjusted for 
effecting four flexes per second. A revolution counter is 
attached to the machine to record the number of flexes 
for the specimen. 


F-3.2 A 105 mm square mild steel plate of 3 mm 
thickness shall constitute the indentor. 


F-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure the thickness of the sample as described in 
Annex B. Determine the indentation hardness index (J) 
as given in Annex D. Adjust the stroke of the crankshaft 
for a depression of the indentor by a distance equal to 40 
percent of the thickness of the sample. This is done by 
adjusting the position of the connecting rod in the crank 
disc. Raise the indentor to the top most position of the 
stroke and the test specimen in the mild steel angle box 
below the indentor. Place wooden blocks of suitable 
thickness below the specimen to ensure that the top 


surface of the specimen is in contact with the bottom 
side of the indentor when the indentor is at the topmost 
position of the stroke. Subject the specimen to flexing 
at arate of 4 cycle/s. After flexing 250000 cycles, allow 
the sample to remain for 30 min. Thereafter, determine 
the indentation hardness index (/,) by test method 
prescribed in Annex D. 


F-5 CALCULATION 

Calculate resistance to flexing as follows: 
Resistance to flexing, percent =(/, — Ly 7x100 

Where, 


I = Indentation hardness index of the original 
sample, and 

I,= Indentation hardness index of the flexed 
Sample. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX G 
( Clauses 7.5 and 7.6 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COMPRESSION SET 


G-1 PRINCIPLE 


The compression set under constant deflection is the 
measure of the residual strain in a test piece after it has 
been strained under compression to a given extent for 
a given time and then allowed to recover for a given 
time, the temperature being substantially constant 
during the test. 


G-2 TEST SPECIMEN 
The test specimen shall be of size 100 x 100 mm. 


G-3 APPARATUS 


The compression device shall consist of two flat steel 
plates, between the parallel faces of which the test 
piece is compressed. Steel spacers in the form of bars 
and of thickness such as to give the required 40 percent 
compression shall be provided to control the thickness 
of the piece during the test. 


G-4 PROCEDURE 


Measure accurately the initial thickness of the test 
piece as in B-2. Compress the test piece by 40 percent 


of its original thickness between the parallel steel 
plates, which shall be larger than the test piece. Use 
steel spacers between the plates, sufficient clearance 
being allowed for tilting of the test piece and care 
being taken to avoid displacement of the test piece. 
After being compressed for 22 h at a temperature of 
70 + 2°C, remove the test piece from the clamp while 
still at the test temperature and allow recovering for 3 h 
at room temperature. Then measure the thickness of the 
test piece again. Test at least two test pieces and take 
the average of test results. 


G-5 CALCULATION 


Calculate the compression set as follows: 
Compression set at constant 
strain, percent = (T-T )/ T. x 100 
where 
T = original thickness of the test piece, and 
Tr— thickness of the test piece after recovery. 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 7.7 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF pH VALUE 


H-1 TEST SPECIMENS 


Draw a square piece of rubberized coir sheet weighing 
about 10 g. 


H-2 PREPARATION OFAQUEOUS EXTRACT 


Cut the piece taken into about 5 mn? pieces and weigh. 
Transfer to a clean, chemically resistant glass flask, 
fitted with ground glass joint for reflux condenser. Add 
distilled water (see IS 1070) weighing 20 times the 


weight of the rubberized coir under test, to the flask. Fit 
the flask to the reflux condenser and heat the contents 
of the flask to boil. Continue boiling for 1 h. Remove 
the flask and close while the liquid is still boiling 
gently using a clean ground glass stopper. Cool to room 
temperature. 


H-3 DETERMINATION OF PH VALUE 


Transfer a portion ofthe aqueous extractto the electrode 
of pH meter (see IS 2711) and determine the pH. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 7.8 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF CHLORIDE 


J-1 REAGENT 


J-1.1 Calcium Carbonate (Chloride Free) 

J-1.2 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1 N. 
J-1.3 Potassium Chromate Solution — 5 percent. 
J-1.4 Burette 

J-1.5 Pipette 

J-1.6 Conical Flask 

J-1.7 Measuring Flask 


J-2 PREPARATION 
SOLUTIONS 


OF STANDARD 


J-2.1 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1N. 


Take 16.989 g of silver nitrate having molecular weight 
of 169.89 and dissolve in distilled water to make it one 
litre. 


J-2.2 Potassium Chromate Solution — 5 percent. 
Dissolve 50 g of potassium chromate in one litre 
distilled water. 


J-3 PROCEDURE 


J-3.1 For the potassium chromate solution prepared 
add standard silver nitrate solution of 0.1 N till a red 
precipitate is formed. Allow it to stand for overnight 
and filter. Dilute the filter to one litre with distilled 


water. Note down the volume of silver nitrate solution 
transferred. 


J-3.2 Take 100 ml of aqueous extract of the solution 
which was prepared during pH analysis. 


J-3.3 Neutralize with calcium carbonate till a pale 
yellow colour is obtained (usually 0.5 g is sufficient). 


J-3.4 Add 1 ml of potassium chromate solution. 


J-3.5 Titrate against standard silver nitrate solution tilla 
red colour is obtained. Note down the volume of silver 
nitrate solution transferred. 


J-3.6 Calculate the percentage of chloride by the 
following formulae. 


J-4 CALCULATION 
Chloride (as Cl), percent 
3.546(V, -V, ) N 


by mass = 
W 
V= volume of standard silver nitrate solution used 
in titration with material, in ml; 
V= volume of standard silver nitrate solution used 
in blank with material, in ml; 
N= normality of silver nitrate solution; and 
W — mass of the material out of which the aqueous 


extract was made for chloride content test 
only, in g. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX K 
( Clause 7.9 ) 


METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF SULPHATE CONTENT 


K-1 REAGENTS 


K-1.1 Barium Chloride Solution, 2 percent (w/v). 
K-1.2 Hydrochloric Acid (Concentrated) 


K-2 PROCEDURE 


Take a measured portion of extract. Filter through 
a suitable filter paper and wash the filter paper with 
distilled water. Add concentrated hydrochloric acid 
drop-by-drop to the combined filter and washing until 
the solution is just acidic to litmus. Add 1 ml of acid 
per 100 ml of solution. Boil the solution for 5 min and 
leave it to cool overnight. Filter off any precipitate on 
a filter paper pulp pad. Wash with water and heat the 
combined filtrate and washing to boiling. To the boiling 
solution add drop-by-drop 10 ml of hot barium chloride 
solution. Boil for 30min and leave to cool overnight. 
Transfer the precipitate quantitatively to an ignited 
tarred Gooch crucible with asbestos pad and wash with 
cold water until the washing are free from chloride. 
Ignite the crucible and its contents gently at first and 
finally at 800°C to 900°C to constant weight. 


NOTE — Whatman No. 41 paper is suitable. 


10 


K-3 Carry out the blank determination. 
K-4 Calculate the percentage of water-soluble sulphate 
by the following formula: 
_ 2.058(a— b) 
H 


P 


Where, 


percentage by weight, of water soluble 


sulphates as sulphate ion; 


a= weight of the precipitate obtained as in test, 
in g; 

b= weight of the precipitate obtained as in blank, 
in g; and 

V= volume of extract taken for the test, in ml. 


NOTE — 100 ml of extract are equivalent to 2.0 g of 
conditioned test specimen. 


K-5 Repeat the test with extract with extracts of the 
remaining test specimens and calculate the percentage 
of water-soluble sulphate in each test specimen. 


Calculate the average of the values obtained as in K-4 
and K-5. 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


ANNEX L 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Coir and Coir Products Sectional Committee, TXD 25 


Organization 


Central Coir Research Institute, Kalavoor 


Coir Pith and Allied Products Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association, Coimbatore 


All India Rubberized Coir Products Manufacturers 
Association, Tirunelveli 


Central Institute of Coir Technology, Bengaluru 
Coconut Development Board, Ernakulam 

Coir board, Kkochi 

Coir Mats and Mattings Association, Ernakulam 
Coir on Foam Products, Coimbatore 

Coir Shippers’ Council, Cherthala 


Federation of Indian Coir Exporters’ Associations, 
Alleppey 


Hindustan Coir, Coir Board Complex Alappuzha 


Karnataka State Coir Development Corporation Ltd, 
Bangalore 


Kerala Organic Manure and Fertilizer 


Kerala State Coir Corporation Ltd, Alappuzha 


Kerala State Small Scale Coir Manufacturer’s Federation, 
Alappuzha 


Kerala State Coir Marketing Federation 


Kurlon Enterprises Limited, Bangalore 


M M Rubber & Co, Chennai 


National Coir Research & Management Institute 
(NCRMI), Thiruvanthapuram 


National Coir Training & Design Centre, Alappuzha 


Natural Green Tech (P) Ltd, Bengaluru 


Orissa Co operative Coir Corporation Ltd, Bhubaneshwar 


11 


Representative(s) 
Dr Anita Das RAVINDRANATH (Chairman) 
SMT Sum! SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNDARESAN 
SHRI MATHEW GEORGE (Alternate) 


Joivr DIRECTOR 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUGATA GHOSH 
Dr K. MURALIDHARAN (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 
Jort Director (Alternate) 


Suri V. A. JOEPH 
SHRI PAVITHRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI HARIRAJAN 
SHRI PHILIP VARGHESE (A/ternate) 


SHRI K. S. SANJEEV 
SHRI SAJAN B. Nair (Alternate) 


SHRIJOSPAUL MATHEW 
SHRI SAJAN B. Nair (Alternate) 


WEAVING MASTER 
SENIOR SCIENTIFIC OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI G. KUMARASWAMY 
Suri K. R. KuMARASwamy (Alternate) 


Suri G. RAJESH 


Suri G. SREEKUMAR 
Suri N. SuNURA) (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR 


SHRI NARENDRA KUDVA 
Suri P. ANIL (Alternate) 


SHRI JOSEPH CHERIYAN 


Dr K. R. ANIL 

Suri C. ABHISHEK (Alternate) 
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 

ALAPPUZHAREGIONAL OFFICER (A/ternate) 
SuRI TOMMY MATHEW 

SHRI ABHISHEK THOMAS (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


IS 8391 (Part 2) : 2020 


Organization 


Rubber Board, Kottayam 
Shaa Pith Media Co, Coimbatore 


Sivanthi Joe Coirs, Tuticorin 


Tamil Nadu Coir Cooperative Federation, Chennai 


Venugopal Fibre Industries, Pattukottai 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dr J. THOMAS 
Dr James Jaco (Alternate) 


SHRI S. PRABHU 
SHRI RAMESH (Alternate) 


SHRI DUNSTEN JOSEPH 
SHRI K. Sivakan (Alternate) 


MANAGING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) 


Suri R. B. SHYAM SUNDER 


Suri A. K. Bera, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Suri P. N. MURALI 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 25 (14437). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


