NAT HIAF IS 17480 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


AAR & fae sea uaea utetiefra 
Ua: RAHA amr erar — AE 


High Density Polyethylene 
Multi Squeezable Tube for 
Packaging — Specification 


ICS 83.080.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4 freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 6 


Plastic Containers Sectional Committee, PCD 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Packaging Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 


This standard prescribes about constructional and performance requirements for high density polyethylene multi 
squeezable tube for packaging of various moisture and oxygen gas sensitive products mainly different kinds 
of processed foods like chilli paste, ginger paste, mayonnaise, onion paste, garlic paste, honey, mustard sauce, 
tamarind sauce, cheese spread, condensed milk, curry paste etc. In addition, the standard will also cover for 
different Personal care products like dental cream and gel, toiletries like shower gel, shampoo, hair cream, hair 
gel, face wash and cosmetics / beauty care products like body lotion, face cream, foundation cream, mascara, 
Heena paste, perfumes etc., Industrial products, such as shoe polish, lubricants, industrial adhesives, water based 
crayons, water based colours, insect and pest control creams and gels, Pharmaceutical based application, such as 
medicated skin cream, wound care ointments, pain relieving ointments, eye care etc. 


High density polyethylene multi squeezable tubes are popularly formulated with larger proportion of a single 
thermoplastic polymer, such as high density polyethylene (HDPE) and with optimum proportion of secondary 
polymer, such as co-polymer ethylene vinyl alcohol (EVOH), adhesive co-polymer and colorant additives. While 
primary polymer ratio (weight by weight) is 95 percent, some total of secondary polymers and allied additives are 
restricted to 5 percent. 


Oxygen sensitive product formulation such as food, pharmaceutical and cosmetics require higher gas and moisture 
barrier for longer product shelf life. Thus, introduction of a layer of Oxygen barrier at the core, such as EVOH is 
essential. Tube is made with HDPE, EVOH and poly propylene (PP) closure. In case of processed food products 
which are sensitive to moisture and oxygen gas, the multi squeezable tubes should also withstand high temperature 
while few of processed food products are subjected to hot filing up to 85 °C. 


However, the products which are not sensitive to oxygen gas like water based pasting gum, crayons, lip balm, 
body lotion and moisturizer etc. the laminated and plastic multi squeezable tube and Closure can be made from 
100 percent high density polyethylene. It is essential that the total density of the tube material including cap 
should not be less than be 940 kg/m?. High density polyethylene tube structure, post-industrial or post-consumer 
can be collected, washed, reprocessed and can be introduced in commercial established high density polyethylene 
recycle stream in compliance to IS 14534. But the Polypropylene cap, if fitted on tube, has to be removed before 
sending to respective recycling stream. 


Multi squeezable plastic tubes (plain or printed) are used for packaging of huge variety of products that will have 
multiuse until the product is consumed completely by the consumer prior to dispose off. Thus, this packaging 
material cannot be considered as a single use and disposable package. 


Considering the wide application of high density polyethylene multi squeezable tubes for packaging, a need was 
arisen to formulate a new standard for the benefit of all the stakeholders of the country. 


A scheme of labeling environment friendly products with the ECO logo has been introduced at the instance of 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF), Government of India. The ECO-Mark is being administered by 
the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) under the B/S Act, 2016 as per the Resolutions No. 71 dated 21 February 
1991 and No.425 dated 28 October 1992 published in the Gazette of the Government of India. For a product to be 
eligible for marking with the ECO logo, it shall also carry the ISI Mark of the BIS besides meeting additional 
environment friendly requirements. For this purpose, the Standard Mark would be a single mark being a 
combination of the ISI Mark and the ECO logo. 


This scheme is based on the gazette Notification No. 170 dated 18 May 1996 for plastic products as environment 
friendly products published in the Gazette of the Government of India. Therefore, this standard has included 
environment friendly requirements for high density polyethylene multi squeezable tube for packaging. 


(Continued to third cover) 


IS 17480 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


HIGH DENSITY POLYETHYLENE MULTI SQUEEZABLE 
TUBE FOR PACKAGING — SPECIFICATION 


1SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the dimensions, performance, 
testing requirements of high density polyethylene multi 
squeezable tube with cap for packaging application. 


2 REFFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No./Other 
Publication 
1060 (Part 1): 1966 Methods of sampling and test 


for paper and allied products: 
Part 1 (Revised) 


Polyethylene 

sheets — 

(third revision) 
Methods of test for plastic 
containers 

Methods of test for 
environmental stress — 
Crack resistance of moulded 
containers 


Title 


films and 
Specification 


2508 : 2016 


2798 : 1998 


8747 : 1977 


9833 : 2018 List of pigments and colorants 
for use in plastic in contact with 
food stuffs, pharmaceuticals 


and drinking water 


Determination of overall 
migration of constituents of 
Plastic materials and articles 
intended to come in contact 
With foodstuffs — Method of 
analysis 


9845 : 1998 


4905 : 1968 
14534 : 1998 


Method of random sampling 


Guidelines for recycling of 
plastics 


IS No./Other Title 


Publication 


3025 (Part 2) : 2004 Method of sampling and test 
(physical and chemical) for 
water and waste water — 
Determination of 33 elements 
by inductively coupled plasma 
atomic emission spectroscopy 


Plastics — Methods of testing: 
Part 9 Optical properties, 
Section 5 Determination ofhaze 
and luminous transmittance of 
transparent plastics 


13360 
(Part 9/ Sec 5) : 
1999 


7328 : 1992 High density polyethylene 
materials for moulding and 
extrusion — Specification 
(first revision) 

10951 : 2002 Polypropylene materials 
for moulding and extrusion 
(first revision) 

10146 : 1982 Specification for polyethylene 
for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals 


and drinking water 


10910 : 1984 Specification for polypropylene 
and its copolymers for its safe 
use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking 


water 


Sheet materials — 
Determination of water vapour 
transmission rate (WVTR) — 
Gravimetric (dish) method 


Plastics — Film and sheeting — 
Determination of gas- 
transmission rate — Part 2: 
Equal-pressure method 


ISO 2528 : 2017 


ISO 15105-2 : 2003 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions, and as illustrated in Fig 1, 2 and 3 shall 


apply. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


Neck 


Shoulder 


Sleeve/ Body 
Side seam 


Tube Length 


Eye mark Head space 


rr pra 


Fic. 1 TuBE Bopy 


End face seal 


Orifice Top 


Laminate Thickness 


Collar Diameter 


Outside Tube Diameter 


Fic. 2 TuBE SHOULDER 


Top Diameter 


Cap 


Height (Skud Height 


Thread 


Major Diameter of Thread. 


Inner Diameter of Cap 


Bottom Diameter 


Fic. 3 STAND-UP Cap 


3.4 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) — 
Polyethylene, manufactured by low-pressure processes, 
containing very few short-chain branching having a 
density greater than 940 kg/m’. 


3.2 Multi Squeezable — An act of pushing or pressing 
firmly by means of finger to discharge the product 
inside the tube through orifice, multiple times. 


3.3 Sleeve/Body — Formed from HDPE either 
laminated/co-extruded web stock, cut to a specific 
length and size, also called body. 


3.4 Body Wall Thickness — Caliper or thickness of 
laminated material. 


3.5 Side Seam — Formed by high frequency /radio 
frequency energy sealing under pressure of the outer 
and inner plastic layers that are overlapped. 


3.6 RF Seaming — Seaming by either high frequency/ 
radio frequency. 


3.7 Shoulder — That portion of tube which integrates 
the neck section to the body. 


3.8 Land — Flat sealing surface on top of neck. 


3.9 Neck Ring — An integrally compression moulded 
portion of the shoulder generally visible as a ring at the 
bottom of the neck section. Some tubing process use 
pre-made injection moulded HDPE shoulder which is 
joined with the tube body with the help of induction 
heating or heat and pressure mechanism. 


3.10 Threads — The portion of the neck moulded with 
thread design to enable suitable closure to be fitted on 
to the tube. 


3.11 Neck — The portion of the tube between the 
shoulder and the land or the top of the sealing surface. 


3.12 Tip — Uppermost integral part of the neck. 


3.13 Orifice — Opening in the neck section through 
which the product is squeezed. 


3.14 Print — May be done by a suitable printing 
process. 


3.15 Eye Mark — The most commonly used 1s the 
square or rectangular shape, located near the open 
end of the tube for the purpose of print orientation, 
registration to the front and back panel. Also used 
for controlling the print position in relation to the cut 
length of the sleeve. 


3.16 End Face Seal Area — At the open end of the 
tube which is sealed, once the product is filled. 


3.17 Head Space — Length of the tube above the 
product fill before scaling, required to assure no 
contamination of the seal area by the product during 
sealing and also includes enough space for actual seal. 


3.18 Caps and Closures — Injection moulded caps 
and closures that are fitted on to neck of the tube. 


3.19 Tube — High density polyethylene multi 
squeezable tube is referred to as tube in this standard. 


3.20 Capacity — The capacity shall be specified either 
in volume (ml) or net mass (gm) of the contents to be 
packed. 


3.20.1 Nominal Capacity — The volume of product 
normally expected to be filled in the tubes at a 
temperature of 27 °C and up to 85 °C for hot fill 
condition. 


3.20.2 Brim-full Capacity — The volume of water 
required to fill the tubes completely at 27 + 1 °C. 


3.21 Water Vapour Transmission Rate (WVTR) — 
The rate at which water vapour passes through a 
multilayer web stock from one side to another side, 
usually expressed in grams per square metre per 
24 h under specified conditions of temperature and 
relative humidity. 


3.22 Oxygen Gas Transmission Rate (OTR) — The 
rate at which oxygen gas molecules passes through a 
multilayer web stock from one side to another side, 
usually expressed in cubic centimetre per square metre 
per 24 h under specified conditions of temperature and 
atmospheric pressure. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 Only virgin material shall be used. 
4.2 Sleeve/Body 


The Tube shall be manufactured from laminates 
comprising layers of high density polyethylene 
(HDPE) confirming to IS 7328. For food-packaging 
applications, the material shall be of food grade HDPE 
confirming to IS 10146. For oxygen barrier tubes, a 
layer of barrier polymer such as EVOH is introduced at 
the core of the tube body. 


4.3 Shoulder 


The shoulder shall be manufactured from high density 
polyethylene (HDPE) confirming to IS 7328. For food- 
packaging applications, the material shall be of food 
grade HDPE confirming to IS 10146. In addition, a 
suitable barrier layer material may be used as an inner 
liner to enhance barrier property for oxygen sensitive 
product as agreed by the buyer and manufacturer of the 
tube. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


4.4 Caps 


The caps shall be manufactured by injection moulding 
or compression moulding process. The material used for 
the cap shall be of high density polyethylene (HDPE) 
confirming to IS 7328. Polypropylene or its co-polymer 
confirming to IS 10951 shall be used for special design 
like flip-open caps. For food-packaging applications, 
the material shall be of food grade HDPE confirming to 
IS 10146 or of food grade polypropylene or co-polymer 
confirming to IS 10910. The master batch as colouring 
agent used during moulding process shall be non-toxic 
and compatible with the product to be packed as agreed 
between the manufacturer and the user of the tube. 


4.5 Colourants 


For food-packaging application, the  colourants 
used shall be as given in the list and meet the limits 
prescribed in IS 9833. 


5MANUFACTURE 


5.1 High density polyethylene multi squeezable tubes 
for packaging manufactured from a continuous web 
stock, consists of a HDPE print layer, first intermediate 
TIE (maleic anhydride grafted co-polymer) or bond 
layer, an optional barrier layer, second intermediate 
TIE (maleic anhydride grafted co-polymer) or bond 
layer and a heat sealable HDPE sealant layer. Outer 
and sealant thermoplastic polymers shall be suitable 
for direct contact with Food, beauty and cosmetics, oral 
care, industrial goods, etc. Product contact layer that is, 
sealant layer must be free from any colourant. Some 
of the shorter shelf life products such as water based 
gum, hand cream etc. may be packed in single HDPE 
polymeric tubes without gas barrier polymeric layer. 


5.2 Lamination Process 


Thermoplastic films (known as substrates) are initially 
manufactured by blown film or cast film process with 
suitable polymer combination and thickness. Substrates 
are then processed through extrusion lamination 
machine and laminated along with barrier substrate 
(like EVOH film) with the help of intermediate TIE 
(maleic anhydride grafted co-polymer) or bond layer. 
Total thickness of the tube for multilayer web stock, 
depends upon the tube diameter, range from 150 u to 
500 u with a tolerance of + 5 percent. 


For laminated tube, wide width web stock is processed 
in a sliting machine and then slitted according to 
the specific length or diameter of the tube. The plain 
web 1s then printed on the surface by means of either 
letterpress, flexographic printing or digital printing. 


The printed web is subjected to the side-seaming 
machine to form the tube body and then shifted to tube 
heading machine, where shoulder and neck are made 
by means of either compression or injection moulding 


IS 17480 : 2020 


process. Suitable caps are fitted on to the tube as agreed 
between the buyer and manufacturer. 


5.3 Co-extrusion Process for Seamless Tube 


Thermoplastic polymers, intermediate TIE 
(maleic anhydride grafted co-polymer) or bond 
and barrier polymers (if any) are fed to individual 
extruder hoppers, melted suitably and passed through 
a multilayer co-extruded die to extrude cylindrical 
tube of suitable diameter. Tubes are cut in-line process 
according to the tube length, surface printed by means 
of either offset, flexographic, screen printed in line and 
taken into shoulder and neck forming machine. Molten 
high density polyethylene (HDPE) is added by means 
of either compression or injection moulding process. 
As an alternate process, tube sleeves are first sent 
for shoulder and neck formation and then to printing 
process. As such, the layers directly in contact with 
the contents shall be compatible with the product to 
be packed which shall be decided after assessing the 
physical and chemical properties of product. Therefore, 
the co-extruded sleeve structure shall be decided by the 
buyer and manufacturer suiting to the application of the 
product. 


5.4 Decoration 


The multi squeezable tubes are often decorated by 
means of printing, hot foil stamping, cold foil blocking 
or filmic wrap-around pre-printed label. 


6 WORKMANSHIP, 
APPEARANCE 


FINISH AND 


The tube shall be manufactured either by using 
lamination process or co-extrusion process adhering to 
good manufacturing practice (GMP). The body of the 
tube shall be smooth externally and free from all kinds 
of visual defects like cavities, crevices, embedded 
foreign matters, detrimental bubbles, streaks, flaws, 
stains etc. 


6.1 Visual Defects 


The finished tubes shall be examined visually for the 
following defects: 


a) Critical Defects: 
1) Incorrect print design or missing colour; 


2) Insect, hair, or other gross contamination on/in 
tube or cap; 


3) Open seam; 

4) Open shoulder weld; 

5) Hole or slit in tube or sleeve; 
6) Incomplete head; 


7) Blocked orifice, and 

8) Stripped threads. 
b) Other Defects: 

1) Delamination; 

2 


3) Seam melted on outside to point where the 
outer layers of polyethylene arc pulled off or 
wrinkled; 


4) Damaged ends; 


— 


Seam poly flow/white line barely visible; 


5) Missing, cracked or badly chipped insert; 
6) Flashing or pigtails in the orifice; 

7) Poly strings inside or attached to tube; 

8) Inside contamination; and 


9) Outside contamination. 
7 DESIGN, SHAPE, SIZE AND TYPE 


7.1 The tube may be manufactured in various design, 
shape and/or sizes. The different design and dimensions 
of different parameters like height, top and bottom 
diameter and internal diameter of thread of caps are as 
agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


7.2 The multi squeezable tubes are manufactured in the 
following two types: 


a) Type I (Plastic Barrier Laminated [PBL] Tube) — 
Tubes are manufactured from the base multilayer 
tube laminate wide width stock having at least 
three thermoplastic layers. For very longer product 
shelf life or oxygen sensitive product formulation, 
very thin layer of ethylene co-polymer based 
barrier layer is introduced at the core of the PBL 
structures. Barrier PBL structures could go up 
to eleven layers but mostly with thermoplastic 
polymers yet the entire tube could be recycled 
efficiently. Being fabricated from wide width 
laminate, the PBL tubes will always have a lap 
joint or seam at the longitudinal side of tube body. 
Depending upon the tube diameter/product fill 
volume, PBL tube wall thickness may vary from 
175 to 500 microns. 


Type II (Extruded Plastic Seamless Tube) — These 
tubes are made with direct co-axial extrusion of 
thermoplastic polymers in single, three or five 
layers. Five layers extruded plastic tubes are 
mainly used for longer product shelf life with 
oxygen sensitive product formulations. Extruded 
plastic tube body, being co-axially extruded in 
the form of cylindrical shape, do not have any 
side seam. Depending upon the tube diameter 
or product fill volume, tube body thickness is 
maintained between 350 to 550 microns. 


b 


wm 


8 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES 


The tubes may be manufactured in different thicknesses 
and different diameter, as agreed between manufacturer 
and purchaser, depending upon the application of the 
tube for different types of product and filled volume. 
However, tolerance on nominal thickness at any given 
point shall be + 5 percent for Type I and +7.5 percent 
for Type II. A tolerance on inside/outside of the tube 
shall be + 0.2 mm. 


8.1 Thickness 


Thickness of the tube shall be determined by Annex A 
of IS 2508. 


8.2 Inside Diameter of Tube 


Inside diameter of the tubes shall be determined by the 
method given in Annex A. 


8.3 Outside Diameter of Tube 


Shall be checked by Go/No Go gauges as per the 
method given in Annex B. 


9 CAPACITY 


The tubes shall be manufactured in nominal capacity of 
50 ml, 100 ml, 200 ml and 300 ml or any other capacity 
as agreed by the buyer and manufacturer. Brimful 
capacity shall be measured in accordance with 5 of IS 
2798. 


10 REQUIREMENTS 


10.1 The shoulder bond strength shall be tested using 
the method given in Annex C. 


10.2 Overall Migration 


The tube shall comply with the overall migration limits 
of 60 mg/l, maximum of simulants and 10 mg/dm’, 
maximum of the surface of the material or article when 
tested by the method prescribed in IS 9845. 


10.3 Specific Migration Test 


The tube shall not release the substances in quantities 
exceeding the specific migration limits listed under 
Table 1. IS 9845 shall be used for the preparation 
of the sample and IS 3025 (Part 2) shall be used for 
determination of specific migration limit. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


Table 1 Specific Migration Test 
( Clause 10.3 ) 


SI No. Substances Maximum Migration 
Limit (mg/Kg) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Barium 1.0 
ii) Cobalt 0.05 
iii) Copper 5.0 
iv) Iron 48.0 
v) Lithium 0.6 
vi) Manganese 0.6 
vii) Zinc 25.0 


10.4 The tube shall also comply with the requirements 
given in Table 2. 


10.5 Additional Requirements for Multi Squeezable 
Tubes 


The additional requirement of the tube will depend 
upon the buyer specific product composition and 
product expected shelf life. It can be determined based 
on the agreement between purchaser and supplier. 


10.5.1 Additional Requirements 


a) Water vapour transmission rate as per ISO 2528; 
and 


b) Oxygen transmission rate as per ISO 15105-2. 
11 SAMPLING 


11.1 Lot 


The tubes manufactured from the same raw material 
and of the same dimensions manufactured under similar 
conditions shall constitute a lot. 


11.2 Scale of Sampling 


To ascertain the conformity ofthe lot to the requirements 
of the standard, tests shall be carried out for each lot 
separately. The number of tubes to be sampled from 
a lot shall be in accordance with Table 3 typically or 
as agreed by the buyer and manufacturer. The tube 
shall be selected at random from the lot. To ensure the 
randomness of selection, methods given in IS 4905 
may be followed. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


Table 2 Requirements of High Density Polyethylene Multi Squeezable Tubes 
( Clause 10.4 ) 


SI No. Characteristics Requirements Method of Test Refer to 
IS/ Annex 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Tube bursting test Shall pass the test Annex D 
ii) Drop test for tubes Shall pass the test C18 of IS 2798 
ili) End seal integrity Shall pass the test Annex E 
iv) Leakage test Shall pass the test CI 6 of IS 2798 
v) Product resistance of Printed tubes Shall pass the test 14 of IS 2798 
vi) Tape test for printed tubes Shall pass the test 13 of IS 2798 
vii) Cap release torque Shall pass the test Annex F 
viii) Environmental stress crack resistance, for tube shoulder, failure time F50 Method I of IS 8747 
ix) Opacity, percent, Min 80 16 of IS 1060 (Part 1) 
x) Haze, percent, Max 15 IS 13360 (Part 9/Sec 5) 
xi) Transparency, percent, Min 80 IS 13360 (Part 9/Sec 5) 


xii) Product compatibility test 


Table 3 Scale of Sampling 
( Clause 11.2 ) 


SI No. Lot Size Sample Acceptance Rejection 

Size No. No. 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Up to 1000 32 1 3 

ii) 1001 to 3000 50 2 5 

ii) 3001 to 10000 80 3 T 

iv) 10001 to 35000 125 5 10 

v) 35001 to above 200 7 14 


12 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE 
PURCHASER 


When specifying the laminated collapsible and 
extruded seamless tubes the following requirements 
shall be stated in the order: 


a) Diameter, 

b) Length, 

c) Orifice or nozzle diameter, 
d) Closure type, and 

e) Particular print design. 


13 PACKING AND MARKING 


13.1 Packing 


The tubes may be supplied in clean corrugated 
fibreboard box or plastic box with or without dividers. 


The tube shall be 
compatible with the 
product to be packed 


CI 12 of IS 2798 


13.2 Each box or cases containing the empty tube shall 
be permanently marked with the following: 


a) Indication of the source of manufacture and trade- 
mark, if any; 

b) Nominal capacity; 

c) Batch No. and Code No.; 

d) Month and year of manufacture; 

e) Made from plastics materials meant for food 
contact applications indicating the material used; 

f) Recycling symbol in line with IS 14534; and 


g) Any other information as required by the statutory 
authorities or by the purchaser. 


13.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules 
and Regulations framed thereunder, and the products 
may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


14 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT FOR ECO- 
MARK 


14.1 General Requirement 


14.1.1 The product shall conform to the requirements 
for quality, safety and performance prescribed. 


14.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce to BIS the 
consent clearance as per the provisions of Water 


(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 along 
with the authorization, if required under Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 and the Rules made thereunder 
while applying for the ECO-Mark. The manufacturer 
shall produce documentary evidence with respect 
to the compliance of regulation under Prevention 
of Food safety and Standards Act, 2005 and Drugs 
and Cosmetic Act, 1940 and Rules made thereunder, 
wherever necessary. 


14.1.3 The product must display a list of critical 
ingredients in descending order of quantity present 
expressed as percent of the total. The list of such 
ingredients shall be identified by Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


14.1.4 The product packaging shall display in brief the 
criteria based on which the product has been labelled as 
‘Environment Friendly’. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


14.1.5 The material used for product packaging shall be 
recyclable or biodegradable. 


14.1.6 It shall also suitably mention that ECO-Mark 
label is applicable only to the packaging material that 
ECO-Mark label is applicable only to the packaging 
material/package, if content is not separately covered 
under ECO-Mark. It may be stated that ECO-Mark is 
applicable to the product or packaging material or both. 


14.2 Product Specific Requirements 


For the manufacture of this product, requirements given 
in IS 7328 and IS 10951 shall be followed. In case of 
food contact application, IS 10146 and IS 10910 shall 
be followed. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 8.2 ) 
MEASUREMENTS OF INSIDE DIAMETER OF TUBE 


A-1 APPARATUS 


Mandrel of appropriate diameter for the tube size being 
tested. 


A-2 PROCEDURE 


A-2.1 Push the tube or sleeve over the mandrel and 
note the amount of force or pressure necessary. 


A-2.2 Observe if the tube or sleeve fits too tight or 
loose over the mandrel. 


A-3 OBSERVATION 


For laminated tubes or sleeves, there should be some 
frictional resistance, but not enough to buckle the wall. 
The fitment should not be loose. 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 8.3 ) 
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF OUTSIDE DIAMETER OF TUBE 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


This method accurately determines the outside tube 
diameter using a Go/No-Go gauge. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


B-2.1 Push sample through the correct hole diameter 
on the gauge. 


B-2.2 The tube should fit through the gauge with a small 
amount of effort. A no fit or extreme effort fit indicates 
that the tube does not meet specification. 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 10.1 ) 
TEST FOR SHOULDER BOND STRENGTH 


C-1 PROCEDURE 


C-1.1 Look at body to shoulder joint carefully to 
determine if there is any obvious flaws or physical 
separation at the joint. 


C-1.2 Cut the body/sleeve into approximately 15 mm 
strips terminating the cut at the shoulder. 


C-1.3 Holding the head in one hand and a strip in the 
other separate the strip from the head. 


C-1.4 Angle of 90° should be maintained between strip 
and the axis of the tube. 


C-1.5 Rate bonds according to the following, 


a) Excellent: hard to pull, laminate/tube body 
material tears; 


b) Good: easy to pull but slight 
laminate/tube body material; and 


tearing of 


c) Poor: easy to pull, no tearing of laminate/tube 
body material. 


IS 17480 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 10.4, Table 2, SI No. 1) 
BURSTING TEST 


D-1 PROCEDURE 


D-1.1 Seal the open end of the empty tube. 


D-1.2 Remove the cap and connect the nozzle with 
appropriate adopter, matching tube neck and thread 
fitment, to air supply line. 


D-1.3 Apply air pressure to the tube at the rate 
of 70 kPa/5 s and continue raising the pressure 


till the pressure reaches 140 kPa. 


D-1.4 Maintain this pressure for 15 s. The tube or side 
seam shall not show any bursting at the tube body or 
side seam. 


D-1.5 Raise the pressure further till the tube bursts. 
Observe the rupture of the tube. The tube passes the 
test if the body ruptures before the seal fails. 


ANNEX E 
( Clause 10.4, Table 1, SI No. 3) 
END SEAL INTEGRITY TEST 


E-1 PROCEDURE 


E-1.1 Cut the sealed empty tube atleast 50 mm below 
the seal. 


E-1.2 Make two parallel cuts, perpendicular to the seal 
at the corner of the seal. 


E-1.3 Pull both strips until the sample fails. 


E-1.3.1 If the seal is good it will fail by fracturing the 
laminate, while the sealed interface remains unaffected. 
If the seal opens up by the pull the sealing is improper. 
A break should occur at the base of the seal next to the 
tube body or elsewhere in the body to ensure a good 
seal. 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 10.4, Table 1, SI No. 7 ) 
TORQUE TEST FOR CAPS 


F-1 APPARRATUS 


Torque-meter, standard cap holders. 
F-2 PROCEDURE 


F-2.1 Take the tube under inspection. Insert tube 
mandrel of same diameter as that of tube diameter into 
torque meter for holding the tube. 


F-2.2 Insert the cap of auto-capped tube into the cap 
holder at bottom portion of the torque meter. 


F-2.3 Holding head portion of the torque-meter in one 
hand and the tube in other hand rotate head portion of 
the torque meter in anti-clock wise direction to unscrew 
the cap from tube nozzle. 


F-3 REPORT 


F-3.1 Note the reading observed in the display of 
torque meter. Reading is expressed in N/cm (Range: 
15 — 45 N-cm). 


IS 17480 : 2020 


ANNEX G 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Plastic Containers Sectional Committee, PCD 21 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity 


All India Plastics Manufacturers Association 
(AIPMA), Mumbai 


All India Plastic Industries Association (AIPIA), 
Delhi 


All India Food Processors Association, (AIFPA), 
Delhi 


Bayer Crop Science, Mumbai 
Bisleri International Pvt Ltd, Delhi 
Coca-Cola India, Gurgaon 


Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET), Chennai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry 
(FICCI), New Delhi 


CUTS International (Consumer Unity & Trust 
Society), Jaipur 


Essel Propack Limited, Mumbai 


Excel Crop Care, Mumbai 
FSSAI, New Delhi 
GAIL India Ltd, NOIDA 


Haldia Petrochemicals, Kolkata 

Hindustan Unilever Ltd, Mumbai 
Huhtamaki-Paper Products Ltd, Mumbai 
HPCL-MITTAL Energy Limited (HMEL), Noida 
Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment 


(ICPE), Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), R&D 


Representative(s) 
Dn N. C. SAHA (Chairman) 


SHRI KAiLAsH B. MURARKA 
Suri R. K. AGGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAvI KUMAR AGGARWAL 
Suri P. P. TuTEJA (Alternate) 


DR SHAMINDER PAL SINGH 
Dn K. L. Gasa (Alternate I) 
Ms SunEvA Panpey (Alternate IT) 


SHRI AJAY BAROT 
Suri Sui JADHAV (Alternate) 


SHRI KADEER KHAN 
Ms Harika Raj (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA 
Dn VinENDRA LANDGE (Alternate) 


Dn S. N. YADAV 
Dr Smita Monanty (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESHWAR MATCHE 
Ms PRIYANKA SHARMA 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH 


SHRI M. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI HARIHARAN K (Alternate) 


SHRI PRASAD GHATE 
Dn DHIR SINGH 


Dr DzBasisu Roy 
Suri Nitin Gupta (Alternate) 
Suri Ras K. Datta 
SHRI SRIKANTH RAMANI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA DOBRIYA 
Suri JIKUL Purouit (Alternate 1) 
Suri Sannir Das (Alternate II) 


SHRI ATIN CHAUDHARY 


SHRI VINEET K. GUPTA 
SHRI ALAKESH GHosH (Alternate) 


Dn V. P. SHARMA 
Dn A. B. Pant (Alternate) 


Suri T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 
SHRI MAHINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SuRI DHANANJAY SAHOO 
Suni Ponnuswamy K. (Alternate) 


10 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 


IIT Roorkee-Saharanpur Campus 

Intertek, Mumbai 

IIT, Delhi 

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 
Mohan Meakins Limited, Ghaziabad 

Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd, Noida 
Mullackal Polymers 


National Association for Feeders and Nipples 
Industries (NAFNI), Mumbai 


National Dairy Development Board, Anand 


Nestle India Ltd, New Delhi 


Nilkamal Plastics Ltd, Mumbai 


PET Packaging Association for Clean Environment 
(PACE) 


Pigeon India, Grater Noida 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Radico Khaitan 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Triveni Polymers Ltd 
Uflex Noida 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


Supreme Industries Limited, Mumbai 
Skypack India Pvt Ltd 
Toyo Ink India Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


BIS Director General 


IS 17480 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MADHAB CHAKRABORTY 
Dr TANWEER ALAM (Alternate) 


DR YUVRAJ SINGH NEGI 
Ms SUNANDA KADAM 
REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 

DR E. K. JAYANARAYANAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAMESH PILLAI 

SHRI Kartik PILLAI (Alternate) 
Suri HARISH SHROFF 

SHRI ASHOK ANEJA (Alternate) 
Suri P. K. PUNDIR 

Suri S. K. Goswami (Alternate) 
SHRI BARUN BANERJEE 

SMT Sarita Devi (Alternate) 
Suni H. V. PAREKH/SHRI V.S. IYER 

SHRI A. K. KHARBANDA (Alternate) 
Dn VuAv HABBU 

SHRI PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 
Ms SIMPLE BAJAJ 

Ms Swena Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI S. V. RAJU 
SHRI RAJESH GERA (Alternate T) 
Dr Sunit ManAJAN (Alternate IT) 


Suri R. B. BIRADAR 


Suri N. A. HASHMI 
Dn A. K. Tyaai (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBODH GUPTA 
SHRI Amit Ray 


Suri M. A. U. KHAN 
Suri H. Wapuwa (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI NAVEEN TALWAR 
SHRI JAGBIR SINGH (A/ternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri N. K. BANSAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (PCD), 
[ (REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (PCD), BIS 


11 


(Continued from second cover) 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PCD 21 (15398). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


