`: Ic ; :i wcih qTFF

lS13082(

Part2):1991

(Reaffirmed 2001)

BULKHANDLINGEQUIPMENTSHIPUNLOADERGANTRYMOUNTED GRABTYPE-CODEOFPRACTICEFOR DESIGN,MANUFACTUREANDERECTION
PART 2 ELECTRO-MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS

UDC

621'869'2 : 629' 12'606'76

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Muy

1991

Price Group 2

Bulk Handling Equipment

Sectional Committee,

HMD 07

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft the Bulk Handling Equipment Sectiotal Committee had been approved by the Heavy Engineering Division Courcil. There are various types of ship urloaders but, main types being continuous could be mounted on the gantry or crawlerltyres. Ship unloaders are important materials shipped. functional sub-system of unloadirg and finalized by Mechanical These of bulk

and grab type. transportation

This Part 2 is the one in the series of other parts of the standard covering the code of practice for design, manufacture and erection of gantry mounted grab type ship unloader provided with Other parts of the standard are: horizontal boom and grab-bucket. IS 13082 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 IS 13082 ( Part 3 > : 1991 Mechanical and structural requirements Information to be supplied by the purchaser

and the manufacturer

The requirements given in this standard are for guidelines and notwithstanding the requirements to be fulfillrd by the purchasers and the manufacturers in accordance with any Statutory Acts, Rules, Regulations or otherwise specified by other Authorities. This standard manufacturers is expected to provide uniform practice to be adopted of such ship unloaders. by the purchasers and the

For structural requirements of ship unloaders a reference may be made to Indian Standard Bulk handling equipment - Mobile continuous type - Rules for the design of structures ( under
prepararion ).

In the preparation of this standard, reference was made to the publication Appliances - Rules for the Design of Hoisting Appliances by Federation Manutention.

on Heavy Europeenne

Lifting De La

IS 13082 ( Part 2 ) : 1991

Indian Standard

BULKHANDLINGEQIJIPMENTSHIPUNLOADER -GANTRYMOUNTED GRABTYPECODEOFPRACTICEFOR DESIGN,MANUFACTUREANDERECTION
PART 2 1 SCOPE 1.1 This Indian Standard covers electro-mechanical requirements, inspection and testing requirements relating to the design, manufacture, and erection of gantry mounted grab type ship unloader provided with horizontal boom and grab-bucket. ELECTRO-MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS

3.6 All enclosures of electrical equipmznts shall be given two coats of anti-corrosive epoxy psint over two coats of primer suitable for epoxy. 3.7 Various control gcacs like contactors, relays, control transformers, etc, shall be housed in dust proof, damp proof and vermin proof protective panels having doors interlocked with the supply control switches. Space heaters shall be provided for the panels. 4 POWER SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS supply shall be controlled by a shore-based circuit breaker on the wharf, from which power shall be taken to the unloader through suitable collector systems like springloaded motor operated cable reeling drum etc. 4.2 It shall be possible to trip the shore-based circuit breaker from the machinery house of the unloader. 4.3 Circuit breaker to isolate the main supply to the unloader shall be provided in the machinery house. It shall be possible to switch off this breaker from the operator's cabin also. 4.4 A plug and socket arrangement shall be provided at thz shore circuit breaker to connect up the unloader's current collecting arrangements ( power and control ). 4.4.1 The plug and socket for power shall interlock so that the plug shall be withdrawn only when the circuit breaker is `OFF'. 4.5 External control links shall be taken out of the unloader using a current collection system similar to that for power. This system may carry the commun:cation links also. 5 POWER TRANSFORMERS 5.1 Power transformers if provided shzll be dry type. These shall have ovrrlo_ld, voltage and
temp-rnture 6 MOTORS protection. 4.1 Power

2 GENERAL unloader shall be complete electrical accessories required for smooth and efficient operation. 2.2 Only non-hygroscopic used for insulation. 2.3 Electrical system for the power supply point. materials
2.1 The

with all its safe, shall be

Offered shall be suitable system fault level at that

2.4 Electrical installation work shall be carried out through licensed electrical contractors, holding valid contractor's iicences issued by the concerned Statutory Authority. 3 ENCLOSURES
3.1 All electrical equipments shall be properly enclosed or protected to suit the environmental conditions and to prevent inadvertent or accidental contact.

3.2 All enclosures shall preferably be of cast iron, or cast aluminium; wherever sheet steel has to be used, the thickness of the metal shall not be less than 2 mm. 3.2.1 All joints in enclosures shall be made dust-proof by gaskets of high quality nondeteriorating rubber or other suitable: material: 3.3 Bare conductors, if used as bus wires, shall be located so as to prevent any form of accidental contact. The execution shall ensure complete safety and wherever necessary metallic
screens shall be employed. 3.4 Flame

proof/increased safety enclosures shall be provided for electrical cquipmcnts wherever required.

3.5 Wherever it is uscessary for an electrical equipment to be adjusted or inspc'cted while in
service, necessary clearances from live parts may be provided to ensure safety in operation.

6.1 To select
established:

a motor

the

follow:ng

shall be

a) The maximum torque required to produce motion in the most unfavourable case. 1

IS 13082 (Part2):
b) That

1991
9.6 Metallic conduits shall be provided wherever necessary for the protection of the cables. 9.7 Power and control circuits be by a festoon cable system.

it

perform wear.

shall allow the unloader to its normal duty without abnormal

to the cab shall

6.2 A/C motors shall be of totally enclosed, fan-cooled, weather protected, hose-proof design ( IP-55 degree of protection ) with at least class B insulatic:n and shall be suitable for crane duty. 6.2.1 A/C motors shall have thermistor, and short circuit protection.
6.3 D/C motors

9.8 Electrical circuits may be printed/painted/ pasted at the inside of control cable covers.

10 EARTHING 10.1 The unloader shall be earthed through shoes rubbing on the rails. In addition, the cornection between the shore-based circuit breaker ard the unloader shall have a fourth conductor to be used as an earth connection. This earth connection shall be linked to the earth concection of the shore-based circuit breaker. 10.2 Double earthing shall be provided equipmects. for all

overload

shall have at least IP-23 enclosure

and shall be housed indoor. 6.4 The motors shall have at least the following cyclic duty factors: Grab hoisting/closing Trolley travel Other motions 60 percent 60 percent 40 percent with

6.4.1 Motors shall have built-in thermistors alarm, and also space heater elements.

6.5 Thyristor drives if provided shall have currerit limitation, speed limitation, overload protection, short-circuit protection and fuse protection. 7 RESISTORS 7.1 Resistors if provided shall be intermittentrated for Class IV duty and shall be suitable for the climatic conditions ard the corrosive atmosphere described elsewhere. Stainless steel resistance grids are preferred. 8 BRAKES 8.1 Electra-mechanical/electro-hydraulic
brakes of adequate capacity shall be provided for all motions/motors, in addition to emergency brakes

11 LIGHTING 11.1 The unloader suitable illumination at all places. 11.2 Flood lights following points:

shall be provided with to ensure good lighting shall bz provided at the

a) On the apron for the operator to see the bucket operation during the night. b) In front and rear portions of the unloader to properly light the tracks during unloader travel in the night. 11.3 All lighting circuits shall be protected with HRC fuses and shall be controlled by one main switch-fuse in addition to separate circuit control switches. 11.4 Battery operated emergency lights shall be provided at strategic locations. These shall be the automatic typ:. The light shall automatically come `ON' when normal power supply fails and shall go `OFF' automatically when normal supply comes back. The unit shall incorporate a trickle charger for keeping the battery on charge. The battery shall b: rated for at least 30 minutes. 11.5 Air-craft warning/obstruction lights shall be provided on the unloader if rcquircd by any Statutory Authorities, for which separate battery units ( one hour rated ) with chargers shall be provided. 11.6 All light fittings absorbxs. shall be mounted on shock

for hoist hold, and hydraulic rail clampers. All brakes shall be of fail-safe type. Smooth braking shall be ensurtd for hoisting and trolley travel. 9 CABLES
cables shall be PVC insulated, armoured and PVC sheathed preferably with All control cables shall be copper conductor. 2'5 mm* copper. 9.2 Power ar,d control with HRC fuses/circuit cables shall be protected breakers.

9.1 All power

9.3 The sizes of the cables shall be so chosen that they are rated to carry the full load current continuously after allowing for necessary dcrating factors for the conditions of installation, and also so that the voltage drop in cables shall not exceed 2.5 percent during running. 9.4 All cables shall be neatly clamped at suitable intervals. All fixing materials shall be given suitable anti-corrosive paint. 9.5 All cables cable Elands. shall be terminated by suitable

11.7 Low voltage plug socket outlets, with hand lamps and sufficient lengths of cables, shall be provided. 12 CONTROLS 12.1 A safe IOW voltage shall be employed for the controls. This shall be from the secondary winding of an isolating transformer; one terminal

IS 13082 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 of this supply shall be earthed and the contactor and the relay coils shall be connected to this terminal. 13 INTERLOCKS 13.1 Necessary interlocks smooth operation of the provided. 13.2 `Forward' and `Reverse' be interlocked electrically, mechanically as well. 14 OPERATOR'S CABIN controls shall be complete for the unloader safe and shall be and the unloader hydraulically. shall get clamped to rails

15.2 Shunt and series limit switches shall be provided for all motions. The shunt switch shall operate first and if the motion fails to stop, Additional limit switches series limit shall act. shall be provided for long travel, trolley travel, cabin travel, etc. 15.2.1 Instead of shunt and series limit switches, mechanical type end-limit switches and magnetic type pre-limit switches may bz provided. The pre-limit switch shall act first to trip the motor and apply mechanical brakes. On reaching the end-limit switch, the breaker on the secondary side of the transformer shall g-t tripped. For the trolley an additional pre-limit switch shall be provided ahead of the two limit switches mentioned above. 15.3 Phase failure relay shall trip the main circuit breaker. 15.4 Smoke detector, shall be provided. operation be provided counter, automatically to etc,

contactors shall and preferably

14.1 Operator's cabin with all necessary for performing the various operations located in such a manner as to ersure view of the operations. 14.2 Control recommendtd cabin: facilities for to be provided

the following are in the operator's facility operation

4
b) c) d) c) f) g)

Unloader travel - ( additional shall be provided to carry out from the wharf also ), Trolley travel, Bucket operation, Cab positioning, Belt feeder operation, Cab lighting, Dust collection equipments+

15.5 A warning bell shall sound during long-travel operation. 16 AIR CONDITIONING

and

stop button toswitch `OFF' h) An emergency all unloader motions. This shall not interrupt power to the auxiliary circuits, lighting, signals, etc. 14.3 Indication control supply, failure, etc. and alarm for main supply, motions, wind pressure, phase

16.1 In the interest of long life and reliable operation, electronic components and other components sensitive to temperature, humidity and dust, shall preferably b: located in air conditioned space(s). 17 PRESSURJSING 17.1 The electrical machinery house shall be pressurised to keep dust away. The pressure inside shall be 2 mm by water gauge. Air charges per hour shall be 30. 18 LIFT 18.1 An mended. electrically operated lift is recom-

14.4 The cab shall b.2 fully insulated and shall be equipped with wall-mounted electric motordriven ventilating fan with gravity type louvres and air filtration arrangement, to ensure sufficient number of changes per hour. 14.5 Wirdows shall bc tinted and shall be arranged to give the operator an unobstructed view of the bucket operation between the hold Electrically of the ship and the gantry hopper. operated wipers for the glass windows shall be furnished to improve visibility during rains. 14.6 There shall be a signal from the operator's cabin. 15 PROTECTION 15.1 In case of excessive wind pressure, an alarm shall sound and all motions shall be cut off horn controlled

19 COMMUNICATION

FACILITIES within the

19.1 Inter-communication facility unloader structure is recommended. 20 AUTOMATION

20.1 Where considered essential, semi-automation may be provided to reduce physical and psychological stress on the unloader operator. Semi-automation may cover all operations of the grab and the trolley, but not operztions inside the hatch. There shall be facility to overside the automatic system at any time.

3

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an lndian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to ducer. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standa& Act, I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. HMD 07 ( 5227 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone t 331 01 13 75 31

37 86 62 53 38 43 41 29 16

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 95

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat Press,:Delhl,

India

