(Reaffirmed 2004)

Is : 4952 -

1968

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF COTTON- BALES, SLIVERS AND ROVINGS
Sampling Methods Sectional Committee,
Representing
N. C. Corporation Private Ltd. Bombey Institute of Agricultural ( ICAR ), New Delhi Research Statistics Laboratory

TDC

33

Chairman DB ( KUXAEI ) S. P. VASWANI Members
DB D.AB~QA SIXOH ~EBI V. N. ADELE ( Alternate DE JAI Psagasn

)

Cotton Technological ( ICAR ), Bombay

Researoh

Snm C. 8. RAJA~AXAN ( Alternate ) Researah & Development Organization (Ministry SHBI P. KSISHNUWAMI of Defence ), New Delhi `Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta DB N. T. MAT'HEW SHBI B. K. RAJA RAO ( Alternote ) The Bombay Textile Research Assoaiation, DB C. NANJUNDAYYA Bombay Education Department, Uovernment of Mysore, SHZU Y. V. NATAIUJAN Bangalore Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals SEBI I. L. PATEL ( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi SHBI A. K. PBAXANIO~ ( Uernate ) Textile Committee, Bombay SHBI R. 8. PBAYAQ The Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co Ltd, Snnr B. RAEA Bombay SEBI S. 8. IPEB ( Akernate ) The South India Textile Research Association, SIXEI T: V. RATNAIK Coimbatore SEBI K. N. SESH~ ( Alternate ) The Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Reeearoh REPBESENTATIVE Association, Ahmedabad Aryodaya Spinning and Weaving Co Ltd. REPBESENTA~I~E Ahmedabad The Khatau Makanji Spinning and Weaving Co S~nx N. V. ULLAL Ltd, Bombay SHBI S. D. MATWBE ( AIternare ) DB B. N. SINOE, Director General, IS1 ( Ex;ofiCio Member ) Director ( Stat ) SH~I Q. W. DATEY Assistant Director (Stat ), IS1

Secretary

( Continued on page 2 ) INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MAR0

Is : 4952 - 1968 ( Conrimed from page 1 ) Panel on Sampling
Members SHEIS. D. MATEWEE SEBI Y. RAMAXCEISEXA RAO
SEW R. N. RAO Sasr B. E. RAJA RAO

of Cotton

Textiles,

TDC

33 : P2

Representing The E(hetsu ?vfaksnji Spinning Bnd wesving

@ Ltd, Bombay Indisn St8tiatic81 Institute, %lcuttE The Ahmed8b8d Textile Industry'8 Reeearoh _ Associetion, Ahmedabad TheB",mz;y Textile Reaesrch Aesooistion,

2

IS : 4952 -

1968

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF COTTON --BALES, SLIVERS AND ROVINGS
FOREWORD

0.

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 December 1968, after the draft finalized by the Sampling Methods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 Evaluation of the quality of cotton is very important for the producWhile formulating standards on tion of cotton yarn and fabrics. methods of tests for cotton flbres, the Textile Standards Sectional Committee felt the need for formulating objective procedures for drawing For this purpose the samples of cotton from bales, slivers and rovings, information was collected from the different textile mills and research organizations in the country and inherent variability of various characThis information has been utilized for arriving at teristics ascertained. the scales of sampling and methods for drawing the sample recommended in this standard. 0.3 This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards relating to Other standards published so far in the sampling of textile materials. the series are: IS : 3919-1966 Methods for sampling cotton fabrics for determination of physical characteristics IS : 3920-1966 Methods for sampling of cotton yarn for determination of physical characteristics 0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard specifies the methods for sampling of cotton from bales or from the processed material in the form of sliver or roving.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS : 4952 - 1968
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply. the purpose of this standard, package the following definitions` shall

2.1 Bale transit. ~~,~ross

A compressed

of cotton

in a form convenient for

Sample - The aggregate

of all tufts or lumps selected from

2.3 Lot 23.1 Bales -

All the bales of cotton of the same variety and quality delivered to a buyer against a despatch note. 2.3.2 Slivers or Rovings - The quantity of sliver or roving processed from the same raw material.

2.4 Roving - A continuous, yarn is spun. 2.5 Sliver -An twist. assemblage

slightly twisted strand of fibres from which of a continuous strand of fibres without

small representative quantity of the material 2.6 Test Sample -A selected from a gross sample for the purpose of testing. 3. SAMPLING FROM BALES

3.1 In order to obtain a representative sample from a lot of bales it is necessary to distribute the sample to be selected over the bales in the lot and different layers in the bale. 3.1.1 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and the seller, the number of bales to be selected at random from a lot shall be in accordance with Table 1. To ensure the randomness of selection of the bales, IS : 4905 - 1968; may be used. 3.2 From each of the bales so selected, the representative be drawn in accordance with 3.2.1 or 3.22. material may fibre properit is desirable in at least 10 layers from a

3.2.1 In view of the variation observed in most of the ties, both within and between the layers of cotton in a bale, to open the bale and draw tufts from different positions equally-spaced layers. In practice the selection of the bale may be done according to 3.2.1.1.
3.2.1.1 are broken.
*Methods

The bale is kept lengthwise on the ground and the hoops A thin layer of cotton is removed from the top and the
for random sampling.

4

IS : 4952 -

1968

tufts are drawn from various positions on the exposed surface. Then a thick slab (about one-tenth the height of the bale ) is removed and the tufts are drawn from the newly exposed surface. The procedure is repeated till the tufts are drawn from at least 10 layers. The procedure is indicated diagrammatically in Fig. 1. While drawing the tufts from various layers, care shall be- taken to avoid any bias in selecting the positions for drawing the tufts. The material so drawn from the bale shall not be less than 2 kg.
1 NUMBER OF BALES TO BE SELECTED FORM A LOT j CIuuse 3.1.1) No.or BALES IN
THELOT

TABLE

NO.OB BALESTO BE SELEOTED 2 4

up to 60 61 ,, 100 101 ._ 160 161 ;; 300 301 ,, 600 601 - 1000 1001 c&d above

7

;t 32 40

I-1'

I FIG. 1 SELECTION

-

KEEP ASIDE DRLW THE INCREMENTS

OF LAYERS

FROM

A BALE

3.2.2 In case it is not economical to open the bale completely, the gross sample may be obtained by breaking one or more of the hoops round the bale and then taking out a lump of at least 1 kg of material from each of the two exposed sides of the bale. The material so taken shall include portions.from the hard, soft and middle parts of the bale. 3.3 The material so obtained from all the bales selected shall be thoroughly mixed to get a gross sample. from the lot

5

Is : 4952 -

1968
OF GROSS SAMPLE

4. REDUCTION

4.0 The procedure as given in 4.1 and 4.2 may be followed for obtaining the test sample from the gross sample. 4.1 The gross sample shall be spread out evenly on a level ground in the form of either a square with each side slightly greater than 1 m, or in the case of a larger sample, a rectangle with the shorter side slightly greater than 1 m and the larger side slightly greater than 2 m. A suitable framework of size 1 -x 1 m with 25 sub-squares or 1 X 2 m From with 50 sub-squares shall be placed on the material so spread. each of these sub-squares, one or more tufts of fibres shall be pulled out atrandom, taking care not to exercise and bias in favour of or against any particular place within a sub-square, and that .tufts drawn from each sub-square weigh about 4 g in the former case and about 2 g in the latter case. The quantity of cotton thus drawn shall constitute the reduced sample. 4.2 The reduced sample shall be well mixed and divided into 25 or 50 approximately equal parts. From each of these parts, one or more tufts of Sbres shall be extracted at random, taking care that the fibres drawn are nearly equal in weight, and the total weight of fibres thus drawn is not less than the quantity required for relevant tests. The material so taken out shall constitute the test sample. 4.3 If soagreed between be prepared, one for the the referee; to be used test samples may then sample by following the 5. SAMPLING the buyer and the seller, three test buyer, another for the seller and in case of dispute between the be simultaneously drawn from procedure given in 4.2. samples may the third for two. These the reduced'

OF SLIVERS AND ROVINGS

5.1 Sometimes it may be necessary to draw the representative sample from the processed material in the form of sliver or roving. In order to obtain a representative sample from the lot, it is necessary to Fetri$ue the sample to be selected over the cans or packages in . 5.2 The number of cans or packages selected at random from a lot for this purpose shall be in accordance with Table 2. To ensure randomness of selection of cans or packages IS : 4905 - 1968* may be used. 5.3 From eaeh can or package selected according to 5.1, at least 1 m of sliver or 5 m roving shall be taken. The portions collected from all such cans or packages shall constitute the gross sample,
*Methods for random sampling.

6

IS : 4952 - 1%8
TABLE 2 NUMBER OF CANS OR PACKAGES SELECTED FROM A LOT ( Clause 5.2 ) No. OBCANS OS
PAOJIAQES INTEELOT

TO BE

No. OB Cms OB
PAOKAGESTOBE SELEOTED

2 3 6 8 13

5.4 The portions of slivers in the gross sample shall be opened up and reduced by following the method thoroughly mixed and then given in 4 to get the test sample(s). 6. NUMBER OF TESTS AND REPORTING

6.1 The preparation of the test specimens, the number of test specimens to be tested for determination of various characteristics and the method for reporting the test results shall be according to relevant standards on the methods of test.

7

