IS 13782 : 1993 IS0 4022:1987 ( Reaffirmed 1999 )

Indian

Standard

PERMEABLE SINTERED METAL MATERIALS DETERMINATION OF FLUID PERMEABILITY

UDC

669-138'8 : 620'193'19

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

June

1993

Price Group 5

Powder

Metallurgical

Materials

and Products

Sectional

Committee,

MTD 25

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 4022 : 1987 `Permeable sintered metal issued by the International Organization for materials - Determination of fluid permeability', Standardization ( IS0 ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products Sectional Committee ( MTD 25 ) and approval of the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without with those used in deviations. Some terminology and conventions are, however, not identical Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear, referring to this standard, Standards it should the current

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

in Indian

The Indian Standard IS 5642 : 1991 In this adopted standard, reference appears to IS0 2738. of density, oil content and open porosity `Permeable sintered metal materials - Determination ( second revision )`. which is identical with IS0 2738 : 1987, is to be substituted in its place. In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with "Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. final value, IS 2 : 1960

IS 13782 IS0 4022

: 1993 : 1987

Indian

Standard

PERMEABLE SINTERED METAL MATERIALS DETERMINATION OF FLUID PERMEABILITY

1

Scope

and field

of application

2

Reference
Determination

This International Standard specifies a method for the determination of the fluid permeability of permeable sintered metal materials in which the porosity is deliberately continuous or interconnecting, testing being carried out under such conditions that the fluid permeability can be expressed in terms of viscous and inertia permeability coefficients (see annex A).

IS0 2738, Permeable sintered metal materiels of density, oil content and open porosity.

3

Principle
of the pressure drop and the

Passage of a test fluid of known viscosity and density through a test piece, and measurement volumetric flow rate.

This International Standard does not apply to very long hollow cylindrical test pieces of small diameter, in which the pressure drop of the fluid in passing along the bore of the cylinder may not be negligible compared with the pressure drop of the fluid passing through the wall thickness (see annex A, clause A.5).

Determination of the viscous and inertia permeability coefficients, which are parameters of a formula describing the relationship between the pressure drop, the volumetric by this fluid. flow rate, the viscosity and density of the test fluid, and the dimensions of the porous metal test piece permeated

IS13782:
IS0 4022

1993

: 1987

4
For

Symbols
the purposes

and definitions
of this International Standard, the symbols and definitions given

in the table apply:

Table Term
Permeability

Symbols and definitions

1

Symbol _

1
Ability pressure of a porous gradient metal metal

Definition to pass a fluid under the action of a

Unit _ m2

Test area Thickness

A e

Area of a porous Dimension a) b)

normal

tc the direction

of the fluid flow

flow

of the test piece in the direction

of fluid

for flat test pieces: for hollow of cylinder flow cylinders:

equal to the thickness given 2) of unit viscosity is transmitted by the equation in 6.1.2

m

Length Viscous permeability coefficient

L W"

Length Volume

lsee figure

m

rate at which

a fluid

through unit area of porous metal permeated under the action of unit pressure gradient when the resistance to fluid flow is due only to viscous considered. Inertia permeability coefficient (//I Volume through flow rate at which a fluid metal of unit permeated density under is transmitted the action of losses. It is independent of the quantity of porous metal

m2

unit area of porous

unit pressure gradient when the resistance to fluid flow is due only to inertia losses. It is independent of the quantity of porous metal considered. Volume Upstream Downstream Mean pressure drop flow rate Q
Pl P2

rn.

Mass flow Pressure Pressure

rate of the fluid upstrean

divided

by irs density

m3/s

pressure pressure

of the test piece of the test piece and downstream on the pressures and downN/m* of porous area and pressure by Newton's upstream law and test piece N/m3 m/s kg/m3 N.&m2 N/m2

downstream

P AP

Half the sum of the upstream Difference stream between the

Pressure

pressures

upstream

surfaces

of the porous

test piece

Pressure Velocity Density Dynamic Apparatus from

gradient

Aple @IA

Pressure

drop divided

by the thickness flow

Ratio of the volumetric Density Absolute Pressure of the test fluid dynamic

rate to the t&t

e
viscosity correction (to be subtracted rl -

at the mean temperature coefficient as defined the

viscosity

difference

observed

between

the observed pressure drop)

downstream pressure tappings when the test apparatus js used without a porous test piece in position. (It varies with the flow rate through the apparatus and arises from venturi effects at the pressure tappings and other causes) 7 Half the sum of the temperatures of the fluid at the upstream side and the downstream side of the test piece

N/m2

Mean absolute temperature
L

K

5

Test piece
testing with

This International test pieces.

Standard

refers to two different

types of apof porous

paratus suitable for determining

the fluid permeability

gas, all liquid shall be removed from the pores of the test piece. Oil and grease shall be removed by using a suitable solvent with the extraction method given in IS0 2738. The test piece shall be dried before testing.
Before

6.1.1

Guard ring test head for flat test pieces

6 6.1

Apparatus Equipment

This is a type of test apparatus which is recommended for carrying out non-destructive testing of partial areas of flat porous sheets.
The permeable flexible metal sheet is clamped between two pairs' of

seals. The inner pair, corresponding

to the test area,

The choice of apparatus is mainly dictated by the size, shape and physical characteristics of the test piece.

has a mean diameter of D1. The outer pair, of mean diameter 02, forms a guard ring surrounding the test-area, which is

2

IS 13782 IS0 4022

: 1993 : 1987

pressurized

to prevent

side

leakage

from formed

the

test

area

(see ring i.e.

The guard

ring test head minimizes

side leakage

by ensuring chambers. by

figure 1). The width

of the annulus

by the guard of the sheet,

that the pressure

is the same in the inner and outer face of the test piece,

test head shall be not less than the thickness

:

On the upperstream

this is achieved

arranging that the port area connecting the upper chambers (as shown in figure 1) is as large as possible. On the downstream D2 - 4 2 Test fluid lfor examnle air) from adjustable pressure-control valve >e face of the test piece, usually subject the inner chamber leads to a flowmeter, and the outer chamber to a small back pressure,

I

7Clamping

force ~_

, .7 I

(Alternative entry for test fluid) Port area as lame as nnssihl.-

!

Yrses'~Inner seal (`0' rings)

,,,

Adjustable pressure- _ equalizing valve

Air to atmosphere

Q2

1

To flowmeter

-t

Tb
= Mean diameter of the inner seals = Test head diameter Qz = Volumetric flow rate, at pressure p, PO = Atmospheric pressure P3 = Downstream guard ring pressure, adjusted to be equal to 4 P2 - PO = Pressure drop across flowmeter PI - P2 = Pressure drop across porous metal D, D,

Line b

Qf
Flowmeter

Pb= P,
Q

v

;*

I

zzl

Test piece

Q,=Q2 Cl Pa=P2 J
Figure 1 Guard ring test head 3

Line a

1
/

IS 13782
IS0

: 1993 : 1987

4022

leads to atmosphere

via a pressure-equalizing

valve. This valve

6.1.2

Jig for hollow

cylindrical

test

pieces

is adjusted to equalize the pressure in the inner and outer chambers. The fitting of a restrictor between the test piece and the flowmeter, to increase the back pressure and thus permit more stable control of the pressure-equalizing valve, is allowed. However, test piece ideal&, should the pressure on the downstream be as near as possible to face of the atmospheric

The permeability ly measured surfaces through and

of hollow cylindrical test pieces is convenientthe cylinder axially between test fluid An to permeate cylinder. example two flat outwards in the

by clamping causing of the

the wall

is shown

figure 2. The flowmeter is placed upstream When clamping the porous metal cylinder ciently flexible seals shall be used to irregularities so as to ensure leak-free sealing.

of the test piece. under test, suffiovercome surface

pressure and a restrictor for the adjustment

should not be used unless necessary

of the pressure drop in the flowmeter.

Toroidal

sealing

rings ("0'`-rings)

are recommended

for the

6.2

Test fluids
of cases, gases are more convenient test fluids

inner seals. In the majority The seals shall be sufficiently imperfections instances separately flexible to overcome all surface than liquids (see annex 8). Test gases shall be clean and dry. By agreement is required. gases. between the interested parties, liquids may be

and lack of flatness of the porous metal. In some sealing.

it may be necessary to load the inner and outer seals to ensure leak-free

used where the permeability Two upper and two lower seals are required and these shall be in line with each other.

with reference

to a specific liquid

This liquid shalf be clean and free from dissolved

Clamping force

Line a

Qf
Flowmeter

- 1
L
Q T P
Line b

Q,=Q1

P, =P1

Test piece

Qb=Q2

Tb
Pb=P2

Seal _J

NOTE - The diameter do should be approximately equal to diameter d and the distance h should be as small as possible to minimize the apparatus correction.

Figure

2 -

Jig for testing

hollow cylindrical test pieces

*>

IS 13782 : 1993 IS0 4022 : 1987

`4

7

Procedure of thickness and area of the

7.4

Measurement

of pressures and temperatures
at the

7.1 Measurement test piece
7.1.1 Flat test pieces

It is necessary to measure the pressure and temperature flowmeter and the test piece in order to

correct the reading of the flowmeter; calculate determine the mean flow rate through the test piece;

The size of micrometer

anvils shall not be larger than the size of nor smaller than the pore size. of -

the surface irregularities,

the density and the viscosity of the test fluid.

The test area is defined as that area normal to the direction fluid flow, and, provided that the pressure gradient this definition is meaningful and the test area measured.

is uniform, is readily

8 8.1

Expression

of results

Mean flow rate
Qr is corrected if it is not being by using the The equa-

7.1.2

Hollow

cylindrical

test

pieces The reading of the flowmeter e and the test area A are used at its calibration flowmeter tion correction `corrected flowmeter pressure and temperature,

For hollow

cylinders,

the thickness relationships:

given by the following
02 4

factor Cr given by the manufacturer. reading Q, is given by the following

>e

:

2 e =

D x (In 42
2 (r I)

Q, = C, x Qf
The corrected flowmeter reading Q, is converted to the mean flow rate Q within the porous test piece using the correction term C,, which can be calculated from the gas law equation:

A=

KxDitLxlnr r-l r = $ (see figure 2)

where

The mean flow rate is Q = C,

x Q,. to use the overall correc-

L)-d
When the wall thickness less than 0,l example

d,

is small-compared with 2 the thickness e and test area

d, for A are

When tabulating tion factor C,:

data, it is convenient

given by the following

equations:

c, =

Cf x

c,
x Of.

D-d e=------2
x x

to obtain the mean flow rate Q = C,

A=

L x (D f d)
2

8.2

Mean density and viscosity
within

The mean pressure and the mean absolute temperature

7.2

Measurement

of pressure drop
either by measuring the

the test piece will enable mean density and mean viscosity to be obtained from ljublished data.

The pressure drop may be determined upstream difference and downstream or by using a differential

pressures separately

and taking the

8.3

Calculation

of results
coefficients flow are determined

pressure gauge. The viscous and inertia permeability by taking a number of simultaneous rate and pressure

The apparatus correction is obtained by using the equipment with no test piece in place and observing the pressure drop over the required range of flow rates. The apparatus correction should preferably not exceed 10 % of the pressure drop (see the table).

drop readings. The number of flow rate readings shall be at least five, equally spaced within an interval of flow rate readings where the highest is at least ten times greater than the lowest.

7.3

Measurement

of flow rate

The results are processed Ap exQxr] x

using the following

equation:

A primary standard for the measurement of the flow rate of the test fluid is preferred. The flow rate shall be corrected to the mean pressure and temperature of the test piece. However, against a standard flowmeter (previously calibrated standard) may be more convenient to use. a primary

A
=G

1

QXP x-----+Axq

1
wv

'

[see annex A, equation

(211.

5

IS 13782 IS0 4022

: 1993 : 1987

`, `5.

This equation

can be re-written

in the form y = U.Y f

h where

8.4
Report (1 pm9

Final result
of the viscous the inertia permeability permeability coefficient coefficient in 10 12 m2

and

in 10

6 m

(1 f_tm). to an accuracy

of f

5 % in relative value.
permeability coefficient (micrometre

x'=-

Vxe
Axrl

NOTE
squared)

~ The unit of viscous
is sometimes

called a darcy.

The

values

x and

y are

calculated

at each

level

of flow

9

Test report
information

rate/pressure drop. The corresponding values of x and y are plotted on linear graph paper and the straight line which best fits the points is drawn.

The test report shall include the following a) reference all details to this International necessary for

:

Standard; identification of the test

The intercept

of this line on the y-axis gives the reciprocal (f/y/J.

of

b)

the viscous permeability

sample; c) the type of apparatus the test fluid used; the result obtained; all operations not specified as optional; which may have affected the by this International Stan used; the reciprocal of the inertia d) e)

The

slope

of

this

line

gives

permeability

(1 /ryJ.

In case of doubt, least-squares

the straight line should be determined

by the f) dard or regarded g)

method.

NOTE - If measurement is made with flow in the laminar regime, only the viscous permeability coefficient can be determined (see annex A).

details of any occurrence

result.

6

IS13782:1993 lS04022:1987

Annex The flow of fluid through

A porous materials

(This annex

does not form

an integral

part of the Standard.)

A.1

Viscous

flow
porous materials was first given by Darcv, followlng experiments with water, and drop per unrt thickness and the flow rate per unit area and the vrscosttv. lt can be

The empirical formula for the flow of fluids through expresses the proportionality between the pressure written

1)

and assumes

that the losses are all due to viscous

shear

A.2

Viscous

and inertia

flow
porous materials can involve several mechanisms, many of whrch can be operating simultaneously

In reality,

the flow of fluid through

However, experience shows that in the majority of cases involving the flow of fluids through porous metals only three mechanisms are usually involved. They are: viscous flow, inertia flow and slip flow. Inertia flow concerns the loss of energy due to the changes in the direction of the fluid in passing with the viscous loss equation through tortuous porosity of Darcy by Fotchheimer and to the onset of local turbulences in the pores, to give the equation (slip flow usually absent) and has been combineci

AP -=-+ e which tion

Qxrl A

Q2 x P
A2 x
. I//,

x wv

121

is used in 8.3 of this International (2) is usually insignificant compared

Standard. with

However,

at low velocities

of flow

(Q/,-l

the viscous

term and can he ignored

to give the simpler

1of viscous fluids, the lnertla term of equaequation (1).

A.3
Equation

Slip flow
(1) assumes that the pore size IS large compared with a very small pore
sue

with

the mean free path of the molecules gases at reduced is absent. Also, pressure
shp

of the test flurd. Thjs assumntlnn When inertia the mea,) free the When slip flow is present,

is most likely to be invalid path of the gas molecules

and with

or high temperature flow occurs. is present,

approaches

the same order of size as the pores of the metal, than when slip flow In the form

porous metal appears to be more permeable absent, so that equation (2) may be written

when

SII~ flow

losses arc usually

13)

where

tys is the permeability for slip flow

coefficient is given by

with

slip flow

present.

The correction

where is the observed is the true viscous permeability with slip flow present;

V', wv B

VISCOUS

permeability factor, which

coefficrent; is a constant for a given gas and porous material, and has the dlmensrons of a pressure

is the Klinkenberg

7

IS 13782 : 1993 IS0 4022 : 1987

This relationship

between

wS and rc/v may be re-written

in the form

+ WV
L Hence, by measuring (c/~over a range of different pressures (i.e., p1 and& by plotting W,against ~
Pl
n

. ..(5)

a straight

line is obtained. wv. and increasing

+Pz
permeability mass,

The slope of this line is equal to B x v/". The intercept The value temperature of the Klinkenberg factor,

of this line on the v,-axis decreasing pore size,

is equal to the viscosity relative

B increases

with

decreasing

molecular

and viscosity

of the gas.

A.4
Equation

Wall

and end effects
to the flow of fluids, assumes that the porosity is uniformly continuous, whereas at the surfaces of a test piece

(2), relating occur.

discontinuities

There are two

cases to consider: into a container; surfaces of all test pieces.

-

the wall effect the end effect

for test pieces edge-sealed at the upstream

and downstream

In general with granular materials, if the diameter prising the porous metal, the wall effect is usually error is less than about End effects are usually 5 %. negligible when

of the test piece is not less than about 100 times the diameter of the parti'cles comnegligible and with a test piece diameter of about 40 times the particle diameter, the

the test piece thickness the end effect

is not less than 10 times the diameter also depends upon the difference

of the particles the porosity

comprising

the

porous metal. As in the case of the wall effect, and the internal porosity.

between

at the surface

A.5
Equation

Long tubes
(2) (see A.2)

of porous

materials
of area and thickness in 7.1.2, as well as the measurement of the pressure drop in 7.2,

and the calculation

assume that the upstream pressure is uniform for all parts of the specimen. With long small bore tubes this assumption may not be valid. To establish that the error caused by the fall in pressure of the fluid along the bore of the tube is less than 5 %, the following procedures a) can be used: pressure nearest tapping at the end furthest inlet. the permeability of this masked tube when the unmasked porfrom the fluid iniet, and compare this value with the value obtained from

Insert a second tapping

the pressure b) tion the fluid

to the fluid

Mask about is nearest farthest

half of the area of the tube from one end. Measure

to from Compare the two measured permeabilities.

inlet end.

IS13782:1993 Iso4022:1987

Annex

B

Test f kids
(This annex does not form an integral part of the Standard.1

In the majority -

of cases, gases are more convenient to remove

test fluids than liquids. The problems could be captured

with liquids are the following: of the porous metal and thereby

it is more difficult

all solid particles which

by the porosity

change the permeability; dissolved gases may be precipitated within the pores, causing "gas locks" to occur; in measuring the pressure drop;

static heads of liquid may add difficulty liquids are more expensive

and messy to work with; reaction with some liquids, whereby the pore size tends to be reduced;

some metals can have an adsorptive

owing to capillary and surfactant effects, the degree of surface wetting served permeability, especially with porous metals of small pore size. However, Newtonian in rare cases liquids may be used where the permeability liquid and the following precautions are observed

of the pore surface by the liquid can effect the ob-

with respect to a specific liquid is required,

provided that it is a

:

-

the liquid must be free of solid particles and dissolved gases; the whole of the porous metal must be filled with the liquid and no pockets of gas shall be allowed to form either on the sur-

faces or in the pores of the porous metal test pieces. In general, liquids will only give permeability gases are the preferred results concordant with those obtained from gases when the pore size is large. For all

these reasons, However,

test fluids, (2) of annex A is more likely to be required.

with gases inertia losses are more likely to be present and hence equation

Printed at Dee Kay Printers. New Delhi, India

`#

I

I

1 Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau ofIndian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to complv with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Acr, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attenting to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MTD 25 ( 3400 ) Aendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, Telephones

STANDARDS

9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 11002 Maniktola C 331 01 31 331 13 75 (37 $4 99, I 37 86 26, t-53 38 43, `~53 23 84 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

: 331 01 31,

Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan,

NEW DELHI

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

16( 1036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600`113

f235 02 16, 235 04 42 1235 15 19, 235 23 15 l-632 92 95, (1632 78 91, 632 78 51 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches
: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

