NAT HA IS 9981 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


IT SCATS MURRU SUCHT — 
UTC sreetactt 


(FAT GRIT ) 


Agricultural Produce Processing 
Equipment — Glossary of Terms 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 65.060.01 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 4 


Agriculture and Food Processing Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized 
by the Agriculture and Food Processing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


With the increasing emphasis on processing of agricultural produce particularly grains, seeds and fodder a large 
number of equipment are being manufactured and used in the country. A need was therefore, felt to prepare a 
standard giving authentic definitions to the various terms used in relation to these equipment. 


This standard was first published in 1981. The first revision was taken up in the year 2000 to incorporate a number 
of new terminologies and up-date some existing definitions. This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the 
latest technological developments and international practices. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 9981 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE PROCESSING 
EQUIPMENT — GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the definitions of various terms 
relating to agricultural produce processing equipment. 


2 GENERAL TERMS 


2.1 Abrasive — The property of particles of bulk 
materials, when in motion, to wear away the surface 
they are in contact with. 


2.2 Abrasive Polisher — A machine is used to remove 
bran from endosperms, using abrasive action between 
the kernel and the emery stone. 


2.3 Air Lock — An equipment used for introducing or 
removing mill stocks into/from pneumatic conveying 
line. 


2.4 Atomizer — A machine for converting liquid 
material in finely divided spray. 


2.5 Aeration — The process of movement of ambient 
air through grain at low air flow rate. 


2.6 Angle of Internal Friction — The angle whose 
tangent is the coefficient of the internal friction between 
particles. The limit of this angle is a right angle. 


2.7 Angle of Nip — The angle between the roll faces 
at the level where they will just hold a particle or grain 
and draw it into the crushing or husking zone. 


2.8 Angle of Repose — When a granular material is 
allowed to flow freely from a point into a pile, the angle 
which side of pile makes with horizontal plane is called 
angle of repose. 

NOTE — The angle of internal friction and the angle of repose 


are not synonymous because of the presence of interlocking 
and cohesive forces. 


2.9 Aspiration — It is the process of cleaning by 
air blast and separating the foreign material which is 
substantially lower in specific gravity than the produce 
to be cleaned. 


2.10 Polisher Brake — A long rectangular soft rubber 
block placed in an abrasive cone polisher between the 
wire mesh segments for restricting motion of kernels 
around the rotating cone. 


2.11 Aspiration — It is the process of cleaning by 
air blast and separating foreign material which is 
substantially lower in specific gravity than the produce 
to be cleaned. 


2.12 Blower — A device to produce air blast. 


2.13 Block Flow — Diagram showing various sections 
of plant block without detailing individual machines. 


2.14 Carborundum — A synthetic abrasive, whose 
hardness is about two and a half times that of natural 
emery. Chemically it is silicon carbide. 


2.15 Chaffing — Pneumatic separation of very light 
materials from the produce. Also known as winnowing. 


2.16 Cleaning — The removal of foreign or dissimilar 
material by washing, screening, hand picking, 
aspiration or any other means. 


2.17 Colour Sorter — Equipment used for sorting out 
material/grains from stock on the basis of colour set to 
preset standard. 


2.18 Conditioner — A machine in which grain is 
treated with any agent for mellowing purposes. 


2.19 Conditioning — It is the process of changing 
the condition of grain/raw material to suit processing 
requirements. It is ordinarily achieved by addition of 
moisture or drying followed by tempering. 


2.20 Corundum — Naturally available abrasive 
material used in polishers, also called emery. 


2.21 Cracking — Development of fissures, checks or 
sun cracks on grains. 


2.22 Curing — Natural or artificial aging of the 
agricultural produce brought about usually by some 
(dry or wet) heat treatment. 

NOTE — In case of rice, it is the process of steaming freshly 


harvested paddy, so that rice undergoes a little heat treatment 
and attains to some extent the properties of aged rice. 


2.23 Differential Speed — Ratio of speed of faster to 
slower rolls. 


2.24 Diagram — Usually applied to a flow sheet. 


IS 9981 : 2020 


2.25 Dust Collector — A machine for removing dust 
from exhaust air from a mill machinery. 


2.26 Determination — Determination is a unit 
operation to separate oil rich germ from the endosperms 
of the kernel. 


2.27 Degree of Milling — The amount of bran 
removed from the brown rice or seed coat removed 
from coarse grains during the milling operation. It is 
usually expressed as a percentage of the brown rice or 
milled cereals. 


2.28 Dehydration — The removal of moisture to a 
very low level by applying external heat. 


2.29 Drying — The reduction of moisture in a product 
to some predetermined moisture content, usually to 
equilibrium moisture content. 


2.30 Elevator — A conveying equipment having a belt 
with buckets attached for lifting grains. 


2.31 Exhaust — Air suction from any machine/ 
enclosure. 


2.32 Edge Runner — A batch type machine to flatten 
partially cooked and dried paddy to produce rice flakes. 


2.33 Emery Coated Polisher — Emery of specific grit 
size bonded with magnesium oxide and magnesium 
chloride coating on the surface of a roller/cone disc to 
provide necessary abrasion for polishing. 


2.34 Fan — Bladed rotor in a fixed case, for exhaustive 
movement of air. 


2.35 Filter — A chamber containing sleeve filter 
elements to treat dust laden air. 


2.36 Firing — A process of applying heat to dry a 
substance rapidly as in processing tea. 


2.37 Flaking Rolls — A machine for flattening 
partially cooked and dried kernels/grits continuously, 
as the kernels grits pass between a pair of heavy rolls 
in one pass. 


2.38 Flotation — It is a process to remove light 
materials like bran from heavy materials like wheat by 
adding a flotation agent in the water. 


2.39 Flow Sheet — Diagram showing distribution of 
stocks and machines in milling process. 


2.40 Fluidization — Suspension of a layer of grain 
by the upward flowing air. When the frictional force 
between grain and upward flowing air counter balances 
weight of grains, layer of grain is said to be incipiently 
fluidized. 


2.41 Gelatinization — The process by which starch 
granules change to a jelly like form and fill the voids 


in grains and cement fissures together at specific 
temperature. 


2.42 Germination — Growth of the radicle and 
plumule in seed, when the latter absorbs adequate water 
and is placed in a normal environment of temperature 
and humidity. 


2.43 Grading — The process of sorting grains into 
different lots conforming to certain predetermined 
standards. 


2.44 Grader — An equipment to perform grading 
operation. 


2.45 Grain Processing — The process of upgrading 
the quality of grains for improving their marketability, 
storability and suitability for human consumption. 


2.46 Gravity Separator — A machine used for 
classifying and separating products with only slight 
difference in specific gravity differences. 


2.47 Glazer — A machine used for removing the 
adhering bran from kernels under slight pressure to 
impart shine to the kernels. 


2.48 Grinder — A size reduction equipment used to 
pulverize grains/kernels into grits and flours of desired 
size. Main machinery used in the process include burr 
mill, hammer mill, pin mill, disc mill, ball mill, etc. 


2.49 Gyro Sifter — A grader in which whole kernel 
and broken are separated based on size by screening 
after passing them over a set of gyrating screens. Rotary 
or flat sieve could also be used for grading. 


2.50 Grinding — Grinding is a unit operation of size 
reduction of grains or its parts with some dissociation 
of the anatomical parts of the grain from one another. 


2.51 Glazing — Glazing is a unit operation done after 
milling to make kernels shinier or glossier by removing 
adhering particles on the surface. 


2.52 Hulling — Generally refers to the removal of the 
outer shell or outer portion of the seed coat or grain that 
is hull. Hulling also refers to the removal of both hulls 
and bran as in the machine Engelberg Huller. 


2.53 Humidified Polisher — Final friction polisher 
using humidified air for removing adhering bran and 
imparting shine to the milled rice grains. 


2.54 Indented Disc Grader — A grader in which 
whole kernel or seed is separated from broken based on 
length which are picked up in the indents provided on a 
set of revolving discs. 


2.55 Indented Drum/Cylinder Grader — A grader 
in which indents are formed in a cylindrical drum/ 
cylinder and revolves slowly and pick up broken and 


separate them from kernel mass, thus grading based on 
the length. 


2.56 Leaching — The outward diffusion of water 
soluble constituents of kernel into the soak water 
during soaking process. 


2.57 Malt — Designates a product resulting from the 
germination of a cereal grain, which is a rich source 
of hydrolytic enzymes and a main raw material for 
brewing. 


2.58 Malting — Malting involves steeping, germination 
and kilning of sprouted cereals. It improves the 
bio-availability of nutrients, enriches the seed with 
hydrolytic enzymes and improves the aroma. 


2.59 Mesh Opening — Aperture size of wire sieves. 
Normally measured in mm or micron. 


2.60 Mixing — Mixing is a process of distributing as 
uniformly as possible by involving them in complex 
movements. It might be for solid-solid, liquid-liquid, 
liquid-solid, gas-gas, etc. 


2.61 Milling — Refers to removal of hulls and bran 
from harvested and dried grain to produce refined stock. 


2.62 Paddy Separator — A machine used to separate 
the ushelled paddy from the mixture of paddy and 
brown rice obtained after shelling. 


2.63 Packer — A machine used for the filling of sacks 
and closing them. 


2.64 Parboiling — It is the process of gelatinization of 
starch by imparting heat treatment to the soaked paddy 
or any other grains by steaming. 


2.65 Pearling — This is another term used for polishing 
or whitening, mostly used for millets. 


2.66 Peeling — The removal of the outer layer of a 
fruit or vegetable is generally referred as peeling. Also 
known as paring or skinning. 


2.67 Pneumatic Conveying — The movement of 
stocks by use of controlled air currents. 


2.68 Polishing — The removal of outer layer of the 
grain by mechanical operation. It is also known as 
whitening or pearling. 


2.69 Popping — Roasting of conditioned whole grain 
with or without sand media to produce highly crisp, 
porous expanded product without retaining the grain 
shape. Popping is the result of sudden release of water 
vapour (steam) from the interstices of the kernel. 


2.70 Primemover — Initial source of motive power. 


2.71 Pitting — Pitting is a process in which the surface 
of the grain is scratched to impart cracks in husk/hull 


IS 9981 : 2020 


so as to facilitate penetration of oil or water in pulse 
milling. Also known as scratching. 


2.72 Pre-treatment — Pre-treatment is the operation 
of treating the grain in order to loosen the husk or 
hull (seed coat) or ease of milling. The pre-treatment 
consists of water and/or oil application, soaking, drying 
and tempering, light roasting or chemical treatment in 
pulse milling. 


2.73 Plansifter — Plansifter is a flat, horizontal sieve 
with a circular motion imparted at the central point of 
sifter with even number of compartments. The mixture 
to be sieved is fed in at the top, falling from sieve to 
sieve by gravity. 


2.74 Puffing — It is due to sudden release of water 
vapour (steam) in the interstices of the kernel /granule. 
If the roasting of conditioned grain with or without 
sand media produces highly crisp, porous expanded 
product retaining grain shape. 


2.75 Rice Glazing — Polished rice treated with talc 
(and in some cases with glucose). 


2.76 Roasting — Roasting is the High Temperature 
Short Time (HTST) process in which the dry or 
water soaked grains are subjected to dry heating for a 
specified temperature range for a predetermined period 
of time with or without sand media. 


2.77 Roaster — A machine which imparts heat to dry 
or wet grain with or without sand media. 


2.78 Rollers — The unit consists of a pair of cylindrical 
rollers arranged with their axis parallel and set in a 
heavy frame. Rolls may be steel, stone or emery coated. 
They may rotate at same speed or differential speed in 
opposite direction inward. 


2.79 Sampler — A probe for taking samples of grains 
from bags or from bulk containers. Also for taking from 
different depths. 


2.80 Scalping — The process of cleaning in which good 
grains or seeds are dropped through screen openings 
(under flow) while larger material retained (over flow) 
is carried over the screen into a separate outlet. 


2.81 Scarification — Scratching of hard seed coat 
to remove the mechanical barrier to obtain uniform 
germination with better penetration of moisture into 
the seed. 


2.82 Screening — Separation of grains by a mechanical 
device where the desired material is carried over the 
device and the undesired material penetrates the device. 
It is a method of separating particles according to size 
alone. 


2.83 Scouring — Scouring is the process in which 
outer layers (mainly those comprising the husk/hull) 


IS 9981 : 2020 


are partially removed through abrasive action. Also see 
polishing. 


2.84 Seed Processing — The process of upgrading the 
quality of seeds for improving their plantability and 
storability. 


2.85 Seed Treatment — The process of application 
of a thin coat or mixing of chemical (insecticide or 
fungicide or biological agents) over seeds or similar 
applications to provide nutrients or improve the 
storability and protect viability. 


2.86 Sieve Aspirator — A grader which separates 
brokens from kernel mass by means of vibrating 
screens in conjunction with air stream. The traces 
of bran adhering to whole kernel and brokens are 
separated by an aspirator. 


2.87 Separation — It is an operation in which a product 
is separated from other products, using the difference in 
physical, thermal, electrical or any other properties of 
the produce. 


2.88 Shelling — Removal of grains from cobs or 
kernels from pods or husk. 


2.89 Sieving — The separating of desired grains by a 
mechanical device, where the desired grain penetrates 
the device and the undesired material is carried over 
the device. 


2.90 Sifting — It is the process of separating small size 
particle through sieves moved in circular motion. 


2.91 Sifter — This is a machine used in the sieving 
operation of powdery material composed of a surface 
with regular openings having uniform shapes and 
dimensions and positioning in a regular manner as fixed 
in a frame. The surface may be wire mesh or perforated 
sheet metal. 


2.92 Soaking — Process of complete immersion of 
grain in water to attain higher moisture content (upto 
saturation). 


2.93 Sorting — It involves inspection, followed by 
separation according to variety, size, colour, degree of 
ripeness, maturity, defects, etc. It is actually a separating 
operation supplementary to grading. 
NOTE — Sorting is a form of separation of food materials and 
food products at any stage of processing, whereas grading is 


done only during assembly and receipt of raw food materials 
for the purpose of establishing their commercial value. 


2.94 Specific Mass — It is attributed to mass upon 
volume quotient. (kg/m? or g/l) of a liquid or a solid 
body. 


2.95 Steeping — Process of allowing the grain soaked 
in water to attain higher moistrue content with the 


available free moisture after removal from soaking in 
water. 


2.96 Tempering — It is a process wherein the grain 
is held temporarily in a bin, between two drying 
passes, so that the moisture content and temperature 
within the centre of the kernel equalize with 
moisture content and temperature on the surface of 
the grain. 


2.97 Test Weight — Test weight of grain is the weight 
of a known volume of grains. 


2.98 Thickness Grader — A machine which separates 
products on the basis of their thickness. 


2.99 Trieur Cylinder — An indented revolving 
cylinder used for separation based on length. Example: 
Separation of broken from unbroken rice. 


2.100 Under Runner Disc Sheller — A machine 
consisting of two horizontal discs, the top one 
Stationary and the lower one rotating. The discs may 
be emery or stone. This unit is used to remove husk/hull 
from the grain by compression and shear. 


3 GRAIN PROCESSING EQUIPMENT 


3.1 Aspirating Leg 

A vertical duct in which the upward movement of a 
controlled air blast remove lighter grains and impurities 
from vertically falling grain. 

3.2 Conveyor 

An equipment or component through which material is 
moved from one point to other. 

3.3 Cyclone Separator 

It is a separating device in which strong centrifugal 
force acting radially is used in place of relatively weak 
gravitational force acting vertically downwards. 

3.4 Destoner 

A mechanical device which separates stones from the 
grain, based on difference in specific gravity. 

3.5 Double Aspirating Separator 

A separator which uses an aspirating leg both before 
and after sieving. 

3.6 Elevator 


A conveyor in which the material is moved upwards. 


3.7 Friction Polisher 


The type of polisher which operates on the principle 
of removing the bran from the kernel by using 
friction between the rice kernels and the screen in the 
polisher. 


3.8 Gyro Sifter 


A machine in which grains of smaller size are 
separated by passing them over gyrating screens. 
Small sized grains tend to get collected at the centre 
while the larger ones move towards the periphery and 
get separated. 

3.9 Huller 


A machine used for removing the hull from the grain. 


3.10 Maize Sheller 

An equipment to remove maize grain/kernel from 
cobs. 

3.11 Paddy Sheller or Dehusker 

An equipment to remove husk/shell from paddy 
grain. 

3.12 Pre-cleaner 

A separator to remove extraneous matter from grain 
before drying by means of sieves and an air-stream. 
3.13 Reels or Revolving Screens 


Cylindrical screens with slight inclination into which 
the material enters at one end and falls through openings 
into a collecting mechanisms while over-size material 
is discharged at the opposite end. 


3.14 Rice Refining Machine 

The machine to remove fine bran adhering to the kernel 
after whitening operation. 

3.15 Riddle 

Oscillating deck used for holding the grain of specific 
size, usually used in dockage tester. 

3.16 Rubber-Roll Sheller 


A machine used to remove husk from paddy. It consists 
of two rubber rollers, rotating with a differential speed 
in opposite direction inward and the paddy passing- 
between the two surfaces with clearance less than the 
mean thickness of paddy is dehusked by compression 
and shear. 


3.17 Scalper 

An equipment or screen used for pre-cleaning of 
grain. 

3.18 Screw Conveyor 

A type of conveyor in which a long screw is used to 
transport grains horizontally or on inclinations up 
to 30°. 

3.19 Sieve Separator 


A simple separator employing an oscillating sieve. 


IS 9981 : 2020 


3.20 Single Aspirating Separator 


A separator with a single aspirating leg. 


3.21 Steel Huller or Metallic Huller 


A machine used for paddy hulling. It consists of a 
fluted cylinder rotating within a steel screen and 
a steel blade. 


3.22 Under-Run Disc Sheller 


A machine which removes the husk from the paddy. It 
consists of two horizontal discs, the top one stationary 
and the lower one rotating. The discs may be emery or 
stone. This unit is used to remove husk/hull from the 
grain by compression and shear. 


4 ROOT CROP PROCESSING EQUIPMENT 


4.1 Potato Grader or Sorter 


A machine used to grade potatoes according to size. 


4.2 Reciprocating Potato Sorter 
A potato sorter with reciprocating grids. 


4.3 Rotary Potato Sorter 


A potato with a rotating, perforated drum having 
appropriate size of peripheral openings. 


4.4 Spool Type Potato Sorter 


A potato sorter rows of spaced rotating spools. 
5 FODDER PROCESSING EQUIPMENT 


5.1 Chaff Cutter 
A machine with blades for cutting the fodder. 


5.1.1 Cutter Head 

The assembly of the component which actually cuts the 
fodder. This may be of cylinder or fly-wheel type. 
5.1.2 Feed Interference 

The obstruction in advancing the fodder against the 
back of the blades. 

5.1.3 Feed Rolls 

The corrugated or slotted rolls placed one above the 
other to compress the fodder and to hold it firmly while 
cutting takes place. 

5.1.4 Throat of a Chaff-cutter 


The rectangular passage through which the compressed 
fodder passes for cutting. 


5.2 Gandasa 


A iron plate attached to a wooden handle and having 
cutting edge at one side and operated by hand. 


IS 9981 : 2020 


6 MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT 


6.1 Delinter 

A machine used to remove residual lint (fuzz) from 
cotton seed using acid or gas. 

6.2 Groundnut Decorticator 


A machine to separate groundnut kernels from 
pods. 


6.3 Sugarcane Crusher 


A machine used for expression of juice form sugarcane. 


6.3.1 Horizontal Sugarcane Crusher 

A sugarcane crusher in which the crushing rollers are 
placed in horizontal position. 

6.3.2 Vertical Sugarcane Crusher 


A sugarcane crusher in which the crushing rollers are 
placed in vertical position. 


IS 9981 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Agriculture and Food Processing Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 20 


Organization 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 


Central Institute for Research on Cotton Technology, 
Mumbai 


Dr Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi Vidyapeeth, Akola 
Essen Multipack Ltd, Rajkot 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, Bangalore 


Indian Institute of Pulses Research, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow 


Indosaw Industrial Products Pvt Ltd, Ambala 


Mecto Engineers, Ludhiana 


National Committee on Plasticulture Application in 
Horticulture, New Delhi 


Northern Region Farm Machinery Training & Testing 
Institute, Hissar 


OSAW AGRO Industries Pvt Ltd, Ambala 


Post Harvest Technology Centre (TNAU), Coimbatore 


The Solvent Extractors Association of India, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Dr K. ALAGUSUNDARAM (Chairman) 
Dr M. K. Gara 


Dr P. G. PATIL 
Dr V. G. ARUDE (Alternate) 


Dr P. A. BORKAR 
SHRI SHAILDIP WAGH 


Dr KANCHAN K. SINGH 
Dr DevinDER DHINGRA (Alternate) 


Dr S. C. MANDHAR 
Dr SENTHIL KUMARAN (Alternate) 


Dr PRASOON VERMA 


Dr AKHILESH KUMAR SINGH 
Dr S. I. ANwar (Alternate) 


SHRI Vinop H. KALBANDE 
SHRI AJAY SAGAR (Alternate) 


SHRI JAGMOHAN SINGH 
Suri D. M. SinGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND R. ZAMBRE 
Suri RoHIT LALL (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. PANDEY 


SHRI VIJAY SONKUSARE 
SHRI JAGDISH SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr R. VISVANATHAN 
Dr V. THIRUPATHE (Alternate) 


SHRI AKSHAY MoDI 
Dr S. D. DESHPANDE, EX-PRINCIPAL SCIENTIST & 
Heap CIAE, Buopat (In personal capacity) 
SHRI P. RAJESH, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR 
ScIENTIST ‘B’, BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 20 (11325). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


