**************** 


*■  fe^K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


^^Eti^^tt^n  f  im^NS^g^T^^i  ra^g^^uiKSaraaa^ 


IS  8996  (1988) 
Containers] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


20-litre  Steel  Jerricans  [MTD  32:  Metal 


&&&i  f /n^sb^s^  rs^arn^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


UDC  62V798-144[669,141-24]  IS  :  8996-1988 


,  _,•       o.     ./    ^  *■.  (Reaffirmed  1998) 

Indian  Standard  *  v  ' 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
20-LITRE  STEEL  JERRICANS 

(First  Revision) 


1.  Scope  —  Covers  material,  constructional  and  ifefthg  requirements  of  jerricans  made  of  mild  steel 
and  of  nominal  capacity  20  litres. 

2.  Terminology  —  Various  components  of  the  jerrican  have  been  shown  in  Fig.  1  and  2. 

3.  Materials  —  Materials  for  different  components  of  the  jerricans  shall  be  as  follows: 

Part  or  Component  Material  Nominal  Thickness 

a)  Panel  body  "1      Mild  steel  sheet  EDD  quality  10  mm 

!      conforming  to  IS  :  513-1986 

b)  Filler  neck  I      'Specification  for  cold  rolled  low  carbon  1  '6  mm 

J      steel  sheets  and  strips  {third  revision)' 

c)  Filler  cap  ~)  1'6  mm 

d)  Filler  cap  hinge  j  1  "6  mm 

e)  Filler  cap  hinge  bracket  I  Mild  steel  sheet  DD  quality  16  mm 

f)  Seating  ring  retainer  f  conforming  to  IS  :  513-1986  1  0  mm 

g)  Filler  cap  toggle  |  3*25  mm 
h)  Handle  J  125  mm 

j)    Toggle  pin  1  Mild  steel  rivet  conforming  to  5  mm  dia  snap 

(  IS  :  1148-1982  'Specification  for  hot  head  rivet 

y  rolled  steel  rivet  bars  (  up  to  40  mm 

k)     Hinge  pin  I  diameter  )  for  structural  purposes  4  mm  dia 

J  ( third  revision )  rivet 

m)   Air  tube  Mild  steel  tubing,  seamless,  cold  drawn, 

of  8  mm  ODx  0*914  mm  or  13  mm 
ODxO'914  mm 

n)    Washer  Polyethylene  or  synthetic  rubber  of  suitable 

composition  which  shall  be  resistant  to 
petroleum  action  on  it 

4.  Manufacture 

4.1  Body  —  The  panel  bodies  shall  be  neatly  pressed  to  shape  and  marking  embossed  at  the  specified 
position  on  one  of  the  panels.  The  circular  opening  at  the  top  for  fitting  the  filler  neck  assembly  shall 
be  neatly  punched.  The  edges  of  the  panels  shall  be  aligned  properly  for  the  full  depth  all  round. 
They  shall  then  be  joined  together  by  welding  all  round.  The  fusion  shall  be  sufficiently  deep  so  as  to 
render  the  joint  adequately  strong  to  withstand  the  drop  test  specified  in  7.5. 

4.2  Filler  Neck  Assembly  —  The  components  of  filler  neck  assembly  shall  be  fabricated  to  correct  size 
and  shape  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  The  seating  ring  retainer  and  the  filler  cap  hinge  shall  be  fixed  on  to 
the  filler  cap  and  the  cap  hinge  bracket  on  to  the  neck  by  means  of  spot/gas  welding.  The  air  vent  tube 
shall  be  formed  to  shape  and  welded  to  the  neck  in  its  position.  The  filler  cap  toggle  shall  be  fitted  to 
the  filler  cap  by  means  of  a  toggle  pin  and  the  filler  cap  hinged  on  to  the  neck  by  means  of  hinge  pin. 

4.3  General  Arrangement 

4.3.1  The  triple  handle  shall  be  welded  at  places  shown  in  Fig.  1 .  A  sealing  hole   of  3  mm   diameter 
shall  be  provided  in  the  handle  just  behind  the  filler  neck. 

4.3.2  The  filler  neck  assembly  shall  be  welded  on  to  the  hole  in  the  left  hand  panel  all  round. 

4.3.3  After  manufacture,  the  jerrican  shall  be  annealed  to  remove  working  and  welding  stresses. 

4.4  Protective  Treatment —  The  jerrican  shall  be  thoroughly  cleaned  free  of  dirt,  grease,  weld  scale, 
rust  and/or  rust  stains  both  inside  and  outside  and  then  given  a  coating  as  agreed  to  between  the 
purchaser  and  the  supplier. 


Adopted  8  August  1988 


©  January  1989,  BIS 


Gr  2 


BUREAU     OF      INDIAN      STANDARDS 

MANAK     BHAVAN,    9     BAHADUR     SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 

NEW  DELHI  11OO02 


IS  :8996  -  1988 


TOGGLE 


HANDLE 


BODY 


FILLER   NECK 


(__) 


« 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
FIG.  1     20-LITRE  JERRICAN 


seating  ring.    The  washer  shall  be 


4.5  The  filler  cap  shall  be  provided  with  washer  synthetic  rubber 
fitted  after  thoroughly  dusting  it  with  French  chalk. 

5.  Workmanship  and  Finish 

5.1  The  jerrican  shall  be  free  from  splits,  cracks,  dents,  wrinkles,  puckers,  burrs,  sharp  corners  and 
other  defects.  The  welding  of  the  body  seams  shall  be  uniform  and  sound  and  shall  be  free  from 
porosity  and  craters.  The  body  seam  at  the  bottom  and  bottom  corners  shall  not  project  beyond  the 
base  so  that  the  jerrican  shall  stand  firmly  on  level  ground  without  rocking.  The  remaining  portions  of 
the  body  seam  may  project  out  up  to  1  mm. 

5.2  The  paint  film  both  on  the  interior  and  the  exterior  shall  be  hard,  flexible,  firmly  adherent  and  free 
from  bare  spots  and  the  painted  surfaces  shall  be  even  and  smooth  all  over.  It  shall  also  be  ensured 
that  no  exterior  paint  has  flown  into  the  interior  of  the  jerrican  during  painting. 

5.3  The  filler  neck  assembly  shall  form  an  easy  and  leakproof  closure.  The  prongs  of  the  toggle  shall 
close  in  position  fully  and  securely  when  pressed  with  the  thumb  near  the  sealing  hole  of  the  toggle. 
The  required  pressure  shall  increase  gradually  with  slight  slackening  off  in  the  final  stage. 


IS:  8996  -1988 


TOGGLE   PIN 
FILLER  CAP  TOGGLE 


4.5  CONSTANT 


SEATING  RING 
RETAINER 


FILLER    CAP 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
FIG.  2     FILLER  NECK  ASSEMBLY 

6.  Dimensions 

6.1  The  jerrican  shall  conform  to  the  dimensions  as  shown  in  Fig.  1  and  2. 

7.  Tests 

7.1  Air  Leakage  Test — Each  jerrican  shall  be  subjected  to  an   internal  air  pressure  of  70  kPa   while 
fully  immersed  under  water.     It  shall  show  no  sign  of  leakage. 

7.1 .1  The  air  leakage  test  shall  be  carried  out  before  the  jerricans  are  painted. 

7.1.2  Care  shall  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  water  does  not  enter  into    the  jerricans  during  or  after 
the  test. 


7.2  Hot  Water  Test  —  The  jerrican  with  the  filler  cap  tightly  closed  shall  be  immersed  in  a  hot  water 
bath  maintained  at  50°C,  Min  for  not  less  than  60  seconds.  During  this  test,  it  shall  not  show  any  sign 
of  leakage  indicated  by 'bubbles' immediately  after  the  removal  of  the  jerrican  from  the  hot  water.  A 
hissing  sound  shall  be  clearly  audible  on  opening  the  cap. 

7.3  Hydraulic  Pressure  Testing  —  The  jerrican  shall  net  leak  when  subjected  to  an  internal  hydraulic 
pressure  of  280  kPa  kept  steady  for  a  period  of  not  less  than  30  seconds. 

7.4  Pouring  Test  —  The  jerrican  shall  be  filled  with  20  litres  of  water  and  then  poured  out  slowly.  The 
pouring  shall  be  guggle  free  and  the  filler  cap  shall  not  fall  on  to  the  neck  during  the  pouring  operation. 

7.5  Drop  Test  —  The  jerrican  shall  be  filled  with  20  litres  of  water  and  the  cap  tightly  closed.  The 
jerrican  shall  then  be  suspended  diagonally  and  dropped  thrice;  one  drop  on  each  bottom  corner;  and 
one  on  the  hump,  falling  free  upon  an  even  and  solid  concrete  floor  from  a  height  of  240  m. 


IS  :  8996-1988 

7.5.1  At  the  conclusion  of  three  drops,  the  jerrican  shall  not  leak  and  the  internal   paint  coat  shall 
not  erase  or  flake  off. 

7.5.2  If  there  is  no  leakage,  the  jerrican  shall  be  emptied  and  subjected  to  an  internal  air  pressure  of 
70  kPa  while  immersed  under  water.  The  jerrican  shall  not  show  any  sign  of  leakage. 

7.6  Dimensions  —  The  components  of  filler  neck  assembly  shall  be  individually  tested  by  gauges. 

7.7  Hardness    Testing —  The  toggle  pin   and   hinge  pin   when  tested  for  hardness  shall  have  Brinell 
hardness  of  not  more  than  133  HB. 

8.  Sampling  —  Representative  samples   of  jerricans  shall   be  taken  for  tests   in   accordance  with 
IS  :  3259-1966  'Methods  for  sampling  of  metal  containers'. 

9.  Marking  —  Each  jerrican  shall  be  legibly  embossed  on  the  left  hand  panel  with  the  manufacturer's 
name,  initials  or  recognized  trade-mark  and  the  year  of  manufacture  or  lot  number  or  batch  number. 

9.1  Standard  Marking  —  Details  available  with  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 


EXPLANATORY     NOTE 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1978  and  has  been  revised  to  incorporate  the  details  of 
material  thickness  for  different  components  of  jerricans  in  clause  3.1.  Dimensions  of  the  assembly  and 
the  components  where  felt  necessary  for  interchangeability  or  proper  fitting  of  the  components  have 
been  specified  and  other  dimension  and  manufacturing  details  have  been  left  to  the  manufacturer's 
discretion. 

The  jerricans  have  been  conventionally  in  use  for  storage  and  transportation  of  petroleum  reserve 
fuels.  Their  ruggedness  and  handy  design  makes  them  indispensable  for  the  Defence  requirements. 
This  standard  is  based  on  the  Defence  specification  IND/GS/1131  Jerricans— 20  litres,  issued  by  the 
Chief  Inspectorate  of  General  Stores,  Kanpur. 


Printed  at  Printrade,  New  Delhi,  India 


