**************** 



* i&$z 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10013-1 (1981): water soluble type wood preservatives, 
Part 1: Acid-copper-chrome (ACC) preservative [CED 9: 
Timber and Timber Stores] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



?&&IiII}g&*±2te 



^\i»i>^/a^> 



\\\«ktc 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR V^ T^TT <sMHI | 3ft ^ft ^FT\ ^f W *T^?TT )f 
Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




• 



• 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



^ *g», 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 10013 ( Parti J ■ 198) 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) , , 

Indian Standard ' c 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

WATER SOLUBLE TYPE WOOD 
PRESERVATIVES 

PART I ACID-COPPER-CHROME ( ACC ) PRESERVATIVE 



l.'IK: 1,71-1^8 : U,\ • 




@ Copyright 1PR2 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

M\\\K BHAVAN, 9 BAtlAXJLIE SHAH 3SAFAR WARG 

NEW 131 LI! I i ]C0l>J 



I *» Gr 8 



i ( irch I 



IS : 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

WATER SOLUBLE TYPE WOOD 

PRESERVATIVES 

PART I ACID-COPPER-CHROME ( ACC ) PRESERVATIVE 

Timber Sectional Committee, BDC 9 

Chairman Representing 

Inspector General ok Forkkts Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation 

Members 

Shri S. S. AmTYANKAR Engincci --in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

( Ministry of Defence ) 
Shki S. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Adihtiomai, In.spkctok OifflKii Aii Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation 

of Forests 
Shui S. K. Ban'khjek National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. K. Kanitnco ( Alternate ) 
Ciiiek Conservator ok Forests, Agriculture, Forests and Co-operation Department, 
Vadooar.a Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad 

Additional Cuiee Conser- 
vator OF F O R E S T b, 
Vadodara ( Alternate ) 
Director Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 
Director, Forest Research Forest Department, Government of Karnataka, 

and Utilization Bangalore 

Director ( Track ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Joint Director ( Works ) ( Alternate ) 
Cmde V. P. Gak« Naval Headquarters ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Assistant Industrial Manager ( Alternate ) 
Sjiri H. H. Hinodr ani Forest Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 

Lucknow 
Shrt K. S. Lauly Federation of Indian Plywood and Panel Industry, 

New Delhi 
Executive Dtrector ( Alternate ) 
ShkiJ. S. Math a kit Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. V. Meiita ( Alternate ) 
Dn A. N. Naver In personal capacity ( C-59, Inderpnri, New Delhi ) 

Shri J.N. Pandey Biliar State Forests Development Corporation Ltd, 

Patna 
Shri B. M. Prasad { Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

President Indian Academy of Wood Science, Dehra Dun 

General Secretary ( Alternate ) 
Di: S. K. Purkayastha Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Wood 

Anatomy Branch ), Dehra Dun 
Dk A. PukUShOtham Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay 

Dr V. Ranganathan In personal capacity ( C 28-C, N Block, Malviya Naoar 

Exln s Sakel, Mew Delhi I JO 0j7 ) 
Shut G. V. Rao Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shiu U. B. Kanchan ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. S. Ratba National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Representative Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Suit I J. K. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shiu S. N. Sanyal Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Timber 

Mechanics Branch ), Dehra Dun 
Shiu A. C. Sekhaii In personal capacity ( 26 S.B.H. Colony, P.O, 

Srinagar, Hyderabad 500 873 ) 
Suki SharaN Small Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Suri F. C. Shakma Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism and Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
Shri G. Raman, Director General, 1SI ( Ex -officio Member ) 



Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Secretary 

Shut J. R. Mehta 
Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ). TSl 



Timber Seasoning and Treatment Subcommittee, BDC 9 : 3 

Convener 

Dr. A. Purushoth am Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay 

Member* 

ShriS. R. Bhatnagar Castrol Ltd, Bombay 

Shiu R. A. Savour ( Alternate ) 
Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of Assam, Dispur 
Forest Officer, Timber 
Treatment Plant ( Alternate ) 
Chief Conservator of Forests Forest Department, Government of Karnataka, 
( Development ) Bangalore 

Director of Forest 
Research and Utili- 
zation ( Alternate ) 
Chtef Conservator oh' Forests Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra, 

Bombay 
Forest Utilization Officer 
( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 7 ) 



IS : 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

WATER SOLUBLE TYPE WOOD 

PRESERVATIVES 

PART I ACID-COPPER-CHROME ( ACC ) PRESERVATIVE 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 29 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 With the rapid industrial development of the country, coupled 
with increased construction activity alround, the demand for timber for 
various purposes has greatly increased. In view of the limited avail- 
ability of naturally durable species, such as teak ( Tectona grandis ) and 
sal ( Shorea rubusta ), it. is imperative that supplies of durable timbers are 
augmented by selected timbers of lesser durability which, when suitably 
treated, would give increased life under service conditions. Preservative 
treatment of timber, therefore, forms a very important part of the 
national effort to conserve the material resources of the country, and to 
achieve their most enconomic utilization. 

0.3 IS : 401-1981* covers types of preservative, methods of treatment, 
and the type and choice of treatment for different species of timber for 
a number of uses. The standard also lists various oil type, organic 
solvent type, and water-soluble ( leachable ) and water-soluble ( fixed ) 
type preservatives. The efficiency of preservative treatment depends, 
besides the proper choice of preservative and the treatment process, on 
the quality of the preservative to ensure required absorption and 
penetration of the preservative. This standard has been formulated 
to jay down requirements of acid-copper-chrome ( ACC ) — a water- 
soluble ( fixed ) type of preservative. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given 
to international co-ordination among the standards and practices pre- 
vailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices 
in the field in this country. 



*C<>Ue of pvanu'e tor preservation of timber f third revision ). 

3 



IS : 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whetlier a particular requirement of 
th\s standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified valuie 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements for acid-copper-chrome, -a 
water-soluble ( fixed ) type wood preservative specified for treatment of 
timber and other lignocellnlosic materials as given in IS : 40l-1981f. 

1.2 This specification covers the composition of the preservative, quality 
of chemicals forming this composition, and sampling procedure for 
analysis. 

1.3 The analysis procedures for different ingredients have been covered 
in TS : 2753 ( Part I )-l%4J. 

2. COMPOSITION AND PROPERTIES OF PRESERVATIVE 

2.1 Acid-copper-chrome preservative formulation shall consist of the 
following active ingredients in nominal proportions by weight as shown 
below: 

Chromic acetate/boric acid Cr ( C 2 H ;1 2 ^.H./) 5 

Copper sulphate CuSO t .5H 2 50 

Sodium dichromate Na 2 Cr207.2H 2 ") 

Or > 45 

Potassium dichromate K^C^O? J 

2.1.1 The percentage of any of the ingredients shall not be less than 
proportions shown below: 

Chromic acetate/boric acid Cr ( C 2 H 3 2 ) 3 .H 2 4 - 75 

Copper sulphate CuS0 4 .5H 2 47"50 

Sodium dichromate Na 2 Cr 2 7 .2H 2 1 

Or }■ 42-50 

Potassium dichromate K 2 Cr 2 7 J 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
tCode of practice for preservation of timber ( third revision ). 

^Method for estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in treating solutions: 
Part I Determination of copper, arsenic, chromium, zinc, boron, creosote and fuel oil. 



IS : 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

2.2 The preservative may be in a dry solid form, semi-liquid paste or 
solution. 

2.3 pU Value — The pH value of solution ready for use shall not be 
lower than 2 '7 nor higher than 4'2 when determined by means of a 
glass electrode at 15'5 C. 

2.4 In case of dry solid, the preservative shall contain not less than 95 
percent of the active ingredients mentioned under 2.1. 

2.4.1 In all cases the percentage of active ingredients, total active 
compounds and amount of moisture shall be labelled on the container 
as well as descriptive literature of the product. 

2.5 Each of the chemicals used for such formulation shall be not less 
than of 95 percent purity. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Samples shall be taken from requisite number of drums out of the 
supply made at one particular time as per sampling procedures laid 
down in IS : 4905-1968*. 

3.2 In case of solution or paste, the same shall be thoroughly mixed with 
a rod and at least 1 kg sample shall be taken for chemical analysis from 
each drum. 

3.3 In case of dry powder form, a true representative sample of the 
materia], not less than one percent of the contents shall be taken for 
analysis. 

3.4 At least 1 kg of the preservative shall be dissolved to obtain 15 
percent solution of the preservative. 

3.5 A small amount of the 15 percent solution may be drawn and 
diluted exactly to 5 percent for chemical analysis. 

4. TESTING 

4.1 The chemical analysis of the soultion with respect to its various in- 
gredients shall be carried out according to the methods of estimation 
given in 3.4 of IS : 2753 ( Part I )-1964-f. The proportion of all 
chemicals shall comply with 2.1 and 2.1.1. 

♦Methods for random sampling. 

■{■Methods for estimation of preservatives in treated timber and in treating solutions: 
Part I Determination of copper, arsenic, chromium, zinc, boron, creosote and fuel oil. 

5 



IS : 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each container shall be legibly marked with the following 
information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, if any; 

b) Date of manufacture; and 

c) Percentage of dry active ingredients. 

5.1.1 The container may also be marked with the LSI Certification 
Mark. 

Note — The use of the I SI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products are also continuously cheeked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



IS t 10013 ( Part I ) - 1981 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Members Representing 

District Fokest Officer, Forest Department, Government ofAndhra Pradesh, 

Hyderabad 
Director Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, 

Bangalore 
Dr. S. An-antiianaravanan ( Alternate ) 
Director ( Track ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Joint Director ( Works } ( Alternate ) 
Shim J. C.Jain Forest Research Institute and Colleges (Forest 

Research Laboratory ), Bangalore 
Supt Y. K. Laiii.v The Curdit Institute Pvt Ltd, Dharwar 

Ok Bidmi Sinoh Rains ( Alternate) 
Shut J. S. MatHaru Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shut V, V. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Dii R. S. Ratra National Buildings Organization, N« w Delhi 

Shui S. N. Sharma Forest Research Institute and Colleges ( Wood 

Seasoning Branch ), Dehra Dun 
Shtu Shiromani S harm a Development Commissioner for Handicrafts, 

New Delhi 
Shki V. C. Shukla ( Alternate ) 
Siiri J. K. Sinma Ministry of Defence ( DGl ) 

Shrt Gol \m A lam ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. R. Sonti Asai Hickson Ltd, Calcutta 

Suit i S. Shiva.fi ( Alternate ) 
Du M. C. Tkwaiu Forest Research Institute and Colleges ( Wood 

Preservation Branch ), Dehra Dun 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS 

Base Units 

Unit 



QUANTITY 

Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric current 

Thermodynamic 
temperature 

Luminous intensity 

Amount of substance 

Supplementary Units 

Quantity 

Plane angle 

Solid angle 

Derived Units 

Quantity 

Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 



Unit 

new ton 

joule 
watt 
webei 
tesla 
hertz 
Siemens 
volt 
pascal 



Symhol 



metre 


in 


kilogram 


kg 


second 


s 


ampere 


A 


kelvin 


K 


candela 


i-(! 


mole 


niol 


Unit 


Symbol 


radian 


rad 


steradian 


sr 



Symhol 

N 

J 

VV 
Wb 
1 

H z 
S 
V 
Pa 



Definition 



1 N « 1 kg.m/s* 

1 .}-l N.m 

1 W = 1 J/s 

I Wh = 1 V.s 

1 T = 1 Wb/m 

1 Hz - 1 c/s (s" 1 ) 
1 S = 1 A/V 
1 V - 1 W/A 

I Pa = 1 N/m" 



