NAT HA IS 11563 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Teach dica ch fers 
a strate cht areca 


( Teel JAQ ) 


Technical Supply Conditions for 
Dynamic Compressors 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.140 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay feet — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2022 Price Group 11 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This Indian Standard was first published in 1986. The first revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. In this revision following major changes have been made: 
a) Clause 2 has been added mentioning the latest version of all the referred standards; 
b) Clauses 7.1.3, 7.1.4. 9.1.8, 9.2.2, 9.3.3, 9.5.1, 9.6.3, 9.12.2, 9.15.2, 9.18.1, 12.3.6 and 14.3.1 have 
been modified; 
c) Anew type ofseal called dry gas seal has been added as clause 9.15.3 (e); and 
d) Anew clause 11.3 has been added. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITIONS FOR 
DYNAMIC COMPRESSORS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


It covers the minimum requirements for the supply of 
dynamic compressors used for handling air, gas, or gas 
mixtures. It excludes such machines which are termed 
as fans and blowers. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards mentioned in Annex A contain provisions 
which through their reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibilities of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 ENQUIRY SPECIFICATIONS 


It is necessary for the customer to furnish the vendor 
with a clear technical specification so that a satisfactory 
offer may be made. Annex B gives all the important 
information to be given by the customer at the time of 
enquiry. 

If the compressors are to operate in parallel with the 
existing units, the customer shall provide the vendor 
with the characteristics of the compressors, which are 
already in operation. 


4 ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS 


The vendor shall offer alternative designs if required. 


5 CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS 


In case of conflict between this standard and the enquiry 
or order, the agreement reached between the customer 
and the vendor shall form a part of the order and this 
shall govern the supply. 


6 TERMINOLOGY 


6.1 Terms used in this standard are defined as under 
(see Fig. 1): 


a) The normal operating point (B) is the one at which 
usual operation is foreseen and optimum efficiency 
is desired. Unless specified otherwise, compressor 
performance shall be guaranteed at this point. 


b) Compressor rated point (D) is determined as: 


1) The highest speed required to meet any 
operating point specified; and 

2) The rated capacity required by the compressor 
to meet all operating points. The vendor 
shall select this point such that the capacity 
encompasses, to the best, specified operating 
conditions within the scope of the expected 
performance curve. 


c) Normal speed is the one corresponding to the 
requirements of the normal operating point. 


d) 100 percent speed is the one corresponding to the 
requirements of the rated point (D). This speed 
can be equal to or greater than the normal speed 
for motor-driven, compressors, 100 percent speed 
shall be equal to gear ratio times (if gearboxes 
are used) the full load speed of the motor being 
furnished. 


e) Maximum continuous speed is the upper limit 
of the operating speed of the compressor. Unless 
stated otherwise, the maximum continuous speed 
shall be 105 percent of the speed of the compressor 
rated point (B) for variable speed machines. 


f) Trip speed for steam turbine drives shall be 
approximately 110 percent of the maximum 
continuous speed. 


wa 


Trip speed for gas turbine drives shall be 
approximately 105 percent of the maximum 
continuous speed. 


8 


h) Stability is the percentage variation in capacity 
(referred to as rated capacity) between the rated 
capacity and the surge point at rated speed. 


j) Turndown is the percentage variation in capacity 
(referred to as rated capacity) between the rated 
capacity and the surge point at the rated head when 
the compressor is operated with design suction 
parameters and gas composition. 


k) Maximum casing working pressure is the highest 
pressure that can exist in the compressor under 
the most severe operating conditions. It shall be 
either: 

1) The maximum suction pressure to be 
encountered plus the maximum differential 
pressure, that the compressor is capable of 


IS 11563 : 2022 


developing while operating under the most 
severe combination of conditions at trip speed; 
and 


2) The safety valve set pressure specified by the 
customer. 


m) Maximum casing design pressure is the one for 
which the casing is suitable, irrespective of the 
actual working conditions. 


6.2 Customer’s specification shall avoid the term 
‘design operating point’ since this shall be used 
exclusively by the compressor designer. It may or may 
not conform to any specified operating point. 


7 CONTRACT INFORMATION 
7.1 Drawings 


7.1.1 The customer shall state in his enquiry and order, 
the period within which the drawings shall be submitted. 
The customer and the vendor shall agree upon the list 
of drawings that shall be submitted for review. 


7.1.2 Review of the vendor’s drawings shall be made 
promptly, after receipt by the customer. 


7.1.3 The vendor shall furnish an electronic copy of 
the outline dimensional drawings of the compressor 
unit. The following information shall be included on 
the outline drawings, other related drawings and data 
sheets, as applicable: 


a) Customer’s order number, item number of the 
equipment, job number, name of the project and 
location. 


b 


wm 


Weights of the compressor, driver, gearbox base 
plate, top casing half and the rotor (for horizontally 
split compressors) or diaphragm rotor pack 
(for vertically split casings). 


Cc 


— 


All principal dimensions including those required 
for designing the foundation and piping by the 
customer, maintenance clearances and maximum 
loading limits on the flanges (forces and moments) 
and thermal growth data. This includes any 
requirements of a straight length of gas inlet 
piping or for vane straightening. 


d 
e 


The direction of rotation. 


YS wm 


Size, type, location, identification and proposed 
use of each pipe and conduit connection including 
those which shall be plugged. 

f) Auxiliary piping, fittings or equipment furnished 
by the vendor. 


g) Make, size and type of couplings. 


h) Complete list of reference drawings including 
those for the driver, lube-oil system, sealing 
system, controls and the control panel (if any). 


7.1.4 Assembly drawings including general 
arrangement drawings and cross-sectional drawings of 
the compressor and all the auxiliaries such as oil pumps, 
relief valves, couplings, seals, etc shall be provided. 


7.1.5 The vendor shall furnish a list of relevant fits, 
clearances and balancing data required for maintenance, 
repair and assembly. 


7.2 Instruction Manuals and Other Data 


7.2.1 The vendor shall furnish instruction manuals 
describing installation, operation and maintenance 
procedures not later than the date of shipment of 
equipment. The instruction manuals shall include 
drivers, auxiliaries and instruments furnished by the 
vendor. 


The instruction manual shall: 


a) be organized and indexed by principal equipment 
items and systems. 


b) include written instructions covering 
start-up, normal shut-down, emergency 
shut-down, operating limits and routine 


operational procedures. 


c 


ma 


include the written sequence of installation and 
final tests and checks for the equipment furnished 
by the vendor (reference may also be made to the 
installation and testing details covered elsewhere 
in this standard). 


describe constructional features of the compressors 
and the function of the component parts or system. 


d 


— 


e 


== 


include an outline and sectional drawings, 
schematics and illustrative sketches in adequate 
detail to identify all parts and special equipment 
and clearly show the operation of all equipment 
and components and the methods of inspection 
and repair. 


f) include instructions for erecting, piping, aligning 
and preparing the compressor and its auxiliary 
equipment for use. 


g) describe the rigging procedures and the methods 
of disassembly, repair, adjustment, inspection and 
reassembly of the compressor and its auxiliaries. 


h) furnish completed, ‘as built’ data sheets and 
performance curves. 


7.2.2 The vendor shall submit a supplementary offer for 
spare parts, including all auxiliaries, other than those 
mentioned in 8.1.2. The offer shall include recommended 
spare parts, illustrative sectional drawings reference 
numbers, price and delivery. Reference number shall 
identify each part for interchangeable purposes without 
the need to refer to the serial number of the compressor. 
Commercially available and bought out items shall be 
identified by the original manufacturer’s reference 


numbers. This supplementary offer shall be forwarded 
to the customer promptly after the receipt of approved 
drawings from the sub-vendors and in time to permit 
ordering and delivery of parts prior to start up at the 
sıte. 


7.2.3 After the receipt of the order, the vendor shall 
furnish the polytropic head and polytropic efficiency 
versus capacity curve for each stage and an overall curve 
for the compressor. After completing the inspection and 
tests, the vendor shall furnish for each compressor the 
required copy of performance curves (as designed, for 
compressors that were not given a performance test at 
the shop), and the vendor’s mechanical run test report. 
The actual diameter of impellers supplied and the surge 
curve shall be shown on the performance curves. All 
curves and data sheets shall bear the serial number of 
the compressor. 


7.2.4 Wherever the compressor vendor furnishes the 
driver, complete data regarding the driver, including 
‘as built’ datasheets, shall be furnished. 


7.2.5 For motor-driven compressors, the vendor shall 
forward the data as given below: 


a) Efficiency and power factor at 50, 75 and 
300 percent ratings. 


b) Locked rotor current and full load current. 


c) Speed versus torque characteristics for the 
compressor, and motor at rated voltage and 
specified reduced voltage. The curve shall mention 
separately the inertia GD? of the motor along 
with the resultant GD? of the driven equipment 
(resolved to the motor shaft) and the calculated 
time for acceleration to full speed at the specified 
voltage. 


d) Permissible locked rotor time in seconds. 


e) Permissible number of consecutive starts when 
the motor is cold and hot. 


7.2.6 The vendor shall furnish the lateral critical speed 
maps and torsional analysis reports within the period 
agreed with the customers. The lateral critical speed 
analysis shall be based on the actual stiffness of the 
rotor-bearing system. 


7.2.7 The vendor shall furnish a report on the noise 
level measurements when specified. 


8 OFFER PROPOSALS 


8.1 General 


8.1.1 The offer shall furnish complete descriptive 
information of the equipment the vendor proposes to 
supply, including necessary drawings, diagrams and 
data. The vendor shall submit the data sheets duly filled 
to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, the 
following information shall be supplied: 


IS 11563 : 2022 


a) Expected noise levels for the individual 
components of the train and the entire train. 


b) Installation list of similar machines. 


c) Details of the driver (if furnished by compressor 
manufacturer) including typical drawings, control 
details and applicable datasheets. 


8.1.2 The vendor shall furnish a price list for spare 
rotors, bearings, seals and other components which are 
subject to wear. 


8.1.3 The vendor shall outline in the offer all necessary 
special weather and seasonal protection required by 
the compressor, auxiliaries and driver (if furnished by 
compressor vendor) for startup operation and standstill. 
The vendor shall quote separately the protective items 
he proposes to furnish. 


8.1.4 The offer shall include a separate proposal covering 
the services of the vendor’s erection supervisor. 


8.1.5 The offer shall include either a specific statement 
that all equipment is in strict conformity with the 
customer’s specification or a specific list of deviations 
therefrom. The deviation may include alternative 
proposals to those specified. 


8.2 Drawings 


8.2.1 Each offer shall be accompanied by a preliminary 
outline dimensional drawing indicating the location of 
the inlet and discharge connection and the direction of 
rotation when viewing the compressor from the driver 
end. 


8.2.2 Drawings showing details of construction 
including shaft sealing details, bearing details and 
internal construction shall be submitted with the offer. 


8.2.3 When interstage coolers are furnished by the 
vendor, he shall provide data for the customer’s heat and 
water balances and details of provisions for separation 
and withdrawal of condensate. The offer shall include 
drawings that show cooling system details. 


8.2.4 Details and description of operation 
instrumentation and controls, as well as the makes, 
materials and type of auxiliary equipment’s, shall be 
submitted. 


8.3 Performance Curves 


8.3.1 Steam and Gas Turbine Driven Compressors 


The following performance curves for each compressor 
shall be included in the offer: 


a) Discharge pressure, absorbed shaft power versus 
inlet capacity (from surge point to 115 percent 
rated capacity) ofthe compressor at specified inlet 
pressure, temperature and molecular weight of the 
gas at 80, 90, 100 and 105 percent of the rated 
speed. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


b) Steam flow through the turbine under the above 
conditions based on normal steam conditions and 
steam flow at maximum power and under the most 
adverse steam conditions. 


c 


wa 


Fuel flow for the gas turbine under the above 
conditions based on normal fuel and site ambient 
conditions and fuel flow at maximum power and 
under the most adverse fuel and site ambient 
conditions. 


8.3.2 Motor Driven Compressors 


The following performance curves for each compressor 
shall be included in the offer: 


a) Discharge pressure, absorbed shaft power versus 
capacity (from surge point to 115 percent rated 
capacity) of the compressor at specified suction 
pressure, temperature and speed. Absorbed shaft 
power shall include losses in the speed changer 
or the hydraulic coupling. Alternate operating 
conditions envisaging throttling shall be shown on 
the performance curve. 


b 


wm 


Torque to overcome friction and wind-age versus 
speed for the compressor including any gearbox, 
under normal starting conditions (closed suction) 
and including load torque with specified suction 
conditions for emergency starting (open suction). 


c 


— 


Motor torque versus speed at rated voltage and 
80 percent ofrated voltage. 


d) Motor current versus speed at rated voltage and 
80 percent ofrated voltage. 


e) GD? for the compressor, gearbox and the motor 
referred to motor speed. 


f) Estimated timings for acceleration for closed 
suction and open suction with 80 percent rated 
voltage unless specified otherwise. 


8.4 Shipment 


The shipment date shall be indicated in the vendor’s 
offer and shall be reckoned from the date of receipt of 
order. 


8.5 Warranty and Guarantee 


Unless a specific exception is recorded by the vendor 
in his offer, it shall be understood that the vendor 
guarantees and agrees to the following: 


a) The compressors shall be guaranteed for head, 
capacity and satisfactory performance and in every 
other respect at all specified operating points. The 
absorbed shaft power shall be guaranteed at the 
normal operating point (see Fig. 1). 


1) For variable-speed compressors, the head 
and capacities shall be guaranteed with the 
understanding that the shaft power may vary 


by + 4 percent. The operating speeds specified 
in the offer are not guaranteed. But where 
changes in specified speeds are needed to meet 
the head requirements, the vendor shall adjust 
the operating range such that the new speed 
range is not closer to a critical or trip speed by 
the percentages indicated in 9.17.1. 


2) For constant speed compressors, the specified 
capacity shall be guaranteed with the 
understanding that the head shall be within 
+5 and 0 percent of the specified one, the 
absorbed shaft power corrected to specified 
head-capacity conditions in accordance with 
the latest practice. Power test codes shall not 
exceed the stated shaft power by more than 
4 percent. Pressure levels at side load 
conditions shall be guaranteed as agreed to 
between the customer and the vendor. 


b) All equipment’s and component parts shall be 
guaranteed by the vendor against faulty design, 
defective or improper materials, poor workmanship 
and failure from normal usage for one year after 
erection but not exceeding 18 months from the 
date of shipment. If any defects or malfunction 
occur during the guarantee period, the vendor 
shall make all necessary alterations, repairs and 
replacements free of charge (ex-works). Field 
labour charges for this shall be negotiated between 
the customer and the vendor. 


9 BASIC DESIGN 


9.1 General 


9.1.1 Compressors, drivers and auxiliaries shall be 
designed and manufactured suitable for continuous 
full load duty and shall be suitable for the specified 
operating conditions. 


9.1.2 The head versus capacity characteristic shall rise 
continuously from rated point to surge. The compressor 
shall be suitable for continuous operation at any point 
at least 10 percent above the surge capacity without the 
use of a by-pass. 


9.1.3 Cooling water systems shall be designed for not 
less than 6 bar working pressure, 0-6 bar pressure drop 
(maximum), an inlet water temperature of 33 °C, an 
11°C temperature rise and a fouling factor of 
0-002 Hr.Ft?.°F/BTU on the waterside, unless specified 
otherwise by the customer. Necessary provision shall 
be made for complete drainage. 


9.1.4 The layout of the compressor installation, 
including auxiliaries shall be finalized jointly by the 
customer and the vendor to provide adequate clearances, 
access for operation and ease of maintenance. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


126% = 105x1.2 


SPECIFIED 
OPERATING 
POINT 


115.5% = 105.5x1.1 


110.3 % = 105x1.05 


COMPRESSOR RATED POINT 


105 % = 100x1.05 
NORMAL OPERATING POINT 


HEAD 


* 


(98 % ASSUMED) 
SPECIFIED OPERATING POINT 


* 


(88 % = 98x0.9) 


=— STABILITY RANG 
— TURNDOWN RANG 


INLET CAPACITY 


NOTE 1 — The 100 per cent speed is determined from the head required for point ‘A’ and the capacity required by the compressor 
design to meet all specified operating points, such as ‘C’. 


NOTE 2 — The head-capacity curve at 100 per cent speed shall be extended to 115 per cent of capacity at ‘D’. At other speeds, the 
head-capacity curve shall be extended to equivalent capacity corresponding to each speed that is, at 105 per cent speed it shall be 
extended to 1:05 x 1-05 times capacity at ‘D’, at 90 per cent speed it shall be extended to 0.90 x 1.15 times capacity at ‘D’. 


These points define the ‘approximate capacity limit’ curve. 


* Assured values for illustration only. 


Fic. 1 ILLUSTRATION OF TERMS 


IS 11563 : 2022 


9.1.5 In the case of vertically split (barrel type) 
compressors, the inner casing or the diaphragm-motor 
package shall be designed such that they can be easily 
withdrawn from the outer casing and disassembled 
for inspection or replacement of parts. The vendor 
shall provide all special fixtures that may be required 
for withdrawal and disassembly of internals. Major 
components, such as casings and bearing housing shall 
be so designed as to ensure accuracy of alignment 
during reassembly. 


9.1.6 Bearing housings, shaft end seals and housings 
that enclose rotating lubricated parts, instruments and 
controls shall be so designed as to minimize ingress 
of dust, moisture and other foreign matter during the 
period of operation as well as standstill. 


9.1.7 The customer shall indicate in his enquiry data 
sheets whether the proposed installation is indoors 
(heated or unheated) or outdoors (with or without 
roof); and the weather conditions under which the 
compressor shall operate including minimum and 
maximum temperatures, condensation (if outdoors), 
usual dust problems and the like. The compressor and 
auxiliaries shall be suitable for the specified conditions. 
The vendor shall indicate in his offer any other special 
protection to be provided by the customer, for the 
latter’s guidance. 


9.1.8 Controlling the noise level ofthe installation shall 
be the joint effort of the customer and vendor. Noise 
levels shall be as agreed between the supplier and the 
purchaser. An acoustic enclosure shall be provided 
wherever required. 


9.1.9 The customer shall advise the vendor at the time 
of enquiry itself about any specific requirements for 
liquid injection. 


9.1.10 The customer shall specify and furnish, along 
with the enquiry, any local rules or regulations that will 
govern the supply. 


9.1.11 Satisfactory performance of the compressor 
and its driver, as a combined unit, shall be the joint 
responsibility of the customer and the vendor. The 
combined unit shall perform substantially well on its 
permanent foundation as it did on the testbed in the 
vendor’s shop. However, many factors like heavy 
piping loads/stresses, misalignment arising at operating 
conditions, deficiencies attributable to supporting 
structures, mishandling during transport and improper 
handling and assembly at the site can adversely affect 
site performance. In order to obviate the problems 
caused by these factors, the vendor shall provide the 
data required for properly designing the foundation 
and indicate the permissible values of pipe stresses and 
moments at the compressor flanges to the customer. 
In addition, the vendor’s erection supervisor shall be 
present during the initial alignment check. 


9.1.12 All electrical components shall be suitable for 
the area classification and grouping specified by the 
customer in his enquiry datasheets. Similar provisions 
shall apply to the lubricant, seal and oil system also. 


9.2 Prime Mover 


9.2.1 The customer shall specify, in his enquiry, the 
type of prime mover. The prime mover shall be sized 
and rated to meet the maximum operating conditions 
ofthe compressor and shall also include either gearbox 
or hydraulic coupling losses. The prime mover shall 
be in accordance with the specifications mentioned 
in the enquiry. The prime mover shall be suitable for 
satisfactory operation with the parameters specified. 
Anticipated process variations, ifany, shall be indicated 
by the customer at the time of enquiry itself so that the 
prime mover is properly sized. 


9.2.2 Unless otherwise specified, the type of protection 
provided to motors for auxiliary equipment shall 
conform to IS/IEC 60034-5. 


9.2.3 Unless specified otherwise, steam turbine prime 
mover including auxiliary prime mover shall be 
capable of continuously developing 110 percent of 
the horsepower required for each of the customer’s 
specified operating conditions while operating at the 
corresponding speed under specified steam conditions. 


9.2.4 For motor-driven units, the motor rating 
(excluding service factor) shall be a minimum of 
110 percent of the greatest power (including gear 
losses) required for any of the operating conditions. 


9.2.5 Gas-turbine prime mover shall be sized by mutual 
agreement between the customer and the vendor. 


9.2.6 Speed increasers and reducers shall be in 
accordance with IS 3681. 


9.2.7 The customer shall specify the starting conditions 
ofthe compressor. Consideration shall be given to start 
the compressor at normal suction pressure. The method 
of starting shall be mutually agreed upon between 
the customer and vendor. Starting torque capabilities 
of the prime mover shall be adequate to meet the 
speed-torque requirements of the compressor. 


In the case of electric motors, torque requirements shall 
be met at 80 percent rated voltage. 


9.3 Casings 


9.3.1 The casing thickness shall be adequate for 
the maximum working and test pressure and shall 
include a corrosion allowance of 3 mm minimum. The 
circumferential stress value in the casing shall be as 
agreed to between the manufacturer and the supplier. 
For cast materials, the factor given in the code shall 
be applied. Materials, casting factors quality and stress 
relieving of any welds shall be according to IS 2825. 


9.3.2 The customer shall provide the system protection 
against the pressure that may be developed by the 
compressor while operating at the trip speed of the 
casing in his offer datasheets. The vendor shall indicate 
the design pressure. 


9.3.3 Casing shall be made out of carbon steel or 
nodular iron for: 


a) Air or non-combustible gas for working pressure 
beyond 21 bar; 

b) Air or non-combustible gas at a calculated 
discharge temperature above 260 °C at any point, 
with the operating range at a maximum continuous 
speed. The maximum temperature is usually 
expected to occur near the surge point; and 


c) Combustible or toxic gases. 


9.3.4 For operating temperature between 30 °C and 
—100 °C, the casing material shall conform to the 
following specifications: 


9.3.4.1 The steel shall be produced either by the 
open-hearth or electric-furnace process. 


9.3.4.2 The steel shall have the following chemical 
compositions: 


Carbon, Max 
Manganese 


0-15 percent 

0-5 to 0-8 percent 
Phosphorus, Max 
Sulphur, Max 
Silicon, Max 
Nickel 


0-04 percent 
0-045 percent 
0-6 percent 

3:0 to 4:0 percent 


9.3.4.3 Castings shall be normalized and tempered 
or liquid quenched and tempered. Casting shall be 
tempered at a minimum temperature of 593 °C and 
this temperature shall be effectively controlled by 
the use of pyrometers. If the manufacturer goes for 
liquid quenching and tempering to meet the impact 
requirements, all the castings shall be subjected to 
magnetic particle testing. 


9.3.4.4 The notched bar impact properties of the 
material shall be determined by testing a set of three 
Charpy keyhole impact specimens at —100 °C test 
temperature. The average energy value of the three 
specimens shall not be less than 2 kg.m with no one 
value falling below 1.4 kg.m. 


9.3.4.5 Tensile properties shall be as under: 


Tensile strength, Min 448-3 N/mm? 
Yield point, Min 279-7 N/mm? 
Reduction of area, Min 35 percent 
Elongation 24 percent 


IS 11563 : 2022 


9.3.5 For operating conditions other than those 
specified in 9.3.3 and 9.3.4, cast iron or other materials 
of construction may be offered. 


9.3.6 Unless specified otherwise, casings shall be split 
vertically when the maximum working pressures of the 
casings, when handling hydrogen-rich gases, exceed 
the following: 


SI No. Molecular Maximum Working 
Percent, Pressure of the Casing 

Hydrogen (bar) 

(1) (2) 6) 
1) 100 15.0 
11) 90 16.5 
111) 80 18.5 
1v) 70 21.0 


9.3.7 Horizontally split casings shall employ a flat 
joint maintained tight by a suitable sealing compound. 
Gaskets shall not be used unless specific approval is 
obtained from the customer. The joints between the 
end covers and the casing cylinder of vertically split 
compressors shall be maintained securely by confined 
gaskets. 


9.3.8 In order to facilitate alignments, disassembly and 
re-assembly, necessary vertical and horizontal jack 
screws, lifting lugs, eye bolts and guide dowels shall 
be provided. Whenever jack screws are provided as a 
means for parting contact faces, the mating face shall 
be countersunk to receive the jackscrew. 


9.4 External Forces and Moments 


When unusual features are noticed in the layout of 
piping systems, a special analysis may be required. 


9.5 Bolting 


9.5.1 Threading for pressure bolting shall be as per 
IS 4218 (Part 1 to 4) and IS 14962 (Part 2) or equivalent 
International Standard. 


9.5.2 Tapped holes for bolting purposes shall be kept 
to a minimum on pressure parts. Studs are preferred to 
cap screws. Besides the corrosion allowance, sufficient 
material shall be left below the bottom of such holes in 
pressure sections to prevent leakage. 


9.5.3 Adequate clearance shall be provided at bolting 
locations to permit the use of socket or box type 
wrenches. The vendor shall supply any special tools 
and fixtures required. 


9.6 Casing Connections 


9.6.1 Inlet and outlet connections shall be with flanges or 
studded bosses oriented as specified in the enquiry data 


IS 11563 : 2022 


sheets and shall be suitable for the working pressures of 
the casing as specified in 9.3 unless agreed to otherwise 
by the customer. Inlet and outlet connections for barrel 
type compressor shall be located on the outer casing 
and not on the end covers. 


9.6.2 Connections welded to the casing shall meet 
material requirements of the casing material rather than 
that of the auxiliary piping. 


9.6.3 Flanged or studded boss connections of not less 
than 19 mm iron pipe size shall be provided for the 
following (see IS 4864 to IS 4870): 


a) Vents, 


b) Pressure and temperature gauge connections at 
each nozzle, 


c) Liquid injection, 

d) Casing drains, 

e) Water cooling, 

f) Lube and seal oil, and 
g) Flushing. 


Casing drains for horizontally split casings shall be 
provided at the lowest point of each stage or at other 
lower points. 


9.6.4 Casing drains on vertically split casings shall be 
studded bosses. They shall be located at the lowest point 
of each inlet section, the section between the inner and 
outer casings and the discharge section. 


9.6.5 Where flanged or studded openings cannot 
be provided for oil and inflammable or toxic gas 
connections, threaded openings in sizes 9 to 38 mm 
are permissible. Pipe nipples, preferably not longer 
than 150 mm shall be screwed and seal welded to the 
threaded openings and shall be provided with a flange. 
Pipe nipples shall be a minimum of schedule 160 for 
sizes 1 and below and schedule 80 for size 1.5. 


9.6.6 Openings for pipe sizes 32, 64, 89, 127, 178 and 
228 mm shall not be used. 


9.6.7 Flanged connections shall conform to IS 1536 
or IS 1537 as applicable, cast iron flanges shall be 
flat-faced. Face and drilling requirements shall also 
apply to studded connections for which studs shall be 
furnished. Flat-faced flanges are acceptable on steel 
casings also with the customer’s approval. Thicker 
and larger outer diameter flanges are also acceptable. 
If the vendor uses flanges other than those covered by 
IS 4864 to IS 4870, all required mating parts shall be 
supplied by the vendor and details of connections shall 
be approved by the customer. 


9.6.8 Threaded connections shall not exceed R 40. 
Tapped openings and bases for pipe threads shall 
conform to IS 554. 


9.6.9 Tapped openings that are not connected to 
piping shall be closed with solid steel plugs. Plugs 
that may require subsequent removal shall be of 
corrosion-resistant material. 


9.7 Auxiliary Piping 


9.7.1 Auxiliary piping systems shall include all 
necessary lube oil, seal oil, control oil, balance gas, 
drain, vent steam and water lines that are relevant to 
the compressor, the prime mover and the auxiliaries. 
Auxiliary piping also includes valves, controls, 
pressure reducers, thermometers, pressure gauges or 
instrumentation on the compressor unit. 


9.7.2 The auxiliary piping within the confines shall be 
furnished by the vendor. Interconnecting piping between 
the unit and other auxiliaries shall be furnished by the 
customer. Piping within the confines of the main unit 
or base plate shall terminate with flanged connections. 
Piping shall be routed keeping in view proper 
flexibility, and easy access for operation, maintenance 
and cleaning. Small piping shall be suitably secured to 
minimize vibration and eventual breakage. 


9.7.3 Oil drains shall be sized to run no more than half 
full and arranged in such a way that good draining 
is ensured (considering the possibility of foaming 
conditions). Horizontal runs shall slope continuously, 
a minimum of 25 mm for every metre, towards the 
reservoir. 


9.7.4 The piping specifications of IS 1570 (Part 5) and 
IS 1239 (Part 2) apply to all piping mounted on either 
the compressor unit or the base plate or both. 


9.7.5 Instrument lines carrying combustible or toxic 
gas or oil shall be provided with a shut-off valve at the 
point of measurement. 


9.7.6 Interstage gas or air piping furnished by the 
vendor shall conform to IS 1570 (Part 5) and IS 1239 
(Part 2). 


9.8 Impellers 


9.8.1 Impellers can be semi-open, consisting of disc 
and vane or closed, consisting of disc, vanes and 
cover. Impellers shall be cast, or of riveted, welded or 
electro-eroded construction. Other methods such as 
brazing shall be permitted if approved by the customer. 


9.8.2 Welded and riveted impellers may consist of 
the cast and forged components. Welds in the gas 
passages shall be smooth and free from weld spatter. 
After welding, the impellers shall be heat-treated and 
stress-relieved. Vanes integral with the disc or with the 
cover shall have a minimum fillet of 3 mm or one half 
the passage width (whichever is less). Vane entrances 
and exits shall not have sharp edges. 


9.8.3 Cast impellers shall be finished ‘all over’ except 
for gas passages. Welding shall be prohibited for 
balancing. Welding for any other purpose will be 
permitted only with the customer’s approval. 


9.8.4 Impellers shall be shrunk assembled on the 
shaft with or without the key. Other methods may be 
acceptable with the customer’s approval. Keyway 
fillets shall be not less than 1.5 mm. 


9.8.5 The vendor’s offer data sheets shall describe in 
detail the type and material of construction of impellers. 


9.9 Interstage Diaphragms and Inlet Guide Vanes 


9.9.1 Interstage diaphragms shall be suitable for all 
specified operating conditions including startup, 
shut-down, settling out and momentary surge. When 
intermediate main connections are employed, the 
customer shall specify the maximum differential 
pressure. Internal joints shall be designed in such 
a way as to minimize leakage and still permit easy 
disassembly. 


9.9.2 If diaphragm cooling is specified, top and bottom 
halves of horizontally split diaphragms shall have 
independent cooling passages. Each inlet and outlet 
connection for the coolant shall be manifolded at the 
top and the bottom of each casing. 


9.10 Labyrinths 


In order to minimize internal leakage, renewable 
labyrinths shall be provided at all internal close 
clearance points. Preferably, these labyrinths shall be 
stationary and easily replaceable. 


9.11 Balance Line and Drum 


9.11.1 A balance drum, line and opening (or equivalent, 
if required) shall be provided to minimize the axial 
loads on thrust bearings. A separate tapping shall be 
taken to indicate the pressure in the balancing chamber. 
The vendor shall specify the operating limits. 


9.11.2 Compressor designs that do not require a balance 
drum are acceptable with the customer’s approval. 


9.11.3 The balance line shall be sized to handle 
balance piston labyrinth gas leakage at twice the initial 
clearance, without exceeding the load rating of thrust 
bearings. 


9.12 Shafts and Shaft Sleeves 


9.12.1 Shafts shall be made of one-piece, heat-treated, 
forged steel and shall be suitably ground. 


9.12.2 Coupling fits shall be tapered, with dimensions 
as agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 
Tapers may be less for hydraulically fitted couplings. 
Cylindrical shaft arrangement can be agreed upon 
between customer and vendor. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


9.12.3 Renewable shaft sealings or their equivalent 
shall be furnished at interstage close clearance points, 
under all carbon ring packings and for gas service at the 
shaft seals, unless other shaft protection is approved by 
the purchaser. These sleeves shall preferably be made 
of corrosion-resistant materials suitably hardened 
to resist wear and shall be sealed to prevent leakage 
between the shaft and the sleeves. 


9.13 Bearing and Bearing Housing 


9.13.1 Radial bearings shall be precision bored and 
of the journal or tilting pad type with steel-backed 
renewable babbit liners, pads or shells. The bearing 
liners, pads or shells shall be replaceable without 
removing the top half of the casing of the horizontally 
split compressor or the end covers of the vertically split 
unit. Bearings shall be designed to maintain a stable oil 
film at any operating speed. 


9.13.2 Thrust bearings shall be of multiple segment 
type designed for thrust in both directions. The sizing of 
thrust bearings shall take into account the thrust loads 
from the compressor and the thrust required to slip the 
coupling with a friction coefficient of 0.25. Reserve on 
the thrust bearing capability shall permit operation of 
the unit with some degree of fouling. The thrust bearing 
shall be adjustable for positioning the rotor axially. 
Thrust collar, which revolves with the shaft, shall be 
replaceable, shrunk and positively locked to the shaft 
to prevent fretting. 


9.13.3 Radial and thrust bearings shall be designed 
for pressure lubrication and shall be so arranged as to 
minimize foaming. Drain openings shall be adequately 
sized and designed to ensure proper drainage. 


9.13.4 Non-pressurized, horizontally split bearing 
housings shall be furnished either separate from or 
integral with the casing. The customer shall specify 1f 
contamination of the gas or lube oil is a factor to be 
considered. 


9.13.5 The compressor shall be so designed as to 
provide access for shaft measurements which are taken 
with a handheld probe adjacent to each radial bearing. 


9.14 Provision for Detectors 


9.14.1 Provision shall be made in each bearing housing 
for mounting two radial vibration measurement probes 
90° apart. Preferably, one probe shall be mounted in 
the predominantly horizontal plane and the other in 
the predominantly vertical plane. The horizontal probe 
shall be located to lead the vertical probe in terms of 
the direction of rotation of the shaft. Provision shall 
be made for one axial displacement probe at the thrust 
bearing end of each casing. The vendor shall indicate 
by illustration the actual location (in degrees) of all 
probes. All probes shall be of the non-contact type. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


9.14.2 Radial probe provision shall be located such 
that the probe will sense an unplated ground surface 
having not more than 0.012 7 mm mechanical runout 
and minimum electrical run out (see 9.18.5). Probe 
provision shall be located such that the oil spill is 
minimized while changing. All vibration probes shall 
be enclosed inside the bearing housing for weather 
protection of the shaft sensing area. Probe provision 
shall be suitable for external mounting as described in 
9.14.3, with the only exception of axial position on a 
drive through casing. 


9.14.3 Probes shall be furnished if specified and shall 
be installed in movable holders. Each holder shall 
be shouldered so that the correct probe location is 
maintained when the probe is removed and reinstalled. 
The holder shall be mechanically locked to the bearing 
housing and the probe itself shall be mechanically 
locked in the holder to prevent loosening during normal 
service. A junction or terminal box shall be mounted 
on the probe holder. The holder and the box assembly 
shall be removable as a unit, while the compressor is 
in service. 


9.14.4 Oscillator-detectors and inter-connecting wiring 
between probes and detectors shall be furnished if 
specified. The wiring shall be in a conduit. Standardized 
cable lengths shall be used on a compressor prime 
mover train. Detectors, wiring and probes furnished 
by the vendor shall be replaceable without the need for 
field calibration. 


9.14.5 If specified, read-out equipment shall be 
furnished, the characteristics of which match with 
that of the detector-probe system and does not require 
field calibration. Vibration matter scales shall have 
0:130 mm span with 0-005 mm scale divisions. Axial 
displacement indicator scales shall have a —0-635 to 
+0:635 mm span, with ‘0’ at the centre, scale divisions 
shall be 0:025 mm. 


9.15 Shaft Sealing 


9.15.1 Shaft ends shall be provided with seals to 
prevent leakage outwards of or into the compressor 
over the range of specified operating conditions and 
during periods of standstill. The offered seals shall be 
suitable for variations in suction conditions that may 
prevail during start-up and shutdown or any special 
operation specified by the customer. 


9.15.2 Unless otherwise agreed, shaft seals shall be 
accessible for inspection and for replacement, without 
removing the top half of the casing of the horizontally 
split compressor or the end covers of the vertically split 
unit. 


9.15.3 Shaft seals may be one or a combination of the 
following types as specified by the customer on the 


10 


enquiry datasheets. The materials for component parts 
shall be suitable for the service indicated. Provision 
shall be made in the seal design for injecting buffer 
gas. The customer shall specify at the time of enquiry 
whether buffer gas is to be used. 


a) Labyrinth type — This type (Fig. 2) may include 
carbon rings, in addition to the labyrinths, if 
approved by the customers. Ejection or injection 
systems, wherever required, shall be furnished 
complete with piping, regulating and control 
valves, pressure gauges, strainers and the like with 
each item piped and valves to permit its removal 
during normal operation Whenever the gas tapped 
from the compressor discharge is the motivating 
fluid for the ejector, the additional provision 
shall be made for sealing during start-up and 
shut-down. 

b) Mechanical (contact) type — This type (Fig. 3) 
shall be provided with labyrinths and oil slingers 
to minimize leakage of oil to the atmosphere or 
into the compressor. Oil or any other suitable 
liquid furnished under pressure to the rotating 
faces may be supplied from the lube oil system or 
an independent seal oil system. Reference may be 
made to IS 8593 (Part 1). 


Oil that comes in contact with the gas shall be 
discarded if it is considered harmful to such 
components as bearings and couplings. Additional 
supplementary devices may be provided to ensure 
sealing when the compressor is at a standstill and 
the seal oil system is shut down. The customer 
shall specify in his enquiry whether such devices 
shall be provided. 

c) Restricted ring-type — This type (Fig. 4) shall 
include rings (of carbon or any other suitable 
material) mounted in retainers or spacers. The seal 
may be operated dry or with a sealing liquid or 
buffer gas. 


Liquid film type — This type shall be provided 
with metallic sealing rings or sleeves or 
labyrinths to minimize leakage of oil to 
the atmosphere and into the compressor. A 
sealing liquid shall be supplied. Liquid film 
type seals may be of the cylindrical bush type 
(Fig. 5) or of the pumping type (Fig. 6). 


d) 


e) Dry gas seals — These are non-contacting, 
dry-running mechanical face seals that consist of 
a mating (rotating) ring and a primary (stationary) 
ring. When operating, lifting geometry in the 
rotating ring generates a fluid-dynamic lifting 
force causing the stationary ring to separate and 
create a gap between the two rings. 


9.15.4 The design of oil seal components shall be such 
that they shall not adversely affect the rotor stability. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


INTERNAL 
CLEAN OIL IN 


GAS 
PRESSURE 


PRESSURE 
BREAKDOWN 


SEAS Gest Sr 

SEN NAM S | 

iy Wy \ 7 
SEE N 

wm D RRRS 


STATIONARY SEAT 


CARBON RING 


SS N 
NL 


1722 
N 


ale a 


COTAMINATED 
OIL OUT 


FIG. 3 MECHANICAL (CONTACT) SHAFT SEAL 


: 2022 


IS 11563 


SCAVENGING PORT 
MAY BE ADDED FOR 
VACUUM APPLICATION 


PORT MAY BE 
ADDED FOR 
SEALING 


zZ 


Fic. 4 RESTRICTIVE - RING SHAFT SEAL 


IS 11563 : 2022 


INNER BUSHING 


OUTER BUSHING 


SHAFT SLEEVE 


I~ 
SIN NI 
Nr We g 
INTERNAL h 
N ATMOSPHERE 
PRESSURE A 
CONTAMINATED OIL OUT 


OIL 


FIG. 5 LIQUID-FILM SHAFT SEAL WITH CYLINDRICAL BUSHING 


GT RER 
01 


IS 11563 : 2022 


CLEAN OIL 
RECIRCULATION INTERNAL 
GAS 
PRESSURE 


LLL” 
Lp 


We 


OIL OUT 


LILLE LLLLLLLLLL LLL pa 
7 


ZZ 


ATMOSPHERE 


LE 


, 


OIL OUT 


FIG. 6 LIQUID - FILM SHAFT SEAL WITH PUMPING BUSHING 


9.15.5 The customer shall specify on the data sheets 
whether the seal oil system and the lube oil system 
shall be independent or a combined one. Ifindependent 
systems are specified, the vendor’s proposal shall 
describe the details of the means to be provided for 
preventing the interchange of oil between the two 
systems. 


9.16 Couplings 


9.16.1 Connections between the compressor, drive and 
gear unit shall be by suitably forged steel, flexible, 
spacer type couplings. The customer and the vendor 
shall mutually agree upon the make, type and the 
supplier (compressor or prime mover manufacturer) of 
the couplings. 


15 


9.16.2 Coupling spacers shall be made from one 
piece of forged steel and not fabricated from multiple 
forgings. They shall be of sufficient length to permit: 


a) removal of either half of the coupling, 


b) removal of bearing parts required for access to the 
seals, and 
c) removal and replacement of such renewable 
circumferential parts as seal rings and complete 
seal units. 
These removals shall be possible without removing the 
rotating elements of the unit. 


9.16.3 The couplings and spacers shall be dynamically 
balanced without the rotating assembly to a tolerance 


IS 11563 : 2022 


suitable for maximum continuous speed. The coupling 
hubs, sleeves and spacers shall be suitably match 
marked. Bolting shall be selected by weight to enable 
interchanging without altering the balance. 


9.16.4 Removal guards shall be provided at all 
non-closed couplings. The guards shall be of a 
sufficiently heavy and rigid design to avoid contact with 
the coupling or the shaft as a result of bodily contact. 
The guards shall be designed so as to prevent drain oil 
from the adjacent bearing housing. 


9.16.5 External feed and drain oil lines for lubricating 
couplings shall be classified as auxiliary piping. Covers 
for the continuous oil lubricating couplings shall be 
leak-proof and shall be designed to promote proper 
drainage to prevent foaming. 


9.16.6 Sleeve bearing motors shall be provided with 
limited end float couplings which shall prevent the 
motor rotor from rubbing either bushing. The maximum 
thrust that the motor will develop, shall be indicated by 
the motor manufacturer and shall be taken care of by 
the gear unit if provided or by the compressor when a 
gear unit is not provided. 


9.16.7 The prime mover half of each coupling shall 
be furnished, with a balanced idling adapter, wherever 
necessary, to permit uncoupled operation. 


9.16.8 Couplings and mountings shall be tapered fit 
for the compressor valves. Fittings for the tapered 
shafts shall have dimensions as agreed between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. 


9.16.9 Coupling hubs shall be provided with suitable 
puller holes. 


9.17 Critical Speeds 


9.17.1 The first lateral critical speed (actual value) 
of stiff shaft compressors shall be at least 20 percent 
above the maximum continuous speed. Flexible shaft 
compressors shall operate with the first critical speed at 
least 15 percent below any operation speed. The second 
lateral critical speed shall be at least 20 percent above 
the maximum continuous speed. Wherever operating 
conditions require reduced operating speeds, careful 
consideration shall be given to the location of the first 
critical speed. The compressor vendor shall carry out 
a lateral critical speed analysis and determine that 
the critical speeds of the prime mover are compatible 
with those of the compressor and that the combination 
is suitable over the entire operating speed range. 
The vendor shall indicate in the summary report his 
assumptions regarding bearing and support stiffness 
used for calculating the lateral criticals. 


9.17.2 The vendor shall perform a composite torsional 
vibration analysis of the compressor prime mover unit 
and shall be responsible for the satisfactory performance 


16 


of the unit. Other manufacturers furnishing components 
in the system shall provide all necessary data of the 
vendor and shall identify the source of torsional 
excitation: 


a) Actual torsional resonant speeds shall not be with 
10 percent of the first and second harmonic of the 
rotational frequency in the operating speed range 
up to trip speed. 

b) Actual torsional resonant speeds shall not be 
within 10 percent of gear tooth passing frequencies 
within the operating speed range. 


9.17.3 In such systems where it may so happen that 
conditions indicated above cannot be satisfied, the 
system is considered acceptable as long as the calculated 
torsional stresses at resonant speed are within the stress 
values permissible for the shaft material. 


9.18 Vibration and Balance 


9.18.1 Major parts of the rotating element, such 
as shafts, impellers, balancing drum, etc. shall be 
individually balanced both statically and dynamically 
conforming to ISO 21940-11 or equivalent. 


9.18.2 The rotating element shall undergo multi-plane 
dynamic balancing during assembly. This shall be 
accomplished after the addition of not more than two 
major elements to a flexible rotor having a normal 
speed above 6 000 rpm. Rotors with normal speeds of 
6 000 rpm and below shall have a minimum of three 
balancing planes. Balance correction shall be applied 
only to new elements. Elements already balanced 
shall not be disturbed, only rotors with single keys for 
coupling shall be balanced with the half key in position. 
The maximum permissible unbalanced force at any 
journal, at a maximum continuous speed, shall not 
exceed 10 percent of the static loading of that journal. 


9.18.3 After completing the final balancing of the 
rotating element assembly, the sensitivity of the 
balancing machine system shall be checked. If the same 
is either marginal or unacceptable, the rotating elements 
shall be re-balanced on a more sensitive machine. 


9.18.4 During the shop test of the assembled compressor, 
operating at maximum continuous speed or any other 
speed within the specified operating range, the double 
amplitude of vibration in any plane measured on the 
shaft adjacent and relative to each radial bearing shall 
not exceed the following value or 50 um, whichever is 
less: 


7 740 000 
= um 


Double amplitude (including runout) = 

rpm 
where rpm is the maximum continuous speed expressed 
in revolutions per minute. At the trip speed of the 
compressor prime mover, the vibration shall not exceed 
this value by more than 12:5 um. 


9.18.5 Besides the shaft runout referred to above, ifthe 
vendor can demonstrate that electrical runout due to 
shaft material anomalies are present, this may be added 
to the permissible vibration level up to a maximum of 
6:5 um, provided a handheld probe gives results not 
exceeding the normal limit. 


Electrical runout can be established by rolling the rotor 
slowly on bearings or vee blocks while measuring 
runout width using a proximity probe and a dial 
indicator at the same location of the shaft. 


9.19 Mounting Plates 


9.19.1 The compressor shall be furnished with sole 
plates or a base plate, as specified by the customer on 
the enquiry datasheets. The equipment to be mounted 
shall be provided with machined levelling surfaces 
and vertical jackscrews, the feet of the equipment shall 
be drilled with pilot holes for use in final dowelling. 
Both types of mounting plates shall be furnished with 
horizontal jackscrews to facilitate positioning the major 
equipment, The horizontal jackscrew arrangement shall 
be capable of overcoming the friction force required to 
move the fully assembled pieces of major equipment for 
achieving acceptable levels of shaft alignment without 
calling for the use of sledgehammers, hydraulic jacks, 
chain falls, etc. 


Mounting plates shall not be drilled for the equipment to 
be mounted by others. Anchor bolts shall be furnished 
by the vendor. 


9.19.2 The compressor base plate shall be a single 
unit fabricated out of carbon steel. It shall include the 
following features: 


a) If specified, the base plate shall be extended, as 
required, to support the driver, gearboxes (if any) 
besides the compressors. A single unit base plate 
shall not preferably exceed 8 metres in length and 
4 metres in width. 


b 


= 


The customer shall specify whether the base plate 
shall be suitable for column mounting. 


c 


wa 


The base plates shall be provided with an adequate 
number of lifting lugs. The base plate shall have 
adequate rigidity to withstand the loads use to 
major pieces of equipment coming on it. 


The customer shall indicate in his enquiry data sheets 
whether the base plates shall be suitable for lifting 
together with the equipment. 


d) Pedestals and base plate shall be rigid enough 
to permit the use of horizontal jackscrews and 
to withstand the maximum forces and moments 
of the piping attached to the equipment mounted 
thereon, without adversely affecting the shaft 
alignment. 


e 


wa 


The bottom of the base plate between the structural 
members shall be exposed and access for grouting 


17 


IS 11563 : 2022 


under the base plate shall be provided. The resting 
pads at the bottom of the base plate shall be in one 
plane to enable the use of a single level foundation 
with continuous grouting under the notch of the 
base plate. A sub-sole plate, if required, shall be 
provided by the vendor. 


f) Levelling surfaces and vertical jackscrews shall be 
provided on the base plate. 


g) Oil reservoirs shall be separate from the base plate 
unless approved otherwise by the customer. 


h) When specified by the customer, decking shall be 
provided and the top of the base plate covering 
walkways and work areas. 


10 MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTIONS 


10.1 General 


10.1.1 Unless specified otherwise herein or on the 
customer’s data sheets, the material of construction 
shall be as per the manufacturer’s standard for the 
specified operating conditions. Annex C lists material 
specifications which when used with appropriate heat 
treatment or impact tests, or both, will ensure the 
selection of materials generally considered acceptable 
for major component parts. The method of manufacture 
(such as casing, forging or fabrication of all major 
components) shall be clearly indicated in the vendor’s 
offer datasheets. 


Materials shall be identified by reference to appropriate 
specifications, type numbers or the like. When it is 
not possible to give appropriate designations, the 
manufacturer’s code or trade name may be used. In 
such cases, the manufacturer shall be identified and the 
chemical composition and significant physical properties 
of the material shall be indicated in the offer datasheets. 


Copper and copper-bearing alloys (excluding monel, 
bearing and precipitation-hardened stainless steel) shall 
be used for compressors or auxiliaries, which are in 
contact with corrosive gases or gases capable of forming 
explosive copper compounds. 


10.1.2 Selection of casing material shall be governed by 
the limits imposed by 9.3.3, 9.3.4 and 9.3.5. For steel 
casing, bolted-on bearing housing and bearing supports 
shall also be out of steel. 


10.1.3 While selecting materials for compressors, which 
handle gases specified to contain hydrogen sulphide, the 
hardness of the impellers, shaft seals, internal bolting 
and other stressed parts, shall not exceed 22 HRC 
unless specified otherwise. Components fabricated by 
welding shall be heat-treated so that both the weld and 
heat-affected zones meet this hardness limitation. 


10.1.4 External parts subjected to rotary or sliding 
motions such as guide vane actuator linkage shall be out 
of non-rusting materials suitable for the location. 


IS 11563 : 2022 


10.1.5 The material quality requirements (minimum) 
of bolting for pressure joints shall be of carbon steel 
St-37 according to IS 1570 (Part 1) for cast iron casings 
and high-temperature alloy steel 40CrIM28 for steel 
castings. Nuts shall conform to St-37. For temperatures 
below —30 °C suitable low temperature bolting material 
shall be used. 


10.2 Quality Standards 
10.2.1 Cast steel casings shall conform to the following 
requirements: 


a) All cast steel casing parts shall be subject to 
magnetic particle examination as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


b 


wm 


All welds for steel pressure castings shall be 
made by qualified operators and by procedures 
in accordance with IS 6916. The compressor 
manufacturer shall be responsible for the review 
of all the repairs and repair welding to ensure 
that they are properly heat-treated and examined 
non-destructively for soundness and compliance 
with specification requirements. 


c 


wa 


Major repair welds for ferritic steels shall be 
given stress relief heat treatment unless agreed 
to otherwise by the customer. Magnetic particle 
inspection shall be performed on all repair welds 
in accordance with IS 5334. 


10.2.2 Fabricated casings made from wrought material 
or combinations of wrought and cast materials shall 
conform to the following requirements: 


a) Welding qualifications shall be in accordance with 
IS 817. 


b) Plate edges shall be inspected by a magnetic 
particle or a liquid penetrant examination. 


c) All accessible surfaces of the welds shall be 
inspected by a magnetic particle or a liquid 
penetrant examination after back chipping or 
gauging and after stress relieving. 


d) All pressure containing welds, including flange 
nozzle and casing circumferential welds, shall be 
full penetration welds connecting main flanges to 
shells of horizontally split casings. 


e) All fabricated casings, irrespective of thickness, 
shall be post-weld heat-treated. 


10.2.3 Forged steel casings and end covers shall be in 
accordance with IS 2644. 


10.2.4 All accessible areas of welds on welded 
impellers shall be inspected by a magna-flux or 
dye-penetrant examination. Cast impellers shall pass 
the vendor’s spot radiographic examination before 
finish machined; radiographs shall be taken at all points 
of critical stress. Each impeller shall be subjected to an 
over-speed test of at least 115 percent of synchronous 


18 


speed if the compressor is motor-driven, or 115 percent 
of maximum continuous speed for variable speed 
units. After the over-speed test, each impeller shall be 
examined all over by means of magna-flux or liquid 
penetrant methods. 


10.2.5 Reports of all heat treatment and radiographs, 
fully identified, whether carried out during the normal 
course of examination or as a part of a repair procedure, 
shall be preserved for five years for review by the 
customer. 


11 LUBE AND SEAL OIL SYSTEMS 


11.1 A complete pressure oil system shall be furnished 
by the vendor with each compressor unit to supply oil 
at a suitable pressure, as applicable, to the: 


a) bearings of the compressor, driver and gearboxes, 
if any, unless specified otherwise; 


b) couplings, if lubricated continuously; 

c) turbine governor, the trip and throttle valve; 
d) customer’s control, system (if hydraulic); and 
e) seal oil system. 


11.2 Unless specified otherwise, IS 8593 (Part 1) shall 
apply. 


11.3 The requirements of the dry gas seal system shall 
be specified by the purchaser in the enquiry document. 


12 CONTROLS AND INSTRUMENTATION 


12.1 The vendor shall provide sufficient data on 
compressor performance to enable the customer to 
properly design a control system for start-up operation, 
for all specified operating conditions and surge 
prevention. The vendor shall review the customer’s 
overall control system for compatibility with the 
vendor-furnished control equipment if requested by the 
customer. 


12.1.1 The oil system shall be suitable for orderly 
start-up, stable operation, warning of abnormal 
conditions, and shut-down of the main equipment in 
the event of impending damage. 


12.1.2 All control, valves, relief valves, solenoid, 
bellows, and diaphragm-operated valves, and all other 
valves handling flammable or toxic fluids shall have 
steel bodies with stainless steel internals and trims. 
Control heads for flammable fluids shall be made of 
steel. 


12.1.3 Controls and control panels shall be completely 
piped, requiring only the purchaser’s external piping 
connections. 


12.1.4 Controls and control panels shall be completely 
wired, is required for controls or instrumentation, 


wiring to all items when more than one wiring point 
shall be provided from a terminal box. All wiring shall 
be installed in protective metal conduits or enclosures. 


12.1.5 All controls and instruments shall be located 
and arranged for ease of visibility by the operators 
as well as for accessibility for tests, adjustments and 
maintenance. 


12.1.6 Valved bleeders arerequired between instruments 
and their valves for service over 15 bar. 


12.1.7 When failure or malfunction of a reducing valve 
may cause overpressure and resultant hazard or damage 
to downstream equipment or components, a relief valve 
discharging to the reservoir shall be furnished. 


12.2 Panels 


12.2.1 At least one instrument panel for the oil system 
shall be provided by the vendor when specified. The 
vendor shall furnish and mount on or in the panels 
the instruments specified on the datasheets. Spaces 
or cutouts, or both, shall be supplied as specified for 
the purchaser’s instruments. The configuration of the 
panels shall be as specified. 


12.2.2 The types of instruments and the locations ofthe 
panels shall be specified by the purchaser. 


12.2.3 After all the equipment locations have been 
fixed, the pressure instruments shall be piped to the 
terminal locations specified by the purchaser. A shut-off 
valve within each panel shall be provided for all lines 
except those for shutdown sensing devices. 


12.3 Alarms and Shut-downs 


12.3.1 The vendor shall furnish as a minimum the 
following alarm and shut-down contacts (or pearing 
metal temperature detectors). The alarm setting shall 
precede the shut-down setting: 


IS 11563 : 2022 


12.3.2 A separate housing shall be furnished for each 
pressure or temperature-sensing switch. Single pole, 
double-throw switches shall be used. 


12.3.3 ‘Open’ (de-energize) to alarm and ‘close’ 
(energize) to trip electric switches shall be furnished. 


12.3.4 The vendor shall furnish a ‘first out’ type of 
annunciator when an annunciator system is specified. 


12.3.5 All instruments and controls other than shutdown 
sensing devices shall be installed with sufficient valving 
to permit removing instruments and controls while the 
system is in operation. 


12.3.6 Piping to a pressure transmitter for alarms shall 
include an orifice, a T-connection, a pressure gauge, 
and a bl9eeder valve to test the alarm. The arrangement 
of the shutdown sensing device shall permit it’s being 
checked during the operation where a redundant system 
(such as a two-out-of-three system) is employed. The 
alarm and shutdown transmitter setting shall not be 
adjustable from outside the housing. Pressure elements 
shall be made of 18 chromium-8 nickel (18Cr8Ni) 
stainless steel. 


12.4 Thermometers 


Industrial thermometers or dial bimetallic or 
mercury-filled thermometers of suitable size shall be 
mounted in the oil piping of the cooler inlets and outlets 
and in the oil piping of the outlet of each radial and 
thrust bearing. Individual 18Cr8Ni stainless steel wells 
shall be furnished in pressurized or flooded locations. 


12.5 Pressure Gauges 


12.5.1 Pressure gauges shall be furnished at the 
discharge of each oil pump, at each bearing and seal 
inlet oil header, and at the control inlet oil header. 


12.5.2 Each pressure gauge shall have a 100 mm 
minimum size dial, a NPS male connection, and a 


Alarm Shut-down 

Low lube-oil pressure for each level ........................- x x 
Low level in the reservoir for each item .............-.......0. x 

Low seal oil level or low seal oil differential pressure for each item ........ x x 
High overhead-tank level for each item ....................- x 

High thrust-bearing oil or metal temperature for each item (purchaser shall specify x 

the arrangement required) ................. 

Standby pump running for each item (not required if the purchaser’s alarms one x 

from the motor starter) ....................- 

High oil-filter differential pressure for each item ..................- x 


19 


IS 11563 : 2022 


18Cr8Ni stainless steel bourdon tube and movement. 
Each gauge shall be suitably valved to permit its 
removal while the system is in operation. 


12.6 Flow-indicators 


12.6.1 Flow-indicators shall be furnished in the 
atmospheric oil-drain return line from each bearing, 
gear, and seal and in either the pressured inlet piping 
or the outlet piping of each continuously lubricated 
coupling. 


12.6.2 Steel non-restrictive flow indicators shall be 
used for atmospheric drain lines. Steel restrictive flow 
indicators shall be used for pressured lines. 


12.6.3 Each flow indicator shall be of the ‘bull’s eye’ 
type and shall be installed with its butt’s eyeglass 
preferably in a vertical plane to facilitate viewing the 
flow of oil through the particular line. 


12.6.4 All instrumentation and controls shall be suitable 
for outdoor installation unless specified otherwise. 


12.6.5 All solenoids shall have continuous duty ratings. 
12.7 Types of Control Systems 


12.7.1 The compressor may be controlled on the basis 
of the inlet pressure, discharge pressure, flow or some 
combinations of these parameters. The control system 
may be mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic, electrical or 
any combination thereof. The system may be manual 
or automatic with a manual override. The customer 
shall specify the sources of the control signal and 
its sensitivity and range, as well as the items to be 
furnished by the vendor. 


12.7.2 For variable speed drive, the control signal shall 
act to reset the driver speed governing system. Unless 
specified otherwise, the control, range limits shall be 
from maximum continuous speed to 95 per cent of the 
minimum speed required for any operating range or 
70 percent of the maximum continuous speed, 
whichever is lower. 


12.7.3 For constant speed drive, the control system 
shall actuate either the control valve in the compressor 
inlet piping (furnished by the customer) or the 
adjustable inlet guide vanes furnished by the vendor 
as an integral part of the compressor. In the later case, 
the vendor shall also furnish a guide vane positioner 
compatible with the type of control signal specified by 
the customer and shall include a hand wheel and other 
means of local manual over-ride during operation. A 
direct-driven vane-position indicator shall be provided, 
which is visible during the operation of the machine. 


12.7.4 A combination of control modes may be required 
on limited speed range drives and multi-service or 
multi-stream applications. 


20 


12.7.5 The full range of the customer’s specified 
control limit shall correspond to the required operating 
range of the compressor. Unless specified otherwise, 
the maximum control signal shall correspond to the 
maximum continuous speed or the maximum flow 
position of the inlet control valves or adjustable inlet 
guide vanes. 


12.8 Minimum Instrumentation 


12.8.1 The customer shall specify the requirements of 
panel instruments. 


12.8.2 Locally mounted instruments shall include 
temperature indicators and pressure gauges, before and 
after any intercoolers, supplied by the vendor provided 
the vendor supplies the interconnecting piping also. 


12.8.3 The customer shall specify any additional 
instrumentation to be furnished by the vendor. 


13 INSPECTION 


13.1 If shop inspection is specified, the inspector 
representing the customer shall have entry to the plants, 
including the plants of the sub-vendors where work on 
or testing of the equipment is being performed. 


13.2 It is intended that the customer inspection work 
may be minimized by assigning to the vendor, the 
responsibility of furnishing the inspector with all 
necessary material certificates, shop test reports, 
radiographic results, etc., which are necessary to 
verify the vendor’s compliance with the specifications 
covering the compressor and all auxiliaries furnished 
by the vendor. 


13.3 Wherever shop inspection is specified; no 
surfaces or parts shall be painted until the inspection 
is completed. 


13.4 Whenever, during the manufacturing schedule, 
shop inspection by the customer is required, the vendor 
seal give sufficient advance notice to the customer. The 
period of advance notice can be established by mutual 
consent between the customer and the vendor. 


13.5 Where shop inspection is required, it shall be the 
responsibility of the vendor to notify the sub-vendors 
of the customer’s inspection requirements. 


14 TESTS 


14.1 General 


14.1.1 All compressors shall be tested in accordance 
with 14.2 and 14.3. Optional tests that may be specified 
shall be as described in 14.4. 


14.1.2 The customer shall reserve the right to witness 
testing, dismantling, inspection and reassembly of 
equipment as specified. 


14.1.3 Acceptance of shop tests shall not constitute a 
waiver of requirements to meet the specified operating 
conditions, nor does inspection in any way relieves the 
vendor of his responsibilities. 


14.2 Hydraulic Test 


14.2.1 Parts shall be hydrostatically tested with liquid 
in accordance with the schedule: 


SI No. Item Minimum Test 
Pressure 
0) (2) 3) 

i) Complete casing 1-5 times the 
including all-welded maximum casing 
connections (unless design pressure 
agreed other-wise 
the customer) 

11) Pressure vessels, 1-5 times the 


process coolers and maximum operating 

piping pressure or in 
accordance with 
applicable codes 


14.2.2 The test set-up shall be maintained for a 
sufficient period to permit complete examination of 
the parts under pressure. The hydrostatic test shall be 
considered satisfactory when no leaks are observed for 
a minimum period of 30 min. 


14.3 Mechanical Run Test 


14.3.1 The following sequence shall be followed in 
conducting the mechanical run test for variable speed 
machines: 


a) Start the compressor from a standstill and raise 
the speed up to maximum continuous speed, 
preferably in 10 percent speed increments. Allow 
the bearing to stabilize at the maximum continuous 
speed. 


b 


= 


Increase the speed to 110 percent of maximum 
continuous speed and keep the compressor 
running for a minimum period of 15 min. 


c 


Ww 


Bring down the speed to maximum continuous 
speed and keep the compressor running 
uninterrupted for four hours. 


d 


wm 


After four hours of the uninterrupted run at a 
maximum continuous speed, reduce the speed 
gradually to a standstill. For flexible shaft rotors, 
during this running down establish the actual first 
critical speed. 


14.3.2 For fixed speed integrally geared compressors 
mechanical run test shall be conducted at rated 
operating speed for a continuous four-hour period. 


14.3.3 Following the mechanical run test, carry out a 
static seal test in the case of compressors having oil 


21 


IS 11563 : 2022 


seals. During this test, check the amount of inward 
oil leakage from each seal, with approximate design 
differential pressures established. 


14.3.4 During the mechanical run test, the compressor 
shall operate satisfactorily. Vibration measurements 
shall be recorded throughout the operating speed range 
and shall not exceed the limits indicated in 9.18.4. 
When the compressor is operating at a maximum 
continuous speed, a sweep shall be made for vibration 
amplitudes at frequencies other than synchronous (for 
running speed in rpm). As a minimum, the sweep shall 
cover a run of 0.25 synchronous to twice the vane 
passing frequency. If the amplitude of any discrete 
nonsynchronous vibration exceeds 10 percent of the 
allowable level as defined in 9.18.4, the customer and 
the vendor shall mutually agree regarding additional 
testing, if any, and the suitability of the machine for 
shipment. 


Preferably, contact vibration probes and detectors shall 
be used during the mechanical run test. If vibration 
probes are not furnished by the compressor vendor or if 
the contract probes are not compatible with the readout 
facilities available at the testbed, shop probes along 
with readout shall be used. Facilities at the testbed 
shall include instrumentation with the capability of the 
continuous X-Y presentation to measure and record 
frequency, peak-to-peak displacement and phase shift. 
The customer shall specify when these facilities shall 
be used for shop tests. 


14.3.5 The actual first critical speed as established 
during the mechanical run test (in the case of flexible 
shaft compressors) shall be stamped on the nameplate. 


14.3.6 If spare compressor rotors are ordered together 
with the compressors, each spare rotor shall also 
undergo at least a clearance check in the casing in 
accordance with the requirements. 


14.3.7 All bearings and end seals (except labyrinth type 
seal) shall be removed after mechanical run test and 
inspected and reassembled. 


14.3.8 If it becomes necessary to replace the bearings or 
seals or if dismantling the casing is required to improve 
mechanical operation the mechanical run test may be 
repeated after replacements and corrections are made. 


14.3.9 The prototype model casings for toxic or 
combustible gas services shall be pressurized with an 
inert gas to the rated discharge pressure and held at this 
pressure for a minimum period of 30 min to check the 
gas leaks by subjecting to a soap bubble test. This shall 
be done after the mechanical run test. 


14.3.10 The vendor shall maintain a complete log of all 
final tests and shall submit to the customer the required 
number of copies. These logs shall include data for 


IS 11563 : 2022 


bearing and seal oil temperatures and pressures, seal oil 
leakage, pressurized gas test, rotors balancing, critical 
speeds and vibration measurements taken over the 
operating speed range and the non-synchronous sweep. 


14.4 Optional Test 


14.4.1 The customer shall specify ifany ofthe following 
optional tests shall be performed on the compressor, 
gearbox, prime mover, and auxiliary equipment: 


a) Performance test — The compressor shall 
be performance tested as agreed between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. 


b 


= 


Complete unit test — During this test such 
components as compressors, gearboxes, prime 
movers and auxiliaries that make up a complete 
compressor unit shall be tested together during the 
mechanical run test. If approved by the customer, 
the auxiliaries may be tested separately. 


c 


wa 


Tandem test — Compressor bodies arranged 
for tandem drive shall be tested as a unit during 
mechanical run test using the shop prime mover 
and oil system. 


Gear-box test — The gearbox shall be tested with 
the compressor unit during the mechanical run 
test. During this test, the vendor shall subject 
the gearbox to partial load and demonstrate 
satisfactory performance. 


d) 


Noise level measurements — The level of noise 
emanating from the compressor shall be measured 
during this test according to IS 4758. 


e) 


f) Post-test inspection — Dismantling, inspection, 
and reassembly of the compressor, gearbox and 
the prime mover shall be made after satisfactory 
completion of the mechanical run test. The 
customer shall specify whether the pressurized 
gas test required according to 14.3.9 shall be 
performed before or after the post-test inspection. 


15 NAME PLATE 


The name plate and the arrow indicating the direction 
of rotation, to be fixed on the compressor, shall be out 
of 18/8 stainless steel or monel and shall be fixed by 
rivets. The following minimum data shall be stamped 
on the name plate: 


a) Manufacturer”s name; 

b) Serial number; 

c) Size and Type; 

d) Normal capacity; 

e) First critical speed; 

f) Maximum continuous speed; 


22 


g) Casing design pressure (Max); and 
h) Maximum allowable temperature. 


16 PREPARATION FOR SHIPMENT 


16.1 Each unit shall be prepared for shipment suitable 
for storage for a minimum period of six months, 
without requiring disassembly prior to operation. 
Following the final tests and post-test inspection, all 
exposed machined surfaces shall be coated thoroughly 
with a rust preventive. All exterior surfaces of the unit 
except machined surfaces shall be given a prime coat of 
paint in the shop. The interior of the compressor and all 
bearing housings shall be either sprayed or flushed with 
a suitable rust preventive which can be later removed 
by flushing a solvent. This shall be done through all 
inlets with the machine kept slowly rotating. 


16.2 All flanged openings shall be provided with metal 
closures of 4 mm minimum thickness, together with 
rubber gaskets and at least four full-sized bolts. All 
unpiped threaded openings shall be fitted with solid 
shank steel plugs or caps. 


16.3 The compressor shall be packed securely for the 
shipment specified (domestic or export). Lifting points 
or lugs shall be clearly marked. Each compressor shall 
be properly identified with the item and serial numbers. 
Materials shipped separately shall be properly identified 
with securely affixed corrosive-resistant metal tags, 
indicating the items and serial numbers for which it is 
intended. 


16.4 If the storage is for periods exceeding six months, 
the customer shall consult the vendor regarding 
re-preservation. 


16.5 If the spare rotor is specified, it shall be suitably 
prepared for storage in unheated indoors. The rotor 
shall be treated with a rust preventive and shall be 
housed in a vapour barrier envelope. The rotor shall 
be suitably created for domestic or export shipment as 
specified. At the support areas, suitable lead sheeting 
shall be used between the rotor and the cradle. During 
storage, the rotor shall be turned periodically as per the 
vendor’s recommendations to prevent a permanent sag 
setting in the shaft. 


16.6 All components shipped with mounted, 
preassembled piping, tubing’s and wiring shall comply 
with the relevant safety requirements and shall carry on 
an all-weather tag stating in bold letters as follow: 


‘This System Has Been Preassembled And Tested For 
Operatibility And Safety And Complies With Relevant 
Safety Requirements And Shall Not Be Disturbed By 
Unauthorized Personnel.” 


IS/ISO No. 


554 : 1999 


817: 1966 


1239 (Part 2): 


2011 


1536 : 2001 


1537 : 1976 


1570 (Part 1): 


1978 


1570 (Part 5) : 


1985 


2644 : 1994 


2825 : 1969 
3681 : 1995 


4218 (Part 1): 


2001 


4218 (Part 2): 


2001 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Pipe threads where pressure-tight 
joints are made on the 
threads — Dimensions, tolerances 
and designation (fourth revision) 


Code of practice for training and 
testing of metal arc welders 


Steel tubes, tubulars and other steel 
fittings — Specification: Part 2 Steel 
pipe fittings (fifth revision) 
Centrifugally cast (Spun) 
iron pressure pipes for water, 
gas and sewage — Specification 
(fourth revision) 


Specification for vertically cast iron 
pressure pipes for water, gas and 
sewage (first revision) 


Schedules for wrought steels: Part 1 
Steels specified by tensile and/or 
yield properties (first revision) 
Schedules for wrought steels: Part 5 
Stainless and heat — Resisting 
steels (second revision) 


High strength steel castings for 
general engineering and structural 
purposes Specification 
(fourth revision) 


Code for unfired pressure vessels 


Gears — Cylindrical, gears — 
Accuracies (first revision) 


ISO general purpose metric screw 


threads: Part 1 Basic profile 
(second revision) 


ISO general purpose metric screw 
threads: Part 2 General plan 
(second revision) 


23 


IS/ISO No. 


4218 (Part 3): 
1999 


4218 (Part 4) : 
2001 


14962 (Part 2) 
: 2001 


4864 : 1968 to 
4870 : 1968 
4758 : 1968 


5334 : 2014 


6916 : 1973 


8593 (Part 1) : 
2017 


IS/ISO 21940- 


11 : 2016 


IS/IEC 60034- 


5 : 2000 


IS 11563 : 2022 


Title 


ISO general purpose metric screw 
threads: Part 3 Basic dimensions 
(second revision) 


ISO general purpose metric 
screw threads : Part 4 selected 
sizes for screws, bolts and nuts 
(second revision) 


ISO general purpose metric screw 
threads — Tolerances: Part 2 Limits 
of sizes for general purpose external 
and internal screw threads 
medium quality 


Specification for shell flanges for 
vessels and equipment 


Methods of measurement of noise 
emitted by machines 


Magnetic particle flaw detection 
of welds — Code of practice 
(third revision) 


Code of practice for fabrication 
welding of steel castings 


Recommendations for centralised 
lubrication as applied to plant and 
machinery: Part 1 Oil lubrication 
(first revision) 


Mechanical vibration Rotor 
balancing: Part 11 Procedures and 
tolerances for rotors with rigid 
behavior 


Rotating electrical machines: Part 5 
Degrees of protection provided 
by the integral design of rotating 
electrical machines (IP Code) — 
Classification (second revision) 


IS 11563 : 2022 


ANNEXB 
(Clause 3) 


TECHNICAL DATA TO BE FURNISHED ALONG WITH CUSTOMER’S ENQUIRY 


CUSTOMER: 
SITE: 
ITEM REQUIRED: 
B-1 SITE CONDITIONS 


B-1.1 Altitude (metres above MSL) 


PLANT: 
SERVICE: 
NO. OFF: 


B-1.2 Temperature during: 
a) Winter (Min) 
b) Summer (Max) 


B-1.3 Relative humidity (percent) 
B-1.4 Barometric pressure (bar) 
B-1.5 Area classification (hazardous/non-hazardous) 


B-1.6 installation: 
a) Indoor (heated/non-heated) 
b) Outdoor (open/under roof) 


B-1.7 Protection (winterization/tropicalization) 
B-2 GAS CHARACTERISTICS 

B-2.1 Gas handled 

B-2.2 Composition by volume (percent) 

B-2.3 Particle/dust concentration (if any) 
B-2.4 Molecular weight (mole) 

B-2.5 Specific heat ratio (C/C) 

B-2.6 Compressibility factor (Z) 


a) At suction 
b) At discharge 


B-2.7 Fouling factor-gas side 
B-3 PROCESS DETAILS 


B-3.1 Suction pressure (bar) 

B-3.2 Suction temperature (°C) 

B-3.3 Discharge pressure (bar) 

B-3.4 Discharge temperature limited to (°C) 
B-3.5 Capacity (Nm*/h): 


a) Normal 


b) Maximum 


24 


B-3.6 Side streams, if any: 
a) Capacity (Nm*/h) 
b) Pressure (bar) 
c) Temperature (°C) 
d) Composition by Volume (percent) 


B-4 PRIME MOVER 


B-4.1 Type (steam turbine, electric motor, gas turbine) 
B-4.2 Steam parameters (for steam turbine drives) 
a) Inlet pressure (bar) Normal 
b) Inlet temperature (°C) 
c) Extraction pressure (bar) 
d) Extraction temperature (°C) 
e) Exhaust pressure (bar) 
f) Exhaust temperature (°C) 
g) Extraction quantity (kg/h) 


B-4.3 
a) Fuel composition (percent by Volume) (for gas turbine drives) 
b) Calorific value (kcal) 
B-4.4 Atmospheric air characteristics: 
a) Dust concentration (in ppm) 
b) Corrosive constituents 


B-4.5 Fuel supply parameters 


B-4.6 System conditions (for electric motor drives): 
a) Rated voltage (kV) 
b) No. of phases (single/three) 
c) Frequency (Hz) 
d) Service factor 
e) Voltage dip (percent) 
f) Starting (full load/No-load, full voltage/reduced voltage, etc) 


B-5 UTILITIES FOR AUXILIARIES 


B-5.1 Electric power: 
a) Voltage (V); 
b) No. of phases (single/three); and 
c) Frequency (Hz). 
B-5.2 Steam: 
a) Inlet pressure (bar) Normal 
b) Inlet temperature (°C) 
c) Back pressure (bar) 


25 


Maximum 


Maximum 


IS 11563 : 2022 


Minimum 


Minimum 


IS 11563 : 2022 


B-5.3 Cooling water: 
a) Pressure at supply limit (bar); 
b) The temperature at supply limit (°C); 
c) Temperature rise permitted; 
d) Fouling factor (water side); and 
e) Quality (fresh/river/sea). 
B-5.4 DC power for trip circuits (220/440V). 


B-5.5 Instrument air pressure (bar). 


B-6 ADDITIONAL REMARKS, IFANY 


26 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 10.1.1) 


MATERIALS FOR MAJOR COMPONENT PARTS 


IS 11563 : 2022 


SI No. 


Part 


Material Specified 


Form 


Temp Limits 


Min °C | Max °C 


Casing 


a) Cast and horizontally 
split 


IS 210: 2009 (Gr FG 300) ‘Grey 
iron castings (fifth revision)’ or 


IS 3038 : 1983 Alloy steel castings 
for pressure containing parts 
suitable for high-temperature 
service (first revision) or 

IS 7806 : 1975 (Gr I) Ferritic 
and austenitic steel casings for 
high-temperature service or 

IS 3444 : 1978 Corrosion resistant 
alloy steel and nickel-based 
castings for general applications 
(first revision) 


Cast 
Cast 
Cast 
Cast 


—30 260 
—30 400 
—20 340 
—100 340 


b) Fabricated and 
horizontally split 


IS 2002 : 1982 Steel plates for 
boilers and 


IS 2041 : 1982 Steel plates for 
pressure vessels 


Plate 


10 340 


c) Vertically split barrel 
compressors 


IS 2002 : 1982 Steel for boilers or 


IS 2041 : 1982 Steel plates for 
pressure vessels or 


IS 2004 : 1978 Carbon steel 
forgings for general engineering 
purposes (second revision) or 


IS 3038 : 1974 Alloy steel castings 
for pressure containing parts 
suitable for high-temperature 
service (first revision) or 


IS 3444 : 1978 Corrosion resistant 
alloy steel and nickel-based 
castings for general applications 
(first revision). 


Plate 
Forged 
Cast 
Cast 


10 340 
—30 340 
—30 400 

—180 300 


Diaphragm and guide vanes 


IS 210 : 2009 (Gr FG 200) Grey 
iron castings (fifth revision) or 


IS 1865 : 1974 Iron castings with 
spheroidal or nodular graphite 
(second revision) or 


IS 3038 : 1974 Alloy steel castings 
for pressure containing parts 
suitable for high-temperature 
service (first revision) 

IS 2002 : 1982 Steel plates for 
boilers or 


IS 2041 : 1982 Steel plates for 
pressure vessels 


Cast 
Cast 
Cast 
Plate 


—195 340 
—195 340 
-195 340 
—10 340 


27 


IS 11563 : 2022 


SINo. 


Part 


Material Specified 


Form 


Temp Limits 


Min °C 


Max °C 


Shaft 


IS 1875 : 1992 Carbon steel 
billets, blooms, slabs and bars 
for forgings — Specification 
(fifth revision) or 

IS 3445 : 1992 Forged steel rolls — 
Specification (first revision) or 

IS 4367 : 1991 Alloy steel forgings 
for general industrial use — 
Specification (first revision) or 


IS 4368 : 1967 Alloy steel billets, 
blooms and slabs for forgings for 
general engineering purposes or 

IS 5517 : 1993 Steels for hardening 
and tempering — Specification 
(second revision) 


Forged 
Forged 


-30 
-115 


340 
425 


Impeller 


IS 4367 : 1991 Alloy steel forgings 
for general industrial use — 
Specification (first revision) 

IS 6603 : 2001 Stainless steel 
bars and flats — Specification 
(first revision) 


Forged 
Forged 


—70 
—30 


340 
340 


Impeller discs and covers 


IS 1875 : 1992 Carbon steel 
billets, blooms, slabs and bars for 
forgings — Specification 
(fifth revision) or 

IS 3445 : 1992 Forged steel rolls — 
Specification (first revision) or 

IS 4367 : 1991 Alloy steel forgings 
for general industrial use — 
Specification (first revision) 


Forged 
Forged 
Forged 


-30 
-115 
—70 


440 
400 
340 


Impeller vane 


IS 4367 : 1991 Alloy steel forgings 
for general industrial use — 
Specification (first revision) 

IS 6603 : 2001 Stainless steel 
bars and flats — Specification 
(first revision) 


Plate 


Forged/ 
rolled 


-30 
—70 


340 
340 


Labyrinths 


IS 617 : 1994 Cast aluminum and 
its alloys — Ingots and castings for 
general engineering purposes — 
Specification (third revision) 


Cast 


—195 


315 


28 


IS 11563 : 2022 


SINo. Part Material Specified Form Temp Limits 


Min*C | Max °C 


8 Balance IS 1875 : 1992 Carbon steel | Forged —30 400 
billets, blooms, slabs and bars for Forged 414 400 
forgings — Specification 
(fifth revision) or Forged 30 340 


IS 3445 : 1992 Forged steel rolls — 
Specification (first revision) or 


IS 4368 : 1967 Alloy steel billets, 
blooms and slabs for forgings for 
general engineering purposes or 


IS 5517 : 1993 Steels for hardening 
and tempering — Specification 
(second revision) or 


IS 6603 : 2001 Stainless steel 


bars and flats — Specification 
(first revision) 
9 Shaft sleeves and labyrinth | IS 3445 : 1992 Forged steel rolls — | Forged -115 400 
seas sleeves Specification (first revision) or Forged _30 340 


IS 4367 : 1991 Alloy steel forgings 
for general industrial use — 
Specification (first revision) or 

IS 4368 : 1967 Alloy steel billets, 
blooms and slabs for forgings for 
general engineering purposes or 

IS 5517 : 1993 Steels for hardening 
and tempering — Specification 
(second revision) or 

IS 6603 : 2001 Stainless steel 
bars and flats — Specification 
(first revision) 


29 


IS 11563 : 2022 


ANNEXD 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


Organization 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
AB B India Limited, Bengaluru 

Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 

Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Boldrocchi Indian Private Limited, Gurugram 

Burckhardt Compression India Private Limited, 
Noida 

CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defense, New Delhi 

Dresser-Rand India Private Limited, Pune 

ELGI Equipments Limited, Coimbatore 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Gail (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 
Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Ahmedabad 
Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 
NTPC Limited, New Delhi 
National Fertilizers Limited, Noida 


Neuman and Esser Compressor Application Centre 
Private Limited, Pune 


Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Represntative(s) 


Suri K. Ravi (Chairman) 
SHRI N. S. PRASAD 
SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 


SHRI V. P. SHYAMSUNDAR 
SHRI Y. V. RAMA LAKSHMI (Alternate) 


SHRI NOKESH AGGARWAL 
SHRI PIYUSH GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRIR. S. GUNAJI 
SHRI A. BHASKAR PRABHUNE (Alternate) 


Dr RAJESH KUMAR 
PROF DRM. SINGH (Alternate) 


Lt COL DEEPAK SHARMA 
Suri U. R. Rasa (Alternate) 


Suri M. H. Vyas 
SHRI J. B. RAvAL (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYARAJ B. 
SHRI JEYASELVAN M. (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. DUGGAL 
SHRI MAHESH EASWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH GEDA 


SHRI M. RAMBABU 

SHRI P. VENKATANARAYANA (Alternate) 
SHRI P. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRADEEP BANSAL 

SHRI ATUL MANI SHARMA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAMESH K. V. 

SHRI DILEEP PATIL (Alternate) 
SHRI NEERAJ BHARGAVA 

SHRI AVDHOOT BHIDE (Alternate) 
Suri A. K. Moni (Alternate) 
Suri S. K. JHA 
SHRI S. K. SHARMA 

SHRI RAMAN GAMBHIR (Alternate) 
SHRI KUMAR PUDURU 

SHRI MAHESH DIXIT (Alternate) 
SHRI BRAJ KISHOR RAI 

SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MANDILWAR 
SHRI AJAY K. S. RUHEL (Alternate) 


30 


IS 11563 : 2022 


Organization Represntative(s) 
Reliance India Limited, Mumbai SHRI S. K. GARYALI 
SHRI RANJIT S. MUNDRA (Alternate) 
Research Designs and Standards Organization SHRI S. P. GOVIL 
(RDSO), Lucknow 
TLT Engineering India Private Limited, Gujrat SHRI MUKESH K. JAIN 


SHRI SANJAY MAKWANA (Alternate) 


Tata Chemicals Limited, Mumbai SHRI M. S. PRASAD 
SHRI AJOY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI 
SHRI ASLAM BASHA B. (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


31 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 22 (17810). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


