( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 11466 ( Part 1 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINER
PART
Freight
Chairman CAPT N. A. TAMHANE
Members

1

GENERAL
Sectional
Container The

CARGO
MCPD 7

Containers

Committee,
Representing

Information

& Services Co, Bombay Transport Development

SHRI MURARILAL BAERI

Indian Roads & _Association, Bombay

SRRI M. P. SANGHVI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Factory Advice Service & SHRI S. K. BAJAJ Labour Institute, Bombay SHRI V. L. KATHANE ( Altcrnatt ) Bahner Lawrie & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI P. K. BISENOI SHBI P. SETH ( Alternate ) The Scindia Steam Navigation Co Lttl, Bombay SRRI A. R. CHOK~I Trans-Freight Containers Limited, Bombay SARI N. L. DALMIA SHRI S. MITTAL ( Alternate ) Department of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI B. R. DAVE Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay SRRI P. G. DESHMUKII Federation of Freight Forwarders' Association in SHISI PRAVIN KANAKIA India, Bombay CAPT N. A. TAMHAN~ ( Alternate ) Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. KAUSHIK SHRI D. V. BAL ( Alternate ) Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRIS. R. KHA~E American Bureau of Shipping, Bombay SHRI MAD&N L. KOCHHAR SHRI R. C. BHAVANANI ( Alternate ) Intermodal Transport and Trading Systrms Pvt Ltd, SKRI RAM V. KOTAR Bangalore SHRI M. 0. SHARIE~F ( Alternate ) SHRI V. L. KRISHNAMURTHY Cochin Port Trust, Cochin SHRI M. VELU ( Alternate ) The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. Bombay CAPT S. B. KUNDARGI CAPT C. P. ALEXANDER ( Alternate )' Indian National Shipowners' Association, Bombay CAPT S. B. KUNDARGI Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Eombay SRRI D. MADHO~ SHRI J. N. GOSWAMY ( Alternate )
( Continued @ Copyright on page 2 )

1986 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyri,& Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11466 ( Part 1) - 1985

Members SaRI A.K.
hf_4JUMDAR SHRI N. N. MOOKJLHILJEE SHRI G. S. E. I. M~XPIT,LI

Repcsenting

Calcutta Port Trust, Calcutta ( Alternate ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay SHRI M. J. MATHLW ( Alternate) SHRI V.S. MANWWCAR Federation of Association of Stavadores, Madras SHRI J. S. MARW~IIA Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ), Lucknow SHRI K. L. NIRW.~N ( Alternate ) SHRI T.N. OBHAN Indian Federation of Transport Operators, Bombay SHRI HAR~~IKAT SINQH KOHLI ( Alternate ) SHRI L. M. PRAUHAICA~E Sea Lord Containers Limited, Bombay SHKI M. G. M~`:RTA ( Alternate ) SHH~ I. N. PRA~H.~N In personal capacity ( JVarainNiwos, 21 North Auenue, Santacruz, West Bombay ) The UK & Continental Shipping Conferences, SHRI S. R. PRASAD Bombay Peninsular European & Asian Container Express, SARI M. G. &INDIA Bombay Board ( Ministry of Railways ), SHRI R. C. SHARMA Railway New Delhi SHRI LOVE DEV RAJ ( Alternate ) General of Technical Development, SHRI RAJ JASWANT SINGH Directorate New Delhi SI~RI KAMAL KRISRNA ( Alternate ) Mahindra Owens Ltd, Pune SHRI G. C. SINGHAL SHRI B. V. B~LIG~ ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), New Delhi SHKI 0. P. SRIVASTAV SHRI A. K. SINGH ( Alternatc ) Ministry of Shipping and Transport, New Delhi SHR~ A. B. THAKUR SHRI S. N. SUM IN ( Alternate ) Nathani Steel Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. VEIZKATACHALAM SHRI A. V. JA~ANNATH ( Alternate ) Bureau Veritas, Bombay SHR~ P. B. WARRIER SHRI M. C. BHATIA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SBRI B. L. RAINA, Director ( MCPD ) Secretary SHRI V. K. SEHGAL Joint Director ( MCPD ), IS1

IS : 11466( Part 1 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR PACKING, STOWAGE AND SECURING OF CARGO INSIDE THE FREIGHT CONTAINER
PART 1 GENERAL CARGO

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 September 1983, after the draft finalized by the Freight Containers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 This standard is intended as a guide to the essentials of safe packing for use by those responsible for the packing and securing of cargo in freight containers. Earlier, the securing of cargo on boardships was NOW it is the responsibility of the done by the skilled stevedore labour. shipper who does the loading and securing of goods inside the container at factory of warehouse, often with less skilled manpower. 0.3 Damage to goods transmitted in containers is usually due to more faulty stowing and securing than due to severe stresses during transportation. Therefore, it is necessary to prevent cargo shifting within the container which may cause damage to the container and/or to the cargo. 0.4 While this part of the standard deals with general cargo, the guidelines for packing, stowage and securing of dangerous goods inside the freight container are given in the Part 2 of this standard. 0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular this standard is complied with, the final value, observed expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be The number of significant accordance with IS : 2-1960*. in the rounded off value should be the same as that value in this standard. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( wired 3
).

requirement of or calculated, rounded off in places retained of the specified

IS : 11466( Part 1 ) - 1985 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) gives guidelines for safe packing, and securing of general cargo in a freight container.
2. FORCES and when stowage

ACTING

ON CARGO - Once cargo is loaded inside a container moves by road, following hazards exist:
docks,

2.1 During Road Transport
the container against a) Tmpact b) Braking d) Coupling e) Vibration

loading

and acceleration, impact, and

c) Sway on curves, and shocks. and deceleration from sudden stops can create 8 `G' ( gravity ). This places a tremendous as well as the entire load. When the cargo `G' forces can be severe specially on loads at It also experiences horizontal centrifugal cornering.

2.1.1 Rapid acceleration forces ranging from 3 to strain on individual pieces bounces inside a container the rear of the container. forces during turning and 2.2 During Rail Transport

a) Acceleration b) Coupling d) Vibrations.

and deceleration, and

impact,

c) Sway on curves,

2.2.1 Movement of container on land at times is accomplished through rail transportation and the goods are subjected to the same stresses as in In addition, hard braking the case of truck ( highway ) transportation. can occur during shunting. This creates retardation, a sudden force and aft movement of cargo. 2.2.2 Shocks and vibrations produced in rail movements are greater than those of the road transportation. It is not unusual to have frequencies of 2'5 to 5 hertz with shock intensities of up 10 1.25 Gs. 2.3 During Sea Voyage weather conditions. ( see Fig. 1 ): and A vessel at sea may be subjected movements of rotation to extreme its axis

2.3.1 A ship has the following
a) Rolling, b) Pitching, c) Yawning.

about

4

IS : 11466 ( Part 2.3.2 A ship has also the following
a) Heave, b) Sway, c) Surge.
YAWIN C

1 ) - 1985
1:

body

motions

as shown in Fig.

and

ROL .LING FIG. 1

>d

BODY MOTION

2.3.3 A ship may move in a single motion or in any combination of all of these motions at one instance making it a confusing and extremely complex action. 2.3.4 A loaded container may travel 21 metres with each complete roll as often as 7 to IO times per minute. In high seas a roll of 45" is not The toughest leg of the journey of a container is the sea uncommon. and the cargo in the container should be loaded and secured to withstand this toughest journey. 3. GUIDELINES

CONTAINER

FOR VISUAL

EXAMINATION

OF THE

The container should be inspected both inside and outside, before it is loaded with cargo. Containers that are damaged, may pose a risk to the personnel handling or transporting them. If a container appears to be severly damaged, the container operator should be contracted with a view to obtain replacement. The following checklist may be used as a guide to inspect the container before loading of cargo is started. 3.1

Interior 3.1.1 The container
or protrading should be free from major damage nails that can damage the cargo. 5 or broken floor

planks

IS : 11466( Part 1 ) - 1985 3.1.2 The
persistant container should odours from previous be clean, cargoes. dry and free of residue and

3.1.2.1 If the container has been used for the transportation of goods with a pungent or obnoxious smell or germinating cargoes, internal cleaning or even disinfection may be necessary. 3.1.3 The container should be weather proof ( unless it is so constructed that this is obviously not required, that is flats ). The risk of water leaking into the container may be checked by entering the container, In particular, closing the doors and seeing if any light comes through. previous patches or repairs should be checked for possible leakage. If this type of checking is carried out, care should be taken to ensure that a person does not inadvertantly get locked inside. 3.1.4 Ventilation openings, if fitted specifically instructed otherwise. should be securely closed unless

3.15 Most of the dry freight containers have built-in tie-down on fittings ( bull rings/D rings ) which are used to secure and brace on cargo inside the container. These tie-down on fittings, where provided, should be in good condition and well anchored. 3.1.6 Folding containers or other containers with movable or removable Care should be taken main components should be correctly assembled. to ensure that removable parts, not in use, are packed and secured inside the container. 3.2 Exterior

3.2.1 The doors of the container should be checked to see that they work properly and can be securely locked and sealed. Door gaskets and weather strips should be checked to see that they seal tightly upon closing the doors. 3.2.2 The corner fittings usually on both the top and bottom of the container are extremely important for the safe handling and transportation of the container. They should be free of damage and there should be no visible cracks. 3.2.3 It is important that the condition, intact and not distorted. 3.2.4 The extent on the the frame of the container walls, floor and roof are in good

structural strength of the container depends to a great metal bottom and top raiF; and vertical posts which form the container. If they are bent this may be evidence that is severely weakened and should not be used. 6

IS : 11466 ( Part 4. GUIDELINES ON THE STOWING,_PACKING OF GOODS IN A CONTAINER 4.1 Before Packhg

1 ) - 1985

AND SECURING

4.1.1 When a container on a vehicle is manoeuvered up to a loading dock or bay, the vehicle's brakes should be applied or wheels checked before loading of the container begins. If a container on a semi-trailer at a loading bay and the tractor unit is removed, trailer is positioned, may become unstable and pivot about trailer landing legs during the if a forklift truck is used inside the conloading process, particularly, tainer, In such circumstances a suitable prop should be positioned under the fifth wheel plate of the trailer.
4.1.1.1 When forklift trucks are used, the dynamic load on the of the container due to the forklift truck shall be limited as follows: Front Mass Wheel Wheel axle mass per front wheel area/wheel width centres 5 460 kg, Max 2 730 kg, Max 142 cmz, Min Not less than About 180 mm 760 mm floor

Contract

4.1.2 Loading pattern should be planned for each commodity prior to commencement of loading in container. The pre-planning leaves the minimum gap inside the~container and avoids overloading done end of the container or the container sides. 4.1.2.1 The maximum permissible exceed the following limits: For 20-ft container For 40-ft container intensity of loading should not

4.5 ton/m2 3 ton/m2

4.1.2.2 Cargo packages of an appropriate strength and type should be selected to be placed adjacent to each other, so as to gain the desired tightness of stowage and compatibility between the items. 4.1.3 The planned load of the container should not exceed the container's weight capacity which is usually marked on the container. In the relevant highway or road ~axle weight limitations in the addition, countries of loading, destination or transit, should not be exceeded. 4.1.4 When cargo comprises heavy units, it-may be necessary to spread their weight over the container floor using timber, steel plates or other In this regard, the size of the bearing area upon which arrangements. to the design strength the weight presses against the floor in relation of the container is the most important factor. 7

IS : 11466 ( Part 1) - 1985 4.1.5 Unboyed machinery should be belted on a skid timbers so that the lower members extend length-wise for the proper distribution of weight. made of sound in the container

4.1.6 Particular care should be taken when securing heavy units within a container to prevent their movement. Batten nailed to wood floor ( where fitted ), securing against corner post or longitudinal rails, lashings to the built-in securing points or combination of any of these should be used to ensure proper securing of the cargo. 4.1.6.1 Portable anchor plates are available which can be placed and secured at strategic locations depending on the cargo to be lashed. 4.2 Packing and Securing secure against all cargo should

4.2.1 It is essential to make the cargo-in the container movement from any reasonable cause and, therefore, be blocked tightly against adjacent goods or surfaces.

4.2.2 In the first instance, it is best to obtain a tight stowage by using the cargo itself and building with a reasonable solidity from side-wall to side-wall. `Ihis may mean some space has to be left but each item should be in contact with some part or the other. If this cannot be the case, intervening spaces should be filled with appropriate dunnage material, that is, timber folded, cardboard, hardboard, air bags, etc. Where timber is used, due account should be taken of any quarantine regulations applying in the country of destination. 4.2.3 Cargo weight should be evenly distributed over the floor of the Where cargo items of varying weight are to be packed into container. a container or where the container will not be full ( either because of insufficient cargo or because the maximum weight allowed wil! be reached before the container is full ), then the stowage should be arranged and secured in such a manner that the approximate centre of gravity of the cargo is close to the mid length of the container. In no case, more than 60 percent of the load should be in less than half of the length of the container. 4.2.3.1 Longitudinally, by the following limits: the centre of gravity may be out of middle

20-ft container 40-ft container

&to*60 m 50.90 m

4.2.4 Heavy goods should not be placed on top of lighter goods. Wherever possible, the centre of gravity should lie in the lower half of the height. Cargo with high centre of gravity shall require more decking and bracing in a container than the onewith a louver centre of gravity. 8

IS : 11466 ( Part

1 ) - 1985

4.2.5 Stowing of incompatible goods in the container should be avoided. For example, dust producing goods, such as cement should not be stowed next to or on top of goods which are susceptible to damage by dust, that is, foodstuffs or fine machinery.
4.2.5.1 Goods with sharp projections or unusual stowed apart from other type of packages, particularly separation timber should be used to avoid damage. shapes bags. should be If possible,

4.2.6 Barrels and drums should usually be packed with bungs uppermost. Proper stowage for barrels is on their side, laid on battens with bulge free and each securely cushioned. Vented packages should be packed so that the vent is in no way blocked. 4.2.7 In order to avoid cargo damage from condensation, wet cargoes, moisture inherent cargo, or cargoes liable to leak must not be loaded Wet dunnage, pallets with goods susceptible to damage by moisture. or wet packaging should not be used. 4.2.8 Damaged packages should not be loaded into a container there is clear evidence that the contents will not spill or leak. 4.2.8.1 In case, the packages develop leakage during order to avoid damage in that case double tier of dunnage off the floor and -above the pool of liquid. unless

voyage, in keeps cargo

4.2.9 When solids and liquids are stowed in the same container, solids should always be placed above the liquids to avoid possibility of damage from leakage. 4.2.10 Permanent securing equipment incor~porated in the design of the container should be used wherever necessary to obtain tight stowage and prevent cargo movement. 4.3 On Completion of Packing

4.3.1 After the packing of the container is completed, steps should be taken to ensure that the cargo will not fall out when the doors Suitably positioned lashing points and wire rope or are opened. strapping hands should be used to leave a restraining net across the face of the cargo or a gate should be positioned to prevent direct pressure on Where medium sized packages are concerned, care should be the door. taken to interweave the cargo itself so as to effectively build a wall and thus reduce the need for a reliance opened lashings or net alone. 4.3.2 If goods are packed in wooden receptacles or wood is used for securing purposes and the goods are destined for countries having wood it is a desirable practice to place a treatment quarantine regulations, copy of the wood treatment certificate in a conspicuous place in the container. 9

INTERNATIONAL Base Units
QUAMTITP Length Mass Time El&&c current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QTTANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force Units

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )
UNIT metre kilogram second ampere k&in candela mole
SYMBOL

m

kg
9

A K

cd mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYXBOL rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL N W Wb T Hz S V Pa 1 1 1 1 1 1

DEFINITION N = 1 kg.m/s' J = 1 N.m W=!J/s T = 1 Wb/m* S = 1 A/V V = 1 W/A

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)

1 Pa = 1 N/m'

