INRI AAF IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


vers Aa ch Tem 
viera fafa — mtesi Arata 
amt 7 uea wara maii cht iam at Frater 


Retaining Wall 
for Hill Area — Guidelines 


Part 7 Construction of Peripheral 
Reinforced Gabion Walls 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEGUE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2022 Price Group 5 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 7) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the 
Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Retaining walls are structures, which support the backfill and maintain the difference in elevation of the two 
ground surfaces. They are generally located at the toe of cut slopes on the valley side of a hill road section or 
excavated platform. Retaining walls are effectively utilized to tackle the problems of landslides in hill areas by 
providing support to the hill slopes or cut slopes. 


If the retaining walls are not provided at the toe of hill excavations, the gradual slope degradation may often lead to 
progressive slope instability and environmental degradation resulting from unprotected excavation. This standard 
(Part 7) is therefore formulated to provide necessary guidelines for the construction of peripheral reinforced 
gabion retaining walls for the protection of cut slopes in the hills. The other parts formulated in the series are: 


Part 1: 1998 Selection of type of wall 

Part 2 : 1997 Design of retaining/breast walls 

Part 3 : 1998 Construction of dry stone walls 

Part 4 : 2018 Construction of banded dry stone masonry walls 

Part 5 : 2018 Construction of cement stone masonry walls 

Part 6 : 2018 Construction of gabion walls 

Further parts being formulated are: 

a) Construction of RCC crib walls, 
b) Design of RCC cantilever walls/buttressed walls/L-type walls, and 
c) Design and construction of reinforced earth retaining walls. 


The choice of a particular type of retaining wall is dependent on the nature of the ground including geology, 
budget and availability of construction materials in the vicinity. A peripheral reinforced gabion (PRG) wall 
contains systematically partitioned gabion units, tied to a series of pipes along the periphery, which is grouted to 
the ground below. In fact, it is the same as the ordinary gabion wall that is attached to the pipes on the periphery 
of boulder filled containers to increase their stability, durability and efficient functioning as compared to the 
conventional gabion walls. To create a PRG wall, a series of boulder filled wire fabric containers are tied together 
along their length in a direction generally perpendicular to the overall slope direction. Since the interconnected 
and variable size gabions filled with boulders are anchored to the ground below along the periphery, they can be 
considered as fairly rigid walls, which are highly pervious in nature. In addition to serving as a retaining wall for 
loose slope debris and soil, they are effectively used as protection walls to prevent bank erosion, parapet walls 
along the road, sea walls, channel lining, revetments and other such works. They are particularly useful for the 
grounds, characterized by loose materials, water logged conditions and even having shallow water conditions as 
the pipes can be anchored to deeper levels. In future, the PRG walls shall be effectively designed for many of the 
infrastructures like highways, railways, bridges, river front structures, bridge abutments, culvert protection works 
and many other uses. This standard particularly deals with its construction as a retaining wall at the toe of cut 
slopes and natural slopes. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard complies with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


RETAINING WALL FOR HILL AREA — GUIDELINES 


PART 7 CONSTRUCTION OF PERIPHERAL 
REINFORCED GABION WALLS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 7) deals with the construction 
aspects of peripheral reinforced gabion (PRG) walls 
used for protecting cut slopes as well as natural slopes 
at the toe of the slope. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain some provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

1239:2004 Steel tubes, tubulars and other 
wrought steel fittings — Specification 
(sixth revision) 

2062 :2011 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 

16013: 2018 Welded wire gabions 
(metallic-coated or metallic-coated 
with PVC coating) — Specification 
(first revision) 

16014: 2018 Mechanically woven, double- twisted, 
hexagonal wire mesh gabions, revet 
mattresses, rock fall netting and other 
products forcivil engineering purposes 
(galvanized steel wire or galvanized 
steel wire with polymer coating) 
(first revision) 

14458 Retaining wall for hill areas — 
(Part 5): Guidelines: Part 5 Construction of 
2018 cement stone masonry walls 

3 GENERAL 


A peripheral reinforced gabion (PRG) wall contains 
systematically partitioned gabion units, tied to a series 
of pipes along the periphery, which is grouted to the 
ground below. In fact, it is the same as the ordinary 
gabion wall that is, attached to the pipes on the periphery 


of boulder filled containers to increase their stability, 
durability and efficient functioning as compared to the 
conventional gabion walls. To create a PRG wall, a 
series of boulder filled wire fabric containers are tied 
together along their length in a direction generally 
perpendicular to the overall slope direction. Since the 
interconnected and variable size gabions, filled with 
boulders are anchored to the ground below along the 
periphery, they can be considered as fairly rigid walls, 
which are highly pervious in nature. In addition to 
serving as a retaining wall for loose slope debris and 
soil, they are effectively used as protection walls to 
prevent bank erosion, parapet walls along the road, 
sea walls, channel lining, revetments and other such 
works. They are particularly useful for the grounds, 
characterized by loose materials, water logged 
conditions and even having shallow water conditions 
as the pipes can be anchored to deeper levels. 


The PRG walls are quite useful in hill infrastructures as 
toe support for cut slopes and natural slopes. A PRG wall 
is basically a gravity retaining structure for retaining the 
soil behind by its weight and section with grouted pipes 
supporting them against overturning. The high porosity 
and permeability of gabions prevent the pore-water 
pressure development behind the walls, which is a major 
advantage here. The PRG walls also have the advantage 
of being able to withstand significant deformations and 
are moderately flexible within the units. These structures 
blend with the surroundings and allow vegetation to take 
roots through the structure which enhances the life of the 
structure. 


The PRG walls are suitable in various field conditions, 
particularly where the terrains are liable to become 
saturated or where the foundation is composed of 
relatively compressible materials like debris and other 
unconsolidated materials. Since the peripheral ends 
are anchored to the ground below, they are costlier 
as compared to conventional gabion walls. But they 
provide long term stability to the wall and also can 
easily accommodate large deformations. Hence, 
they are highly useful in areas where considerable 
deformations are anticipated due to water charging or 
loose ground conditions. In view of its added stability 
and usefulness in variable conditions, these walls 
may prove to be helpful in many areas of rugged and 
unstable Himalayan terrains. If basic facilities like 
portable drilling machines and grouting are created, 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 


these types of economic and highly stable walls can 
effectively replace conventional gabions, particularly 
along road cut slopes. 


4 MAIN COMPONENTS OF PRG RETAINING 
WALL 


4.1 APRGretaining wall is basically a gravity structure, 
made by stacking gabion boxes, which are filled with 
rock blocks and tied together among themselves as well 
as with the peripheral pipes. The PRG walls have four 
major components namely pipes along the boundary 
of individual rows, gabion boxes, blocks for filling 
gabions and backfill. 


4.2 Pipes 


Holes are drilled along the boundary of individual 
rows at required spacing and the Galvanized iron pipes 
and fittings as per IS 1239 are inserted in these holes. 
Depending upon the size of holes, pipes of different 
sizes ranging from 80 mm to 120 mm are used for tying 
the stone filled gabion box along the periphery. Below 
the ground level, these pipes are perforated, to facilitate 
effective grouting of pipes. The diameter of perforation 
is generally 10 mm. Two holes are provided in one row 
which is opposite each other, and the centre to centre 
distance of each row is 100 mm. The second row of 
perforation is provided perpendicular to the axis of 
the first row or perforation. The perforation is started 
0.2 m to 0.3 m above the pipe end. 


4.3 Gabion Box 


The gabion boxes as per IS 16013 or IS 16014 are stacked 
between the two linear rows of pipes. The selection of 
the gabion box and its construction is decided as per site 
conditions. The most commonly used gabion boxes are 
rectangular fabricated double twisted steel woven wire 
mesh having mesh sizes ranging between 60 mm and 
80 mm with heavily galvanized. The box is divided into 
cells by transverse diaphragms. For using the gabions 
in harsh and aggressive environments additional PVC 
coating is done over the heavily galvanized steel wire. 
Nylon, polypropylene and polyethylene materials may 
also be used in specific conditions in view of their 
lightweight and corrosion resistance. 


Gabion boxes are designed and manufactured as per the 
field requirements with all components mechanically 
connected at the production facility. The external 
face and top lid are made from the same mesh. The 
ends, back, and diaphragm are connected to the base 
at the installation site by lacing wires or rings as per 


IS 16014 or any other methods. All perimeter edges of 
the mesh forming the basket have selvedge with wires 
having a diameter of about 1.5 times that of the wire 
mesh to prevent unravelling. The gabion base, top and 
sides should be formed from a single piece of mesh. 
The completely woven wire mesh box can stretch or 
contract in two directions in its own plane and thus a 
rectangular wire-mesh basket filled with rock blocks 
can deform in any direction. Welded wire mesh is also 
manufactured from steel wires electrically welded 
at each intersection. It does not have the ability to 
stretch and contract so that the baskets are less flexible 
as compared to woven wire-mesh gabions. Gabions 
are supplied to the project site from the factory with 
their components folded flat, collapsed and packed in 
bundles. 


A variety of cage sizes are used taking into account the 
spacing between the rows and terrain considerations. 
However, the modules of 1.5 m to 5.0 m (parallel to 
the hill face) x 0.5 m to 1.0 m (height) x 0.7 m to 
1.0 m (width) could be preferred depending on local 
conditions for PRG walls. The above type of simple 
box is used for walls up to 6 m height. However, if 
the walls are to be designed for more heights, strong 
boxes to withstand higher gravity loads are required. 
For that purpose, additional measures such as bracing 
wire/stiffener as well as fasteners/overlapping 
fasteners/steel rings can be provided in addition to 
other safety measures. Since low to medium height 
walls are extensively constructed in hills for various 
purposes, here focus is on PRG walls up to 6 m. Ifmore 
height of the wall is required, a horizontal or inclined 
(up to 30°) bench/platform shall be provided at 6 m 
height (see Fig. 1) having a bench width of 3 m. By this 
way, walls for more height can be planned safely by 
providing such benches. 


4.4 Gabion Infill Material 


Rock blocks/boulders used for filling gabions should 
be fresh to fairly fresh, hard, angular to sub-rounded, 
durable, clean and well graded. Weathered rock 
blocks shall not be used as they tend to break under 
loading. Care should be taken to ensure good quality 
that they do not lose their integrity on exposure to the 
atmosphere or water during the life of the structure. 
The maximum size ofthe rock block should not exceed 
two-thirds of the depth of the gabion to be filled or 
300 mm, whichever is less. The generally preferred 
size is 150 mm to 300 mm. The smallest dimension 
of the rock block should be at least twice the largest 
dimension of the mesh aperture. 


BRACING WITH 


STEEL ANGLE an 
X > 


BENCH WIDTH 


- 


TOP WIDTH - = 
(0.7 TO 1m) a > 
T- ea A o 
Ban : 
0.6 TO 0.8 m ES A 7 
RR A r.r. : 
Ges I PANA Me RA l 
So EAR -.- : E 
Es Cee di e LIA 
EDGE WIDTH 2 PER, NATURAL > ss A 
0.7 TO 1 7,2222 GROUND 4, 4 aoe 
(0.7 m) Saar re Br els 7.7207; 
R N A eee A eee OS 
. oon Pe a 1.7 7, o. A. 
ee - . Sg! eg Be 
AO 2 BASEMIDIA 22, 2 22 404 


Der 


>, 
Ai > 
¡AA 
22 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 


ORIGINAL 
HILL SLOPE 


AN 
SS 
“efe ION 


a 


© 


NK ES 1 
SEBS 
K 


(3 m) 


7, OSTOOGH R A A oa tes 
ER er RA 
- “GROUTED SECTION” “ 

(2 TO 3m) 


a A AO, 


PIPE INTO THE ^. <. ~ 
- NATURAL SOIL ~. 7 


_ ir. A 
Beer 


ar 
OP ae 
E 
. ee A 
E a ADA 
DI 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL SECTIONAL VIEW OF Two UNITS OF PRG 
(ONE UNIT OF PRG wITH Two Rows GABION WALL) 


4.5 Backfill 


The hill cutting for gabion wall construction is generally 
minimum particularly in case of low height walls 
(< 3 m). However, it may be considerable in case the 
height of the wall is more. If the width of the backfill 
is 0.7 m or more, the inverted filters as suggested 7 of 
IS 14458 (Part 5) is recommended as backfill. 
Alternately depending on the requirements, other 
suitable filters can also be provided. If the width of 
the backfill is less than 0.7 m, free draining materials 
ranging from small boulders to gravel shall be dumped 
in the gap between the wall and hill cutting. In all cases 


of backfill, the top 0.5 m thickness shall be filled tightly 
with natural soil or impervious clayey soil to prevent 
ingress of surface water into the backfill material. The 
growth of vegetation on the top soil and penetrating 
roots through the structure of the gabion in a short 
time will help to blend it with the surroundings, which 
enhances the life of the structure. 


5 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


5.1 The PRG retaining walls up to 6 m in height can be 
considered as a gravity retaining wall, that is anchored 
to the ground along the periphery. Based on field 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 


experiments and preliminary analysis, the following 
general design considerations are found to be adequate: 


a) Top width — 0.70 m to 1.0 m, and 
b) Base width — 0.5 to 0.6 H (H = height of wall) 


5.2 Specifications of Drilling 


5.2.1 For wall heights up to 3 m: 


a) Size of G.I. pipes to be grouted = 80 mm to 100 mm 
(perforated below ground level as per 4.2); 


b) Depth of grouted drill holes = 2.0 m to 2.5 m; 


c) Size of drill holes along the periphery of gabion 
units = 100 mm to 120 mm; and 


d) Number of rows of gabion units = 2 Nos. (with a 
height difference of 0.6 m to 0.8 m). 


5.2.2 For wall heights >3 m and up to 6 m: 


a) Size of G.I. pipes to be grouted = 100 mm to 
120 mm (perforated below ground level as per 
4.2); 


b) Depth of grouted drill holes = 2.0 m to 3.0 m; 


c) Size of drill holes along the periphery of gabion 
units = 120 mm to 140 mm; and 


d) Number of rows of gabion units = 3 to 4 Nos. 
(with a height difference of 0.6 m to 0.8 m each). 


5.3 Other Consideration 
The following shall apply: 


a) Spacing between drill holes along individual row 
= 0.70 m to 0.80 m (centre to centre); and 


b) Spacing between rows (width of individual gabion 
unit) = 0.70 m to 0.80 m (centre to centre). 


5.4 Depending upon the site conditions, the 
engineer-in-charge shall validate the design before 
execution and ensure safety against overall stability or 
global failure. 


6 CONSTRUCTION PRACTICE 


6.1 Foundation Preparation 


Considering appropriate cross-sections across the 
slope, the locations of PRG walls are selected. The 
foundation preparation starts with the excavation of the 
slope to the desired width and depth. The excavation 
shall be limited to the desired requirement and excess 
excavation shall be avoided. Loose pockets, if any, 
shall be excavated and filled back with suitable granular 
or backfill material. The place should be cleared of 
standing water to ensure a suitable work environment 
for drilling and proper placement of gabions. The entire 
surface should be compacted well so that the density of 
compacted formation should be greater than or equal to 
95 percent of the modified Proctor or standard Proctor 
value. Later the formation shall be levelled without ruts 
and undulations. Depending upon the width of the wall, 


an edge distance of about 0.7 m to 1.0 m shall be left on 
the valley side. 


6.2 Drilling and Tying of Peripheral Drill Holes 


Initially, drilling of holes on the hill side is taken up 
and the holes on the valley side shall be taken up later. 
Drilling could be done with a portable pneumatic drilling 
machine or any other suitable drill machine for depths 
of 2 m to 3 m (Fig. 1). The size of the drill hole is always 
bigger than the pipe inserted in it. The size difference 
could be about 20 mm to 30 mm to help in effective 
grouting. The section of the pipe inside the ground shall 
be perforated as given in 4.2 to allow better grouting. 
The size and spacing of pipes shall be as given in 5.1. 


The total length of an individual pipe shall be the depth 
of pipe below the ground plus the height of the wall 
above the ground in that location. After completion of 
drilling, these holes shall be filled with grout (cement: 
sand) ranging from 0.8 : 0.2 to 0.7 : 0.3 with a nearly 
equal proportion of water. In addition, 2.5 percent 
sodium silicate of the total quantum shall also be added 
to the mixture as an additive. Then the perforated portion 
of pipes with a conical shoe at the bottom shall be placed 
inside the grout and inserted/hammered into the natural 
soil for about 200 mm to 300 mm (see Fig. 2). 


The projecting pipes shall be braced in the inner side 
with a steel equal leg angle of size 4 50 mm x 50 mm 
x 5 mm as per IS 2062 with a clear spacing of 0.20 m 
to 0.30 m between the angles. Across the row of 
pipes, the pipes shall be braced and closed after every 
5 m length, to create a box type structure of (length x 
width x height) 5 m x 0.70 m x 1 m size. The bracing 
shall be fixed through nut bolts/welding. Bracing 
through a nut bolt shall be preferred as the long-term 
performance of the nut bolt is better than the welding. 
Three rows of drilling are done if two rows of walls are 
to be constructed and four rows of drilling are done if 
three rows of walls are preferred. The height difference 
of the two gabion walls is 0.6 m to 0.8 m. 


6.3 Placement of Gabion Boxes and Filling 


Gabion boxes of suitable size shall be placed 
systematically inside the space formed by 
interconnected pipes through steel angles. Initially, the 
boxes are placed for a height of 1 m covering the desired 
length and the space inside shall be filled tightly with 
hand packed blocks/boulders as per 4.4. These boxes 
are closed and tied to the pipes before placing other 
boxes above. In this way, the entire height is covered 
with blocks/boulders filled gabion boxes in parts of 5 m 
length (see 6.2). Later, once all the lids of the boxes are 
closed, steel angles are welded to the pipes on the top 
of each segment to make a protective cover on the top 
(Fig. 2). It is to be noted that for making the protective 
cover welding is more suitably used. Similarly, the 
whole length of the individual row and further rows on 
the valley side can be covered to construct a PRG wall 
of desired dimensions. 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 
0.2 to 0.3 m 


FRONT ELEVATION 


BRACING WITH 
STEEL ANGLE 
SECTION 


= 
O 
O 
N 


| GROUND LEVEL 
«a GROUTED 


É) 


STE SL LTL ES EE EES 
AREAS ROSS PO 
IRES SS 

NO SS q CLR FS Pe ee ERA 

ESSO LES 


PROS RR LUD CEEE) en 
S Ooh X 

SIS Oe 

D\SKRASARXKS LEHRE 

SK 25 LIES 


FA 
ES PES 
> EEE ZELLEN 
RELY EKKO 
OS OR SER 
PSSS ORES IONE 


X AGES 2 


SOK PEL KA SOLE 
CHE, 
SIR RIA 
PR DES 
b SO ESSO KEN ER O PS 
LIANE NR SE 


X BRL KX 
PORK SOR 
> LZ X X X ST 
S JS RR 
BES ARE TEE 
SIX SOK AS X SAY NYX x S 
REE 
REED 


12 IR 


ES 
> 


OO 


EX 


CLS 


Q 
L 
E 
= 
O 
oa 
(©) 


GROUTED 
G.I PIPES 


70 cm 
PLAN VIEW 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL DETAILS OF TWO ROW GABION WALLS IN A SINGLE PRG UNIT 


n 
ul 
A 
a 
O 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Hill Area Development Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 56 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (Godrej Prime Tetra Tower (S4), 
Flat No 802, Shell Colony, Sahakar Nagar, Chembur, 
Mumbai 400071, Maharashtra) 


AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Roorkee 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Defense Terrain Research Laboratory (DRDO), Delhi 
Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment 
Development, Almora 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Maccaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Gurugram 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer- in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Science and Technology, Department of 
Science and Technology, New Delhi 


National Centre for Seismology, New Delhi 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. ANBALAGAN (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
SHRI AMAN KHULLAR (Alternate) 


Dr ASHOK KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr J. K. MOHNOT 
SHRI ANIL SWARUP (Alternate) 


Dr PANKAJ GUPTA 
Dr P. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI GUNSAGAR JAIN 
SHRI P. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


DR MANISH GUPTA 
SHRI HARI Dev (Alternate) 


Director HCD 
DIRECTOR (SARDAR SAROVAR) (Alternate) 


Dr L. K. SINHA 


BRIG N. K. SHARMA 
SHRI A. K. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI KIREET KUMAR 
ER VAIBHAV EKNATH GOSAVI (Alternate) 


DR SAIBAL GHOSH 
SHRI K. ARAVIND (Alternate) 


DR AJANTA GOSWAMI 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
Dr N. K. SAMADHIYA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MINIMOL KORULLA 
SHRI RUDRA BUDHBHATTI (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI RIVOO MAHENDRU 
SHRI S. K. MISHRA (Alternate) 


Dr BHOOP SINGH 


Dr O. P. MISHRA 
Dr H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURUGAPPAN 


IS 14458 (Part 7) : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee Dr SUDHIR KUMAR 
DR SANJAY Kumar JAIN (Alternate) 
Rail Vikas Nigam Limited, New Delhi SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
Snow and Avalanche Study Establishment (DRDO), Cor P. MATHUR 
Chandigarh 
THDC India Limited, Rishikesh SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 


SHRI AJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 
Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun DR VIKRAM GUPTA 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, ACE Dr R. K. GOEL 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida) 


In Personal Capacity (Department of Civil Dr M. N. VILADKAR 
Engineering, IIT, Roorkee, Roorkee -247667, 
Uttaranchal) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST “E? AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Sectary 


Dr MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 56 (18243). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


