IS 13414:1992

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Ivldian Stamiard

MONITORING OF ROCK MOVEMENTS USING MULTI-POINT BOREHOLE EXTENSOMETERS-GUIDELINES

UDC

624'121'54

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 11AHADlJII

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

RHAVAN.

NEW July 1992

DELHI

110002 Price Group 3

Rock Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard the Rock Mechanics Council. was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, Sectional Committee had been approved by the after Civil the draft f?naliTed by Engineering Division

Rock movement is monitored to ensure safe and economic construction of some civil and mining works. It helps in receiving a forewarning of impending failure and taking corrective measur-es. One of the methods to measure rock movement is by using borehole extensometer. Rorehole exlensorneters are used to measure rock movements that may take place as the result of surface and underground excavation, foundation loading, movement of natural slopes or in-situ testing. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'.

IS 13414:1992

MONITORING OF ROCK MOVEMENTS USING MULTI-POINT BOREHOLE EXTENSOMETERS-GUIDELINES
I SCOPE

4.2 Classification 4.2.1 Depending upon the movement transferring element between anchors and the borehole collar ( see Fig. IA ): a) Wire type borehole extensometer ting element is wire. b) Rod type borehole extensometer ting element is rod. connecconnec-

This standard describes the method of rock movement measurement using multi-point borehole extensometer (MPBX). This covers the measurement of static rock movements that may take place as a result of surface and underground excavations, foundation loading, movement of natural slopes or in-situ testing. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standard IS I 1358 : 1987 `Glossary of terms and symbols applicable to rock mechanics' is a necessary adjunct to this standard.

c) Probe type borehole extensometer -- no direct connection between the anchors and the borehole collar. 4.2.2 Depending ( see Fig. 1B ): upon the number of anchors

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard the definition given in IS 11358 : 1987 shall apply in addition to the following.

a) Single point borehole extensometer ( SPBX ) - anchorage at one point. b) Double point borehole extensometer ( DPBX ) - anchorage at two points. c) Multipoint borehole extensomer ( MPBX ) - anchorage at more than two points. 4.2.3 Depending upon the reading facility: with direct with

3.1 Rock Movement It is the relative displacement of the rock mass between the anchorage point and the collar of the cxtensometer which may be caused due to one or more than one of such processes as loosening, squeezing, swelling, creeping, destressing, etc. It may or may not cause strata separation.

a) Mechanical MPBX reading facility.

or SPBX -

b) Electra-mechanical MPBX or SPBX remote and direct reading facility. Electrical MPBX or SPBX reading facility only. 4.2.4 Depending on anchor types:

with remote

4 INSIRU.%lENT/EQUlPMENT 4. I General The borehole extensometer is an instrument used for monitoring movement of rock mass at several points aro;ind underground openings, rock slopes and other excavations. This instrument consists of anchors embedded in a borchole at different depths, movement transferring elements which are fixed to the anchors and extend up to a reference head connected to bnrehole collar. Each movement transferring element is covered by a rigid PVC pipe, so that these elements are free to transfer the displacements of the rock mass from anchor positions to borehole collar position. The relative displacement bctwecn the collar and the movement transferring elements is measured by means of a mcchanic:il or an elcctricol read out unit. The relative displacement may also be monitored through a computerised data acquisition system. 1

type with expansion shell type a) Mechanical and prong type anchors ( see Fig. 2 ). type in which the anchors are b) Grouted grouted into the borehole while keeping the movement transferring elements free within rigid PVC pipes. 4.3 Multi-point Fig. 3 ) Borchole Extensometer ( sc'c

A multi-point borehole extcnsometcr following four main components:

comprises

4 Anchors, b) Rods or wires,

4

Collar

head, and sensors.

4 Displacement

+-TO ' TO WEIGHT

RECEIVER

-

ELCT DEPTH

CABLE WITH MARKING BORE HO1

ANCHORS _ PRGBE

`-

-

u

j$

AOU

TYPE

WIRE

TYPE

PROBE

TYPF.

SINGLE

POINT

TWO

POlNl 18

MULTI

PIIINI

1A

FIG. 1

ROCK MOVEMENT MONITORING APPAIZATUS ( BASIC TYPES )

LESS THAN HOLE DIA CAPP. l/,OlA,

EXPANSION SHELL

I A Prongs Type Anchorage FIG. 2 4.3.X Anchors 4.3.1.1 Anchors are reference points in a borehole and consist of expansion shells ( as used in rock bolting), spring loaded wedges, prongs or simply lengths of twisted steel bar fixed to the borehole wall using cement, chemical or resin and grout ( Fig. 2 ). 4.3.1.2 These anchors represent the displacement of the rock mass along the longitudinal ltxis of the borehole. Grouted types of anchors are preferred in areas susceptible to vibrations due to blasting where the rock mass is highly jointed. 4.3.2 .Roads or Wires
4.3.2.1
DII+ERENT

`I B Expansion Shell with Screw Plug Type Anchorage
T,YPES OF

ANCHOKAGE

such rods using a coupler. The rods may be in lengths of 2 m, 1 m, 0'5 m, 0'25 m and O'I m as per the requirements. 4.3.2.2 The use of borehole eutcnsometcr factors: either wire or rod in a depends on the following

a) The length oi` time ol' the observations, b) Degree or precision, c) Maximum depth of the ;~nchor, and d) The direction of the borehole.

Rods or wires are the movement transferring element of the anchors embedded in the Rods or wires arc laid in rigid PVC borehole. Spncer-s should pipes for their free displacement. be used to align and control the position of these PVC pipes. Rods should be threaded on both the sides with a provision of joining two 2

4.3.2.3 Wires may bc used li,r short-term observations up to 3 months. Wires should not be used for depths in excess of IO m. Similarly, wiI-es may be used only in vertical boreholeS. Wires requir-c tile :cpplication of it lixed tension ;I! each observation. Mild steel rods may bc LISCCI for observations up to one year. Stninlcss steel rods itre essential if obsel-tatIons ;LIL`required for periods exceeding 011e year. Stainless steel rods arc essential for precise nlcasurernents.

1s 13414 : 1992

GROUTED

PAD READOUT UNIT

BEARING

PLATE

3A

Bore Hole Extensometer

at a Installation

EXPANSION TYPE SHELL ANCHOR

ANCHOR

ROD

GROUl

- DRILL

HOLE

DRILL

HOLE

ROD
dbPOLYTHENE WALL 7 TUBE

REFERENCE

El .OCK `- TUNNEL WALL

MOUTH

11

38

-

MULTI-POINT EXTENSOHETER

WIRE

It--

THREADED TYPE

ROD

REFERENCE COLLAR

_..

-

BOREHOLE

3 C - MULTI

POINT ROD TYPE BOREHOLE EXTENSOMETEf3 WITH GROUTED ANCtlORS

t;lG. 3

MULTI-POINT

BOKEIIOLE ~ITENSOMETEl<S

IS 13414 : 1992 4.3.2.4 Recommended tension in wire and extensometers: a) Rods dimensions recommended of rods and for borehole than than 5.2 The recommended ation of a Multi-point follows: procedure of the installBore Extensometer is as

5 mm dia for depths less 30 m, and - 11 mm dia for depths greater 30 m 0'5 mm to 1'5 mm dia. shall be as follows:

b) Wires -

c) Wire tension

measurements - suitable in-situ tension may be applied through coil or leaf spring - suitable conii) For other measurements stant tension ( that is the member should be capable to withstand the tension ) may be applied through dead weight or spring balance.

9 For

4.3.3

Collar Head

The collar head should be made of non-rusting It is fixed stable material such as stainless steel. to the mouth of the borehole. It should have boles to receive movement transferring elements. In case of the wire type MPBX, the wires should be taken out of the collar head, reference points fixed on both the collar head and the wires and readings between the reference points be taken. In the case of the rod type MPBX, the rod lengths should be so adjusted that the heads of the rods remain within the holes of the collar head. The external face of the collar head should be used as the reference surface and the distance between this reference surface and the face of the rods should be read by a depth gauge in the case Electrical sensors betof the mechanical MPBX. ween the collar head and the rods should be connected in the case of the electrical MPBX. 4.3.4
Displucrmen~ Sensors

Displacement sensors are either of the electrical type or the mechanical type. The mechanical sensor may be a depth micrometer, a dial gauge, or vernier callipers. lzlectrical sensors may consist of linear variable differential transducer ( LVDT ), rotary or linear potentiometers or using cantilever displacement sensing devices The vibrating wire or resistance strain gauges. LVDT or the vibrating wire type sensors should be used for stable long-term measurements. These sensors are preferred over the mechanical type where a large number of instruments make it obligatory to use a computerised data acquisiIn all cases, where the reliablity 01 tion system. the electrical sensors has not been established, arrangements for both electrical and mechanical sensors should be preferred so that periodic cross check by a mechanical sensor 15 possible. 5 INSTAI,L,Al'ION PROCEDURE

a) Decide the actual Dlace of installation. orientation and length of borehole and number of anchors in each hole by closely examining the site of installation, keeping in view the purpose of instrumentation. To avoid the effect of temperature, the collar head should be kept inside the underground opening. If the borehole extensometers are to be installed ahead of an excavation face which require the collar head on the ground surface, super invar rods should be used as movement transferring elements. In the case of slopes, it is suggested to use super invar rods instead of ordinary steel rods. b) Drill the borehole up to the required depth in the desired direction using diatnond coring drill. c) Study the cores and fix the depth of anchors depending upon the stability considerations and positions of geological discontinuities, if any. before 4 The borehole should be cleaned installing the instrument. 4 Anchors should be fixed at their designated positions in the borehole by grouting ot any other suitable method of anchorage. For grouted anchorage at least 24 hours should be allowed for setting and hardening of the grout before installation of the electrical sensor unit. A protective covering is required for the safety of the collar head, f) ln case of vertically upward and upward inclined holes a breather tube of rigid PVC pipe should be inserted up to the full depth of the borehole to take out air wllilc grout is injected. i?) LVDT, etc, and readout unit should be thoroughly checked before connecting to the movement trnnsterring rods. should bc 11)The readings of the instruments recorded in a field note book as per the given data sheet ( see Annex A ). Every entry in the data sheet should be recorded clear manner. explicitly &marks in column should point out any specific information to be furnished to the data analysis agency. 6 DA'I`A ANALYSIS 6.1 The calculation of rclalivc displaccnlcnt 01` anchors is the first step in data analysis. The calculation depends upon the type of dlspIacement seusor used for taking the observalictus. If ;t mechanical sensor is used for ohservutic~ns, thcll the change in reading directly gives tile chnnge itI distance between the reference head and thl: anchor. In case OK an electrical displaccincnt sensor, the reading slrnll be Gol-lccied wirh the calibration chart Lo oblain the change iii distance. error pet missible sllollld Ilot exccetl The $ 0'02 111n1. 4

5.1 The procedure of` installation and mvnltoring should be carried out strictly under the guidance instrumentation and rock of an experienced mechanics expert.

IS 13414: 1992 6.2 The calculated relative displacement should be plotted against time (see Fig. 4). Rate of relative displacement should also be calculated and the rate of change of displacement with time be plotted as shown in Fig. 5. b) A high rate of displacement or a sudden increase in rock movement is indicative of unstable conditions. c) Large displacements tmstable condition. also indicate an

NO.

OF

DAYS

------c

FIG. 4

PLOT

OF TIME VERSUS RELATIVE

ROCK MOVEMENT 6.3 Following these plots: inferences can be drawn from
NO OF DAYS
-

a) Curves 2 and 3 in Fig. 5 indicate instability of the structure, whereas curve 1 indicates the stability.

FIG. 5 PLOT OF RATE 01: RELATIVE DISPLACEMENT VERSUS TIME

ANNEX A ( Clause 5.2 )
STANDARD DATA SHEET

'

FOR ROCK MOVEMENT USING MPBX

MONITORING

Name of Project: Date of Installation: Date of Excavation: Type of Rock Mass: Location: Angle of Borehole: Depth of Anchors: Anchor No. 1: Anchor Anchor Anchor Observations: Date & Time of Observations Face Chainage m
NOTES 1 l'rovidc information on Joint 01 sheal- done in the remarks column. of Iod ICII~LII if the

No. 2: No. 3. No. 4:

Observations, mm C___----h_-..__-_-_ An 3 An 2 An 1

Kemarks An 4

2 Write down data and tinx of repositioning of rcferencc point on a wire or rcadjustmcnt range of mensurenlcnt has exceeded the designated panic.
3 Collect infornxttion on date and time of blast or excavation cycle, support installation,

ctc, for ux in analysis.

5

Starrdsrd

Mark

Bureau

of

Indian Standards

of hdiorl Sitrrdtrrc~s Acr, 1986 to protnote BIS is a statutory institution establtshed under the Burruu marking and quality certifcattott of goods harmonious development of the activities of standardi/.atiort, and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced tn BlS lt;ts the copyright of all its publtcattons. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessitry details, such as symbols and sires, type or go-ade Ettquiries relating to copyright he addressed to the Director ( Publications ). BIS. designations.
Revision of Indian Standards are

issued

are reviewed pertodically and revised. wheu necessary and >ttttettdtnettts, if any, Users of Indtan Standards should ascertain that they are in possessiott time. Comments on this Indian Standard may be cent to BIS giving the latest amendtnents or editton following reference : Indian Standards
titne from to

of the

Dot : No

CED 48 ( 4634 )
Amendments Issued

Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 I3 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg. New Delhi

I IO002 Telegrams : Marlaksattstha ( Common to 011 Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan. 9 B;tttadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shalt Zafar
blarg

( 331 01 I3 75 31

Eastern

: l/l4 C. 1.T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road. CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CIIANI~IGARII IV Cross Road, Marol,

Mantkrola

37 86 62

Northern Southern Western

160036 6001 13

53 38 43 235 02 I6 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus,

MADRAS

: M;tnak:tl;tya, E9 MII>C. BOMBAY 400093

Attdheri

( East )

Branches

: AI~MAI~ABAD. IIANGALORli. I~IIOI'AI~. I3I1IIl~ANt~Sl1WAR. ~`OI[L1I~A1'OI~I~. FAI~II~ABAD. Gl1AZIABAI). GUWAHATI. HYDERARAD. JAIPUK. KANI'UR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRlJVANANTHAPIJRAM.

