RAT Alte IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


aadi A 99-39199 
saan — ofa {ват 
тт 2 Patera чё verat sT 
(aT Чтй&їт) 


Anti-termite Measures 
in Buildings — Code of Practice 


Part 2 Pre-Constructional 
Chemical Treatment Measures 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 91.120.99 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM ъй 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, +ç fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2022 Price Group 9 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Termite control in buildings is very important as the damage likely to be caused by the termites is huge. Wood 
is one of the cellulosic material which is damaged by termites whose basic nutrient is cellulose. Termites also 
damage materials of organic origin with a cellulosic base, household articles like furniture, furnishings, clothing, 
stationery, etc. Termites are also known to damage non-cellulosic substances in their search for food. Rubber, 
leather, plastics, neoprene as well as lead coating used for covering of underground cables are damaged by 
termites. The widespread damage by termites and high constructional cost of buildings have necessitated evolving 
suitable measures for preventing access of termites to buildings. 


On the basis of their habitat, termites are divided into two types, namely 
(a) subterranean or ground nesting termites, and 
(b) non-subterranean or wood nesting termites having no contact with soil (see Annex B). 


The subterranean termites are most destructive and are mainly responsible for the damage caused in buildings. 
Typically, they form nests or colonies underground in the soil, near ground level in a stump or in other suitable 
piece of timber, and some species may construct a conical or dome shaped mound. These colonies may persist for 
many years and, as they mature, contain a population running into millions. All attacks by subterranean termites 
originate from the nest but timber either lying on or buried in the ground may be reached by means of shelter tubes 
constructed within, or over such materials or else by the erection of an independent, free standing mud structure. 
Chemical barriers which prevent the termites from reaching the super-structure of the building will protect the 
building and its contents. Treating the soil beneath the building and around the foundations with a soil insecticide 
Is a good preventing measure. The purpose of this treatment 1s to create a chemical barrier between the ground 
from where the termites come and the woodwork, cellulosic materials and other contents of the buildings which 
may form food for the termites. Timber which is seasoned and is naturally durable in heartwood or such species 
of timber which can be adequately treated to the desired retention of preservative for durability, may be used in 
the building structure. However, non-durable timbers and sapwood of all timbers should be treated for durability 
to withstand the attack of dry wood termites [see IS 401 : 2001 *Preservation of timber — Code of practice 
(fourth revision)’ and IS 1141 :1993 ‘Seasoning of timber — Code of practice (second revision)’ |. 


This standard (Part 2) was first published in 1971 and subsequently revised in 1981, 2001 and 2013. 
This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 

Part 1 Constructional measures 

Part 3 Treatment for existing buildings 


In the 2013 revision, the chemical lindane was removed and imidacloprid was introduced; use of watering cans 
for chemical disposal was dispensed with; and treatment to simple RCC basement buildings was included, apart 
from some other modifications. 


In view ofthe developments since the last revision and based on the further knowledge that has become available, 
the committee responsible for formulation of this standard decided to take up its revision. 


In this fourth revision, the following significant modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Bifenthrin has been added to the existing chemicals namely chlorpyrifos and imidacloprid 
recommending its use for anti-termite treatment. 


b) An informative annex on typical calculation of amount of chemical solution required for treatment 
for foundations, including masonry, RCC, pile and raft foundations has been included as Annex C. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


ANTI-TERMITE MEASURES 
IN BUILDINGS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 2 PRE-CONSTRUCTIONAL CHEMICAL TREATMENT MEASURES 
( Fourth Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) covers practices for chemical 
treatment of soils for the protection of buildings from 
attack by subterranean termites. It includes reference 
to chemicals to be used, lays down minimum rates 
of application for usage, and outlines procedure to be 
followed while the building is under construction. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, consitute provision 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 

456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 

4015 : 1998 Guide for handling cases of 
pesticide poisoning (first revision) 

8944 : 2005 Chlorpyrifos, emulsifiable 
concentrates — Specification 
(first revision) 

15936:2011 Pesticide — Bifenthrin, technical — 
Specification 

16131:2015  Imidacloprid suspension 
concentrate (SC) — Specification 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Chemical Barrier — The layer of chemically 
treated soil in immediate contact with the foundation 
and floor structure or basement of a building which 


kills or repels termites thus forming a barrier which is 
impervious to termite entry. 


3.2 Soil Treatment — The application of chemicals 
(toxicant solutions) to the soil adjacent to and under a 
building to form a chemical barrier which is lethal or 
repellent to termites. 


3.3 Pre-Construction Soil Treatment — The process 
in which soil chemical treatment is applied to a building 
during the early stage of its construction. 


4 SITE PREPARATION 


4.1 The removal of trees, stumps, logs or roots from 
a building site reduces the hazards from subterranean 
termites. Similary, the subfloor area should be kept free 
from all debris in which new colonies of termites might 
be established. In order to ensure uniform distribution 
of the treating solution and to assist penetration, some 
site preparation, may be necessary. The information 
given 4.1.1 to 4.1.4 is for guidance in preparing a 
building site for chemical treatment. 


4.1.1 Heavy Soils and Sloping Sites 


On clay and other heavy soils where penetration is 
likely to be slow, and on sloping site where run off of 
the treating solution is likely to occur, the surface of the 
soil should be scarified to a depth of at least of 75 mm. 


4.1.2 Sandy or Porous Soils 


On loose, sandy or porous soils where loss of treating 
solution through piping or excessive percolation is 
likely to occur, preliminary moistening to fill the 
capillary spaces in the soil is recommended. 


4.1.3 Levelling, Excavations and Filling 


All subfloor levelling and grading should be completed; 
all cuttings, trenches and excavations should be 
completed with backfilling in place, borrowed fill 
should be free from organic debris and should be well 
compacted. If this is not done, supplementary treatment 
should be made to complete the barrier. 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


4.1.4 Removal of Concrete Formwork and Other 
Materials 


АП concrete formwork, levelling pegs, timber off-cuts 
and other builder's debris should be removed from the 
area to be treated. 


5 CHEMICALS AND RATE OF APPLICATION 


5.1 Basic Principle 


Chemicals toxic to subterranean termites may be used 
effectively to check termite infestation in the soil. 
These are useful in the treatment of new building sites 
and may also be used to eradicate existing infestation in 
buildings and to prevent reinfestation. The effectiveness 
and/or residual activity depend upon the choice of the 
chemicals, the dosages adopted and the thoroughness 
of application. The chemical solutions or emulsions are 
required to be dispersed uniformly in the soil and of the 
required strength so as to form an effective chemical 
barrier which is lethal and repellent to termites. 


5.2 Mound Treatment 


If termite mounds are found within the plinth area of 
the buildings, these should be destroyed by means 
of insecticides in the form of water suspension or 
emulsion which should be poured into the mounds at 
several places (within the mound) after breaking open 
the earthen structure and making holes with crowbars. 
The quantity to be used will depend upon the size of 


mound. For a mound volume of about 1 n», 4 litres of 
water based chemical shall be used. 


5.3 Chemical Solution 


5.3.1 Chemicals to be Used for Soil Treatment 


Treating the soil beneath the building and around the 
foundations with a soil insecticide is a preventive 
measure. The purpose of the treatment is to create a 
continuous chemical barrier between the ground from 
where termites come and woodwork or other cellulosic 
materials in the buildings. 


The chemicals given in Table 1 conforming to relevant 
available Indian Standards, in water emulsion are 
effective when applied uniformly over the area to be 
treated. 


Necessary precautions as in the Material Safety Data 
Sheets (MSDS) supplied by manufacturers shall be 
ensured including when applying the termiticides in the 
exterior of a building where pisciculture/aquaculture 
is practiced, near water bodies and during foraging 
period of honey bees as some termiticides are toxic to 
honeybees and fishes. 


5.3.2 Water to be Used for Preparing Chemical Solution 


Quality of water used to prepare chemical solution 
shall conform to IS 456. Potable water from municipal 
supply is considered suitable for the purpose. 


Table 1 Chemicals for Anti-termite Treatment 
( Clause 5.3.1 ) 


SI No. Chemical Relevant Indian Concentration by Mass, Dosage 
Standard Percent (Active Ingredient) 

(D (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Chlorpyrifos 20 percent IS 8944 1.0 250 ml in 5 litre water 
Emulsifiable Concentrate (EC) 50 ml in 1 litre water 

ii) Imidacloprid 30.50 percent IS 16131 0.075 10.5 ml in 5 litre water 
Suspension Concentrate (SC) 2.1 ml in 1 litre water 

iii) Bifenthrin 2.5 percent See Note 3 0.05 100 ml in 5 litre water 


Emulsifiable Concentrate (EC) 


NOTES 


20 ml in 1 litre water 


1 The above mentioned chemicals are registerd (as on date) chemicals with the Central Insecticides Board — Registration Committee 
(CIB RC). Efforts will be made to update (add/delete) the list of chemicals (termiticides) as obtained time to time from the CIB RC 
for incorporation in the above table appropriately. However, the chemicals from the above table as available in the CIB RC's approved 
list at any point of time, shall only be used. 

2 The chemicals described in this standard are insecticides with a persistent action and are regarded highly poisonous. These chemical 
can have an adverse effect upon health when absorbed through the skin, inhaled as vapours or spray mist or swallowed. Detailed 
precautions for the safe handling of these chemicals are given in Annex A. Persons carrying out chemical soil treatment in accordance 
with this standard should familiarize themselves for these precautions and exercise due care when handling the chemical whether 
in concentrate or in diluted form. The use of the chemical should be avoided where there is any risk of wells or other water supplies 
becoming contaminated. 


3 IS 15936 provides specification for bifenthrin - technical for pesticide purposes, which needs to be suitably referred until a separate 
Indian Standard on emulsifiable concentrate of bifenthrin is formulated. 


6 REQUIREMENTS FOR BARRIER AND 
METHOD OF APPLICATION 


6.1 Conditions of Formation 


Barrier shall be complete and continuous under the 
whole of the structure to be protected. All foundations 
shall be fully surrounded by and in close contact with 
the barrier or treated soil. Each part of the treated area 
shall receive the prescribed dosage of chemical. 


6.2 Time of Application 


Soil treatment should start when foundation trenches 
and pits [in case of load bearing structure and basements 
(with no backfills inside the basement walls)] are ready 
to take mass concrete in foundations. Laying of mass 
concrete should start when the chemial emulsion has 
been absorbed by the soil and the surface is quite dry. 
Treatment should not be carried out when it is raining 
or when the soil is wet with rain or subsoil water. The 
foregoing requirements applies also in the case of 
treatment to the filled earth surface within the plinth 
area before laying the subgrade for the floor. 


6.3 Disturbance 


Once formed, treated soil barriers shall not be disturbed. 
If, by chance, treated soil barriers are disturbed, 
immediate step shall be taken to restore the continuity 
and completeness of the barrier system. 


000207 


300 тт 


ЕЕ] 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


7 TREATMENT 


7.1 Soil Treatment 


7.1.1 The chemical solution described in 5.3 shall be 
applied uniformly at the prescribed rate in all the stages 
of the treatment. Hand operated pressure pump with 
sprayer or an electrically operated pump with sprayer 
shall be used for uniform spraying of the chemical 
solution from graduated containers. Alternatively 
watering can with sprayer may also be used depending 
upon site specific constraints. Proper check shall be 
kept so that the specified quantity of chemical is used 
for the required area during the operation. 


7.1.2 In the event of waterlogging of foundation, the 
water shall be pumped out and the chemicals should be 
applied when the soil 1s absorbent . 


7.2 Treatment for Masonry Foundations and 
Basements (Load Bearing Structures) 


7.2.1 Treatment to Trenches Made for Foundation of 
Masonry Walls or Basement 


The bottom surface and the sides (upto a height of 
about 300 mm) of the excavations made for masonry 
foundations and basements shall be treated with the 
chemical at the rate of 5 I/m? surface area (see Fig. 1). 


Fic. 1 TREATMENT OF TRENCH BOTTOM AND SIDES 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


7.2.2 Treatment to Vertical Backfilled Soil Along 
Masonry Foundation/Retaining Wall 


After the masonry foundations and the retaining wall 
of the basements come up, the backfill in immediate 
contact with the foundation structure shall be treated 
at the rate of 7.5 I/m? of the vertical surface of the 
sub-structure for each side. If water is used for 
ramming the earth fill, the chemical treatment shall 
be carried out after the ramming operation is done by 
rodding the earth at 150 mm centres close to parallel 
to the wall surface and spraying the chemical at the 
above mention dosage. After the treatment, the soil 
should be tamped in place. If the filled earth has 
been well rammed and the surface does not allow the 
emulsion to seep through, holes upto 50 mm to 75 mm 
deep at 150 mm centres both ways may be made with 
12 mm diameter mild steel rod on the surface to 
facilitate saturation of the soil with the chemical. 


The earth is usually returned in layers and the treatment 
shall be carried out in similar stages. The chemical 
shall be directed towards the masonry surfaces so that 
the earth in contact with these surfaces 1s well treated 
with the chemical (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). 


7.2.3 Treatment of Top Surface of Plinth Filling 


The top surface of the consolidated earth within plinth 
walls shall be treated with chemical at the rate of 
5 |/m? of the surface before the sand bed or sub-grade 
is laid. This treatment shall also be carried out on 
DPC provided on plinth wall. If the filled earth has 
been well rammed and the surface does not allow the 
emulsion to seep through, holes up to 50 mm to 75 mm 
deep at 150 mm centres both ways may be made with 
12 mm dimeter mild steel rod on the surface to facilitate 
saturation of the soil with the chemical. 


7.2.4 Treatment at Junction of Wall and Floor 


Special care shall be taken to establish continuity of 
the vertical chemical barrier on inner wall surface from 
ground level (where it had stopped with the treatment 
described in 7.2.2) up to level ofthe filled earth surface. 
To achieve this, a small channel 30 mm x 30 mm shall 
be made at all the junction of wall and columns with 
the floor (before laying the subgrade) and the rod holes 
made within the channel up to the ground level 150 mm 
apart and the iron rod moved backward and forward to 
break up the earth and chemical poured along the wall 
at the rate of 7.5 l/m? of vertical wall or column surface 
so as to soak the soil right to the bottom. The soil 
should be tamped back into place after the operation. 
NOTE — The above procedure generally addresses those 
cases where the depth of plinth is less than 1 m. However, in 
cases where the depth of plinth is beyond 1 m, to enable the 
chemicals reach such depths, the total height shall have to be 
considered for the calculation of chemical volume while using 
the rate of chemical (7.5 l/m?). Also, in such cases care should 
be taken so that the chemicals slowly percolate down along 
the wall surface. This would ensure an uninterrupted chemical 


barrier vertically at the junctions of wall and floor from the last 
treatment described in 7.2.2. 


7.2.5 Treatment of Soil Along External Perimeter of 
Building 


7.2.5.1 After the building is complete, the earth along the 
external perimeter of the builiding should be rodded at 
intervals of 150 mm and to a depth of 300 mm. The rods 
should be moved backward and forward parallel to the 
wall to break up the earth and chemical poured along the 
wall at the rate of 7.5 l/m? of the vertical surface. After 
the treatment, the earth should be tamped back into 
place. Should the earth outside the building be graded 
on completion of building, this treatment shall be carried 
out on completion of such grading. Such holes shall be 
made as near as possible to the wall, column and footing 
but without damaging them so that required protection is 
achieved. 


7.2.5.2 In the event of filling being more than 300 mm, 
the external perimeter treatment shall extend to the full 
depth of filling up to the ground level so as to ensure 
continuity of the chemical barrier. 


7.2.6 Treatment of the Soil Below Apron 


After construction of a new building, and where there is 
a provision of apron around building, separate treatment 
is recommended for the soil below such apron. This 
treatment shall be carried out similar to the treatment 
mentioned in 7.2.3, that is, treatment for top surface 
of plinth filling. Wherever aprons are provided around 
a building, treatment below the apron is required for a 
distance maximum 1 m of the apron from face of the 
building even if the apron extends more from face of the 
building. 


7.3 Treatment for RCC Foundations (Buildings 
without Basements) 


7.3.1 In the case of reinforced cement concrete (RCC) 
foundations, the treatment shall start at a depth of 
500 mm below the ground level except when such ground 
level is raised or lowered by filling or cutting after the 
foundations have been cast. In such cases, the depth of 
500 mm shall be determined from the new soil level 
resulting from the filling or cutting mentioned above, 
and soil in immediate contact with the vertical surfaces 
of RCC. Foundations shall be treated at the rate of 
7.5 l/m? (see Fig. 4). 


7.3.2 Treatment of Top Surface of Plinth Filling 


The top surface of the consolidated earth within plinth 
walls shall be treated with chemical at the rate of 5 l/m? 
of the surface before the sand bed or subgrade 15 laid. 
If the filled earth has been well rammed and the surface 
does not allow the emulsion to seep through, holes up to 
50 mm to 75 mm deep at 150 mm centres both ways may 
be made with 12 mm dimeter mild steel rod on the surface 
to faciliatate saturation of the soil with the chemical. 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


r FLOOR FINISH 


/- FLOOR BASE CONCRETE 
DPC ~ 


s~ SAND BED / 
SOLING ETC. 


TREATMENT 


FINISHED 
GROUND кү 


A 


"| ` BACKFILL 


A 


Stages of Treatment: 

А — bottom and sides of trenches (see 7.2.1) 

B — backfill in immediate contact with foundation walls (see 7.2.2) 
C — junction of wall and floor (see 7.2.4) 

D — top surface of plinth filling (see 7.2.3) 

E — external perimeter of building (see 7.2.5) 


Fic. 2 TREATMENT FOR MASONRY FOUNDATIONS WITHOUT APRON 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


2277 
72 FLOOR FINISH 


DPC 2 FLOOR BASE CONCRETE 
—— 


atte og лис 


TREATMENT 


J io 


APRON C 
FINISHED 
GROUND LEVEL | © PA 
УУ МУЎУ = 
E `F 


BACKFILL 


Stages of Treatment: 

A — bottom and sides of trenches (see 7.2.1) 

B — backfill in immediate contact with foundation walls (see 7.2.2) 
C — junction of wall and floor (see 7.2.4) 

D — top surface of plinth filling (see 7.2.3) 

E — external perimeter of building (see 7.2.5) 


F — soil below apron (see 7.2.6) 


Fic. 3 TREATMENT FOR MASONRY FOUNDATIONS WITH APRON ALONG EXTERNAL PERIMETER 


SAND BED / 


y SOLING ETC. 


PLINTH 
FILLING 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


FLOOR FINISH 
- FLOOR BASE CONCRETE 


` re Ae t 628 Z€ 
ETSIGQ aa. f 


SAND BED / 
SOLING ETC. 


TREATMEN 


FINISHED 


GROUND LEVEL PLINTH 


FILLING 


f É RCC COLUMN © `` 


27 7f. BASE CONCRETE “С 


а 


Stages of Treatment: 

A — backfill in immediate contact with foundation walls (see 7.2.2) 
B — junction of wall and floor (see 7.3.3) 

C — top surface of plinth filling (see 7.3.2) 

D — external perimeter of building (see 7.3.4) 


Fic. 4 TREATMENT FOR RCC FOUNDATIONS 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


7.3.3 Treatment at Junction of Wall and Floor 


Special care shall be taken to establish continuity of 
the vertical chemical barrier on inner wall surface from 
ground level (where it had stopped with the treatment 
described in 7.3.1) up to level ofthe filled earth surface. 
To achieve this, a small channel 30 mm x 30 mm shall 
be made at all the junction of wall and columns with 
the floor (before laying the sub-grade) and the rod holes 
made within the channel up to the ground level 150 mm 
apart and the iron rod moved backward and forward to 
break up the earth and chemical poured along the wall 
at the rate of 7.5 |/m? of vertical wall or column surface 
so as to soak the soil right to the bottom. The soil should 
be tamped back into place after the operation. 


7.3.4 Treatment of Soil Along External Perimeter of 
Building 


After the building is complete, the earth along the 
external perimeter of the builiding should be rodded at 
intervals of 150 mm and to a depth of 300 mm. The 
rods should be moved backward and forward parallel 
to the wall to break up the earth and chemical poured 
along the wall at the rate of 7.5 l/m? of the vertical 
surface. After the treatment, the earth should be tamped 
back into place. Should the earth outside the building 
be graded on completion of building, this treatment 
shall be carried out on completion of such grading. 
Such holes shall be made as near as possible to the wall, 
column and footing but without damaging them so that 
required protection is achieved. 


7.3.4.1 In the event of filling being more than 300 mm, 
the external perimeter treatment shall extend to the full 
depth of filling up to the ground level so as to ensure 
continuity of the chemical barrier. 
NOTE — Wherever, making manual holes beyond 300 mm 
and up to say 500 mm is not possible due to prevailing site 
conditions, in order to penetrate the total expected chemical, 
the entire depth shall have to be considered so as to evaluate 
the probable total consumption required and slow penetration 
ofthe same be ensured which would create the barrier upto the 
prescribed depth. 


7.3.5 Treatment of Soil Surrounding Pipes, Wastes and 
Conduits 


When pipes, wastes and conduits enter the soil inside 
area of the foundations, soil surrounding the point of 
entry shall be loosened around each such pipe, waste 
or conduit for a distance of 150 mm and to a depth of 
75 mm before treatment is commenced. When they 
enter the soil external to the foundation, they shall be 
similarly treated at a distance of over 300 mm unless 
they stand clear of the walls of the building by about 
75 mm. 


7.3.6 Treatment for Expansion Joints 


Expansion joints at ground floor level are one of the 
biggest hazards for termite infestation. The soil beneath 


these joints should receive special attention when the 
treatment under 7.3.2 is carried out. This treatment 
should be supplemented by treating through the 
expansion joints after sub-grade has been laid, at the 
rate of 2 litre per linear metre. 


7.4 Treatment to RCC Basement Buildings 


The treatment starts after the excavation for basement 
18 complete and before laying soling and Plain Cement 
Concrete (PCC). The treatment shall be carried out in 
the following stages (see Fig. 5). 


7.4.1 Treatment to Soil Below Raft 


Before laying the rubble soling and PCC, the compacted 
and levelled soil shall be treated at 5 1/2. 
NOTE — In case of soils/sand filled above the raft, the 
treatment at 5 l/m? shall be carried out on the top surface of 


filled soil/sand. In such case, treatment to soil/sand below raft 
may not be necessary. 


7.4.2 Treatment to Soil Along the Retaining Wall 


The soil retained by the walls (soil coming in contact 
with retaining wall) shall be treated at the rate of 
7.5 lm? of the vertical surface so as to effect a 
continuous outer chemical barrier, in continuation 
with that of the one formed under 7.4.1. The treatment 
shall follow the backfilling in stages of 300 mm. 
However rodding may be carried out to facilitate the 
treatment. 


7.4.3 Treatment of Soil Along External Perimeter of 
Building 


After the building is complete, the earth along the 
external perimeter of the builiding should be rodded at 
intervals of 150 mm and to a depth of 300 mm. The 
rods should be moved backward and forward parallel 
to the wall to break up the earth and chemical poured 
along the wall at the rate of 7.5 l/m? of the vertical 
surface. After the treatment, the earth should be tamped 
back into place. Should the earth outside the building 
be graded on completion of building, this treatment 
shall be carried out on completion of such grading. 
Such holes shall be made as near as possible to the wall, 
column and footing but without damaging them so that 
required protection is achieved. 


7.4.4 Treatment of Soil Surrounding Pipes, Wastes and 
Conduits 


When pipes, wastes and conduits enter the soil, the 
inside area of the foundations, soil surrounding the 
point of entry shall be loosened around each such pipe, 
waste or conduit for a distance of 150 mm and to a 
depth of 75 mm before treatment is commenced. When 
they enter the soil external to the foundation, they shall 
be similarly treated at a distance of over 300 mm unless 
they stand clear of the walls of the building by about 
75 mm. 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


C. VERTICAL TREATMENT ALONG 


COLUMNS / WALLS 
EXTERNAL PERIPHERY 
FROM THE RAFT OF THE BUILDING 


B. VERTICAL TREATMENT 
ALONG RETAINING WALL 
OF BASEMENT IN LAYERS 


FINISHED 
GROUND LEVEL 


FINISHED 
GROUND LEVEL 


BACKFILL 


PCC IN BASEMENT 3 
EXCAVATION A. TREATMENT FOR BASEMENT 


BOTTOM SURFACE BEFORE 
PCC BELOW RAFT 


Stages of Treatment: 

A — below raft (see 7.4.1) 

B — along the retaining wall (see 7.4.2) 

C — external perimeter of building (see 7.4.3) 


Fic. 5 TREATMENT FOR RCC BASEMENT BUILDING- STAGES OF TREATMENT 


7.4.5 Typical details of treatment to the RCC basement 2 Aftercreating a vertical chemical barrier around the columns/ 
buildings with backfill within the basement walls footings, the entire horizontal surface of the compacted filled 
above the raft, is given in Fig. 6. In this case, it may soil within the plinth before the soling/flooring/PCC/tremix 
shall be treated with the solution at the rate of 5 l/m?. 
not be necessary to treat the excavated areas below the 
foundation/PCC/raft. 7.4.6 Typical details of treatment to RCC basement 
NOTES buildings with pile foundation is given for deeper 
1 In the case of backfill of soil around columns/footings within basements in Fig. 7 and for shallower basements in 
the basement but above raft, the treatment shall start at a depth Fig. 8; in which it is not necessary to treat the excavated 
of 500 mm below the compacted filled soil or new soil level areas below the foundation/PCC/raft. 
and soil in immediate contact with the vertical surfaces of 
RCC. Foundations shall be treated at the rate of 7.5 l/m?. 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


VERTICAL TREATMENT VERTICAL TREATMENT ALONG 
ALONG RETAINING WALL COLUMNS / WALLS EXTERNAL PERIPHERY 
OF BASEMENT IN LAYERS FROM THE RAFT OF THE BUILDING 


FINISHED 
GROUND LEVEL 


FINISHED 
GROUND LEVEL 


A. VERTICAL TREATMENT E^ 4B. HORIZONTAL TREATMENT 
AROUND ALL THE L^ ДРОВ SOIL FILLING ABOVE 


COLUMNS UPTO „| RAFT 


500 mm DEEP | 


BACKFILL 
PCC IN BASEMENT RAFT SOIL FILLING ABOVE RAFT 
EXCAVATION 
ЕС. 6 TREATMENT FOR BASEMENT WHEN THERE IS FILLING ABOVE RAFT 
bist elabi ipid VERTICAL TREATMENT ALONG 
ALONG RETAINING WALL 
COLUMNS 1 WALLS EXTERNAL PERIPHERY 


OF BASEMENT IN LAYERS 


FROM THE RAFT 


OF THE BUILDING 


FINISHED 


FINISHED 


BACKFILL 


RAFT 


"m FILLING AROUND PILE CAP 


Ес. 7 TREATMENT FOR DEEP BASEMENT WITH PILE FOUNDATION 


10 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


VERTICAL TREATMENT 
X ALONG RETAINING WALL VERTICAL TREATMENT ALONG 
\ OF BASEMENT INLAYERS (COLUMNS /WALLS EXTERNAL PERIPHERY 
\ \FROM THE RAFT NUES 
N "c j / 
FINISHED \ р. / FINISHED 
AL GROUND LEVEL 


GROUND LEVEL 


BACKFILL 


PILE 


¿ FILLING AROUND PILE CAP 


FIG. 8 TREATMENT FOR SHALLOW BASEMENT WITH PILE FOUNDATION 


11 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Table 1) 
SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 


A-1 PRECAUTIONS FOR HEALTH HAZARDS 
AND SAFETY MEASURES 


A-1.1 All the chemicals mentioned in 5.3.1 are 
poisonous and hazardous to health. These chemical 
can have an adverse effect upon health when absorbed 
through the skin, inhaled as vapours or spray mist or 
swallowed. Persons handling or using these chemical 
should be warned of these dangers and advised that 
absoroption through the skin is the most likly sources 
of accidental poisoning. They should be cautioned to 
observe carefully the safety precautions given in A-1.2 
to A-1.6 particularly when handling these chemicals in 
the form of concentrates. 


A-1.2 These chemicals are brought to the site in the form 
of emulsifiable concentrate/suspension concentrate. 
The container should be clearly labelled and should be 
stored carefully so that children and pets cannot get at 
them. They should be kept securely closed. 


A-1.3 Particular care should be taken to prevent skin 
contact with concentrates. Prolonged exposure to dilute 
emulsions should also be avoided. Workers should 
wear clean clothing and should wash thoroughly with 
soap and water specially before eating and smoking. 
In the event of severe contamination, clothing should 
be removed at once and the skin washed with soap and 


water. If chemicals splash into the eyes they shall be 
flushed with plenty of soap and water and immediate 
medical attention should be sought. 


A-1.4 The concentrates are oil solutions and present 
a fire hazard owing to the use of petroleum solvents. 
Flames should not be allowed during mixing. 


A-1.5 Care should be taken in the application of soil 
toxicants to see that they are not allowed to contaminate 
wells or springs which serve as sources of drinking 
water. 


A-1.6 The person/operator who uses the chemicals 
shall wear Personal Protective Equipments (PPE), like 
hand gloves, eye goggles, face masks, safety shoes, ear 
muffler and cap. 


A-1.7 In case of poisoning, suitable measures shall be 
taken for protection in accordance with IS 4015. 


A-1.8 The application of anti-termite treatment should 
be carried out by a professional agency which is trained 
and possess a valid licence issued by the respective 
state/central government department of agriculture as 
required under the /nsecticides Act, 1968 and the Rules 
framed thereunder. 


ANNEX B 


( Informative ) 
( Foreword ) 


А SHORT NOTE ON TERMITES 


B-1 CLASSIFICATION 


B-1.1 Termites constitute a separate order of insects 
called ‘Isoptera’ (isos is ‘equal * and pteron means 
‘wing’ in Greek). Although, they are commonly called 
white ants, they are not related to ants who have a thin 
waist in contrast to the thick waist of the termites. 
Furthermore, the front pair of wings of the ants are 
longer than their hindpair whereas in termites, both 
pairs are equal. There are over 2 300 species of termites 
out of which about 220 are found in India. All these 
species are not considered to be serious pests. 


B-1.2 According to their habitats, termites can be 
divided into two well defined groups: 


12 


a) subterranean termites which build nests and live in 
the soil, and 


b) non-subterranean termites which live in wood and 
do not require contact with the soil. 


B-1.3 Subterranean termites require moisture to sustain 
their life. They need access to ground at all times. 
They build tunnels between their nest and source of 
food through earth and earth-like covered runways 
around obstructions. These covered tunnels provide 
humidity conditions and darkness necessary for their 
movement and for maintaining contact with earth. The 
subterranean termites enter a building from ground 
level, under the foundation, working their way upwards 
through floors, destroying all before them. So little is 


seen of these termite operations that sometimes the 
structural member attacked is found to be merely a shell 
with the inside completely riddled and eaten away. 


B-1.4 The drywood termites on the contrary are able 
to live even in fairly dry wood and without contact 
with ground. These frequently construct nests within 
the roofs and other parts of houses, which they destroy, 
if not speedily exterminated. However, they are not as 
prevalent and common as subterranean termites, and 
are generally confined to coastal regions. 


B-1.5 A subterranean termite colony consists of a pair of 
reproductives, the so-called king and queen and a large 
number of sterile workers and soldiers. If however, 
the queen is lost or destroyed, her place is taken by 
number of supplementary reproductives, thus even by 
removing the queen, the colony will not be destroyed. 
All the work of the colony is carried out by the workers. 
Guarding the colony is the work of the soldiers. The 
adult workers and soldiers are wingless. The workers 
are gernerally greyish white in colour. The soldiers are 
generally darker than the workers and have a large head 
and longer mandibles. There are, however, other types 
of soldiers whose mandibles are small, degenerated 
and functionless; instead, the frontal part of the head is 
prolonged to form a long nasus; they dispel the enemy 
by squirting out of white poisonous fluid through the 
nasus. The reprodutives, that is, the flying adults, 
have brown or black bodies and are provided with 
two pairs of long wings of equal size in contrast to the 
reproductives of ants which have two pairs of wings of 
unequal size. 


B-1.6 The food of the termite is cellulosic material 
like timber, grass, stumps of dead trees, droppings of 
herbivorous animals, paper, etc. Once termites have 
found a suitable foothold in or near a building, they 
start spreading slowly from a central nest through 
underground and overground galleries in the case of 
subterranean termites and galleries within the structural 
member, once they get direct access to them, in the 
case of drywood termites. In their search for wood they 
bypass any obstacle like concrete or resistant timber to 
get a suitable food many meters away. 


B-1.7 In subterranean termite colony, the workers feed 
the reproductives, soldiers, winged adults and young 
nymphs. One of the habits of the termites which is of 
interest is the grooming of their own bodies and the 
bodies of their nest mates by licking. This grooming 
habit is associated with their eagerness to obtain the 
glandular secretions that are extruded over the body 
surface. During the course of grooming, any dust 
particle that may be adhering to the body surface are 


13 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


removed and ingested. This habit plays an important role 
in the poisoning of termites for control operations. If 
finely powdered toxic material is introduced into termite 
runways, particles of the powder will adhere to the body 
of the termite and will kill any termite that subsequently 
grooms the dusted one. 


B-2 DEVELOPMENT OF TERMITE COLONY 


At certain periods of the year, particularly after a few 
warm days followed by rain, emergence of winged 
adults or colonising flights, frequently occurs. This 
swarming, also called the nuptial flight, may take place 
any time during the monsoon or the post monsoon 
period. The flight is short and most of the adults perish 
due to one reason or another. The surviving termites 
soon find their mates, shed their wings and establish a 
colony if circumstances are favourable. The female of 
the pair or queen produces a few eggs in the first year. 
The first batch of the brood comprises only of workers. 
The rate of reproduction, however, increases rapidly 
after 2-3 years. Although a colony may increase in size 
comparatively rapidly very little damage may occur 
in a period less than 8-10 years. Any serious damage 
that may occur in a short time is perhaps due to heavy 
infestation in the initial stage due to large population 
of termites existing in the soil before the building is 
constructed. 


B-3 RECOGNIZING THE PRESENCE OF 
TERMITE INFESTATION IN BUILDINGS 


B-3.1 Swarms of winged reproductives flying from the 
soil or wood are the first indication of termite infestation 
in a building. Often the actual flight may not be observed 
but the persence of wings discarded by them will be a 
positive indication of a well established termite colony 
nearby. Termite damage is not evident from the exterior 
in the case of subterranean termites, since they do not 
reduce wood to a powdery mass or push particles like 
some of the wood borers or drywood termites. These 
termites are also recognised by the presence of earth-like 
shelter tubes which afford them the runways between 
soil and their food. 


B-3.2 Drywood termites on the contrary may Бе 
recognised by their pellets of excreta. Non-subterranean 
termites excrete pellets of partly digested wood. These 
may be found in tunnels or on the floor underneath the 
member which they have attacked. These termites may 
further be noticed by blisters on wood surfaces due to 
their forming chambers close to the surface by eating 
away the wood and leaving only a thin film of wood on 
the surface. Also the hollow sound on tapping structural 
timber will indicate their destructive activity inside. 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Informative ) 
( Foreword ) 


TYPICAL CALCULATION OF AMOUNT OF CHEMICAL SOLUTION REQUIRED FOR 
TREATMENT OF DIFFERENT FOUNDATIONS 


C-1 MASONRY FOUNDATION 


C-1.1 Calculation for a Building of Size 50 m x 20m 
at Plinth Level 


a) Area of plinth is 50 m x 20 m, that is, 1 000 m°; 


b) Approximately 20 percent of the plinth area is 
covered by the excavation for masonry foundation 
that is, 200 112; 

Total peripheral length of external walls will be 
140 m; and 

To calculate the area of junctions of wall and floor, 
the total depth of plinth needs to be considered. 
Here, the depth of plinth is assumed as 1.5 m. 


c 


ме 


d 


М7 


NOTE — Sample calculations given in this annex аге 
informative in nature. While calculating required total 
consumption of the chemical for any site, actual area as per the 
recommendations given in this standard shall be taken. 


C-1.2 The dosage/concentration ratio of respective 
termiticides are as follows: 
а) Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC — 50 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 
b) Imidachloprid 30.5 percent SC — 2.1 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 


c) Bifenthrin 2.5 percent ЕС — 20 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 


C-1.3 The consumption of solution (chemical diluted 
with water) as well as the concentrated termiticides 
(recommended) will be as under: 


C-1.3.1 First Treatment — Bottom and Sides of Trenches 


For bottom surface of trench - For 50 m x 20 m of 
plinth size, 20 percent of the total plinth is covered by 


excavation that is, 200 m? x 5 litres per m°= 1 000 litre 
total consumption of solution. 


For sides of trench- average peripheral length of trench 
(that 15, 140 m) x 0.3 m x 2 (for both sides) x 5 litres 
per m?- 420 litre total consumption of solution. 


C-1.3.2 Second Treatment — Backfill in Immediate 
Contact with Foundation Walls 


Average peripheral length of masonry foundation (that 
is, 140 m) x 0.5 m approximately (take actual depth of 
treatment area of backfill in immediate contact with 
foundation wall) х 7.5 litres per m? x 2 (for both sides) = 
1 050 litres total consumption of solution. 


C-1.3.3 Third Treatment — Junction of Wall and Floor 


For building area 50 m x 20 m , average peripheral length 
that is, 140 running metre x 1.5 m approximately (depth 
of walls below the plinth level is considered on average) 
x 7.5 litres per т> = 1 575 litres total consumption of 
solution. 


C-1.3.4 Fourth Treatment — Top Surface of Plinth Filling 


Total area of plinth (that is, 1 000 m?) 5 litres 
per m? = 5 000 litres total consumption of solution. 


C-1.3.5 Fifth Treatment — External Periphery 


For 50 m x 20 m plinth area, average peripheral length, 
that is, total 140 running metre, 140 x 0.3 (depth) x 
7.5 litres per m? = 315 litres. 
NOTE — Where there is a provision of apron around building, 
separate treatment is recommended for the soil below such 


apron and accordingly total consumption of solution for this 
treatment shall also be calculated. 


C-1.4 In line with the calculations in C-1.3, a summary 
of calculations with different chemicals is given below: 


First Second Third Fourth Fifth Total Consumption for 
Treatment | Treatment | Treatment | Treatment | Treatment | Plinth Area of 1 000 m° 
Solution with 1 420 1050 1575 5 000 315 9 360 € 
Termiticide (0) 
Chlorpyrifos 20 71.00 52.50 78.75 250.00 15.75 468.00 £ 
Percent EC (t) 
Imidachloprid 30.5 2.98 2.20 3.30 10.50 0.66 19.64 € 
Percent SC (£) 
Bifenthrin 2.5 28.40 21.00 31.50 100.00 6.30 187.20 £ 
Percent EC (t) 


14 


C-2 REINFORCED CEMENT CONCRETE 
FOUNDATION 


C-2.1 Calculation for a Building of Size 50 m x 20m 
at Plinth Level 
a) Area of plinth is 50 m x 20 m, that is, 1 000 m?; 
b) Approximately 15 percent of the plinth area is 
covered by R.C.C. foundation; and 
с) Assume total numbers of columns are 150 and the 


average size of R.C.C. column is approximately 
0.5 m x 0.2 m. 


C-2.2 The dosage/concentration ratio of respective 
termiticides are as follows: 
a) Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC — 50 ml chemical per 
1 litre of water 
b) Imidachloprid 30.5 percent SC — 2.1 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 
c) Bifenthrin 2.5 percent EC — 20 ml chemical per 
1 litre of water 


C-2.3 The consumption of solution (chemical diluted 
with water) as well as the concentrated termiticides 
(recommended) will be as under: 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


C-2.3.1 First Treatment — Backfill in Immediate Contact 
with Foundation 


1.4 m (peripheral length of each column) x 0.5 m 
(depth of treatment area from ground level) x 150 
(no. of columns) х 7.5 litres рег т> = 787.5 litres total 
consumption of solution. 


NOTE — In case of masonry filling between the columns, the 
same may also be treated. 


C-2.3.2 Second Treatment — Junction of Wall and Floor 


For plinth area 50 m x 20 m, average peripheral length 
thatis, 140 running metre x 1.5 m approximately (depth 
of walls below the plinth level is considered on average) 
х 7.5 litres per m?— 1 575 litres total consumption of 
solution. 


C-2.3.3 Third Treatment — Top Surface of Plinth Filling 
Total area of plinth (that is, 1 000 m?) x 5 litres 
per m?- 5 000 litres total consumption of solution. 
C-2.3.4 Fourth Treatment — External Periphery 


For 50 m x 20 m plinth area, average peripheral length, 
that 1s, total 140 running metre, 140 x 0.3 (depth) 
x 7.5 litres per m? = 315 litres. 


C-2.4 In line with the calculations in C-2.3, a summary 
of calculations with different chemicals is given below: 


First Second Third Fourth Total Consumption for 

Treatment | Treatment | Treatment | Treatment | Plinth Area of 1 000 m° 
Solution with 787.5 1 575.0 5 000.0 315.0 7 677.5 t 
Termiticide (£) 
Chlorpyrifos 20 39.37 78.75 250.00 15.75 383.87 l 
percent EC (t) 
Imidachloprid 30.5 1.65 3.30 10.50 0.66 16.11 € 
percent SC (t) 
Bifenthrin 2.5 15.75 31.50 100.00 6.30 153.55 t 
percent EC (0) 


15 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


C-3 PILE FOUNDATION 


C-3.1 Calculation for a Building of Size 50 m x 20 m 
at Plinth Level 


a) Area of plinth is 50 m x 20 m= 1 000 m°; and 
b) Assume total numbers ofpile foundations/pile caps 


is 60 nos. and the average size of pile foundation/ 
pile cap is approximately 1.5 m x 1.5 m. 


C-3.2 The concentration ratio of respective termiticides 
are as follows: 


a) Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC — 50 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 

b) Imidachloprid 30.5 percent SC — 2.1 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 

c) Bifenthrin 2.5 percent EC — 20 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 


C-3.3 The consumption of solution (chemical diluted 
with water) as well as the concentrated termiticides 
(recommended) will be as under: 


C-3.3.1 First Treatment — Backfill Around R.C.C. 


Average peripheral length of foundation (that is, 
140 m) x 2.0 m approximately (take actual depth of 
treatment area of backfill in immediate contact with 
RCC above raft up to finished ground level) x 7.5 litres 
per m?- 2 100 litres total consumption of solution. 


C-3.3.2 Second Treatment — External Periphery 


For 50 m x 20 m plinth area, average peripheral length, 
that is, total 140 running metre, 140 m x 0.3 m (depth) 
x 7.5 litres per m? = 315 litres. 


C-3.4 In line with the calculations in C-3.3, a summary 
of calculations with different chemicals is given below: 


C-4 BASEMENT THE RAFT 


FOUNDATION) 


(WITH 


C-4.1 Calculation for a Building of Size 50 m x 20m 
at Plinth Level 


Area of plinth/basement is 50 m x 20 m = 1 000 m’. 


C-4.2 The dosage/concentration ratio of respective 
termiticides are as follows: 
a) Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC — 50 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 
b) Imidachloprid 30.5 percent SC — 2.1 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 


c) Bifenthrin 2.5 percent EC — 20 ml chemical 
per 1 litre of water 


C-4.3 The consumption of solution (chemical diluted 
with water) as well as the concentrated termiticides 
(recommended) will be as under: 


C-4.3.1 First Treatment — Treatment of Plinth/Basement 
Excavation 
1 000 m? (total plinth/basement excavated soil surface 
area) x 5 litres per m? = 5 000 litres total consumption 
of solution. 


C-4.3.2 Second Treatment — Treatment for Filling 
around Retaining Walls of Basement 


For 50 m x 20 m plinth area, average peripheral length, 
that 1s, total 140 running metre. 


The depth of actual basement/filled soil around 
basement retaining walls needs to be considered (the 
depth/height of basement may differ for different sites). 


For example, if the depth is 5 metres: 


140 running metre (periphery) x 5 m (depth) x 7.5 litres 
per m?- 5 250 litres total consumption of solution. 


First Second Total Consumption for 
Treatment Treatment Plinth Area of 1 000 m? 
Solution with Termiticide (€) 2 100 315.0 2415€ 
Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC (t) 105.00 15.75 120.75 £ 
Imidachloprid 30.5 percent SC (0) 4.41 0.66 5.07 £ 
Bifenthrin 2.5 percent EC (0) 42.00 6.30 48.30 £ 


16 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


C-4.3.3 Third treatment — Treatment for External 140 m x 0.3 m (vertical 300 mm depth of basement 
shall be considered) х 7.5 litres per m?= 315.0 litres. 


Periphery 
For 50 m x 20 m plinth area, average peripheral length, С-4.4 In line with the calculations in C-4.3, a summary 
that is, total 140 running metre. of calculations with different chemicals is given below: 
First Second Third Total Consumption for 
Treatment | Treatment | Treatment | Plinth Area of 1 000 m? 
Solution with Termiticide (t) 5 000 5 250 315 10 565t 
Chlorpyrifos 20 percent EC (€) 250 262.5 15.75 528.25 t 
Imidachloprid 30.5 percent SC (€) 10.5 11.02 0.66 22.18 £ 
Bifenthrin 2.5 percent EC (t) 100 105 6.3 211.3 t 


17 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX D 
( Informative ) 
( Foreword ) 
COMPARATIVE STATEMENT OF TERMITICIDES 


Name Imidacloprid Chlorpyrifos Bifenthrin 

| — 30.5 percent SC 20 percent EC 2.5 percent EC 
Property 
Active ingredient 0.075 percent ] percent 0.05 percent 
Formulation Suspension Emulsifiable Emulsifiable 
concentrate concentrate concentrate 
Chemical classification Neonicotinoids Organo phosphates Synthetic pyrethroids 
Dilution per litre of water 2.1 ml (1 : 476) 50 ml (1 : 20) 20 ml (1 : 50) 
Odour No smell Felt Felt 
(aromatic hydrocarbon odour) 

Type of termiticide Non-repellent, but Repellent Repellent 


termites get affected 


NOTES 


1 The above is purely a general comparison of the three termiticides to serve only as a preliminary guide. 


2 Users are suggested to examine the respective Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) of the termiticides from manufacturers for 
detailed information/comparison thereof, so as to make an informed choice for their project based on its location, size, soil type, 
amount of infestation, type of building, etc. 


18 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector-18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 
Builders Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion 
Council, New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology, 
Jorhat 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Confederation of Construction Products and Services, 
New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers’ Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Development Alternatives, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 


Housing and Urban Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi 


Indian Plywood Industries Research and Training 
Institute, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


Suri D. S. SACHDEV (Chairman) 


SHRI SHOBHIT UPPAL 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A .N. PRAKASH 
SHRI SATISH V. SALPEKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
SHRI H. E. IYER (Alternate) 


SHRI SUROJIT SAMANTA 
SHRI RAM AVTAR (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDI NATH JHA 


SHRI S. K. NEGI 
Dr Asay CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr S. D. BARUAH 
SHRI AMITAVA Biswas (Alternate) 


Dr S. SAIBABU 
SHRI FARVAZE AHMED (Alternate) 


DR B. S. PHOGAT 
Dr J. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI HARISH KUMAR 
SHRI MANOJ Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GAHLOWT 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAMESH KUMAR 
SUPTDG ENGINEER (P)-1 (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHOSLA 


SHRI ANURAG SINHA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


DR KISHAN Kumar V. S. 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BANSAL (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. BHATIA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


VICE PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAVA SIL 
SHRI ANAND NANDANWAR (Alternate) 


19 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


Organization 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai 


Military Engineering Services, Engineer-in- Chief's 


Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence 
(Army), New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
Rentokil Pest Control (India) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Public Works Department, Govt of Gujarat, 
Gandhinagar 


Public Works Department, Govt of NCT of Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Research Designs and Standards Organization, 
Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 

The АП India Glass Manufacturers' Federation, 
New Delhi 

The Indian Institute of Architects, Mumbai 

The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


The Energy Resources Institute, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity [Pratap Nursery Lane 
(Near Gurudwara), Panditwari, Dehradun 
248007] 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJAN VENKATESWARAN 
SHRI V. SUKUMAR HEBBAR (Alternate) 


Ms MALA MOHAN 
SHRIMATI SHOBHANA V. (Alternate) 


Suri D. D. S. SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI AJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suni R. L. DAS 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR M. GHUGE 
SHRI JAYANT DANDAWATE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. PATEL 


SHRI A. K. SINHA 
SHRI PUNEET KUMAR VATS (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (WORKS) 
ADE/Works (Alternate) 


PROF ANIL DEWAN 
ProF JAYA Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI SOURABH KANKAR 
SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY GARG 
SHRI SHAMIT MANCHANDA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. ADLAKHA 
SHRI DEVENDRA GILL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SETH 
Ms МЕСНА BEHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI K. S. PRUTHI 


BIS Directorate General SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretaries 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S. 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


and 


SHRI DURGESH KUMAR PATEL 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


20 


IS 6313 (Part 2) : 2022 


Working Group on Anti-termite Measures in Buildings, CED 13/WG 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 2061, Engineers SHRI D. S. SACHDEV (Convener) 
Apartments, Plot 11, Sector-18A, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110078) 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai SHRI K. SRINIVAS 
SHRI H. E. Iver (Alternate) 
Central Insecticides Board, Faridabad DR B. S. PHOGAT 


DR J. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


CSIR- Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI S.K. NEGI 
Dr AJAY CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI MANOJ KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI AMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


Indian Pest Control Association, New Delhi VICE PRESIDENT 
SECRETARY (Alternate) 


Paramount Pest Consultants, Pune Dr SARANG SAVALEKAR 


21 


(Continued from second cover) 


c) An informative annex on comparative statement of termiticides with respect to their properties has 
been included as Annex D. 
d) References to Indian Standards have been updated. 
The provisions of this standard are without prejudice to the various Acts, Rules and Regulations including the 
Insectides Act, 1968 and the Rules framed thereunder. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2:1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 13 (15756). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


