**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 5329 (1983) : Code of practice for sanitary pipe work 
above ground for buildings [CED 24: Public Health 
Engineering . ] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SANITARY PIPE WORK ABOVE GROUND 

FOR BUILDINGS 



{ First Revision ) 



First Reprint FEBRUARY 1993 



UDC 69612 : 62r643-2 : 006'76 



© Copyright 1984 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 April 1984 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
SANITARY PIPE WORK ABOVE GROUND 

FOR BUILDINGS 

I First Revision ) 

Water Supply and Sanitation Sectional Committee, BDC 24 

Chairman Represmting 

Shri J. D'Cbitz Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Undertakings 

New Delhi 

Members 

Chief Engineer ( Civil I ) ( Alternate to 
Shri J, D'Cruz ) 
Adviser ( PHE ) Ministry of Works and Housing 

Depitty Adviser ( PHE ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S- Bhairavan Public Health Engineering Department, Government 

of Kerala, Trivandrum 
Superintending Ekgineeb ( Alternate ) 
Shbi I, Chandra Public Works Department, Public Health Branch, 

Government of Haryana, Chandigarh 
Shri K. K. Gandhi ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Constrttc- Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknow 
tion ) 
Superintending Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Shri R, C P. Chaxtdharv Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. V. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, K. Dasgupta Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. R. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Prof J. M. Dave Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri S. G. Deolalikah In personal capacity {Flat No. 403 y Savitri Cinema 

Commercial Complex^ Greater Kailash II, New Delhi ) 
Shri B. R. N. Gupta Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri K. V. KrishNamurthy ( Alternate ) 
Hydrauwc Engineer Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay 

Chief Engineer { Sewerage 
Projects ) ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1984 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication 15 protected under tlM IndiM Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any nwam except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infrii^gement of copyright tmder the said Act. 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri R, a. Khanka Public Health Engineering Department, Government 

of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 

Shri D, K. Mitba ( AUernaU I ) 

Shbi I. S. Baweja ( Alternate II ) 
Shri P. Krishakan Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

SUBVBYOR OF WoRKS-1 

( NDZ ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Y. Madan The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri C. E. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S, L. Maini Public Works Department, Public Health Branch, 

Government of Punjab, Patiala 
Shri R. Natabajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Sbbi B. M. Rahul ( Alternate ) 
ShriK. J. Nath All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, 

Calcutta 
Shri D. Gusizr ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Poon-abauam Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Pbof V. Ramai7 National Environmental Engineering Research 

Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 
Shri S. R. Kshibsagab ( Alternate ) 
Shbi RaKJit Singh Ministry of Railways 

Db a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shri O. P. Ratra ( Alternate ) 
Secretary Indian Water Works Association, Bombay 

Seobbtary Genehai« Institution of Public Health Engineers India, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. N. Banbr.ibe ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. R. Sbhoai. L. R. Sehgal & Co, New Delhi 

Shbi S. K, Sharma Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri B. N. Thyagabaja bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, 

Bangalore 
Shri H. S. Puttakbmpanna ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. Vaxiadabajan Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 

Board, Madras 
Shbi S. Daivamani { Alternate ) 
Shbi G. Raman, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offieio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri A. K, Avasthy 
Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI 



( Coniin^d on page 26 ) 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

SANITARY PIPE WORK ABOVE GROUND 

FOR BUILDINGS 

{First Revision) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 30 November 1983, after the draf*^ finalized by 
the Water Snpply and Sanitation Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 AH aspects of design, layout construction and maintenance of drains 
for carriage of wastes and sewage together with all ancilliary works like 
manholes, inspection chambers, etc, have been generally dealt with in 
IS : 1742-1983*. However, a qode of practice specially dealing with the 
design and layout of soil and waste pipes of buildings was felt necessary to 
give detailed guidance for this part of work. 

0.2.1 The code covers the traditional two-pipe system of plumbing and 
the modern methods of plumbing, namely, the one-pipe and the single 
stack systeni. In this revision guidance for the choice of plumbing 
system and safeguards for single stack system have been covered in 
detail. The requirements for soil pipe, waste pipe and ventilating pipe 
have also been included. 

0.3 This code represents a standard of good practices and, therefore, 
takes the form of recommendations. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated » ex- 
pressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in 
this standard. 



•Code of practice for building drainage {first revision ). 
fRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code deals with the design, installation of soil, waste and 
ventilating pipes where they occur above ground both inside and outside 
the building, 

1*2 Rainwater pipes are not covered by this code. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Back Pressure — Air or waste water from pipes being forced up 
through traps. 

2.2 Branch Ventilating Pipe ( B.V.P. ) — A pipe, one end of which 
is connected to the system adjacent to the trap of an appliance and the 
other to a main ventilating pipe or a drain-ventilating pipe. It is fitted 
to prevent loss of water seal from a trap owing to partial vacuum back 
pressure, or surging caused by air movement within the pipe system. It 
also provides ventilation for the branch waste pipe. 

2.3 Branch Soil Pipe ( B.S,P* ) — A pipe connecting one or more 
soil appliances to the main soil pipe. 

2.4 Branch Waste Pipe { B.W.P ) A pipe connecting one or more waste 
appliances to the main waste pipe. 

2.5 Branch Soil Waste Pipe ( B.S.W.P. ) — A pipe connecting one or 

more soil and/or waste appliances to the main soil waste pipe ( one-pipe 
system ). 

2.6 Building Drain ( sge Fig. 1 ) — The building ( house ) drain is the 
part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives 
the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls 
of the building and conveys it to the building ( house ) sewer beginning 
one metre outside the building wall. 

2.7 Building Sewer ( see Fig. 1 ) — The building ( house ) sewer is 
the part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extend 
from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of 
the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, 
individual sewage-disposal system, or other point of disposal. 

2.8 Cleaning Eye — An access opening in a pipe or pipe fitting arranged 
to facilitate the clearing of obstructions and fitted with removeable cover. 

2.9 Crown of Trap — The topmost point of the inside^of a trap outlet. 

2.10 Diameter — The nominal diameter of pipas fittings. 

4 



IS : 5329 - 1983 




BUILDING 
SEWER 



-BUILDING DRAIN 



Fig, 1 Definition of Building Drain and Building Sewer 



2.11 Drain — Any pipe which conveys discharges from sanitary 
appliances in a drainage system. 

2.12 Drain Ventilating Pipe ( D.V.P. ) — A pipe installed to provide 
flow of air to or from a drain to prevent undue concentration of foul air 
in drain. Main soil pipe or main waste pipe may serve as drain ventilat- 
ing pipe wherever their upper portions, which do not receive discharges, 
are extended to the roof level and let open to air. 

2.13 Holderbat — A bra^cket made in halves, with bolts and nuts for 
joining the halves and with provision for building-in or screwing to the 
structure. 

2.14 Induced Siphonage — The extraction of water from a trap by 
siphonage set up by reduction of pressure at the outlet of the trap. 

2.15 Main Soil Pipe ( M.S.P. ) — A ' pipe connecting one or more 
branch waste pipes to the drain. 

2.16 Main Ventilating Pipe ( M.V.P. ) — A pipe which receives a 
number of branch ventilating pipes. 

2.17 Main Waste Pipe ( M.W.P. ) — A pipe connecting one ormore 
branch waste pipes to the drain. 



IS s 5329 - 1983 

2.18 Main Soil Waste Pipe ( M.S.W.P. ) — A pipe connecting one 
more branch soil waste pipes to the drain. 

2.19 Pipe Ears — Two wings cast integrally with the pipe socket 
provided with holes to take fixing nails or screws. 

2.20 Pipe Systems — The system to be adopted will depend on the type 
and planning of the building in which it is to be installed and will be 
one of the following: 

a) Two Pipe System ( see Fig. 2) — A discharge pipe system compris- 
ing two independent discharge pipes one of which conveys soil 
directly to the drain, the other conveying waste water to the 
drain through a trapped gully. The system may also require 
ventilating pipes. 

b) One Pipe System ( see Fig. 3) — The plumbing system in which the 
waste connection from sinks, baths and wash basins and the soil 
pipe branches are all collected into one main pipe which is con- 
nected ' directly to the drainage system. Gully traps and waste 
pipes are completely dispensed with but all the traps of water 
closets, basin, etc, are completely ventilated to preserve water 
seal. 

c) Single Stack System ( see Fig. 4A and 4B ) — One pipe system with- 
out trap ventilation pipe work. 

2.21 Self Siphonagc — The extraction of water from a trap by 
siphonage setup by the momentum of the discharge from the sanitary 
appliance to which the trap is attached, 

2.22 Stack — A main vertical discharge or ventilating pipe, 

2.23 Trap — A fitting or device so designed and constructed as to 
provide, when properly vented, a liquid seal which will prevent the back 
passage of air without materially affecting the flow of sewage or water 
through. 

2-24 Water Seal — The water in a trap which acts as a barrier to the 
passage of air through the trap. 

2.25 Fixture Unit — A quantity in terms of which the load producing 
effects on the plumbing system of different kind of plumbing fixtures are 
expressed on some arbitrarily chosen scale. 

3. PRELIMINARY DATA FOR DESIGN 

3.1 In order to design a soil and waste pipes system above ground, infor- 
mation on the following items should be collected: 

a) New Work — In the initial stages, there should be consultation 

6 



IS : 5329 * IMS 

between the local authority, owner, architect and engineer 
concerning the following matters: 

1) Number, position and types of appliances to be installed; 

2) Position and size of sewers and any precautions necessary to 
ensure satisfactory working of the drainage system and to 
avoid flooding of the premises; and 

3) Requirements of local authority. 

b) Existing Work — Any report on existing work should include the 
following: 

1) Results of tests, 

2) Details of appliances connected to the drainage system, 

3) Description of the condition of the pipework and fittings, and 

4) Particulars of the ventilation of the drainage system. 

c) Information Required hy Local Authorities 

1) Notification on the appropriate forms and particulars of the 
propossd work, and 

2) Drawings. 

d) Information Required by the Plumbing Contractor 

1) Drawings — The architect or engineer should advise the 
plumbing contractor of the acceptance of the proposal by the 
local authority and provide an exact copy of the approved 
drawings. These drawings should show any special annotations 
made by the local authority, also notes as to any preparatory 
constructional work which may be required to accommodate 
the pipework. The plumbing contractor should be provided 
with sufficient copies of the large scale working drawings of 
the installation containing notes of any special requirements 
and giving all necessary dimensions. 

2) Specification — The plumbing contractor will require copies of 
the relevant clauses of the main specification which should 
include the following: 

1) General description of the work, 

2) Information as to ^statutory authorities' requirements, 
if ^ly , 

3) Description of materials required, 

4) Methods of fixing and jointing, and 

5) Any special requirements. 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

3.2 The work shall be carried out by a plumber duly licensed by local 
authorities in conformity with the rules laid down for the purpose. 

4. TIME SCHEDULE 

4.1 A time schedule for the installation of the soil and waste pipework 
should be prepared and co-ordinated with the programme of the main 
building work, particularly with that part of it dealing with the under- 
ground drainage system. This schedule may require adjustment from 
time to time to accord with the progress of the job. The following are 
important points to be considered in the preparation of a time schedule; 

a) Dates when drawings are required, 

b) Dates for the supply and delivery of materials, and 

c) Dates for the start and completion of individual section of the 
work. 

5. MATERIAL 

5.1 Materials and components of the materials used in the construction 
work described in the code shall conform to the requirements laid down 
in the relevant Indian Standards. However, where no Indian Standard 
exists on the particular item, materials used shall be of satisfactory quality 
and workmanship acceptable to the owner. 

5.2 Choice of Materials for Pipes and Fittings — The following 
material may be used for a sanitary pipework system: 

a) Asbestos cement [ conforming to JS : 1626 { Part 1 )-1980* ]; 

b) Cast iron ( conforming to IS : 1536-19761, IS : 1537-1976+, IS; 
1538-1976§, IS : 1729-19791|, and IS : 3989-19701f ); 

c) Salt glazed stoneware pipes ( conforming to IS : 651-1980** ); 

d) Galvanized steel and wrought iron [conforming to IS; 1239 
( Part 1 )-1979tt],and 

e) Any other material as approved by the local authority. 



♦Specification for asbestos cement building pipes and pipe fittings, gutters and gutter 
fittings and roofing fittings: Part 1 Pipe and pipe fittings (Jirst revision ). 

fSpecification for centrifugally cast ( spun ) iron pressure pipes for water, gas and 
sewage ( second revision ). 

JSpecification for vertically cast iron pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage 
( Jirst revision ) . 

§Specification for cast iron fittings for pressure pipes for water, gas and sewage 
( second revision ) . 

1 1 Specific at ion for sand cast iron spigot and socket soil, waste and ventilating pipes, 
fittings and accessories {first revision ). 

li Specification for centrifugally-cast (spun) iron spigot and socket soil, waste and 
v«ntilating pipes, fittings and accessories {first revision ). 

♦♦Specification for sait-glazed stoneware pipes and fittings {fourth revision ). 

tfSpecification for mild steel tubes {fourth revision ). 

8 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

5.2.1 Care should be taken to select materials resistant to corrosion 
caused by the liquid carried, by atmospheric conditions, or by electrolysis. 

6. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

6.1 Pipe Systems — The design to be adopted will depend on the type 
and planning of the buildings to which it is to be installed and will be 
one of the following: 

a) The two-pipe system ( set Fig. 2 ), 

b) The one-pipe system ( j^^ Fig. 3 ), or 

c) The single stack system ( see Fig. 4A and 4B ) 

6.1.1 Choice of Plumbing System — Where the sullage from baths and 
kitchens can be dealt with separately for use in gardening or any other 
such purposes, the two pipe system is advantageous. Obviously, the one- 
pipe system is more economical and has application where all types of 
waste waters are taken in a common sewer line to the place of disposal or 
treatment. Both these systems are fully ventilated by a system of ventilat- 
ing pipe. However, these days the single-stack system without any vent 
pipe system, where the stack itself is made to serve the vent require- 
ments also by restricting the flow in the stack, is being used. This system is 
recommended with 100 mm diameter stack for up to 5 storey buildings. 
Not more than two toilet units can discharge to the single stack at each 
floor level. For any different case, the permission of the local authority 
shall be obtained. In high-rise buildings, a partially ventilated one-pipe 
system is being used where the vent stack is connected to the drainage 
stack or the WGs at each or alternate floors. The safeguards for the 
single stack system are stipulated in 6.9.2. The fully ventilated system 
does not demand any sp>ecial safeguards. 

6.2 Pipe Capacities — Pipe diameter should be calculated according 
to 4.5.1 of IS: 1742-1983*. 

6.2.1 Branches and stacks which receive discharges from WG pans should 
not be less than 100 mm, except where the outlet from the siphonic 
water closet is 80 mm in which case a branch pipe of 80 mm may be 
used; for outlet of floor traps 75 mm diameter pipes may be used. 

6.2.2 The gradient of a horizontal branch should not be flatter than 1 
in 50 and not steeper than 1 in 10. 

6.3 Layout of Pipes — Pipe work and appliances should be so arranged 
as to allow close grouping of connections preferably with a water closet 
near to the main soil pipe. The level of the trap outlet of an appliance 
shall be studied in relation to the level of the floor and the branch pipe. 

♦Code of practice for building drainage (first revision ). 



IS : 5329 - 1983 



evp NOT REQUIRED TO 
FITMENT CONNECTED 
TO HIGHEST BRANCH 
IF LENOTH OF BWP 
(5 NOT EXCESSIVE 



ALTERNATIVELY, MVP 
UHif CONNECT TO MSP 
OR MWP ABOVE 

HIGHEST FITTING 




POSITION OF ACCESS 
TO IE OETERMiNED 
DY DETAILS OF DESIGN 



TO BUILDING DRAIN 



TO BUILDING DRAIN 

DIRECTLY OR 
THROUGH GULLEY 



Fig. 2 Diagram of Two-Pipe System 
10 



IS:5329-1%3 



FL 




BVP NOT REQUIRED TO 
FITMENT CONNECTED 
TO HIGHEST BRANCH 
IF LENGTH OF BSP OR 
BWP IS NOT EXCESSIVE 



rsiNKj ^-=r 



Ni: 



ALTERNATIVELY, LOWEST ABLUTION FITMENT 
MAV OISCHAT^GE INTO MVP ABOVE THE BEND 



t » WHERE THE LOWEST BRANCH IS LESS TH 
U 300cm ABOVE DRAIN, MVP TOCONNECT TO 
TO MAN- MSWP BELOW LOWEST BRANCH OR TERMI- tq-bUil DING 
HOLE NATE AT HIGH LEVEL IN MANHOLE ™5SuN 




POSITION OF ACCESS 
TO BE DETERMINED 
BY DETAILS OF OESIGH 



Fig. 3 Diagram of One-Pipe System 



11 



IS : 5S29 - 1983 



STACK 100 mm ^ 



WASH BASIN 



BATH 




50mm PARALLEL BRANCH 
TO BE INTRODUCED ONLY 
WHEN BATH WASTE WOULD 
OTHERWISE ENTER SOIL 
STACK BELOW WC BRANCH 
AND WITHIN 200 mm MIP^ 
(s« Pie.ft) 



- LARGE RADIUS BENDS 

4A Single Stack System (Western Styl) 



we' 



TO BUILOMO 
DRAIN 



W? ^x^MAlN STACK 
PyWB 

W? 

Jywe 



,J" 



4B Single Stack 
System (Indian 
Practice) 



Fig. 4 Main Features of Design of Single Stack System 

6.3.1 Pipes should be placed, fixed and jointed so as to avoid risk of 
damage through variations in temperature. Unless suitable precautions 
are taken, the jointing of pipes exposed to unduly high temperatures 
may become unsatisfactory. Small waste pipes are particularly liable to 
damage caused by the freezing of water from a leaking tap in places 
where freezing normally occours, 

6.3.2 The pipework in branch connections should always be arranged 
to allow free drainage of th? system. Connections to main or branch 
pipes should be so arranged as to prevent cross flow from one appliance 
to another. Connections should be made with an easy sweep in the 
direction of flow particularly in connection in the ^single stack' system 
( see Fig. 4 ). 



12 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

6.3.2.1 When the pipes are concealed, inaccessible or laid exposed 
along with the internal face of the walls, they should preferably be of 
cast iron. In the ground floor all the pipes, including those laid on the 
external face of the walls, should be of cast iron. 

6.3.2.2 All joints in pipework and of pipework to appliance should 
be made in such a manner as to be airtight and watertight and to remain 
so during use. Care should be taken to ensure that no jointing material 
projects inside the bore of the pipe. Some flexibility is desirably 
where there is possibility of movement between the pipes or between the 
pipes and the appliances. 

6.3.2.3 The joint shall be made of neat cement paste well caulked 
like lead ( with water content not exceeding 30 percent ) preferably with 
asbestos or hemp fibre; cement joints should be avoided where the joints 
are likely to be exposed to direct sunlight or heat. Where rubber rings 
are used for the jointing of external pipes, the annular space in the 
socket above ring should be filled with a suitable mastic compound. 

6.3.3 Bends should be of long radius where practicable. In the case of 
bends in the bottom most pipes they should necessarily be of long radius 
and should preferably be made of 135° ( 1/8 ) bends. 

6.3.4 Ample provision should be made for access to all pipework and 
the embedding of joints in walls should be avoided as far as possible. 

6.3.5 All pipework adjacent to living or sleeping quarters should be 
insulated against sound transmission and steps should be taken to avoid 
the transmission of noise from one apartment to another by way of the 
pipe system ( j^^ IS : 1950-1962* ). 

6.4 Connection of Fixtures — Fixtures may preferably be connected 
to the stack directly or through floor traps. 

6.5 Traps 

6.5.1 General — The entry of foul air to the building should be 
prevented by suitable traps, properly sited, 

6.5.2 Traps should always be of a self-cleansing pattern. A trap which 
is not an integral part of an appliance should be directly attached to its 
outlet, and the pipe bore should be uniform throughout and have a 
smooth surface. 

6.5.3 Traps for use in domestic waste installations and all other traps 
should be conveniently accessbile and provided with cleaning eyes, or 
other means of cleaning. 



*Code of practice for sound insulation of non-industrial buildings. 

13 



IS: 5529 -1983 

6«5«4 Selection of Traps for Various Purposes — The factors given in 
Tables 1 and 2 should receive consideration in relation to attached traps. 



TABLE 1 MINIMUM INTERNAL DIAMETERS FOR WASTE APPLIANCES 


Item 






Diameter 
mm 


Drinking fountains 
Wash basins 






25 
30 


Bidets 






30 


Domestic sinks and baths 






40 


Showerbath trays 
Domestic bath tubs 






40 
50 


Hotel and canteen sinks 






50 


Urinals : 








Stall urinals ( with not more 
drainage ) 
Lip urinals 
Floor traps ( outlet diameter ) 


than 1-20 m 


of channel 


50 

40 
65 





TABLE 2 DEPTH OF SEALS FOR DIFFERENT PLUMBING SYSTEM 

{ Clause e,b A) 



Sl 


Item 




TWO-PIPE 


0:nk-Pipe 


Single Stack 


No. 






mm 


mm 


mm 


i) 


Water closets 




50 


50 


50 


ii) 


Floor traps 




50 


50 


50 


iii) 


Other fixtures, directly 


connec- 









ted to the stack: 

a) Where attached to branch 40 
waste pipes of dia 75 mm 

or more 

b) Where^^ttached to branch 40 
waste pipe of less than 

75 mm dia- 



40 



40 



40 



75 



Note — - When connection is made through floor trap, no separate seals are required 
for individual fixtures. 

6.6 Soil Pipe 

^ 6.6.1 A soil pipe conveying to a drain any solid or liquid filth shall be 
circular and shall have a minimum diameter of 100 mm. 



H 



IS : 5329 - M83 

6.6.2 Except where it is impracticable, the soil pipe shall be situated 
outside the building or in suitably designed pipe shafts and shall be con- 
tinued upwards without diminution of its diameter, and ( except where 
it is unavoidable ) without any bend or angle, to such a height and 
position as to afford by means of its open end a safe outlet for foul air. 
The position of the open end with its covering shall be such as to comply 
with 6.8 relating to ventilating pipe. Even if the pipes are laid in external 
chases, the soil pipes shall not be permitted on a wall abutting a street 
unless the Authority is satisiied that it is unavoidable. Where pipe «hafts 
are provided the cross-sectional area shall be such as to allow free and 
uilhampered access to the pipes to be installed in the shaft and in no case 
shall the cross section be less than a square of 1 metre side. All pi^.^e 
shafts shall be provioed with an access door at ground level and facilities 
for ventilation. 

6.6.3 Soil pipes, whether inside or outside the building, shall not be 
connected with any rain water pipe and there shall not be any trap in 
such soil pipe or between it any drain with which it is connected, 

6.6.4 Soil pipes shall preferably be of cast iron. Asbestos cement 
building pipes may also be used as soil pipes only above ground level. 

6.6.5 The soil pipe shall be provided with heel rest bend which shall 
rest on sound footing. It shall be fixed at least 50 mm clear of the finished 
surface of the wall by means of suitable clamps of approved type. 

6.7 Waste Pipe 

6«7.1 Every pipe in a building for earring off the waste or overflow 
water from every bath, wash basin or sink to a drain shall be of 32 to 
50 mm diameter, and shall be trapped immediately beneath such wash 
basin or sinl^ by an efficient siphon trap with adequate means for inpec- 
tion and cleaning. Such traps shall be ventilated into the external air 
whenever such ventilation is necessary to preserve the seal of the trap. 
Waste pipes, traps, etc, shall be constructed of iron, head, brass, stoneware, 
asbestos cement or other approved material. The overflow pipe from wash 
basins, sinks, etc, shall be connected with the waste pipe immediately 
above the trap. Vertical pipes carrying off waste water shall have a 
minimum diameter of 75 mm. 

Note — Wherever Wash basins and sinks have in-built overflow arrangements^ there 
is no need to provide overflow pipes in such cases. 

6.7.2 Every pipe in a building for carrying off waste water to a drain 
shall be taken through an external wall of the building by the shortest 
practicable line, and shall discharge below the grating or surface box of 
the chamber but above the grating of a properly trapped gully. The 
waste pipe shall be continued upwards without any diminution in its 
diameter and ( except when unavoidable ) without any bend or angle to 

15 



IS : 5329- 1983 

such a height and position as to afford by means of the open end of the 
waste pipe, a safe outlet for foul air, the position of the open end and its 
covering being such as to comply with the condition. 

6.7.3 Except where it is impracticable, the common waste pipe shall 
be situated outside the building and shall be continued upwards without 
diminution of its diameter { except where it is unavoidable ) without any 
bend or angle being formed to such a height and position as to afford by 
means of the open end a safe outlet for foul air, the position of the open 
end and the covering thereafter being such as to comply with the 
conditions set out in ventilated pipe. 

6.7*4 The waste pipe shall be finally attached to the wall atleast 5 cm 
clear of it, if the waste pipe is of cast iron, the pipe shall be secured to the 
walls properly fixed holderbats or equally suitable and efficient means. 

6.8 Ventilating Pipe 

6.8.1 Ventilating pipes should be so installed that- water cannot be 
retained in them. They should be fixed vertically. Whenever possible 
horizontal runs should be avoided. Ventilating pipe shall be carried to 
such a height and in such a position as to afford by means of the open 
end of such pipe or vent shaft, a safe outlet for foul air with the least 
possible nuisance. 

6.8.2 The upper end of the main ventilating pipe may be continued to 
the open air above roof level as separate pipe, or it may joint the MSP 
and/or MWP above the floor level of the highest appliance. Its lower 
end may be carried down to join the drain at a point where air relief 
may always be maintained. Four typical methods of jointing the main 
ventilating pipe at the lower end are given in Fig. 5. 

6.8.3 Branch ventilating pipes should be connected to the top of the 
BSP and BWP between 75 mm and 450 mm from the crown of the trap. 

6.8.4 The ventilating pipe shall always be taken to a point 150 cm 
above the level of the eaves or flat roof or terrace parapet whichever is 
higher or the top of any window within a horizontal distance of 3 m. 
The least dimension shall be taken as a minimum and local conditions 
shall be taken into account. The upper end of every ventilating pipe 
shall be protected by means of a cowl. 

6.8.5 In case the adjoining building is taller, the ventilating pipe shall 
be carried higher than the roof of the adjacent building, wherever it is 
possible. 

1*> 



IS : 5329 - 1983 




RETURNED TO MAIN STACK NOT 
LESS THAN 2Scm OR MOUE 
THAN 60cm BELOW LOWEST 
BRANCH CONNECTION INTO 
MAIN STACK 



5A 



MSP MVP 




CONNECTION TO THE 
NEAREST MANHOLE ON 
THE LINE OF THE DRAIN 



CONNECTION TO DRAM 
ON DRAIN SIDE Of 
LONG RADIUS BEND 



MSP MVP 



5C 



WASH BASIN 




CONNECTION OP VENT PIPE. 
TO GROUND FLOOR WC BRA>4CH, 
WITH THIS METHOD THE VENT 
STACK CAN BE USED AS A 
•WET' VENT TAWNG THE 

i BRANCHES OF THE GROUND 

I FLOOR WASTE PITTING 



Fig. 5 End Connections of Vent Pipe 
17 



IS : 5329 - 1983 
6»8«6 Sizes 

6.8.6.1 The building drain ventilating pipe shall be of not less than 
75 mm diameter. When, however, it is used as MSP or MWP, the upper 
portion, which does not carry discharges, shall not be of lesser diameter 
than the remaining portion. 

6.8.6.2 The diameter of the main ventilating pipe shall not be less 
than 50 mm. 

6.8*6.3 A branch ventilating pipe on a waste pipe in both one and 
two-pipe systems shall be of not less than two-thirds the diameter of the 
branch waste ventilated subject to a minimum of 25 mm. 

6*8«6.4 A branch ventilating pipe on a soil pipe in both one- and 
two-pipe systems shall be not less than 32 mm in diameter. 

6.9 Design Data for Single Stack Plumbing 

6.9.1 The following recommendations are conditional upon those 
given in Table 3: 

a) The appliance should be grouped as closely as possible round the 
main stack so as to keep the branch pipes short and reduce 
noise. 

b) Branch connections should be of large radius along the invert 
( se€ Fig. 6 ). 

c) Flat gradients reduce self-siphonage and noise; waste pipes should 
fall at between 1 : 50 and 1 : 10. 

d) A typical method of single stack system of plumbing is shown 
in Fig. 4A and 4B. 

6.9.2 Safeguards for Single Stack System 

a) As far as practicable, the fixtures on floors shall be connected to 
stack in order of increasing discharge rate in the downward 
direction. 

b) The vertical distance between the waste branch ( from floor trap 
or from the individual appliance ) and the soil branch connection, 
when soil pipe is connected to stack above the waste pipe, shall 
be not less than 200 mm. 

18 



IS : 5329 - 1M3 




^—25 mm R 
MAX 



6A 6B 

SATISFACTORY 




r 



6C 60 

UNDESIRABLE ON ACCOUNT 
OF SELF SIPHONAGE 

Fig. 6 Single Stack System — Waste-Pipe Gomnegtions 

c) Depth of water seal traps for different fixtures shall be as below: 

Water closets 50 mm 

Floor traps 50 mm 

Other fixtures directly connected to the stack: 

1) Where attached to branch waste pipes of 40 mm 
dia 75 mm or more 

2) Where attached to branch waste pipes 75 mm 
of less than 75 mm dia 



19 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

NoTB — When connection is made through floor trap no separate seals are required 
for individual fixtures. 

d) Branches and stacks which receive discharges from W.C. pans 
should not be less than 100 mm, except where the outlet from the 
siphonic water-closet is 80 mm in which case a branch pipe of 
80 mm may be used; for outlet of floor traps 75 mm dia pipes 
may be used. 

e) The horizontal branch distance for fixtures from stack bend(s) at 
the foot of stack to avoid back pressure as well as vertical distance 

between the lowest connection and the invert of drain shall be 
as shown in Fig. 4A. 

f ) For tall buildings^ ground floor appliances are recommended to 
be connected directly to manhole/inspection chamber. 

6.9.2.1 Additional requirements — The pipes shall be laid in straight 
lines as far as possible in both vertical and horizontal plans. Anything 
that is likely to cause irregularity of flow, such as abrupt changes of 
direction, shall be avoided. No bends and junctions whatsoever shall 
be permitted in the sewers except at manholes and inspection chambers. 

6J9.3 Stack Size — The size shall be 100 mm diameter. 

6.9«4 Single Branches and Fittings — Table 3 gives recommendations for 
the design of single stack system. Ail appliances directly connected to 
stacks are trapped. 

6.9.4.1 Pipes should fall gradually and continuously in the direction 
of flow. 

6.9.5 Combined Bath and Basin Waste — When the basin and bath are at 
some distance from the stack, it may be cheaper and simpler to combine 
the waste pipes into one than to run each separately to the stack. Alter- 
natively, a 32 mm dia trap with a short 32 mm tail pipe may be arranged 
to discharge into 38 mm or 50 mm waste pipe. Any bends in the waste 
should be of large radius. 

7. INSPECTION AND TESTING 

7.1 Inspection — Work should be inspected during installation and 
tests applied on completion, care being taken that all work which is to be 
encased or concealed is tested before it is finally enclosed. 

• 7.1.1 Pipe systems should be tested for gas-tightness^ and for hydraulic 
performance ( see 7.2 ). Inspection should be carried out to ensure the 
following: 

a) Work accords with the drawings and specification; 

b) All pipe brackets, clips, etc, ^.re securely fixed; 

20 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

c) Fixing are correctly spaced; 

d) Pipe is protected where necessary by thermal insulation; 

€) Embedded pipework is properly protected before sealing-in; 
f ) All access covers, caps or plugs: 

1) are accessible, 

2) are so made that the internal faces truly complete the internal 
bore, 

3) cause no obstruction in the pipe bore, and 

4) are well jointed. 



TABLE 3 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DESIGN OF 
SINGLE STACK SYSTEM 



No. 



Component 



( Clause 6.9 A) 

Action to be 
GtTARDED Against 



(1) (2) (3) 

i) Wash basin waste Self-siphonage 



Design RECOMMEafDATioNs 



(4) 



ii^ 



Bath and sink 
wastes 38 mm 
trap and 

38 mm waste 
pipe 



Self-siphonage 



Backing up of 
discharge from 
W.G. branch into 
bath branch 



75 mm seal P-trap to be xised. The 
maximum slope of a 40 mm waste 
pipe to be determined from Fig. 7 
according to the length of the waste 
pipe. Any bends to be not less 
than 75 mm radius to centre line. 
Waste pipes longer than the 
recommended maximum length of 
165 cm should be vented, or a 
larger diameter waste pipe or 
approved resealing trap should be 
used 

75 mm seal traps to be used. Self- 
siphonage not important. Length 
and slope of waste branch not 
critical, but long waste pipes may 
be troubled by sedimentation and 
access for cleaning should be 
provided 

Position of entry of bath waste into 
stack to be as in Fig. 8 , the bath 
waste pipes may be connected to 
the stack so that its centre line 
meets the centre line of the stack 
at or above the point where the 
centre line of the WC branch meet 
the centre line of the stack, or 
at least 20 cm below it 

( Continued) 



21 



IS : 5329 - 19R3 



TABLE 3 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DESIGN OF 
SINGLE STACK SYSTEM — Contd 



Si. 
No. 


COXPONKHT 


Action to be 
GuARDSD Against 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


in) 


SoU l»anch con- 
necdon to stack 


Induced siphonage 

when W.C. is dis- 
charged 


i^) 


Bend at foot of Back pressure at 
stack (««» Fig. 4A lowest branch. 
and 4B ) Build-up of deter- 
gent foam 


V) 


Offiets in stacks 


Back pressure above 
offset 



vi) Floor traps and 
75 mm branch 
pipe 



Induced siphonage 



Design Recommendations 



(4) 

W.C. connections should be swept in 
the direction of flow. Fittings 
should have a minimum sweep of 
at least 5 cm radius 

Bend to be of large radius or two 
135* bends to be used. Vertical 
distance between lowest branch 
connection and invert of drain to 
be at least 750 mm ( 450 mm for 
2 storeyed houses with 100 mm 
stack ) 

There should be no offsets in stacks 
below the topmost appliances 
unless venting is provided to relieve 
any back pressure. Offsets above 
the topmost appliances are of no 
significance. 

50-mm seal trap to the used. Slop^ 
of the branch pipe may vary fromj 
1 in 50 to 1 in 10 



Noos — ^^The recommendations apply to systems with swept-inlet WC branches. 
With straight inlet branches a 100 mm stack with no vents has been found 
satis&ctory for up to four storeys, a 150 mm stack with no vents has been found 
satis&ctory for up to 15 storeys. 



7J2 Testing of System 

7J!.l Water Test — The water test may be applied before the appliances 
are oonnected and may be carried out in sections so as to limit the static 
head to 4*5 m. It is necessary to seal all openings affected by the test 
and provide support to the plugs used as stoppers. 

l.%2 Air Test — The air test may be applied by inserting expanding 
rubber testing plugs in the lower and upper ends of the main soil pipe 
and main ventilating pipe and sealing the plugs with water, where 
possible. 



22 



IS 1 5329 - 1983 




0*75 I'O 1*25 1*5 1'7m MAX 

LENGTH BETWEEN TRAP WEIR AND VENT,L 

Fio. 7 Length and Fall of Basin Waste Design Curve for 32 mm 
Waste and 75 mm Seal P-Traps Connected to Single Wash Basin 



23 



IS : 5329 - 1983 




jr-i Of BATH WASTE NOT TO 
/be below THIS LEVEL 



20Cmm* 



OF BATH WASTE NOT TO 
BE ABOVE THIS LEVEL 



Fig. 8 Connection of Bath Waste to Stack 

7.2.2.1 The testing plug at the upper end of the ventilating pipe 
should be fitted with a tee-piece with a cock on each branch, one 
branch being connected by a flexible tube to a manometer. Air pressure 
is then introduced into the system through the other branch of the tee- 
piece until the desired pressure is shown on the manometer scale. The 
pressure applied should be equal to 65 mm water gauge and should 
remain constant for a period of three minutes to prove the soundness of 
the installation. 

7.2.2.2 Alternatively, the air pressure may be applied by passing a 
flexible tube from a tee-piece attached to a manometer through the water 
seal of the trap of the sanitary appHance, the test then being carried out 
as described in 7.2.2.1. 

7*2.3 Smoke Test — Faults indicated by the air test may be located by 
pumping smoke into the system with a smoke machine. Care should be 
taken to ensure that the system is filled with smoke before sealing with 
plugs. 

7.2.4 Hydraulic Performance — Discharge tes^ . should be made from all 
the appliances, singly and collectively. Obstruction in any of the pipe 
lines should be traced and the whole system examined for proper 
hydraulic performance, including the retention of an adequate water seal 
in each trap. 



li4 



IS : 5329 - 1983 

7.2.4.1 Any defects revealed by the tests should be made good, 
and the tests repeated until a satisfactory result is obtained, 

7.3 Testing the Efficiency of the Design 

7.3.1 A soil and/or waste pipe system should, under tests, withstand 
any condition of discharge of its appliances which may occur in practice, 
without the discharge from one appliance being forced up into another, 
and every trap should retain at least 25 mm of its seal under these 
conditions. The tests should be designed to make full allowance for the 
maximum suction and pressure effects which may occur as given below: 

a) In small installations when all the appliances are discharging 
together, and 

b) In large installations when sufficient appliances are simultaneously 
discharged to simulate peak conditions. 

7.3.2 When testing the seals of traps fitted to ablutionary appliances, 
the latter should be filled to overflow level and allowed to discharge in 
the normal way. 

7.3.3 Tests similar to the above should also be carried out by 
discharging some appliances, while others are empty with plugs out, 

7.3.4 Each test should be carried out at least three times and the 
maximum loss of seal in any of the tests should be taken as the signffieant 
result. 



25 



IS s 5329- 1983 

( Continued-from page 2 ) 



Drainage Subcommittee, BDC* 24 : 2 

Representing 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay 



Convener 
Shki P. G.JOSHI 

Members 
Deputy Chief Engineer ( Sewerage ) ( Alternate to 
ShriP. G.Joshi ) 
Additional Chief Engineer Delhi Municipal Corporation, Delhi 
( Water ) 
Deputy^Drainage Engineer ( Alternate ) 

Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, 

Chandigarh 
Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board, 

Madras 
Ministry of Works and Housing 
In personal capacity ( 16 A Maya Mahal, 17th Road, 

Khar^ Bombay ) 
Public Health Engineering Department, Government 

of Kerala, Trivandrum 
National Environmental Engineering Research Ins- 
titute ( CSIR ), Nagpur 



Chief Engineer 

Chieit Engineer ( General ) 

Deputy Adviser ( PHE ) 
Shbi Devendra Singh 

Shbi K. Govindan Nai 

ShBiY. S. MURTHY 



Shri a, K. Seth ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. K. Sharma 



Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 
Roorkee 



26 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 
Talephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanatha 

( Common to all offices ) 



Reglortal Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 

NEW DELHI-1 10002 
•Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, 

CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 

tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Mar: I, Andheri ^East), 

BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices: 
'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 

AHMEDABAD 380001 
tPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
53/5, Ward No. 29, R, G. Barua Road, 5th Byalane, 

GUWAH ATI 781003 
5-8-56C L N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road), 

HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KAN PUR 208005 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 
T.C. No. 14/1421, University P.O., Palaya.n 
TRIVANDRUM 695035 

fnspectlor) Office (With Sale Point) : 

Pushpanjall, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAG PUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 

PUNE 411005 



Telephones 

[331 01 31 

1331 13 75 

36 24 99 



*Sahs Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhea Approach, P.O. Prlncap 
Street, Calcutta 700072 

tSales Office in Bombay is at Noveity Charrbera, Grant Road. 
Bombay 400007 

tSatea Office in Bangalore ia at Unity Building, Naraalmharala Sauara 
Bangalore 560002 



[218 43 
L316 41 
24 42 
2519 
2916 
6 32 92 95 



141 



T2 63 48 

12 63 49 

r38 49 55 

L38 49 56 

6 6716 

5 36 27 
3 31 77 

2310 83 

re 34 71 

La 98 32 

r21 68 76 

L2I 82 92 

6 23 05 
r6 21 04 
16 21 17 



2 51 71 
5 24 35 

27 68 00 

8» 65 28 
22 36 71 



PrInUd at SImee Printlna PrMt. Oalhl, tnali 



