( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS z 7354( Part 2 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF ELECT-RONIC AND ELECTRICAL 1TEMS
PART 2 RELIABILITY AND MAlNTAliJABlLlTY MANAGEMENT

( First Revision )
Reliability of Electronic and Ekctrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 3
Chairman Pno~ S. SAMPAT~ Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur Members
ADDITIONAL

Representing

DIRECTOR, STAN- Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DARDS ( S & T ) RDSO JOINT DIRECTOR, STANDARDS (S & T )-III, RDSO (Alternate ) SHRI S. P. BHATII<AR All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI K. B. MENON ( Alternate) DR K. CHANDRA National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi SHRI~~HARANJIT SINC+H Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad WQ CDR K. SURESH BABU ( Alternate) DR P. K. DUF~A Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) SHRI B. P. GHOSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI A. P. GUPTA Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SHRI I. S. SULAKH ( Alternate ) Overseas Communication Services, Bombay SHRIR.K. JAYADEV SHRI HARDEV SINCTH I Alternate 1 BRIM L. G. KETEAR ' `Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL V. K. KHANNA ( Alternate ) The Radio Electronic & Televisyon ManufactuSHRI S. P. KULKABNI rers' Association, Bombay SHRI S. M. KHURSALE ( Alternate) ( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN Copyright 1984 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the szid Act.

fS : 7354 ( Part 2 ) - 1984
( Continued from page 1) Members Representing Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. M. MANEAD SHRI B. BIIASKAR RAO ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI D. C. MEIITA SHRI R. V. ISRANI (Alternate ) Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI H. V. MEHTA SHRI S. RAHALIN~AM ( Alternnte ) Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, SHRI S. R. MERTA Bombay SHRI T. C. GO~ALIA ( Alternote ) In personal capacity ( Department of Electrical DR K. B. MISRA * Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur ) SHRIK. R. ANANDAKUMARAN NAIR Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHRI C. RANQANATEAN ( Alternatd 1 Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, SHRI D. V. PETKAR Bombay SHRI A. K. BABAR ( Alternate ) SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore fSR0 Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHRI K. RAYOOPAL SHXI SIHARAN DE ( Alternate ) Directorate of Technical Development and SRRI R. SOMASUNDARA~~ Production ( AIR j , Ministry of Defence SHRI R. N. SIIARIKA ( Alternate) SHRI H. C. TEWARI Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi SHRI D. P. SINIIA (Alter&e ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) BRIG J. VARQ~ESF. SHRI P. K. SHURLA ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SIIRI B. VIRESALIN~AIII SHRI V. MUTHAIAH ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DRR. P.WADIIWA SHRI E. G. NAUARAJAN (Alternate) Director General, IS1 ( E.v-ojicio Membrr ) SERI N.~RINIVASAN Director (Electronics ) ( Secrctasy )

2

IS : 7354 ( Part 2 ) - 1984

Indian Standard
GUIDE ON RELIABILITY OF ELECTRONIC AND ELECTRICAL ITEMS
PART 2 RELIABILITY AND MAINTAINABILITY MANAGEMENT

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 June 1984, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard ( Part 2 ) provides management guidelines for establishing reliability and maintainability programmes applicable in varying The scope degrees to the complete life cycle of electrotechnical products. and impact of selected comprehensive group of reliability and maintainability activities are given in this standard, while procedures for accomplishing these activities are contained in the Indian Standards given in Appendix A. This standard is intended to serve as an overall standard that links the various standards on technical aspects of reliability and maintainability. 0.2.1 The reliability and maintainability procedures covered in the guidelines are applicable to large organizations as well as small companies. They are also applicable to _producers and users of large systems and small components. 0.2.2 Taking into consideration the current emphasis on the need for the standard provides management economic resource conservation, guidelines for the selection of reliability and maintainability activities for Activities are perelectrotechnical products based on life cycle concept. formed in the most appropriate phase of product life and decision criteria take into account impact on all phases of product life. 0.3 This standard ( Part 2) was first issued in 1975 and this revision has been undertaken to bring it in line with the latest developments taking place in this field.

3

IS : 7354 ( P&t 2 ) - 1984 0.4 This standard is based on and technically equivalent to IEC Document 5'6 ( Central Office ) 86 Draft-Guidelines for Reliability and Maintainability Management issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) provides management guidelines for the selection of reliability and maintainability activities appropriate to each of five definable phases of product life : concept and definition, design and development, manufacturing and installation, operation and maintenance, and disposal. 1.2 This standard is applicable to electrotechnical products and is an overall standard to be applied by management in establishing a reliability and maintainability programme appropriate to the product and its end use. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions and explanation terms given in IS : 1885 ( Part 39 )-1979* shall apply. 3. LIFE CYCLE CONCEPT of

3.1 The reliability and maintainability activities to be implemented for each phase of product life cycle shall be selected within the context of the Decisions made at any point in time have total life cycle of the product. an impact on product reliability and maintainability and cost at that time and in subsequent phases of the product life. There are five definable phases in the product life cycle as follows:
a .I Comefit und DeJnition Phases - when the need for the product is decided and its basic requirements subsequently defined, usually in the form of a product specification, agreed to between customer and contractor. wherein the product hardware and software are created to perform the fu'nctions described in the product specification. This phase may conclude with the assembly of a prototype product and its test, either under laboratory-simulated conditions or in actual-field trial conditions or with the formulation of detailed manufacturing specifications and instructions for operation and maintenance. vocabulary: Part 39 Reliability of electronic and electrical items

b) Design and Development Phase -

*Electrotechnical ( Jirsl revision).

4

IS I 7354 ( Part
c)

2 ) - 1984

Manufacturing and Installation Phase - during which the design is placed into production. In the case of large, complex products, the installation of the product on a particular site may be regarded as an extension of the manufacturing process. This phase may conclude with product acceptance testing before it is turned over to the customer.

d) Operation and Maintenance Phase - when the product is operated for the period of its useful life, During this phase, essential preventive and corrective maintenance actions are taken and product performance is monitered. The useful life of a product ends when its operation becomes uneconomic because of increasing repair costs or other factors, or the product becomes technically obsolete. e) Disposal Phase - when the product reaches the end of its useful life, or the requirement no longer exists for the product, it is being disposed, 4. RELIABILITY AND MAINTAINABILITY PROGRAMME

4.1 To assemble an effective reliability and maintainability programme during the product life cycle phases requires not only a knowledge of reliability and maintainability principles, but an understanding of the product itself and its technology and the various cost factors. More effective results can be achieved if reliability and maintainability activities are integrated into all other activities connected with the product rather than managed separately. 4.2 In establishing a reliability and management shall take into consideration maintainability programme the following criteria: required the

a) The level of reliability and maintainability product, b) The phase of the product in its life cycle,

for the

c) Assignment of responsibility for each reliability and maintainability task, d) The technology proposed for the product and past history of similar products, and e) Programme constraints ( such as scheduling and funding ) and technical constraints (such as size, weight and programming language ) . 4.2.1 Using these criteria, the management ~may select appropriate reliability and maintainability activities from those described in 5 to establish an effective reliability and maintainability programme.

5

IS : 7354 ( Part 2 ) - i984 4.3 The basic classes of reliability and maintainability activities and areas of involvement indicating their principal associations with the life cycle phase of a product are tested in Table 1. An effective reliability and maintainability programme can be assembled by selecting the appropriate iactivities to suit specific needs and circumstances of product requirements. 4.3.1 The tasks called for in the reliability programme shall be implemented by applying the Indian Standards referred to in Appendix A. 5. RELIABILITY AND MAINTAINABILITY and maintainability procedures of relevant

ACTWI'JTES ,; ,, ,r : 5.0 The basic classes of reliability and maintainability ,activities and area of involvement from which a reliability and maintainability programme can be prepared are described in 5.1 to 5.12. 5.1 Establishment of Reliability aad Maintainability Plan and ObjectivesA `reliability and maintainability plan' should be established the during concept and definition phase to provide for an integrated series of tasks necessary to achieve reliability and maintainability objectives. The `reliability and maintainability plan' selects the appropriate tasks required from the list of reliability and maintainability activities, assigns responsibility for each task, and provides a preliminary schedule for implementation. The `reliability and maintainability plan' should establish objectives in quantitative and qualitative terms and state criteria and conditions for their verification. The reliability minimum details: and maintainability plan should include the following

4 b)

An organization reliability and product, Quantitative objectives,

structure and management maintainability activities' and qualitative reliability

responsibilities for the associated with the and maintainability

C>Schedule d) Criteria

for reliability

and maintainability and maintainability

tasks implementation, assessment and product

for reliability verification,

1

e) Parts control and standardization, f-1 Design reviews, and 9) Documentation, Training and support programmes. h)
5.2 Definition and Analysis of Operating Conditions conditions should be defined during the, concept and definition Operating phase and

TABLE

1 PRINCIPAL

AS'sOCIATION OF RELIABILITY AND ACTIVITIES WITH LIFE CiCLE PHASES ( Clause 4.3 )

MAINTAINABILITY

CLAUSE REFEBENCE

LIFECYCLEPHASES RELIABILITY MAINTAINABILITY ACTIVITY

AND

CONCEPT DESIGN AND AND DEFINITION DEVELOPMENT (3) (4)

MANUFAG-

TURING AND
INSTALLATION (5,

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (6)

DISPOSAL

(1)
5.1 5.2 5.3 4 5:4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 5.10 5.11 5.12 Definition tions Evaluation tainability and

(2)
Establishment of reliability plan and objectives analysis and Maintainability

(7)
X

X of operating and policy condiX

.of product base

reliability

mainX

Establishment of maintenance analysis of requirements Establishment Evaluation tainability Selection analysis Evaluation Provision Verification Training

and
X X X X X` X

of product design guidelines

_
X

of contractual reliability and mainrequirements and interface of reliability and main*ainab.lity

X

X

X

of risk and cost of design reviews and compliance and data and support programmes

X

X

X

X X
X X X X

Documentation

X X

X

X

IS : 7354 ( Part 2 ) - 1984 updated during the design and development an influence on all the elements of operation affect reliability and maintainability. It is necessary following conditions: a) Modes b) to analyse the phase. These conditions have and maintenance, and directly environment in terms of

product

of operation, speed, environment, conditions, and personnel. and maintenance and maintenance for operating

Duty cycle and processing

c) Operating

d) Transportation e) Requirements

and installation

5.3 Evaluation of Product Reliability and Maintainability Base Evaluation of product reliability and maintainability base forms part of an overall evaluation of product base. The purpose of the evaluation is to define the starting point for new design work and to assess the impact of reliability and maintainability features on the selection of technology, design configuration, and product performance capability to meet market requirements. There shall be an evaluation of cost and risk involved in bridging the gap from the existing product base to the new generation product. Typical considerations for the include the following aspects: a) New product b) Market c) Technological functional obsolescence potential evaluation of product base should

,

requirements, product, product, of existing

for new generation

d) Life cycle cost, and e) Effort associated with new product development wwus modification of existing product to meet new market demand. 5.4 Establishment of Maintenance Policy and Analysis of Requirements - The maintenance policy should be established early in the concept and definition phase. Reliability and maintainability task involvement includes the following: a) Analysis of product maintainability in product personnel, and diagnostic support and features, policy b) Levels for maintenance of each, c) Skill level of maintenance d) Test facilities ments The maintenance associated with and the repair

at each level of maintenance. policy shall be appropriate to the service requireproduct operating conditions. In the design and 8

ISr73M(Part!2)-1984

development phase, when more detailed design information becomes available, an analysis should be carried out of maintenance requirements so that appropriate reliability and maintainability features can be designed into the product.
5.5 Establishment of Product Design Guidelines - The reliability and maintainability programme should consider the basic standards applicable to the design, development, manufacture, and operation of the product, because these have an impact on the cost. The applicable standards include the following :

4

b)

Customer and contractor standards such as those for manufactwring and design practices, part stress criteria and parts application, preferred part lists, approval of non-standard parts, maintenance test points, and design guidelines for maintainability features; and Industry land government standards and regulations, such as those governing various aspects of safety, electromagnetic emission levels, pollution control lists and power consumption.
of Contractual and Interface Reliability and Maintainability

5.6 Evaluation Requirements

The reliability and maintainability contractual requirements shall be reviewed and evaluated in terms of ability of product to comply with the specifications and standards called up* Contractual reliability and maintainability contractual requirements shall also be evaluated in the light of their interface with other requirements, such as, safety, quality, field support and performance. Interaction among various programmes within the contractual requirements is needed so that a concerted effort can be made to provide a standard product in a cost-effective manner on schedule. 5.7 Selection of Reliability and Maintainability Analysis - The reliability and,maintainability analysis to be performed shall be selected to assist in assuring that the product will be capable of meeting end-item application. Tvnical reliabilitv and maintainabilitv , analvsis that could be / selected includk'the following: a> Reliability and maintainability allocation and apportionment, b) Thermal and electrical stress analysis and through part, c) Parts application, d) Reliability and maintainability predictions, and e) Failure modes, effects and criticality analysis. The reliability and maintainability plan shall establish a preliminary schedule for these analyses that takes into account the timing of major programme milestones and the costs of performing the analyses.

IS t 7354 -( Part 5.8 Evaluation

2 ) - 1984

of Risk and Cost - Cost is a significant element of each product development programme. An economic evaluation allows management to assess the risks and benefits over the system life cycle resulting from decisions made during the design and development phase. The decision-making process should consider the impact on;

a) Facilities, b) Reliability

workload, and schedule; and maintainability, operation, and safety; logistic support and future requirements;

c) Maintenance,

d) Cost of design, development and manufacture; and e) Cost of ownership (operation, maintenance and energy). The evaluation shall assess the risk of using new technology for achieving product objectives including reliability and maintainability, given the constraints of schedule, budget and technical specifications. 5.9 Provision of Design Reviews - Design reviews performed at specified intervals throughout the design and development phase as part of the product development programme enhance reliability and maintainability. The purpose of the design reviews is as under: a) Assess the design options available, b) Identify areas of design study toward product reliability maintainability improvement, c) Provide experience feedback to design authority, and d) Document the design decision process. and

5.10 Verification and Compliance - Reliability and maintainability verification tasks are normally carried out during the design and development phase to verify the adequacy of the design, during manufacturing to verify the conformance and producibility of the design, and during For large and complex installation to verify product service performance. systems the reliability and maintainability verification activities are often conducted in early operation phase to assess compliance of system service objectives. 5.10.1 Verification tasks include both analytical approach and testing taking into consideration ~the product performance history and the associated hardware and software failure characteristics of the product where applicable. Reliability growth phenomenon of newly developed products should be recognized and appropriate steps taken for reliability growth monitoring and verification. For each verification task a plan should be prepared that identifies the maim, intent, and expected results of the verification task. The plan should provide a schedule and assign responIt should provide for distribution of results sibility for task performance. of the verification task, and, ifpossible, the action to be taken if the results 10

IS : 7354 ( Part

2 ) - 1984

are not in line with expectations. Verification of results could serve as evidence for product reliability and maintainability compliance. 5.11 Documentation and Data - The extent of documentation and data requirements shall depend on the contract data requirements and data management objectives. 5.11.1 The reliability and maintainability programme should institute a system of events and reporting of results that ensures visibility of key events. Typical key events to be monitored should include the following: a) Establishment of reliability and maintainability objectives. b) Apportionment of reliability and maintainability requirements, c) d) e) f) Testing, Failure and fault occurrences, Maintenance actions, Part list development, action taken and results.

g) Analysis of data, and h) Corrective 5.11.2 The events reporting system should provide for traceability of data and documentation of conditions under which the data were collected,, The the assumptions made, and the constraints on application of data. reporting system should capture the minimum data necessary to achieve the objective; the output of the reporting system should be structured to the needs of recipients and distributed for appropriate action. 5.12 Training and Support Programmes - Training requirements shall be planned early in the reliability and maintainability programme. Training and support programmes should tie in with product development planning, maintenance policy and the operational strategy of the product. 5.12.1 Personnel shall be trained to operate, maintain and support the product. The training and support programmes should consider the type and level of training needed by the service personnel, the complexity of the product, the operation requirements, the maintenance and logistics support policy, the time and resources available, and facilities and tools needed. 5.12.2 The reliability and maintainability activities should complement other support functions such as given below: a) Occupational and product safety; b) Testing, manufacturing and life; 11`

IS t 7354 ( Part

2 ) - 1984

4 Quality control/assurance; 4 Inspection/measurements; e) Calibration services; f > Standardization; g> Supplier/vendor/subcontractor 4 Installation and field services;

activities; and

j)

Spares provisioning.

APPENDIX

A

( Clauses 0.2 and 4.3.1 )
REFERRED 1NDIAN STANDARDS ON RELIABILITY

ClRef

Reliability and Maintainability Activities

Applicable Standard
c----_-_-__~
-----------7

5.1

Establishment ofreliability and maintainability plan and objectives

Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 39 Reliability of electronic and electrical items ( jirst revision ) Mathematical guide to the terms and definitions for of electronic reliability equipment and components ( or parts ) used therein. Guide on maintainability of equipments: Part 3 Maintainability prosramme. Overall ability concept
12

IS : 1885 ( Part 39) 1979

IS : 7699-l 975

IS : 9692 ( Part 3 )-1981

lJ?lder preparation

IS : 7354, ( part

2 ) - 1984

ClRef

Reliability and M&tainabili{y Activities

Ajjh'cable Standard

5.4

Establishment maintenance and analysis quiremen ts

of policy of re-

IS : 9692 (Part Guide on maintainability 1 )-1980 of equipment: Part 1 Introduction to maintainability Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 2 Maintainability requirements in specifications and contracts Guide on the maintainability of equipment: Part 5 Maintainability studies during the design phase IS : 9692 ( Part 2 )-1980

Under prejaration

5.6

Establishment of contractual reliability and maintainability requirements and interface

Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical items: Part 6 Inclusion of reliability clauses into specifications for components ( or parts ) (jfirst
revision )

IS : 7354 ( Part 6 )-1983

Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 2 Maintainability requirements in specifications and contracts Guide for the inclusion of reliability requirements into specifications for electronic equipment 5.7 Selection of reliability and maintainability analyses Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 5 Maintainability studies during the design phase Presentation of reliability, maintainability and availability predictions 13

IS : 9692 ( Part 2 )-1980

Under preparation

lhder preparhtion

IS : 10139-1982

fS:7334(Part2)-1984
ClRef Reliability and Maintainability Activities _ APplicable Standard

techniques for Analysis system reliability: Part 2 Procedure for failure mode and effects analysis m:d~%!cts"::d &i&e ity aialysis ( EMECA ) 5.9 Provision reviews Verification pliance of design Reliability and maintainability design reviews Guide for equipment reliability testing: Part 1 Principles and procedures Guide for equipment reliability testing: Part 2 Design of test cycles -

Under preporation

Under preparation

5.10

and com-

IS : 8161 ( Part 1 )-1976
Under preparation

Under Preparation Guide for equipment reliability testing: Part 4 Procedure for determining point estimates and confidence limits from equipment reliability determination tests

Guide for equipment relia- Under prebaration bility testing: Part 3 Preferred test conditions for equipment reliability testing Guide for equipment reliability testing: Part 5 Comfor pliance test plans success ratio Guide for equipment reliability testing: Part 6 Tests for validity of a constant failure rate assumption 14 IS : 8161 ( Part 5 )-1981

IS : 8161 ( Part 6 )-1983

IS:7354(part2)-1984

ClRef

Reliability and Maintainability Actiuities

Applicable Standard __-`-----`h_--~

Guide for equipment reliability testing: Part 7 Compliance test plans for failure rate and mean time between failures assuming constant failure rate

IS : 8161 ( Part 7 )-I977

Guide on maintainability IS : 9692 ( Part of equipment: 6 )-1983 Part 6 Maintainability verification 5.11 Documentation data and Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical items: Part 4 Collection of reliability availability and maintainability data from field performance Guide on maintainability of equipment: Part 7 Collection, analysis and presentation of data related ~to maintainability Guide on reliability of electronic and electrical items: Part 3 Presentation of reliability data on electronic and electrical components ( or parts ) ( jirst reoision ) IS : 7354 ( Part 4 )-1974

IS : 9692 ( Part 7 )-1984

IS : 7354 ( Part 3 )-1984

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Quantity Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units Units

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )

U/Ii1 metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela moie

Symbol m kg $ K cd
dOI

Unit radian steradian

Symbol rad sr

Quant/fy Force Energy . Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

Unil newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Symbol N J W Wb t Hz s V Pa 1 1

Definition N = J = 1 kg.m/sa 1 N.m 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms I c/s (s-1) I A[V 1 W/A 1 N/ms

1 W=lJ/s
1 Wb = 1 T = 1 Hz =
1 S =

`b

1 1

V = Pa =

