(Reaffirmed 2012)

IS t 9632 - 1980

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR OPERATION AND PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF CROP PROTECTION EQUIPMENT
Crop Protection Equipment Sectional Committee,
Chairman

AFDC 43
Ludhiana

Representing Punjab Agricultural University,

DR C. P.

SINGR

Members Ds D. S. WADHWA ( Alternate to Dr C. P. Singh ) Department of Agriculture, Government of Uttar SHRI R. K. AGARWAL Pradesh. Lucknow SHRI R. C. GOEL ( Alternate ) Shaw Wallace & Co Ltd, Madras SHRI I. BURUHANT~ DEEN SERI 0. S. NATARAJAN ( Alternate) N. Das & Sons Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. D. DAS Defence Materials and Stores Research and SERI C. D. DWIVEDI Development Establishment ( Ministry of Defence ), Kanpur SHRI M. G. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Mechanical Engineering Research & DevelopSHRI C. L. GARG ment Organization ( CSIR ), Ludhiana SHRI R. NIGAM ( Alternate ) State Farms Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI R. K. GUPTA Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Food ), DR K. KRISRNAMURTHY New Delhi SHRI G. N. BHARDWAJ ( Afternate ) The Sigma Steel Industries ( Regd), Ludhiana SHRI KRISHAN KL~AR MANGAL SRRI JAGDISH GRANDER ( Alternate ) Tractor Training & Testing Station ( Ministry of SRRI S. K. MISR.~ Agriculture ), Budni SENIOR TEST ENGINEER (Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development SHRI S. NAG ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New PROF A. C. PANDYA Delhi SHRI N. S. L. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) American Spring & Pressing Works Ltd, Bombay SBRI L. M. PATEL SHRI S. L. PATEL ( Alternafc )

( Continued on page 2 )
@ Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the raid Act.

IS:%32-

1980

( Continucdfrmnpage 1 ) Members DR R. L. RAJAK Representing Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Faridabad Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi

SERI M. MASEEH ( Alternate ) SHILI K. G. SAMNOTRA SERI 0. D. SANGAR SERI V. C. S. SASTRY DR B. S. SIROHI DR B. L. WATTAL SHRI G. C. JOSHI ( Altcrnatr ) Smx T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food )

SHRI P. RAMDAS

SHRI V. C. S. SA~TRI ( Alternate )

National Malaria Eradication Programme, Delhi Directorate General of Supplies 8s Disposals, New Delhi Central Plant Protection Training Institute, Hyderabad Indig $g~;;litural Research Institote ( ICAR ), Natioial Institute Delhi Director of Communicable Diseases,

General, IS1 ( Ex-O&&J Member

)

Secretary SHRI R. N. SHARMA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

2

ISt9632-1980

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR OPERATION AND PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE OF CROP PROTECTION EQUIPMENT
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 November 1980, after the draft finalized by the Crop Protection Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 For increasing agricultural production, use of pesticides is increasing day by day in the country. Equipment play an important role in the Though a number of Indian successful application of pesticides. Standards ( see Appendix A ) on various crop protection equipment have been published stipulating various quality parameters, it has been seen that even the good quality equipment may not be able to do the job of application effectively unless they are properly used and maintained. It is, therefore, necessary that the people who are engaged in operation and supervision of the crop protection equipment should have full knowledge of handling, operation, care, safety, upkeep and maintenance, etc of the equipment. This standard has been prepared to fulfil this objective. 0.3 In preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been received from Central Plant Protection Training Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Hyderabad.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the guideline for operation maintenance of crop protection equipment.
No~~-This pesticides. standard does not cover equipment

and preventive
of

for aerial application

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1

IS : 9632 - 1980 3. DETAILS TO BE CHECKED EQUIPMENT 3.1 While purchasing
a) the equipment an equipment, is complete

~BY THE
purchaser

BUYER
should

OF THE
check whether:

in all respects;

b) the equipment has been certified by any certifying agencies, such as the ISI or it has been tested by any independent testing authority; c) the operation, maintenance and servicing manual/instructions in a simple and preferably in local language is being provided; d) the tools and accessories, if any, is being supplied by the manufacturer/seller; and e) the after sale service facility is available with the manufacturer/ dealer/seller at district level. 3.2 The purchaser the various controls shall familiarize of the equipment. himself with the operation and with

3.3 Before purchasing, trial should be taken components. 4. TRAINING

the equipment should be run idle and a working for checking the smooth functioning of various

AND

FAMILIARIZATION

4.1 Generally, the farm workers are not conversant with the operation Special care shall, therefore, be taken and controls of the equipment. to ensure that each worker understands the safe operation and safety precautious particularly the following:
a) The method of starting and stopping the prime mover, in case of power-operated equipment; b) The hazards which are known to arise in the course of normal working; c) The hazards liable to arise from inattentiveness and misuse of controls; and d) The hazards working. 5. OPERATIONS liable to arise from the use of intoxicant while

BEFORE

USING

THE

EQUIPMENT
operation and

5.1 The recommendations of manufacturer for lubrication, maintenance should be carefully read and followed.

5.2 General inspection for cracks, loose connections, etc should be made. The spraying equipment may be filled with water and run to locate any leakage and to ensure proper working. 4

IS : 9632 - 1980 5.3 Only those formulations
is designed. The dusting should be used in the equipment for which it material used should be dry and well sieved.

5.4 In order to apply the correct dose of chemical per hectare, the equipment should be calibrated. In the case of dusting equipment, calibration should be done for each type of dust. 5.5 Clean water be strained. It quantity of water quantity of water should be used for preparing spray fluids which should is important to mix wettable powders first with small to form a homogenous paste before adding the required to it. agitated.

5.6 The spray fluid in the tank should be properly

5.7 In case of difficulty in fitting a plastic hose or parts do not apply extra force. It is advisable to dip them into hot water for a short while before fitting to prevent their cracking. 5.8 In the comfortably case of knapsack type, the equipment put on the back of the operator. shall be properly and

5.9 In case of two-stroke petrol engines, only correct fuel and oil mixture should be used. The oil and fuel should not be poured separately into the tank. The split fuel and oil should be wiped off. 6. ADJUSTMENT/OPERATIONS

EQUIPMENT

WHILE

USING

THE
sprayer.

6.1 Nozzle setting should be checked
6.2 The height conditions. of nozzle should

in case of hydraulic

be adjusted

to suit the crop and wind

6.3 Nozzle should be examined for any deformity or observed for inconsistency in the spray pattern. If the output has increased by more than 10 percent, then a new tip or disc should be fitted to avoid overapplication of pesticides.
6.4 If presure gauge is provided, close watch should ensure that the required pressure is being maintained. be kept on it to

6.5 In case the working of the equipment becomes heavy, extra force The equipment shall not be applied as it can result in some breakage. should then be carefully examined and defects rectified.

, 6.6 When
equipment

changing over from one should be properly cleaned.

chemical

or

dust to other,

the

5

IS : 9632 - 1980
6.7 The hoses should not be bent at sharp angle.

6.8 The engine should not be run continuously for longer period than those recommended by the manufacturers to avoid over-heating. 6.9 The operatorshould walk at a constant speed. In case of spraying with non-systemic pesticides for the control of pests found all over the foliage, care should be taken to spray on either sides of the leaves. 7. PRECAUTIONS

DURING

OPERATION
operation protective should be by chemicals mask kept on crops for for dureyes,

7.1 As far as possible,
ing the night should 7.2 The operator mouth and nose.

pest control be avoided. have towel

should

specially ready

7.3 Clean water, soap and the hands after operation. 7.4 Children, and nursing operation.

washing

mentally retarded and unsound persons as well as pregnant ladies should not be involved in chemical application understood and

7.5 Label on pesticide container should be properly instructions on the label should be strictly followed.

7.6 The mixing and preparing the pesticide dilution should be done in the open or in well-ventilated place. The operator should stand upwind when mixing or loading particularly dusts. 7.7 Contamination ing and spraying. of skin or clothes should be avoided during mix-

7.8 Operation should not be done against the direction Movement of the operator across the wind is recommended.

of the

wind.

7.9 The operation should be done in early hours of the day. Treatment should be started on the down-wind side of the area to be treated.

7.10 The

hazards associated with the drifting or dusts should always be taken into consideration.

of the

pesticide

sprays

7.11 Precautions should be taken to guard against the run-off cides into sources of water supply, such as well and ponds. 7.12 The operator should ged nozzle and/or line. never use his mouth

of the pestithe clog-

to blow through

6

IS :9632 -1980
7.13 In no case, there shall be any naked wound operator and others who handle the pesticides. 7.14 Chewing, spraying. drinking and smoking shall be or cut on the body of the strictly avoided while

7.15 Pets and unprotected persons should not be allowed during pesticide application operation. 7.16 At the end of day's work, Clothes and change the clothes. before re-use. 7.17 As far as possible, an operator at a stretch for pesticide application

to enter the area

the operator should bathe with soap used while spraying should be washed should not work more than two hours operation.

7.18 Before spraying in kitchen or pantry, the cooking and eating utensils Children should be kept and foodstuffs should be moved to a safe place. away during operation. 7.19 After treating a lawn no one should be allowed grass has been washed well and dried. on the lawns until the

7.20 No chemical application should be resorted to just before the harvest of any crop, plant, fruit or vegetables in order to avoid the residual poisoning of human beings and animals. 8. PREVENTIVE

MAINTENANCE

8.1 General 8.1.1 Clean outer surface oil or water.
with brush or cotton waste by using kerosine

8.1.2 Lubricate the moving ended grade of oil or grease. 8.1.3 Filter the tank. the chemical

or rubbing

surfaces

of parts with recomm-

solution

or fuel-oil

mixture

while pouring

into

8.1.4 Flush the equipment with clean water to wash inside parts of the containers, and tubes and nozzles to be free from chemicals after the day's work. 8.2 For Hand Sprayers and Dnsters

8.2.1 Dry and sieved dusts should be used for dusters. 7

IS : 9632 - 1980

8.2.2 Clean the duster after the from the hopper.
8.2.3 Lubricate frequently. 8.2.4 the cup leather

work by removing

all dusting

powder

washers

and bucket

washers

of sprayers

Nozzle tips should not be rested on ground

to avoid clogging.

8.3 For Power Sprayers and Dusters

8.3.1 Lubricating oil level should stroke engines daily.
8.3.2 Mixture of engine used for two-stroke engines, 8.3.3 8.3.4 8.3.5 8.3.6 Clean
oil

be checked

and

maintained

in four-

and petrol in correct proportions duly stirred and strained.

should

be

the air and fuel filters with petrol frequently. should be checked gauge and tightened, if necessary.

All the fasteners Check

up the pressure engine

and safety valve frequently. the petrol always cock. be free from

Stop two-stroke

by closing tightened

8.3.7 Belts should slip and slackness. 8.3.8 Keep sprayers. 8.3.9 Rubber stationed. 8.3.10 Rubber on the ground. 8.3.11 cleaning 8.4 Care before proper

be kept

and should

inflation

pressure

in the

tyred

wheels

of power

tyred

equipment

should

be

rested

on

props

when

hoses should

not be bent

at sharp

angles

and dragged

Equipment should be stored and lubrication of the parts. and Upkeep of the

in a suitable

place

after

proper

Equipment

When Taken to Field
tested for normal working

8.4.1 Equipment
the spraying

should be checked and season or before storing. common tools

8.4.2 Always
troubles.

carry

required

for

attending

to

field

8

IS : 9632 - 1980
8.4.3 field. Carry some spares like washers and filters, gaskets and pins to the

8.4.4 Carry small quantity grease, cotton waste to the field. 8.4.5 8.4.6 8.4.7 Carry the equipment

of

kerosine,

petrol,

lubricating

oil,

properly

and carefully. on the ground.

Do not drop the equipment Clean the equipment before

and attachments and after work. should

8.4.8 All the rubber-tyred equipment with recommended inflation in the tyres.

be

pulled

on

road

9. COMMON

FAULTS

AND

REMEDY
and remedies

9.1 Some of the common defects along with their reasons are given in Table 1 for the guidance of the operator. 9.2 The common defects related the guidance of the operator. 10. OFF-SEASON to engines are given

in Table

2 for

STORAGE
place after proper cleaning

10.1Equipment and lubrication

should be stored in a suitable of the parts. parts (see Table

10.2 Sufficient spare each equipment. 10.3 All fuel should operated equipment. and the supply line.

3 ) should

be

kept

ready

for

be drained from fuel tank before storing the powerNo fuel should be allowed to stay in carburettor

10.4 The component needing lubrication should be lubricated storage and frequent oiling of leather components should be done. 10.5 Hoses should be dried, rolled

before

and stored in a cool and dark room. be kept at one place and not in a

10.6 Equipment of one category mixed-up fashion.

should

10.7 Tyres, if provided, shall be kept inflated. The tyres should be jacked-up to lift them off the ground in case of storing for longer period. 9

IS : 9632 - 1980
TABLE 1 COMMON DEFECTS (
DEFECTS

TO

CROP 9.1 )

PROTECTION

EQUIPMENT

POSSIBLE CAUSES (3) a) Clogged suction screens b) Loose connections or missing in gaskets suction line, or partially opened suction valve; broken or leakv suction hose or suction pipe; drain cocks not closed c) Imperfect scaling due to deposition of sand under the ball valve or certain solids on the surface of the ball, or wearing-out of ball valve and its seat d) Lid of the tank may be loose or the gasket may be broken e) Pump speed slow

SUGGESTED REMEDIES (41 a) Clean them b) Find out the specific cause and rectify the fault

REMARKS (5) Applicable to all sprayers

(1)

(2) to i) Failure develop n d a maintain pressure

c) Clean the valve assembly and any other related parts. If necessary, repair or replace the valve seat or valve, or both d) Tighten the lid and the gasket check and replace it, if necessary e) Increase speed the pump ApplicabIe to all equipment Applicable to all sprayers

iij Leakage

Loose nuts and clamps worn out gaskets

or

Tighten the nuts and clamps, and replace the gaskets a) Clean suction the assembly set. Rethe place cup leather, if wrinkled or wornout. In case cup leather is hard and dry, lubricate with a vegetable oil, such as castor oil b) Put water through the inlet so that it reaches the suction valve to loosen it. If necessary, open the valve

.

iii) Lack of suction

a) Cup leather (plunger bucket) is either wrinkled or worn out, or it is completely dried

b) Suction valve rarily stuck

tempo-

( Continued )

10

lS:9632-1980
TABLE 1 COMMON DEFECTS EQUIPMENT POSSIBLECAUSES (3) Piston may be bent Straighten piston TO CROP - Contd PROTECTION

DEFECTS N% (1) (2)

SUGGESTER) REMEDIES (4) or replace the

REMARKS (5) Applicable to all sprayers -do-

iv) Hard working of piston v) Uneven discharge of spray

a) Nozzle obstructed

a) Clean various parts of nozzle especially the orifice b) Replace the tip or disc nozzle

b) Worn out nozzle tip or disc vi) Piston rod

UP automatically after the downword stroke vii) Spray fluid Ferly `i;charged only during the pressure stroke

.icF" push-

Leakage valve

in the

delivery

Clean the ball valve and its seat. If the valve is wornout replace it

Applicable to double barrel stirrup pump

Rupturing tube

of

delivery

Repair or replace very tube

deli-

-do-

viii) Air pump does not pump air ix) Liquid enters the air pump x) On thedown stroke, strong resistance is felt xi) Cut-off device does not function

Leather bucket not flexible

washer

Add oil drops or change bucket washer

Applicable to compression sprayer -do-

Air check working

valve

is

not

Chececkand assembly

replace a;; valve

Faulty valve leather

or

cup

Clean or replace the valve or cup leather

-do-

Rubber

seat not proper

Check or change the rubber seating and its assembly, if needed

Applicable to all sprayers ( Continued)

11

IS : 9632 - 1980
TABLE 1 COMMON DEFECTS EQUIPMENT POSSIBLECAUSES TO CROP - Contd PROTECTION

SL No. (1)

DEFECTS

SUGGESTED REMEIHES

REMAILKS

(2) Dust and dirt liquid present in Clean the filter element of nozzle, replace if needed Charge the sprayer with the spray fluid by a strokes few before pumping the air Check and correct pump Check up and safety valve charge

(5) Applicable to all sprayers Applicable to pressure retaining sprayer -do-

xii) Nozzle and filter get jammed xiii) Sp r a y e r does not get charged with air

Float valve getting to the seat

stuck

xiv) Liquid charging is difficult xv) Air escapes through safety valve xvi) Piston does not move freely in cylinder Xvii) Pressure chamber does not move upwards automatically after the downward stroke xviii) Pedal does not move upwards automatically after the downward stroke

Charge ing Defective

pump

not

hum-

safety

valve

adjust

Locknut

tight

Loosen the locknut

Applicable to all sprayers -do-

Rubber washer below chamber is broken

the

Replace

the washer

Pedal-return spring loose or defective

is

Change the pedal spring

return

-do-

xix) Crank does not rotate

Fan chocking up with dust

Clean and box

the fan housing grease the gear

Applicable to hand rotary duster

( Continued ) 12

IS : 9632 - 1980
TABLE 1 COMMON DEFECTS EQUIPMENT POSSIBLE CAUSES TO CROP - Contd PROTECTlON

SL No.

DEFECTS

SUGGESTED REIWEDIES

REMARKS (5)

(1)
xx) Dust is not coming out Regulator not working Sieve the dust and change with dry dust. Clean the regulator Maintain proper speed

Applicable to hand rotary duster -do-

xxi) Dusting is not uniform xxii) Blower touthing the case

Speed is not uniform

Loose or worn-out ings

bear-

Repair ings

or replace

bear-

-do-

TABLE

2

TROUBLE

WITH

ENGINE

OF POWER

SPRAYERS

( Clause 9.2 ) DEFECT s POSSIBLE CAUSES (3) a) Fuel cock closed b) Lack of fuel in tank c) Air vent in the cap clogged d) Main jet blocked tank SUGGESTED REMEDIES

(1)

(2)

(4) a) Open the fuel cock b) Fill the fuel tank c) Clean the air vent d) Remove and clean it by blowing with air, and not with a needle or a wire with e) Close the fuel cock; open the throttle lever completely and turn the engine over a few times. Unscrew the spark-plug, clean, and dry it ( Continued )

i) Engine does not start

e) Engine flooded the fuel

13

IS : 9632 - 1980
TABLE 2 TROUBLE WITH ENGINE OF POWER SPRAYERS Contd

2. (1)

DEFECTS (2) f)

POSSIBLE CAUSES

SUGGESTEDREMEDIES

(3) Spark-plug damaged

(4) sooted 01 f) Clean the spark-plug and see whether the gap is If the lead gives proper. a spark but the plug does not, change the sparkplug dirty g) Clean the carburettor h) The lead meant for stopping the engine may be contact with the game. Break this contact loose or points j) Fasten it or replace need be it, as

g) Carburettor h) Short circuit

j ) Ignition wire damaged k) Contact-breaker ' dirty

k) Clean the noints and make the con&t breaker point opening as recommended by the manufacturer

m) Air-cleaner

dirty

4 4

Clean with and refit Tighten

petrol,

dry it

ii) Engine runs irregularly or stops

a) Spark-plug

loose filter

the spark-plug

b) Dirty fuel-pipe

b) Clean

the fuel-pipe filter at the fuel cock or in the carburettor supply nipple, or both

c) Main jet clogged d) Spark-plug sooted

cl 4

Clean the jet Clean or replace it the lead tightly to the plug or replace it, if badly damaged

e) Lead to spark-plug loose or disconnected, or insulation broken or burnt f ) Contact-breaker points oily or frozen together

e) Fasten

f)

Clean and adjust the contact-breaker points or replace them, if necessary ( Continued)

14

IS :9632 - 1980
TABLE ST.
NO. (1) (2)

2

TROUBLE

WITH

ENGINE

OF POWER

SPRAYERS

-

Contd

DEFECTS

POSSIBLE C-&USES

SUQGESTED REMEIXES

(3)

(4)

iii) Engine does not gain the speed

a) Air-filter

b)
Cl 4 e) f1 g)
iv) Misfiring

element choked Choke closed partly Carburettor blocked part or Exhaust silencer choked Oil seal of the crankcase leaking Cylinder bore and rings worn-out Ignition timing incorrect Plug dirty or defective

a) Clean the air-filter

element

b) Open the choke c) Clean the carburettor d) Remove the carbon deposit

e) Change the oil seal f) Change the barrel and the rings g) Correct the ignition timing a) Clean or replace the plug or replace the b) Clean silencer c) Tighten the connections d) Change the fuel a) Run at the speed recommended by the manufacturer b) Correct the proportion of fuel and oil in the mixture c) Check for dirt in the jet and set the carburettor needle jet d) Correct the ignition setting e) Clean the surface of fins and fan blades f ) Remove the carbon deposit

b) Silencer choked c) Poor,
connections the coil Water in the fuel to

4

4
v) Engine over-heating

4 Engine overspeeding b) Fuel incorrect cl Mixture lean
d) Ignition setting incorrect e) _4ir-flow to the engine obstructed f) Exhaust system choked

vi) High fuel consumption with a strong smell of unburnt fuel

a) Float needle damaged b) Needle seating damaged c) Float punctured d) Main jet too big e) Air-cleaner dirty

7

it
I

Replace

the defective

part

J

Clean the air-clearer

15

\

TABLE

3

RECOMMENDED

SPARE

PARTS

REQUIRED

DURING

THE

USE

OF VARIOUS

EQUIPMENT

t:
;;, E N I c

( Clause 10.2 )
EoorpY*nT
NAME OF

SL

No. (1)

~_-._--------_-------~ One Season (3) Nil B ;;,"h;rt gasket

SUGGESTED SPARE PARTS DUE TO WEAR AIYD TEAR AFTER THE USE OF

One Year (4)

Two Years (5) Glandnut packing, nozzles hose and

---7---Three Years (`3)

'

(2) pump

i) Stirrup

Glandnut packing, hose and nozzle Bucket washer, gasket, nozzle, air check valve assembly Bucket washer, gland packing, nozzle, gasket Gasket, piston, clamps, strainer, nozzle Gasket, float valve, regulator cock Bucket Feed washer control straps

Glandnut packing, hose, nozzle, valves, piston rod, piston Bucket washers, gasket, nozzle, air check valve, clamps, hose, straps Bucket washers gland pa;:&!, springs, nozzle, clamps, cotter pin, gasket Gasket, piston, hose pipe, strainer, clamps, nozzle, cotter pin

ii) Hand compression sprayer iii) Foot Z iv) Rocker sprayer sprayer

'

washer, gasket, Bucket air check valve nozzle, assembly, clamps Bucket washer, gland packing, nozzle, springs, hoses, clamps, cotter pin, gasket Gasket, piston, hose pipe, clamps, strainer, nozzle, cotter pin G;$tt float valve, regulator nozzlk strainer s;fe;~

Bucket washer, gasket Gasket

.

v) Pressure sprayer

retaining

Gasket

J

Gasket, float valve, valve, regulator, nozzle, strainer Bucket washer

safety cock,

vi) Charge pump vii) Hand rotary duster operated viii) Lever contiruous knapsack sprayer

Nil Nil Piston, gland packmg, gasket

Bucket washer Feed control straps, bushes Piston, gland packing, gasket, split pins, nozzle, agitator, cut off device valve and spring

Feed control straps, crank handle

bushes,

Piston, gland packing, gasket, split pins, nozzle

Piston, gland packing gasket, split pins, nozzle, agitator, cut-off device valve and spring, straps, hose, strainer ( Continued )

TABLE

3

RECOMMENDED

SPARE

PARTS

REQUIRED Cod

DURING

THE

USE

OF

VARIOUS SL No.

EQUIPMENT

EQUIPMENT

NAMEOF
--One Season

SUCJGESTED

SPARE

One Year

PARTS DUE TO WEAR AND TEAR ABTER -----Two Years (5) .

THE

USE OF -------7 Three Years

(6)
Piston, piston rings, valves, small end bush, main bearings, jets, spark plug Spark-plug, piston ring, piston, piston pin, contact breaker points, condenser, coil, small end bush, main bearings, carburettor jets

ix) Four-stroke petrol engine for power and sprayer power dusters x) Two-stroke petrol engines for mist blowers and Micron sprayers

Fuel

filter

Valve seating, Plug

spark

Piston rings, spark plug, contact breaker points

4

Fuel filters, sparkplug

Piston rings, spatkplug, contact breaker points, condenser

piston pin, Spark-plug, rings, piston, piston contact breaker points, condenser, coil, small end bush

IS : 9632 - 1989

APPENDIX

A

( Clauses 0.2 and 2.1)
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARD PROTECTION IS:
1970 ( Part I )-1974 Hand-operated Non-pressure retaining compression knapsack type ( third revision ) compression knapack sprayer: sprayer: Part I Part II ( third

SPECIFICATIONS EQJJIPMENT

ON CROP

1970 (Part II )-1979 Hand-operated pressure retaining type 1971-1975 2870- 1977 3062- 1974 3634-1977 3652- 1974 3897-1978 3906 (Part 3906 Hand-operated revision ) Charge knapsack Rocker pump sprayer sprayer

continuous

single-barrel

stirrup-pump type

for pressure-retaining (jfirst reuision ) for burrows

compression

( second revision ) dust applicator (Jirst revision )

Hand-operated Food sprayer

( second revision )

Hand-operted sprayer, atomizer type ( second revision ) Hand-operated continuous knapsack sprayer: Part I I)-1974 Piston type ( second revision ) ( Part II )-1979 Hand-operated continuous knaspack sprayer: Part II Diaphragm type (first revision ) I )-1974 Hand (Jirst revision ) Hand rotary rotary duster: duster: Part Part I II Belly-mounted type

5135 ( Part

5135 ( Part II )-1977

Shoulder-mounted equipment:

type Hydraulic spray nozzles for pest control 7417 ( Part I )-1974 Part I Cone and fan type 7458-1974 7515-1975 7593 (Part Spray Cut-off lance for manually device for manually operated operated pneumatic sprayer sprayer

I)-1975 Power-operated Part I Knapsack type

sprayer-cum-duster:

18

