NAT HIAF IS 17346 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ata d gA sents — AÈ 


Insulating Glazing Unit — 
Specification 


ICS 81.040.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda get tt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR vo. 9 Tea TH AMT, ay ect 110002 


Wa SÍ Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2020 Price Group 7 


Glass, Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee, CHD 10 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Glass, 
Glassware and Laboratoryware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 
Insulating glazing units (IGU) are pre-assembled units consisting of panes of glass that are sealed at the edges and 
separated by dehydratedspace(s). The insulating capability of IGUs reduces the load on air conditioning and aid 
in energy conservation. A few applications of insulating glazing units include windows, window walls, picture 
windows, sliding doors, patio doors, railway coaches etc. 


In preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 
ISO 20492-1 : 2008 Glass in buildings — Insulating glass — Part 1: Durability of edge seals by climate 
tests 
ISO 20492-3 : 2010 Glass in buildings — Insulating glass — Part 3: Gas concentration and gas leakage 


ISO 20492-4 : 2010 Glass in buildings — Insulating glass — Part 4: Methods of test for the physical 
attributes of edge seals 


BS EN 1279-1 : 2004 Glass in building — Insulating glass units — Part 1: Generalities, dimensional 
tolerances and rules for the system description 


The list of experts who made significant contribution to the formulation of this standard is given in Annex N. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) "The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


INSULATING GLAZING UNIT — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements and the 
methods of sampling and test for Insulating Glazing 
Units (IGU) meant for use in architectural buildings, 
railway coaches and other applications like visicoolers, 
humidity chambers, incubators etc. 


NOTE — Units where the nature is only artistic are not part of 
this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No 
1382 : 1981 


Title 


Glossary of terms relating to glass 
and glassware (first revision) 


2553 (Part 1): Safety glass — Specification: 


2018 Part 1 Architectural, building and 
general uses (fourth revision) 

4905 : 2015 Random sampling and 
randomization procedures (first 
revision) 

14900 : 2018 Transparent float glass  — 
Specification (first revision) 

17004:2018 Testing methods for processed 
glass 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 1382, IS 2553 (Part 1), IS 14900 and IS 17004, in 
addition to the following shall apply. 


3.1 Bite size —the distance from the primary sealant 
bottom sight line to the edge of the IGU. 


3.2 Cavity (Cavities) —The space(s) between the 
parallel panes of an IGU. 


3.3 Cohesive Failure — The sealant tears within itself, 
but remains fully bonded to the substrate, when an 
external pulling force is applied. 


3.4 Desiccant — A substance which is able to lower 
the partial pressure of water vapour inside the IGU. 


3.5 Edge Seal —The processed edge of an insulating 
glazing unit, designed to ensure that moisture and gas 
transmissions between the inside and outside of the 
unit are restricted, designed with a certain mechanical 
strength, and designed with a certain physical and 
chemical stability. 


3.6 External Condensation —Condensation appearing 
on the glass panes of an insulating glass unit either on 
the room side surface or on the external surface. 


3.7 Gas-filled Insulating Glazing Units — An 
insulating glazing unit, the cavity of which contains 
gas(es) in addition to air, usually for improving thermal 
and/or sound insulation. 


3.8 Insulating Glazing Unit (IGU) — An assembly 
consisting of at least two parallel panes of glass, 
separated by one or more spacers, hermetically sealed 
along the periphery, mechanically stable and durable. 


3.9 Moisture Penetration Index — A measure of the 
drying capacity exhausted after standardized ageing 
conditions. 


3.10 Standard Room Conditions — Ambient 
temperature of 27 + 2°C and a relative humidity 
of 65 + 5 percent. 


3.11 Sealant — Sealing material that, after application, 
has sufficient mechanical properties of cohesion and of 
adhesion to glass and/or spacer for use in edge seals. 


3.12 Spacer — A component used to separate the panes 
and control the width of the gap at the edge of the unit. 


3.13 System — A range of insulating glazing units 
with a common edge seal profile, edge seal materials 
and edge seal components as described in the system 
description. The range shall have a similar edge seal 
performance, for example, moisture penetration index, 
gas loss rate. 


3.14 System Description —Description of components 
and the edge seal of the insulating glazing unit in terms 
relevant to identification and in terms relevant to edge 
seal performance, for example, moisture penetration 
index, gas loss rate. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


Moisture penetration 


Fic. 1 MOISTURE PENETRATION AND Gas Loss 


4 CONSTRUCTION 


Insulating glazing units are two or more panels of glass 
spaced apart and hermetically sealed to form a single 
unit with air or gas filled space between the panels. 
Typically, the spacer is made of aluminium that is either 
mill-finished or painted/anodized in different colours 
or finishes. Desiccants are filled inside the spacer 
framework to prevent condensation inside the unit. The 
primary sealant acts as a barrier to moisture and vapour 
penetration. The secondary sealant provides structural 
integrity to the unit. 


5 REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Physical Requirements 

Individual panes of the IGU shall conform to the 
relevant product standards, or as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturerin the absence of the 
relevant Indian Standard. 


The allowable joints in case of bendable spacers used in 
construction of IGU shall be between 1 and 4. 


5.1.1 Dimensions and Squareness 


5.1.1.1 Dimensions 


The horizontal edge of the IGU shall be designated as 
width (W) and the vertical edge shall be designated 
as length (L) or height (H). The tolerance on nominal 
dimensions shall be as prescribed in Table 1. 


= 
rc 


Ww 
<—__—— > 


Fic. 2 EXAMPLES OF WIDTH AND LENGTH/HEIGHT 
WITH RESPECT TO PANE SHAPE 


NOTE — For IGUs containing patterned glass panes, the 
direction of the pattern should be specified relative to one of 
the dimensions. 


Table 1 Tolerances on Width W and Length L/H 
( Clauses 5.1.1.1 and 5.1.1.2 ) 


Nominal Dimension Tolerance, v 


of Side Nominal Glass Nominal Glass 
Thickness t < 8 Thickness t > 8 
<2 000 +2.5 +3 
>2 000 and < 3 000 +3 +4 
>3 000 +4 +5 


All dimensions are in mm 


NOTE — Nominal thickness corresponds to the thickness of 
thickest pane in the insulating glazing unit. 


5.1.1.2 Squareness 


The nominal dimensions, that is, width and length/ 
height shall be as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. However, the finished pane shall not 
be larger than a prescribed rectangle of dimensions 
(W+v, L+v), or smaller than a prescribed rectangle 
of dimensions (W-v, L-v), where v is the maximum 
tolerance on nominal dimensions (see Table 1). The 
corresponding sides of the prescribed rectangles shall 
be parallel to each other and the rectangles shall have a 
common centre (see Fig. 3). 


L+v 


Y 


k Wav 


Fic. 3 TOLERANCE LIMITS FOR DIMENSIONS OF 
RECTANGULAR PANES 


5.1.2 Thickness Tolerance along the Periphery of the 
Unit 

The actual thickness of IGU shall be measured between 
the outside glass surfaces of the unit, at each corner and 
at the approximate centre points of the edges, as per 
the method prescribed in 5.1 of IS 17004. The values 
shall be measured to the nearest 0.1 mm. The measured 
thicknesses shall not vary from the nominal system 
thickness of the IGU by more than the tolerances 
prescribed in Table 2. 


Table 2 Thickness Tolerance of IGU 
( Clause 5.1.2 ) 


Nominal Thickness Tolerance 
< 24 mm + 1.0 mm 
> 24 mm + 2.0 mm 


5.1.3 Displacement/Mismatch 


For all thicknesses and for all range of dimensions, 
displacement/mismatch tolerance between the two 
glass panes shall be + 2.0 mm. A suitable calibrated 
equipment, for example, a caliper, shall be used to 
measure displacement/mismatch. 
NOTE — Glass Edge Finish: Edge finish may be as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. Since insulating 
glazing units are mostly used in applications where edges 
are either concealed or sealed with secondary sealant, it is 
generally not required to have glasses with polished or ground 
edges. Arrising of the edges is generally enough in most cases. 


5.1.4 Sealant Protrusion 


For all thicknesses and for all range of dimensions, the 
allowable primary sealant protrusion shall be + 2.0 mm. 
A suitable calibrated equipment, for example, a caliper, 
shall be used to measure sealant protrusion. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


5.1.5 Bite Size 


The minimum bite size, when measured using a Vernier 
caliper/scale, shall be 6mm. 
NOTE — The purchaser shall clearly prescribe the optimum 
bite size calculated considering the application, installation 
technique, glass thickness, panel size and wind and other 
subjected loads. The recommended seal dimensions are shown 
in Fig. 4. 


5.2 Performance Requirements 


5.2.1 Dew/Frost Point Measurement 


The frost/dew points of all cavities shall be -40°C or 
lower, when tested as per 7.4.1 and 7.4.2 of IS 17004. 


5.2.2 Climate Test (Optional) 


When tested as per 7.4 of IS 17004, insulating glazing 
units shall satisfy the following requirements: 


a) The average moisture penetration index over 
the five test specimen shall not exceed 0.20 
(20 percent). 


b) The average moisture penetration index shall be 
the average of the measurements of five individual 
units. However, any breakage of glass during test 
shall not be considered a failure and spare IGU 
shall be used for the test instead of the broken test 
specimen. 


c) The highest measured moisture penetration index 
of any unit shall not exceed 0.25 (25 percent). 


5.2.3 Inert Gas Level Test (Optional) 


When the system description includes inert gas-filled 
insulating glazing units, the sample shall be tested for 
the gas level as per 7.5 of IS 17004. The fill of inert gas 
in the IGU shall not be less than 90 percent. 


Key 

A 0.25 mm to 0.40 mm 
B 4.78 mm to 6.00 mm 
C 10.78 mm to 12 mm 
D 6.00 mm 


Fic. 4 RECOMMENDED SEAL DIMENSIONS 


IS 17346 : 2020 


5.2.4 Edge Strength (Type Test) 


Tensile load may be applied on the test specimen by 
means of an extensiometer or a Roman scale. 


5.2.4.1 All edge seals shall have sufficient adhesive 
and cohesive strength to allow the extension of seals so 
that any rupture of the seal occurs outside the area 0AB 
of Fig. 5, when tested by means of an extensiometers 
prescribed in Annex A. 


If, during the strength test of the glass-sealant-glass 
joint, as seen from the side view, loss of adhesion 
or cohesion extends through the whole depth of the 
sealant within the area OAB of Fig. 5, then the sealant 
test specimen shall be deemed to be failed (see Fig. 6). 
The principle of light transmission through the defect 
can be applied to determine pass or failure. 


Any breakage of glass during test shall not be considered 
a failure and spare test specimen shall be used for the 
test instead of the broken test specimen. 


0 Strain — B 


Fic. 5 STRESS-STRAIN TRIANGLE 


Key: 


1 Loss of cohesion 
2 Loss of adhesion 


Fic. 6 ILLUSTRATION OF THE EXTENSION OF LOSS OF 
ADHESION OR COHESION THROUGH THE WHOLE DEPTH 


5.2.4.2 Ifa Roman scale (see A-3.6.1) is used, the value 
of tensile stress in the seal at rupture shall be at least 
0.7 MPa. 


6 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMPONENTS 


The following tests are intended for factory production 
and process control. The manufacturer shall carry out 
these tests each day before the start of production 


in their premises. In case of butterfly test, butterfly 
adhesion test, snaptime test, peel adhesion test and 
delta T test for desiccant, these tests shall be carried out 
also after change of kit/drum. The manufacturer shall 
keep an adequate record of these tests. 

6.1 Test for Two Part Sealant 


It is very important that two part sealant be checked 
properly to ensure well curing. Improper mixing of 
silicone will result in adhesion failure and eventually 
lead to unit failure. 

6.1.1 Butterfly Test 

The sealant shall pass the butterfly test when tested as 
prescribed in Annex B. 

6.1.2 Butterfly Adhesion Test 

The sealant shall pass the butterfly adhesion test when 
tested as prescribed in Annex C. 

6.1.3 Peel Adhesion Test 

The sealant shall pass the peel adhesion test when 
tested as prescribed in Annex D. 

6.1.4 Snap Time Test 

The measured snap time shall be within 30 to 60 
minutes, when tested as per Annex E. 

6.1.5 Shore A Hardness Test 

The measured Shore A hardness reading shall be 
between 30 and 50, when tested as per Annex F. 


6.2 Test for Spacers 
6.2.1 Butyl Quantity Test 


The primary sealant quantity shall not be less than 
2.7g per side per running meter, when tested as per the 
method prescribed in Annex G. 

6.2.2 Test for Aluminum Spacers 

Aluminium spacers shall pass the test for tightness of 
the welded slit as prescribed in Annex H. 

6.3 Delta-T Test for Desiccant 


When the desiccant is subjected to the test as prescribed 
in Annex J, the temperature rise of water shall not be 
less than 32°C. 


7 PACKING AND MARKING 


7.1 Packing 


Insulating glazing units shall be packed as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


The packet shall be marked with the following 
information: 


a) Indication of the source of manufacture, 
b) Nominal thickness of IGU, 


c) Code or batch number, 
d) Month and year of manufacture, and 
e) Type of glass. 


7.2 Marking 


7.2.1 Each unit shall be marked with the words 
‘Insulating Glass’. 
In each unit, the constituent pane shall be marked 
indelibly and distinctly with the following information: 
a) Toughened safety glass, shall be marked with the 
word ‘Toughened’; 


b) Heat strengthened glass, shall be marked with the 
words ‘Heat Strengthened’; 


IS 17346 : 2020 


c) Laminated glass, shall be marked with the words 
‘Laminated Safety’; and 


d) Indication of the source of manufacture. 


7.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the products may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


8 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of the material shall be drawn 
as prescribed in Annex K. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX A 


( Clause 5.2.4 ) 


EDGE STRENGTH TEST 


A-1 GENERAL 


The test consists of preparing a number of test specimens 
consisting of glass-sealant-glass joints, some of which 
are unaged and some are subjected to ageing processes 
(see A-3.2 to A-3.4) before tensile load test. 


A-2 TEST SPECIMEN 


The components of the test specimen (see Fig. 7) shall 
be of the following dimensions: 


Glass pane = 75 mm x 12 mm x 6 mm 


Sealant = 50mm x 12mm x 12 mm 


After the glass pane is cut to the desired dimensions, it 
should be thoroughly cleaned and dried before being 
used in the test specimen. The cleaning process may be 
similar to that used in the manufacture of IGU and with 
similar precautions as being followed for sealing and 
bonding of glass with sealant. Other cleaning processes 
are allowed provided that the process does not interfere 
with the adhesive quality of the sealant, for example, by 
chemically modifying the glass surface. 


After cleaning the glass, the test specimen shall be 
prepared from freshly mixed (in case of two part 
sealant) or freshly unpacked sealant. The sealant 
shall be prepared according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. For two-part systems, the mix ratio shall 
be within the limit of + 5 percent of the absolute value 
prescribed. 


The glass panes of size 75 mm x 12 mm x 6 mm shall 
be so arranged as to form a cavity of 50 mm x 12 mm x 


Key 

1 Glass 

2 Sealant 

3 Face that may be coated 


12 mm between two parallel surfaces. Larger glass 
panes may be used if this aids the production of the test 
samples, but the cavity shall still be of the size 50 mm x 
12 mm x 12 mm. Gunnable seal shall be extruded 
smoothly into the cavity and allowed to set without 
any disturbance to form a bond of desired dimensions 
(see Fig. 7). Polyethylene or other non-adhesive 
mould pieces may be used to ensure the correct joint 
dimensions. At least one 50 mm x 12 mm surface of 
the sealant shall be exposed to the atmosphere during 
initial curing. For pre-extruded sealants, a length 
of 50 mm shall be applied on one piece of glass. The 
second piece of glass is compressed onto the sealant 
according to the sealant manufacturer’s instructions. 
Sealant height should be preferably 12 mm. 


Condition all prepared test specimen at standard room 
conditions for not less than 21 days (initial cure). 


A-3 PROCEDURE 
A-3.1 Initial Cure 


After initial cure, further condition seven test specimens 
at standard room conditions for at least seven days. 


A-3.2 Heat Exposure 


After initial cure and further conditioning at standard 
room conditions for at least seven days, another 
seven test specimens shall be aged in a closed oven at 
60 + 2°C for 168 + Sh. Where the sealant shows plastic 
flow at 60°C, the spacers shall be retained between the 
two glass pieces to prevent bond deformation. 


1 

wo 
2 N 
1 

wo 


Fic. 7 Test SPECIMEN 


A-3.3 Water Immersion 


After initial cure and further conditioning at standard 
room conditions for at least seven days, another seven 
test specimens shall be immersed in 1 | to 2 1 of distilled 
or deionized water for 168 + 5h, at standard room 
condition. Fresh water shall be used for each test. The 
conductance of the fresh water shall be equal to or less 
than 30 uS. 


A-3.4 UV Exposure 


After initial cure and further conditioning at standard 
room conditions for at least seven days, another seven 
test specimens shall be subjected to UV irradiation for 
96 + 4h, which shall be perpendicular to the glass and 
with an intensity of 40 + 5W/m? in the UV-A range. 


The height of the UV source shall be adjusted to 
ensure all joint assemblies are exposed to the minimum 
irradiation intensity. The irradiation intensity shall be 
measured at the beginning and end of each test. The UV 
source shall be replaced with a new one when it can no 
longer sustain the minimum irradiation intensity. 


A-3.5 After initial curing, ageing (where relevant) 
and conditioning for 24 h to 48 h at standard room 
conditions, width, depth and height of the test specimens 
shall be measured accurately. The test specimens shall 


IS 17346 : 2020 


then be subjected to tensile load (see A-3.6) by means 
of an extensiometer (with accuracy equal to or better 
than 2 percent) or a Roman scale. 


A-3.6 Application of Tensile Load 


A Roman scale (see Fig. 9) or an extensiometer may be 
used for the test. 


A-3.6.1 Application of Tensile Load Using Roman 
Scale 


The effective weight applied to the sealant joint is equal 
to the product of actual weight (W) on the Roman scale 
plate and the ratio of b/a (see Fig. 9). The test specimen 
shall be clamped with a parallel sample holder. 


The load shall be applied for a maximum of 10 s with 
no adhesive or cohesive failure of the sample. If no 
rupture occurs, increase the load by adding increments 
of 0.5 kg to the scale until the sample ruptures. Record 
the load at which rupture observed and calculate the 


tensile load. 
b 
x 
A MPa 


50x12 


NOTE — Actual weight (W) = Actual mass of load in the 
Roman scale in kg x 9.81 


Tensile load = 


1 Clear glass 


2 Tested surface which can be coated 


3 Ultraviolet radiation 


Fic. 8 ORIENTATION OF THE SURFACE BEING TESTED TO THE ULTRAVIOLET RADIATION 


R = W * b/a 


Iw 
Key 
1 Holder with test specimen 
2 Weight 


FiG. 9 ROMAN SCALE 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX B 


( Clause 6.1.1) 


BUTTERFLY TEST 


The purpose of butterfly test is to check for adequate mixing of the base with catalyst components. The test is 
performed by dispensing a bead of sealant on a piece of white paper and folding the paper in half, smearing down 
the sealant bead as shown in Fig.10. Then the paper shall be reopened and inspected visually. The smeared sealant 
should appear uniform in colour with no white streaks. 


Key 


(a) 


Sealant bead on paper 


(b) 


Homogenous mixing 


(c) 


Non homogenous mixing 


Fic. 10 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF BUTTERFLY TEST 


(c) 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX C 


( Clause 6.1.2 ) 


BUTTERFLY ADHESION TEST 


C-1 GENERAL 


The purpose of this test is to evaluate the adhesion of 
sealant to glass and spacers. Improper mixing ratio 
and poor raw material quality of sealant can result in 
improper adhesion of sealant to glass and spacers and 
ultimately cause unit failure. 


C-2 PROCEDURE 


Two glass panes of size approximately 200 mm x 
200 mm or equivalent shall be used to make the test 
specimen. Two edges (opposite to each other) shall be 
sealed using spacer and sealant. Allow the sealant to 


Key 


2 Spacer 


1 Sealant 


cure completely for 24h. A longitudinal cut shall be 
made on the centre line on the surface of the specimen, 
parallel to the sealed edges. Break the glass pane along 
the cut and bend the two halves outward at a 180° angle 
(see Fig. 11). Inspect the adhesion of the secondary 
seal. 


C-3 OBSERVATIONS 


Sealant shall not be detached from glass and spacer. 
The test sample shall also be examined for complete 
filling of sealant as well as presence of voids and 
bubbles in the sealant. The continuity of the primary 
sealant application shall also be noted. 


3 Cutting line 
A Position A 
B Position B 


Fic. 11 BUTTERFLY ADHESION TEST 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX D 


( Clause 6.1.3 ) 


PEEL ADHESION TEST 


D-1 GENERAL 


The purpose of this test is to verify adhesion of sealant 
to the glass substrate. An adhesive or cohesive failure of 
sealant with glass substrate can result due to improper 
curing of sealant or poor quality of raw material. 


D-2 PROCEDURE 


Clean the substrate thoroughly to remove greasy/oily 
matter and dust, and dry. Place a piece of bond breaker 
tape across the flat surface. Apply a bead of sealant 
and spread it to form a strip approximately 200 mm x 
15 mm x 6 mm. At least 4 cm of the sealant should be 
applied over the bond breaker tape (see Fig.12). 


The sealant shall be cured at room temperature for at 
least 24 h. Grab the 4 cm long tab of sealant which 
overlays the bond breaker tape and pull it at a 180° 
angle (see Fig. 13). Peel back only 1 to 2cm of sealant 
leaving the remainder in place for additional testing. 


D-3 RESULT 


The sealant shall be considered acceptable if 100 
percent cohesive failure occurs, since this indicates that 
the strength of adhesion is greater than the strength of 
cohesion. The sealant shall be deemed to be unfit for 
application if adhesive failure occurs. 


Test Piece 


Flat Test 
Surface 


Bond breaker 
tape 


Tooled Sealant 


Fic. 12 PEEL ADHESION TEST SPECIMEN 


Adhesive Failure 


Sealant 
Bead 


Glass sample 


Pull back 
at 180 
degrees 


Bond breaker tape 


Cohesive Failure 


Pull back 
at 180 
degrees 
Sealant 
Bead 


Glass sample 


Bond breaker tape 


Fic. 13 ADHESIVE AND COHESIVE FAILURE OF SEALANT 


IS 17346 : 2020 


Fic. 14 ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF COHESIVE FAILURE 


ANNEX E 


( Clause 6.1.4 ) 


SNAP TIME TEST 


E-1 GENERAL 


The purpose of this test is to demonstrate the proper mix 
ratio and the proper curing of sealant. Mixed sealant 
will behave like a one-component sealant until the 
chemical reaction between the base material and curing 
agent begins to occur, which causes the sealant to begin 
to “snap” and show elastomeric or rubber properties. 


(a)Initial (string) 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


Fill a small container with mixed sealant. Place a small 
stick or spatula into the sealant. At constant intervals 
of time, pull the stick/spatula out without stirring or 
agitating the sealant. As the curing progresses, the 
sealant becomes viscous. Time taken for the sealant 
to tear cohesively and snap back when pulled shall be 
recorded as ‘snap time’. 


Fic. 15 Snar Time TEST 


11 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX F 


( Clause 6.1.5 ) 


SHORE-A HARDNESS TEST 


The IGU sample shall be cured for a period of 24 h 


the cured sealant shall be checked using a Shore-A 


at standard room conditions. Then, the hardness of hardness meter. 


ANNEX G 


( Clause 6.2.1 ) 


BUTYL QUANTITY TEST 


G-1 GENERAL 


This test is used to estimate the minimum quantity of 
primary sealant applied on a spacer. Primary sealant 
needs to be applied on spacers in a certain minimum 
quantity for effective glass to spacer primary seal. 


G-2 PROCEDURE 


A spacer specimen shall be drawn randomly from 
production line and primary sealant shall be extruded 
under standard production conditions. The primary 
sealant shall be carefully removed from the spacer and 
the mass of primary sealant shall be estimated.The 
length of the spacer shall also be measured. Calculate 
the mass of primary sealant per running meter (mass of 
primary sealant divided by length of spacer). 


ANNEX H 


( Clause 6.2.2 ) 


TEST FOR ALUMINIUM SPACERS 


H-1 GENERAL 


This test is applicable to hollow spacers with profile 
having a closing slit on the back. In order to have a 
stiff and tight spacer, the closing slit is welded. This test 
checks the tightness of the welded slit. 


H-2 PROCEDURE 


Take approximately 1 m of spacer bar. Place the test 
piece in a horizontal, slightly sloping position, with 


12 


the welded slit downwards. Spray a penetrating liquid 
(fluorescent dye) inside the spacer until the liquid 
comes out from the opposite end. Wait for 5 min. 
Check with UV light for leakage of liquid along the 
welded slit. Tightness of the welded slit is considered 
acceptable in case of no leakage. 

NOTE — In case leakage is observed, the profile of closing slit 


shall be reviewed and modified so as to ensure proper tightness 
of welded slit. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX J 


( Clause 6.3 ) 


DELTA -T TEST FOR DESICCANT 


J-1 GENERAL 


This test is used to check the adsorption capacity of 
desiccants used in insulating glass units. 


J-2 PROCEDURE 


Take water at room temperature in a beaker and measure 
its initial temperature (T) and quantity in ml. Add equal 
quantity of desiccant in g. Now the temperature of water 
will start rising due to exothermic reaction. Measure 
the temperature of water at equal intervals and note the 
maximum temperature (T). Calculate AT = T,- T. 


ANNEX K 


( Clause 8 ) 


SAMPLING OF INSULATING GLAZING UNIT 


K-1 All the Insulating Glazing Units (IGU) of the 
same combination of glasses and system, which are 
processed under similar conditions in a day shall be 
grouped together and shall constitute a lot. Sample 
shall be made and tested from each lot to determine its 
conformity to the requirements of this specification. In 
order to ensure the randomness of selection, procedure 
in IS 4905 shall be followed. 


K-2 The sampling plan as described in Table 3 may be 
followed for the various tests to be performed as per the 
requirements of this specification. 


Butterfly test, butterfly adhesion test, peel adhesion test, 
snap time test, shore A hardness test, butyl quantity test, 
test for aluminium spacers and delta T test for desiccant 
are tests on components of IGU. These tests are 
intended for in house production and process control. 
The manufacturer shall keep an adequate record of 
these tests being carried out. 


Table 3 Sampling of Insulating Glazing Unit 
( Clause K-2 ) 


SI Testing Parameters No. of Samples Size of Samples/Criteria Acceptance Criteria 
No. 
a) 2 (3) (4) (5) 
1 Dimensions and squareness 5 percent of the quantity Actual size of product All samples shall pass. In case of any 
2 Thickness tolerance along from each typical single failure, draw another 5 percent 
eriphery of IGU combination, but not less and repeat the tests. None of these 
P than five glasses. samples shall fail. 
3 Displacement /Mismatch 
4 Sealant protrusion 
5 Bite size 
6 Dew point measurement 6 Actual size of product All samples shall pass. In case of any 


13 


single failure, draw another 6 samples 
and repeat the tests. None of these 
6 samples shall fail. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


Table 3 ( Concluded ) 


SI Testing Parameters No. of Samples Size of Samples/Criteria Acceptance Criteria 
No. 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
7 Climate test (optional) 12 305 mm x 502 mm All samples shall pass. In case of 
any single failure, draw another 
12 samples and repeat the tests. None 
of these 12 samples shall fail. 
8 Inert gas level test (optional) 10 350 mm x 500 mm All samples shall pass. In case of 
any single failure, draw another 
10 samples and repeat the tests. None 
of these 10 samples shall fail. 
9 Edge strength(type test) 28 75mm X 12 mm x 6mm All samples shall pass. In case of 


any single failure, draw another 
28 samples and repeat the tests. None 
of these 28 samples shall fail. 


ANNEX L 


( Informative ) 


OTHER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 


L-1 INTERFERENCE COLORATION 


L-1.1 Brewster’s Fringes 


When the glass pane surfaces exhibit near perfect 
parallelism and the surface quality is high, the insulating 
glazing unit shows interference coloration. These are 
lines varying in colour as a result of diffraction of light, 
creating an interference pattern. When the sun is the 
light source, the colours vary from red to blue. This 
phenomenon is inherent to the insulating glazing unit 
construction. 


L-1.2 Newton Rings 


This optical effect only occurs in faulty insulating 
glazing units when the two panes of glass are touching 
or nearly touching in the centre of the IGU. The optical 
effect is a series of concentric coloured rings with the 
centre being in the point of contact/near contact of the 
two panes. The rings are roughly circular or elliptical. 


L-2 GLASS DEFLECTION DUE TO 
VARIATIONS IN TEMPERATURE AND 
BAROMETRIC PRESSURE 


Temperature variations of the space filled with air 
and/or gas and barometric pressure variations of the 
atmosphere and altitude will contract or expand the air 
and/or gas in the cavity and consequently deflections 


14 


of the glass pane will occur, resulting in distortion of 
reflected images. These deflections, which cannot be 
prevented, show variations over time. The magnitude 
depends partially on the stiffness and size of the glass 
panes, as well as on the width of the cavity. Small 
sizes, thick glasses, and/or small cavities reduce these 
deflections significantly. 


L-3 EXTERNAL CONDENSATION 


External condensation on insulating glazing unitmay 
occur on either side of the IGU. When it is inside 
the building, it is principally due to high humidity in 
the room, together with a low outside temperature. 
Kitchens, bathrooms, and other high humidity areas 
are particularly susceptible to this type of external 
condensation. When it is outside the building, 
condensation is principally due to nocturnal heat loss of 
the outside glass surface by infrared radiation to a clear 
sky, together with high humidity, but no rain. These 
phenomena are due to atmospheric conditions and do 
not constitute failures of the insulating glass. 


L-4 NATURAL COLOUR OF CLEAR GLASS 


Generally, clear glass has a very light green appearance, 
especially at the edges. It becomes more visible when 
the glass is thicker or multiple layers of clear glass are 
used. 


L-5 COMPATIBILITY OF INSTALLATION 
SEALANTS WITH IGU SEALANT 


It is important to identify and use installation sealants 
which are compatible with the two-part secondary 
sealant used in sealing insulating glazing units. Use 
of general purpose sealants with high acetic curing 
properties can seriously dent the performance of the 
secondary sealant and cause flaking. 


The secondary sealant should be compatible with the 
structural sealant and respective sealant manufacturers 
may be consulted for selection of compatible sealants. 
Acetoxy silicone sealants should not be used as 
secondary sealants. Under certain conditions, the 
corrosive vapours liberating from acetoxy cure silicone 
sealant can cause degradation of two part silicone 
secondary sealants, potentially leading to premature 
failure of the insulating glazing unit. 


L-6 SEALANT COMPATIBILITY 


It is advisable to confirm the compatibility of the 
sealants toother accessory materials (setting- blocks, 
gaskets, spacers, weather-seals etc.) as follows. The 
sealant is applied in direct contact with the accessory 
material in question. The test specimen is placed in a 


IS 17346 : 2020 


chamber with high-intensity ultraviolet radiation. After 
the test period, samples are inspected for compatibility 
in the form of sealant discolouration and adhesion. It 
may be noted that non-silicone setting and edge blocks 
have the ability to cause discolouration of secondary 
sealants and field-applied silicone weather-seals. 


L-7 EXPOSURE TO SOLVENTS 


Silicone insulating glass sealants are susceptible 
to swelling when in contact with solvents, such as 
isopropanol, volatile siloxane fluids, methylethylketone, 
and terpenes. These solvents will not decompose the 
silicone, but will permeate the silicone and attack the 
polyisobutylene primary sealant. Solvent-based water 
repellents that are post-applied to a masonry building 
and allowed to enter the glazing weep system have 
been documented to cause polyisobutylene flow within 
a sealed insulating glazing unit. Setting blocks and 
edge blocks that are saturated with solvent have been 
documented to cause polyisobutylene flow within a 
unit. Solvent-extended sealants and solvent-based 
sealants contacting the secondary seals of an IGU can 
have similar effects. Polyisobutylene flow within a 
unit can be very unsightly and may result in premature 


fogging. 


ANNEX M 


( Informative ) 


FOGGING 


Exposure to high temperature and/or solar irradiation 
may volatilize components of an IGU. When these 
volatiles condense on the inside surfaces of an IGU, 
it results in chemical fogging. Chemical fogging 
can appear similar to condensation in the airspaces. 


15 


ISO 20492-2 prescribes two methods for testing the 
resistance to chemical fogging of pre-assembled, 
permanently sealed IGUs or IGUs with capillary tubes 
intentionally left open. 


IS 17346 : 2020 


ANNEX N 
( Foreword ) 


EXPERTS WHO MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTION 


Organization(s) Representative(s) 
CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata Dr K. MURALEEDHARAN (Chairman, CHD 10) 
Dr. B. B. JHa (Alternate) 
Asahi India Glass Limited. SHRI RUPINDER SHELLY 
SHRI PRAVEEN SAINI (Alternate) 
Borosil Glass Works Ltd SHRI SHRIKANT GANGAN 
SHRI SATISH CHITRIV (Alternate) 
CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata Dr K. ANNAPURNA 
Confederation Construction Products and Services (CCPS) SHRI SHASHI KANT 
Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Materials) SHRI MAHIPAL 
Dow Chemicals India Pvt Ltd SHRI S. RAVISHANKAR 
SHRI PADMADAS Nam (Alternate) 


Federations of Safety Glass. SHRI SHARANJIT SINGH (Convener, CHD 10:4 
PROCESSED GLASS SUBCOMMITTEE) 
SHRI Vinop TANDON (Alternate) 


FG Glass Industries (P) Ltd. SHRI TARIQ KACHWALA 


Glazing Society of India Suri G. N. GOHUL DEEPAK 
SHRI MATHIVANANn M. (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUBIN CALVIN Geo (Alternate II) 


Gold Plus Glass Industry Ltd SHRI PREMDUTT 

GSC Glass Ltd Suri L. K. ANEJA 
Kuraray India Pvt Ltd SHRI MALVINDER SINGH 
L&T Construction SHRI ANANDH C. 
Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME) SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR 
Saint - Gobain Glass India Ltd Suri MURALI N. 


SHRI SOMNATH PRABHU (Alternate) 
SGRT Facility, Civil Engineering Department, IIT Madras Pror (Dr) S. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN 
Solutia Chemicals India Pvt Ltd Suri V. B. Sup 


The All India Glass Manufacturers Federation SHRI SANDEEP SINGH 
SHRI GOPAL GANATRA (Alternate) 


Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer Education Suri B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
(VOICE) 


BIS Directorate General Suet U. K. Das, Scientist ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI SACHIN S. MENON 
ScIENTIST ‘B?’ (CHD), BIS 


16 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 10 (12685). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


