( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS:10708-1985

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF QUALITY COSTS

(First Revision)
Quality Control and Industrial Statistics Sectional Committee, EC 3
Quality and Chairman DR P. K. BOSE Representing

Indian

Association for Productivity, Reliability ( IAPQR ), Calcutta

B. HIMAWINQKA ( Alternate to Dr P. K. Bose ) SHRI B. ANANTH KRISRNANAND National Productivity Council, New Delhi SHRI R. S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI P. N. ARUMUQHAM Bharat Heavy-Electricals Ltd, New Celhi SHRI M. G. BHADE The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI N. C. CHATTERJEE National Test House, Calcutta DR S. RAHUT ( Alternate ) SHRI H. K. CHAWLA Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi SH~I A. D. CHOWDHURY Lucas-TVS, Madras SHRI U. MOHAN RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI C. A. CRASTO The Cotton Textile Export Promotion Council, Bombay National Institute of DIRECTOR Occupational Health Ahmadabad SHRI P. K. KULKAXNI ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute ( ICAR ), New Delhi DR S. S. PILLAI ( Alternate ) SHRI A. LAHIRI Indian Jute Industries Research Association, Calcutta SRRI U. DUTTA ( Alternate ) SERI J~N_~Ic MAHT.~ Association of Indian Engineering Industries, New Delhi SHRJ A. SINQH ( Alternate ) Tea Board, Calcutta SHRI R. N. MONDAL DR S. P. MUKHBRJEE Calcutta University, Calcutta Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta PROF A. N. NANKANA Tata Iron si Steel Co Ltd ( Tubes Division ), SHRI M. K. V. NARAYAN Jamshedpur SHRI P. N. GUPTA ( Alternate )
SHRI

( Continued on page 2 ) @I Copyright 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION

I

Ihis publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the rairri Act.

I

IS:10708-1985
( Continued from page 1 ) Members SHR IT. R.
PURI

Representing Army Statistical New Delhi Organization, Ministry of Defence,

SHRI V. K. ARORA ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD SHRI N. DHANASEEHARAN ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection, Ministry of SHRI RAXESH SEANEAR Defence, New Delhi SHRI N. S. SEN~AR ( Alternate) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SHRI A. RAMAIAH SHRI A. R. SETHURAMARAO ( Alternate ) The South Indian Textile Research Association, SHRI T. V. RATNAM Coimbatore Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. V. RAO SHRI K. MOHAN RAO ( Alternate ) Defegerh&earch and Development Organization, DR D. RAY SHRI A. SANJEEVA RAO SHRI R. SETHIJRAMAN Shriram Fibres Ltd, Madras Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHBI MANOJ CHAWLA ( Alternate ) The State Trading Corporation of India Ltd, New SHRI S. SHIVAR~X Delhi Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. SUBRAMU SHRI S. S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI G. W. DATEY, Director ( Stat ) Secrrtary SHRI P. K. GAMBHIR Deputy Director ( Stat ), ISI

Process Convener DR P. K. BOSE Members

and

Product

Control

Subcommittee,

EC

3

: 6
Quality and

Indian Association for Productivity, Reliability ( IAPQR ), Calcutta

SHRI B. K. CHOWDHURY ( Alternate to Dr P. K. Bose ) National Productivity Council, New Delhi SHRI B. ANAXCH KRISHNANAND SHRI R. S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Indian Association for Quality and Reliability SHRI R. S. CHAUHAN ( IAQR ), Bangalore Lucas-TVS, Madras SHRI A. D. CHOWDRURY SHRI C. RANCJANATHAN( Alternate )

( Continued on page 20 )

2

IS:10708- 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF QUALITY COSTS

(First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1This
Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 14 February 1986, after the draft finalized by Quality Control and Industrial Statistics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee.

0.2 The considerations of cost are of paramount importance in any Whereas comsuccessful business administration of an organization. petitiveness is a direct function of the sale price of a product, the relationship between cost and quality is more subtle. All the same, it is now universally accepted that optimum quality of any product is determined Consequently, any reduction in taking into account the cost factor also. the cost without affecting the quality of the product adversely would go a long way in improving its competitiveness in the market or in enhancing the profit margin or both. 0.3 The operating quality costs -of a product, consisting of prevention, appraisal and failure costs, provide an excellent field for cost control efforts through reduction of re-work, re-inspection, delays, loss of producIt is obvious that failure costs reduce the profits. tion potential, etc. The preventive quality control activities and appraisal of quality standards also cost money. The increase in prevention costs results in reduction of failure and appraisal costs, but the relationship is not proportional. Therefore, the optimization of the operating quality costs This should be done by evaluating and analysing various quality costs. will help in identifying the areas of concentration of quality losses and measure overall effectiveness of the quality programme. 0.4 This standard was originally published in 1983. The Panel for Handbook on Statistical Quality Control, while reviewing this standard for inclusion in the Handbook, felt that this standard needs a large number of changes and also the presentation can be improved by condensing the write-up. The committee, therefore, decided to revise this standard. In this revision, apart from other corrections, Fig. 1 and 2 3

IS : 10708- 1985 have been re-drawn by taking the quality level in non-decreasing order on the horizontal axis. The write-up on various components of operating quality costs, and the measurement bases for quality costs, have been The write-up on abridged so as to make the contents more clear. collection of cost data and also an example of operating quality costs are included in this revision. 0.5 Quality costs shall be evaluated and analysed periodically and the results shall be flashed to the management. The management shall maintain a close watch on the continuing score board of quality costs and initiate action to minimize avoidable quality costs.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard gives the broad guidelines for the collection and analysis of operating quality costs of an organization with an objective of achieving the desired balance among various components, so that control of these costs may lead to an effective and profitable business management. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Operating Quality Costs - The expenditure incurred in defect prevention and appraisal activities together with the losses due to internal and external failures. 2.2 Prevention Costs - The costs of any action taken to investigate land prevent or reduce defects and failures.
NOTE - Prevention ing the quality control costs include system. the cost of planning, setting-up and maintain-

2.3 Appraisal Costs - The costs of assessing during the `first time through'.

the

quality

mainly
out and

NOTE - Appraisal costs include the cost of a inspection, testing, etc, carried for incoming materials, during and on completion of manufacture, b) materials services consumed in testing, and c) evaluation of quality of stocks.

- The costs arising within the organiza2.4 Failure Costs, Internal tion of the failure to achieve quality specified.
NOTE consequent The term includes the cost of scrap, losses within the organization. re-work and re-inspection and also

2.5 Failure Costs, External - The costs arising outside the organization of the failure to achieve the quality specified.
ISOTE - The term ments and repair. includes the costs of claims against warranty such as, replace-

4

IS : 10708 - 1985 2.6 Quality Level - A general indication of the from the ideal, usually a numerical value indicating conformity or the degree of non-conformity. extent of departure either the degrees of

NOTE - Quality level is a tern used in a comparative sense. Where possible a more precise term should be used, for example, `proportion efl'ective', `fraction effective', `fraction defective', `acceptable quality level', `limiting qaality level', and `average outgoing quality limit'.

2.7 Economic Quality Level quality costs are minimum. 3. MODEL FOR OPERATING

-

A quality QUALITY

level at which the COSTS

operating

3.1 This standard is mainly concerned with the analysis and control of direct operating quality costs ( and not indirect operating quality costs, see 3.3 ). This consist of the following four main components: a) Prevention b) Appraisal costs, costs, failures, failures. and

c) Costs of internal d) Costs of external

3.2 The operating quality costs of prevention and appraisal activities are considered to be a controllable quality costs whereas the internal and external failure costs are not directly controllable. It is easy to visualize that the quality level increases with the increase in prevention and Again, as the prevention and appraisal costs increase, appraisal costs. The typical curves the internal and external failure costs decrease. corresponding to prevention and appraisal costs and also internal and external failure costs, plotted against the quality level of the product are these two curves the total direct operating shown in Fig. 1. Combining Theoretically, it can be presumed that quality costs curve is obtained. the quality level corresponding to the minimum of total direct operating quality costs is the economic quality level. 3.2.1 It has been observed that the curve of the total direct operating quality costs tends to be rather flat near its minimum. In the case of a market which inclines towards consistently higher quality demands, it may be useful to go for little higher quality level, which means paying relatively more attention to prevention and appraisal efforts. 3.2.2 In practical situations, the price which one gets for product depends upon supply, demand and quality level. `Therefore the optimisation of the quality costs is not the only criteria for deciding upon the quality level. 3.2.3 In the event of the quality level changing due to an essential change of the process ( for example, the introduction of new machinery ), the trend of operating quality costs must be determined again for this new situation. 5

IS:10708 - 1985

PREVENTION AND APPRAISAL COstS

QUALITY
FIG. 1

LEVEL----r

DIRECT OPERATING QUALITY COSTS CURVES

3.3 In addition to the direct operating quality costs, the in direct quality costs and their effect on the total cost curve should also be considered. Although it is not the intention of this standard to try to quantify the indirect quality costs, the attention of the users of the standard is drawn to the indirect quality costs to highlight their importance. The important indirect quality costs may be the following: a) Consumer consumer warranty b) Consumer incurred quality costs ( including the due to equipment down time, repair period, transportation cost, etc ), and dissatisfaction quality costs. cost to the cost after the

3.3.1 Although it is difficult to measure these intangible indirect quality A typical indirect cost curve costs, they do affect the total cost curve. It is easy to visualize that the indirect cost curve is is given in Fig. 2. high for low quality level and drops off as the quality level increases. Taking the direct operating cost curve and indirect cost curve together, It may be noted a total cost curve may be drawn as shown in Fig. 2. that the economic quality level for the total cost curve has moved to the

IS:

10708- 1985

right than that obtained by the direct operating cost curve, thereby indicating that there is a need for a higher quality level. A higher quality level can be obtained by increasing the prevention and appraisal costs which subsequently reduce the internal and externa1 failure costs.

\

I QUALITY
FIG. 2 4. COMPONENTS OF OPERATING

I

LEVEL

COSTS

DIRECT AND INDIRECT QUALITY COSTS CURVES QUALITY

4.1 Since the working and set up of different organizations vary enormoand foolproof check list usly, it is not possible to give an exhaustive of the various components which contribute to the operating quality It is essential that the classification of cost data should be relevant costs. and consistent with other accounting practices within the organization soethat comparisons may be made between costing periods of related activities. 4.2 For control purposes, it is necessary to allocate quality costs to the accountable area. The use of account codes within cost centres is the The allocation of cost is important for the analysis convenient method. and prevention of failure. There is likely to be a need for arbitration The decision for allocation of cost when accountability is disputed. 7

IS :10708 - 1985
Arbitration may need should not be made solely by the accountant. to be carried out by an independent technical authority such as technical In some cases, it may be necessary director or engineering manager. to refer the allocation to an appropriate arbitration committee. 4.3 Prevention Costs -- This is usually reported and process control/engineering. in two parts:

4.3.1 Quality Engineering Quality control/en&neering

those costs associated 4.3.1 .I Quality control/engineering - Represents with planning the quality system and translating product design and customer quality requirements into manufacturing quality controls on quality of materials, process and products. The areas and titles of personnel performing this type of work may include the following: a) Quality control engineers, engineers (includes procedures, standards b) Quality control systems and manual writers ), c) Quality planning inspection process d) Assembly e) Final f ) Special inspection

engineers, and test ~planning personnel, personnel, and test planning engineers, and committee activities.

g) Reliability h) Engineering j) Formal

engineers, statisticians, review and reliability

design

4.3.1.2 Process control/engineering - Represents those costs associated with implementing and maintaining quality plans and procedures. The areas and titles of personnel performing this type of work may include the following: a) Process b) Process d) Defect c) Process control control analysis engineers, testing engineers, engineers, and study engineers. Quality personnel Measurement performing tind Control this type of engineers,

c) Reliability

testing

or capability

4.3.2 Design and Development of Equipment - The areas and titles of work may include the following: a) Test equipment engineers, planners b) Test equipment c) Inspection d) Gauge engineers

and designers, and

equipment

engineers, 8

and designers.

IS:10708 - 1985
4.3.3 Quality Planning by Functions Other than Qua& Assurance - This represents the costs of quality planning incurred by personnel who do The personnel outside the quality not report to a quality function. assurance function who may perfnrm prevention functions include the following: a) Laboratory engineers and final products; b) Manufacturing equipment; who plan the testing who plan of incoming, inspection inprocess and/or test

engineerings

c) Manufacturing or industrial engineers who develop inspection and test procedures for quality measurements as required by the quality plan; d) Engineering qualification; e) Sales personnel personnel who plan and direct initial and product

who develop personnel

visual quality

standards;

f ) Engineering

who develop

acceptance

standards. Used to Evaluate maintenance of Equipment Used in personnel assurance

4.3.4 Calibration and Maintenance of Production Equipment Quality - This includes the costs of calibration and templates, jigs, fixtures and similar items. 4.3.5 Maintenance Control of Quality

and Calibration

of Test and Inspection

4.3.6 Suppliw Assurance - This represents the costs of engaged in the preventive activities of a supplier quality These activities include the following: programme. a) Evaluation: 1) supplier 3) design b) Planning: 1) determining 2) planning 3) carrying 4.3.7 Quality implementing, programmes. and documenting inspection process methods of supplier surveys, evaluation order audits and ratings; of supply; of alternative placement. products; 2) identifying 4) purchase new sources review

and testing before

and

control; and

incoming

and test requirements; c:+pabilit\~ exercises.

out supplier -

Training operating

This represents and maintaining

the costs of developing, formal quality training

9

lS:10708-1985 4.3.8 Administration,
Alldit and Improvement

4.3.8.1 Administration represents all other expenses associated with planning, implementing and maintaining a quality system not specifically included elsewhere, such as secretaries, telephone, rent and travelling. 4.3.8.2 Audit represents documentinmg, implementing the costs of personnel engaged in planning and maintaining audits on the quality system. the costs of formal activities. quality improve-

4.3i8.3 Improvement represents ment programmes and motivational 4.4 Appraisal
Costs

4.4.1Laboratory Acceptance Testing - This represents the costs related to tests to evaluate the quality of purchased materials ( raw, semi-finished or finished ) which become part of the final product or that are consumed during production operations.
4.4.2 Inspection and Test - This represents the payroll cost of inspection and test personnel, including supervision and clerical support ( including receiving inspection ). The costs associated with inspectors or testers visiting or stationed at vendor operations to perform or witness evaluations should be included. 4.4.3 In-process Inspection - This represents the costs of personnel ( not inspectors by job classification ) engaged in the in-process evaluation of product conformance to quality requirements. I cost of 4.4.4 Set-Up for Inspection and Test - This includes the payroll setting up equipment or products for inspection or functional testing. 4.4.5 Inspection and Test Materials - This includes consumed or destroyed in control of quality. 4.4.6 Product Quality Audits - Payroll on in-process or finished products. the costs of materials quality audits

costs of performing

4.4.7 Review of Test and Inspection Data - The costs incurred for regularly reviewing inspection and test data before release of the product for shipment, for example, to determine whether product quality requirements have been met. 4.4.8 product Field ( on-Site ) Performance acceptance on site. Testing -- Costs incurred in testing and for

4.4.9 Internal Testing and Release - The costs of setting-up in-house of the complete product for customer acceptance.

testing

4.4.10 Evaluation of Site Material ( Field Stock ) and Spare Parts - The costs of evaluation, testing or inspection of site material, resulting from engineering charges, storage time ( excessive self life ) or other suspected problems. 10

IS : 10708 - 1985 4.4.11 Data in accumulating work. 4.5 Internal Processing Inspection and Test Reports - The costs incurred and processing test and inspection data used in evaluation Failure Costs in the course of meeting meeting quality quality

4.5.1 Scrap requirements.

All scrap losses incurred

4.5.2 Rework and Repair requirements where material

The costs incurred in can be restored for use.

4.5.3 Troubleshooting or Defect/Failure Analysis analysing non-conforming materials, components causes. 4.5.4 Reinspect, Retest that has failed previously. The

-- The cost incurred in or products to determine or retesting material

costs of reinspection

4.5.5 Scrap and Rework; Fault of Supplier; Downtime due to failure of purchased material to meet quality payroll costs incurred. 4.5.6 Modzjications Permits and Concessions - The in reviewing products, designs and specifications. 4.5.7 reasons, 4.6

The losses incurred requirements, and time for spent quality

costs of the

Downgrading - The losses due to non-conformance resulting in a reduced selling price. Failure Costs The payroll costs

External

4.6.1 Complaints complaints. 4.6.2 services product

Administration

of administrating

Product or Customer Service; Product Liability - The costs of product directly attributable to correcting imperfections, including any liability costs. and Returned; Recall; for rejected products, RetroJt including The costs of any recall and with failures analysing within the

4.6.3 Products Rejected handling and accounting retrofit costs.

4.6.4 Returned Material Repair - The costs and repairing customer returned material. 4.6.5 Warranty warranty period. Replacement The

associated

costs of replacing

4.6.5.1 Marketing errors - The costs of replacing products due to marketing error, that is, wrong interpretation of customer specifications requirements. 11

IS : 10708- 1985 4.6.5.2 DesignlspeciJication errors - The costs of replacing due to supplier's design and/or engineering specification inadequacies.
4.6.5.3 Factory or installation errors due to production or installation errors. 5. COSTS been More have that what The costs of replacing products errors or products

DATA

5.1 Collection of Costs Data --When

the list of costs elements has identified ( see 4.3 to 4.5 ), the collection of costs data can begin. analysis may be needed in an organization that does not already The guidance a departmental costing system than in one that has. follows, however, gives all organizations enough information to see depth of analysis will be needed.

5.1.1 The steps given in 5.1.1.1 to 5.1.1.5 refer to a `quality' function as being an existing budget centre. The analysis may require all or most of these five steps to identify the quality costs. 5.1.1.1 Calculate those costs that are directly `quality' function. These will normally include: payroll a> function pension costs of people or department, costs; specifically and will attributable to the

controlled by include wages,

the quality salaries and

b) cl 4
e)

a proportion of building occupation costs related to the persons mentioned in (a) above, for example, rents rates, insurance, heating lighting and security; a proportion of canteen stration costs; the costs assessment costs, office services of specialized and quality other adminiand

of depreciation equipment; and

control

the costs of smaller

items that the organization

does not capitalize.

5.1.1.2 Identify costs that are not directly the responsibility of the `quality' function but which should be counted as part of the total These costs will usually be incurred quality costs of the organization. Itis not necessary to make a by other departments and organizations. formal accounting transfer to the `quality' function costs centre, but they A number of departshould be included in memorendum account. ments may incur these costs, for example, purchasing, stores planning. Costs in this category should be apportioned to quality on an equitable basis.
The costs identified in 5.1.1.X and 5.1.1.2 will be mainly concerned with prevention and appraisal, and those in 5.1.1.3 to 5.1.1.5 deal with failure costs. 12

IS : 10708 - 1985 5.1.1.3 Identify and enter in the memorandum account the internal For example it may be normal practice to costs of `budgeted failures'. To be certain of completing 100 it make a product in batches of 100. may be a matter of routine to plan 110 starts. Only experience will eventually tell whether it is worth calculating the cost of the additional 10, but the costs should be calculated, at least for a trial period. 5.1.1.4 Identify the internal costs of unplanned failures, where failures are not allowed for in the initial production planning. ( It is common to find the costs of failures in the accounts of manufacturing overheads ). Related costs may include materials that have been scrapped or the cost of reworking to put the defective item right, or even of completely remaking. The costs will usually lie either in the accounts of the department causing the failure or in the department doing the rectification. Wherever they lie the costs should be noted in the memorandum account. 5.1.1.5 Identify the cost of failures after change of ownership. Costs will include the time spent by the quality department in investigations and of other department, such as, marketing, custom-er servicing, and accounts. These costs will rarely be identified. at all in existing systems. An initial estimate should be made and the results entered in the memorandum account. Where the customer is eventually charged for the investigation and any costs of rectification, the income should be noted in the memorandum. 5.2 Cost Data Sources - It is advisable to confer with the management accountants to review the list of elements and data sources. It will be found that a good percentage of the desired information is available in one form or another, though this might not appear to be the case at first. 5.2.1 Although there are no established rules for searching the following are recommended as valuable source documents: a) Payroll c) Scrap Travel analysis; expense reports; authorizations/reports; reports; or rectification expense claims; and warranty and costs reports; cost information; replacement and test records; review records. b) Manufacturing d) Rework out data,

e> f 1 Product
g) h)
Field

repair,

Inspection Material

j)

5.2.2 Data extracted from source documents should be transposed by appropriate collection work sheets and coded for easy tabulation. The aim is to have all cost data reported by code. The use of coding permits consistency of collection regardless of the source or size of the costs. 13

IS : 10708 - 1985 Each department should report should then be accumulated by code. its costs. Data from all sources

5.2.3 Where actual costs~cannot be directly associated with specific elements, it may be necessary to make an expense allocation by arbitration. If these costs are significant, it is recommended that the necessary records be established in order to record the data factually. 5.3 Data Tabulation - After all costs have been collected, they should An example be tabulated to give a breakdown of costs by element code. of a proforma for quality costs period reporting and breakdown of costs elements, period and category is shown in Appendix A. 6. MEASUREMENT BASE FOR QUALITY COSTS

6.1 Operating quality costs by themselves present insufficient information for analysis. A measurement base is required which will relate operating uality costs to some aspect of the business which is sensitive to change. An organization F!! ome typical measurement bases are given below. The choice of a base depends may not have all the measurement bases. upon the activity of an organization. 6.2 Labour Base - Internal direct labour costs, that is, Total 6.3 Costs Base - Total total material and labour failure costs related to total labour or

Internal failure costs ( or direct ) labour costs failure costs related costs, that is, TotaI failure Manufacturing costs costs to nett that is, sales billed or to manufacturing costs or

quality 6.4 Sales Base - Total value of finished goods transferred

costs related to inventory,

Total equality costs Nett sales 6.5 Unit Base units produced, - Test and inspection that is, costs related to the number of

Test and inspection costs Units of production 6.6 Value Added Base - Total quality costs related to a measure of manufacturing activity unaffected by fluctuations in sales price, that is, Total quality costs Value added 14

IS:10708-1985
of caution, measurement bases are only as Consideration should methods for keeping them consistent. adjustments made when bases are affected -by: a~) direct Iabour replaced by automation; due to the use selling prices, of alternative distribution costs mateand b) manufacturing rials, methods c) changes market d) changes cost changes or processes; margins,

6.7 As a matter

good as the be given and

in gross demand;

in product

mix; and that differs from time scale of denowhen

e) time scale menator.

of numerator

6.7.1 The above factors should be considered and comparing quality costs with a measurement base. 7.

understood

OPTIMIZING

QUALITY

COSTS

7.1 It may be of interest

to an organization to optimize the operating Although the models described in 3 indicate the optimum quality costs. level, it is not very easy to arrive at this in practice.

7.2 One of the technique to determine the optimum quality costs is to compare it with other similar organizations. This pre-supposes that quality costs are being maintained and analysed by other similar organizations. Another technique to determine the optrmum level is to analyze the inter-relationship among the various cost components. Theoretically, the prevention and appraisal costs should be equal to or greater than the If reverse is the case in any practical situation, it indicates failure costs. the need to give greater emphasis on prevention and appraisal costs so as to approach the optimum quality level. The optimum level of operating quality costs could also be arrived by optimizing the different components. Failure costs and appraisal costs are optimized when there are no indentifiable sources or profitable projects to reduce them. 7.3 One of the most effective cost analysis tools is the use of pareto analysis. After identifying the cost component which is significant ( for example, the cost of failures ), it is further broken down into different elements either by cause-wise or by~the departments to which the cost can be allotted. These are then arranged in descening order of magnitude. The first few elements which contribute the main portion of the cost are referred as vital few and the remaining as trivial Once the vital few are known, the projects can be developed to many. reduce the cost contributed by them. In other words, money is spent to control the vital few whereas little or no money is spent to control the trivial many. 15

IS: 10708- 1985

8. PERIODIC

REVIEW

OF QUALITY

COSTS A

8.1 The quality costs shall be evaluated and analyzed periodically. periodic study of quality costs have the following advantages:

a) to inform the management of the amount of money involved, and to reduce arguments for making efforts for improvements, in other words, to invest money in prevention; b) to isolate the most promising direct plans for the successive elimination c) to measure the effectiveness balance d) to seek the optimum failure costs. 8.2 The management take following steps: b) the formulation action points and to formulate of excessive costs; and appraisal and and to prevention,

of the efforts; among

will be stimulated

by all this to consider to quality control;

a) the task of top management of an optimal c) the review of the functional d) the involvement of all levels all sectors ( horizontally ); e) coordination; f) education and training; of design, and quality g) the quality

with respect quality of the organization;

policy; company ( vertically ) and

specifications,

etc.

16

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.3 )
EXAMPLE OF PERIODIC QUALITY in 000's ) ( Rupees

A
COST REPORTING

_. I . . . . .._.... Organization Period 4th Quarter ( 1 September-31 December
COSTS FOR 4TH QUARTER ~---__h__..-.-.-~ Budget Actual Difference ( ActualBudget )

1985 )

__"

_~ COSTS FOR YEAR ~_~___h~~~~~~ Budget Actual

1985 Difference ( ActualBudget )

__--___

____Prevention Costs

-__________

z
50 4: 50 20 25 20 15 10 300 5.0 60 43 73 53 16 23 27 20 17 332 5.2 10 3 3 -4 3 -2 7 5 7 32 0.2

(4
(b) I?) (e)

(f) (9) (h) Total prevention costs Percent of total aualitv

Quality engineering: (i) Quality control/engineering (ii) Process control/engineering Design and development of quality measurement and control equipment Quality planning by other functions Calibration and maintenance of production equipment used to evaluate quality Maintenance and calibration of test and inspection equipment Supplier assurance Quality training Administration, audit and improvement costs

190 150 250 180 05 85

202 146 248 180 56 79

-' f
-2 0 -9

ii
40 1 100 4.9

iii
56 1 125 4.8 25 0.1

( Continued )

CYSTS FOR ~TH QUARTER C--___h__-__~ Budget Actual Difference ( ActualBudget )
Apfiraisal Costs

COSTS FOR YEAR 1985 ~_-_--*__-__~ Budget Actual Difference ( ActualBudget )

250 200 175 75 z 225 175 50 129 75 60 35 1 440 24`0

242 199 I85 85 228 171 43 114 71 57 28 1 423 22.3 -

- 8 -1 10 10 3 -4 -7 -6 -4 -3 7 17 I'7

acceptance testing (a) Laboratory Inspection and test ( including (b) inward' ) (c) In-process inspection and test (d) Set-up for inspection Inspection and test material (e) (f) Product quality audits (9) Review of test and inspection (b) Field ( on-site ) performance

`Goods

950 750 700 300 875 650

949 781 726 335 893 670 167 446 279 223 112 5 581 24.1 -

-1 31 26 35 18 20 23 -4 -2 2 81 0.3 21

data testing

190 450 300 225 110 5 500

testing and release ( j) Internal of field stock and spare (k) Evaluation parts (m) Data processing reports Total Percent appraisal costs costs inspection and test

of total quality

24-4

Internal Failure Costs 425 900 200 625 600 300 250 3 300 55.0 z 430 893 198 628 595 297 264 3 305 51.7 -"7 -2 (a) Scrap (b) Rework and repair (c) Troubleshooting or defect/failure analysis (d) Re-inspect, retest (e) Scrap and rework; fault of vendor; downtime (f ) Modification permits and concessions (g) Downgrading Total Percent internal failure costs costs 1 600 3 500 700 2400 2 300 1 100 900 12 500 55.6 1 654 3 535 763 2418 2 390 1 145 1 019 12 924 55.7 54 E 18 90 45 119 424 0.1

-5" 3 14 5 3.3

of total quality

External Failure Costs 50 150 175 275 50 75 125 900 15.0 6 000 80 226 255 413 77 106 172 1329 20.8 6 392 30 76 80 138 27 31 47 429 5.8 392 (a) Complaints (b) Product or customer service; product liability (c) F'ttod;;ts rejected and returned; recall; (d) (e) (f ) (g) Returned material repair Marketing errors Design and specification errors Factory or installation errors external failure costs costs 200 600 675 925 200 300 500 3 490 15'1 22500 212 601 692 996 216 318 531 3 566 15.4 23 196 12 1 17 71 16 E 166 0.3 696 t; ; s 8 ' i WI

Total Percent Total

of total quality quahty costs

IS:10708 - 1985 (Continued
from page 2 ) Members DIRECTOR Ds K. G. ANEJA ( Alternate ) DR M. N. GOPALAN SHRI A. LAAIRI Representing Indian Agricultural Statistics ( IASRI ), New Delhi Research Institute

DR S. P. MUERERJEE SHRI K. S. RAMAMURTI RAO ~. \ SHRI N. C. AC+RAWAL( AIternaze ) Directorate General of Inspection, Ministry of SHRI RAMESN SHANKED Defence, New Delhi SHRI N. S. SENQAE ( Alternate ) Defence Research and Development Organization, DR D. RAY Ministry of Defence, New Delhi National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New REPRESENTATIVE Delhi Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta SRRI M. N. SAPRE DCM Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. R. SEN Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI S. SUBRADZU SHRI S. S. GUPTA ( Alternate )

Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay Industries Research Association Indian Jute ( IJIRA ), Calcutta Calcutta University, Calcutta Bajaj Auto Ltd, P&e

20

