IS 15735:2006

Indian Standard HERBAL COSMETICS -- GENERAL GUIDELINES

lCS 71.100.70

0 BIS 2006

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
December 2006 Price Group 1

Cosmetics Sectional Committee, PCD 19

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cosmetics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. The awareness and need for cosmetics with herbs is on the rise, primarily because consumer believes that these products are safe and ti-ee fi-omside effects. There is a need to provide assurance to the consumers that such products generaIly claimed and/or labelled to as `Herbal Cosmetics' are actually delivering the benefit claims, safe and are of standard quality and provide the `claimed cosmetic benefits' accruing tl-om their use. There is a need for adoption of generaI guidelines by the formulators and marketers of such cosmetics. Cosmetics claimed and labelled as `Herbal' could be those products which are formulated using standard, approved cosmetic base into which herbs are added for providing the claimed product benefits. These guidelines address identified areas, which the formulators/marketers of herbal cosmetics need to comply. Formulators/Marketers who claim their cosmetic product to be a herbal cosmetic by Iabelling them with such words on the pack need to comply with the general guidelines for herbal cosmetics. Formulators/Marketers can use herbslherbal ingredients, for example, to create variants, in which case the cosmetic formulation shall be governed by the current regulations under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules as may be applicable, and this general guidelines for herbal cosmetics shall not be applicable to such products. No stipulations have been made in these guidelines regarding the composition of the herbal cosmetics. However, it is necessary that the raw materials used in these formulations are such that in the concentrations in which they wotdd be present in the finished cosmetics, after interaction with the other raw materials used in the formulation, are flee tlom any harmfil effects. For determining the suitability of a new formulation or of a new raw material used in an old formulation, shall reference may be madetoIS4011 :1997 `Methods of test for safety evaluation of cosmetics. (secondrevision)'. It be the responsibility of the manufacturers of finished cosmetic, to satisfi themselves of the dermatological safety of their formulation according to that standard before releasing the product for sale.

IS 15735:2006

Indian Standard HERBAL COSMETICS -- GENERAL GUIDELINES

1 SCOPE

This standard primarily deals with general guidelines for herbal cosmetics. 2 REFERENCES The following standards contain provisions, which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 1S No. 3958:1984 4011:1997 4707 (Part 1) :2001 (Part2) :2001 Title Methods of sampling cosmetics (first revision) Methods of test for safety evaluation of cosmetics (second revision) Classification of cosmetic raw materials and adjuncts: Dyes, colours and pigments (second revision) List of raw materials generally not recognized as safe for use in cosmetics (second revision) Guidelines for hygienic manufacture of cosmetics (first revision) Methods of test for microbiological examination of cosmetics and cosmetic raw materials (f%st revision)

formultstors/marketers may be responsible to lay down their own standards and comply with the same.

4 Herb(s)/Herbal Ingredient(s) The `herb(s)/herbal ingredient(s)' for use in products covered under these guidelines, shall mean to include one= or more of the following: a) Fresh herbs/j uices/pastes/oleoresins made from whole or part(s) of plants, b) Dried powdered herbs, c) Herbal extracts, d) Cold expressed and/or solvent extracted, fixed oils/ fats from herbs, and e) Distillates/Essential oils of herbs.
5 SELECTION OF HERB

5.1 Selection of Herbal Ingredients

11377:2001 14648:2005

Formulators should carefully select herbs/herbal ingredients based on their known and reported properties (in literature), properties known in cultural heritage or traditional use and usage reported in traditional books. Formulators shall also apply adequate care in selecting the forms in which the herbs would be used as an `ingredient' in the products. Formulators may use an herbal ingredient for newer uses than known earlier provided; adequate data is available on that ingredient and its newer use. 6 QUANTITY/ PROPORTIONS
OF HERBS USED

3 DEFINITIONS
3.1 Herbal Cosmetics -- Herbal cosmetics, hereinatler

referred as products are formulated, using various permissible cosmetic ingredients [see IS 4707 (Part 1) and IS 4707 (Part 2)] to form the base in which one or more herb(s)/herbal ingredient are used to provide defined cosmetic benefits with a label declaration as `Herbal Cosmetic'. These Guidelines shall be applicable where the term `Herbal Cosmetics' are declared in the PCRO (as per the Packaged Commodities Regulation Order) panel.
NOTE -- Such Products should comply with the definition of Cosmetics as defined in the Drugs & Cosmetics Act and also comply with Schedule S of the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945. Finished cosmetics for which no Indian Standards exist,

Formulators should have adequate data justi@ing the proportion of the herbs or the herbal ingredient(s) for which claims are made, used in the product. In the absence of scientific data, availability of the quantity of herb in a product to provide the intended cosmetic benefits, such data may be based on the known knowledge, published literature, and reported knowledge k traditional books and/ or scientifically generated data using appropriate in-vitro and/or in-vivo (clinical) methods. 7 HERBAL COSMETIC BENEFITS CLAIMS The cosmetic benefit claims made for products shall be true, factual and based on the data in possession with the formulators/marketers. Such data may be based on the known knowledge, published literature, knowledge reported in traditional books and/or scientifically generated data using appropriate in-vitro and/or in-vivo (clinical) methods. No formulators/marketers shall make 1

IS 15735:2006 any cosmetic claim/claims, which are false, exaggerated or misleading. However, in cases where cosmetic benefit claims are Iinked specifically to herbsiherbal ingredients, the"formulator/marketer shall do so, based on adequate and appropriate data in their possession justi~ing that the particular benefit claim is actually provided by the herb/'herbal ingredients.

9 SHELF-LIFE

DATA

Formulators may adopt suitable shelf-life study protocols which ensure product integrity throughout the intended shelf-life period through appropriate data. Vkible signs of degradation such as fermentation, rancidity, change in colour, and such other parameters as applicable to the product shall be used to prove the stability of the product. Samples of the products exposed topre-decided challenge conditions of storage shall also be tested for confirming the claimed cosmetics benefits. Finger printing technique or any other suitable methods would be acceptable while generating shelf-life data. Stability ofherbal ingredient(s) proven in a cosmetics formulation base can be justified and extrapolated to cosmetics with similar base formulation with changes within normal ranges from proven product. 10 SAFETY DATA Formulators shall ensure that the finished product is safe (see IS 401 1). Results of safety data/such studies should be available with the formulators/marketet$ and shall be produced, whenever required, Formulators/marketers shall suitably inform the consumer, if there are any precautions to be taken while hsing the products, which are known to show safety concerns in specific individuallpopulation on the labels of such products. For microbiological evaluation/examination, reference may be made to IS 14648, For the purpose of hygienic manufacture of cosmetics, reference may be made to IS 11377 and for sampling details, reference maybe made to IS 3958.

Formulators/marketers who are incorporating herbal ingredient(s) for varianting purposes shall ensure any cosmetic benefit claim made shall be delivered by the product as a whole, even though such benefits are not attributable to any specific herbal ingredient, and such cosmetics shall be governed by the current regulations under D&C Act and Rules as applicable to cosmetics. However, no formulator/marketers shall make any cosmetic benefit claim, which is not delivered by the product. 8 QUALITY ASSURANCE is recognized that testing of herbal ingredients in herbal [t cosmetics is not easy and practicable due the multicomponent nature of herbal ingredients, Formulators using
herb/herbal ingredients shall adopt necessarj' quality assurance techniques ingredient. Adequate adopted while deciding to use an herblherbal raw material quality control shall be

each time when a herb/herbal ingredient is used. Use of herb/herbal ingredients shall be done through `Certification by addition' during manufacturing and such certification documentation shall be recorded and maintained in the relevant `Master product specification' or `Bill of materials' or `Weighment sheet' duly authenticated by the production and quality personnel. Written procedures would be available for it and records shall be maintained for having applied the procedures and their results of compliance.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS,
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revi~on. Users of Indkm Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards : Monthly Addhions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 19(2 15'7),

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western, : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 2609285 { 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
Printed at Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

