**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11970 (1987) : Guide for condensate polishing (power 
plant) [CHD 13: Water Quality for Industrial Purposes] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11970- 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CONDENSATE POLISHING ( POWER PLANT ) 



UDC 621' 182448 



® Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SIIAII ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 4 Septembei 1987 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 DECEEMBER 2008 

TO 

IS 11970 : 1987 GUIDE FOR CONDENSATE POLISHING 

(POWER PLANT) 

{Page 7, clause 2.3, read with Amendment No. 1) — Substitute *< 2' for 
•< 5' as Specified limit of Sodium, ppb in plant effluent for ammonia cycle 
operation. 

[Page 7, clause 3.1(a) ] — Insert the following at the end: 

'Ammonia dosing has to be ensured an auto mode so that pH of condensate is 
maintained in the range of 8.8-9.0 in hydrogen cycle mode of operation.' 

(Page 10, clause 4.3, line 6) — Insert the following after the word 
'externally': 

'Complete resin transfer from service vessel to regeneration vessel and vice 
versa to be ensured.' 

(Page 11, clause 4.3) — Insert the following at the end: 

'Cross contamination of resin to be tested after every S regeneration. Screen 
testing of resin to be tested after every ten regeneration. Chloride content in 
caustic used for anion regeneration should be compatible with rayon grade and 
preferably A.R. grade anmionia to be used for boosting pH in condensate in 
hydrogen cycle. Both cation and anion resin quantities are to be made up to the 
design quantities so as to maintain their interface level in resin separation unit.' 

(Page 12, clause S^ first para) — Insert the following at the end: 

'Provision of on-line sodium and chloride analyzers to be envisaged. Provision 
of air mixing in service vessel to be envisaged.' 

(Page 12, clause 5, second para) — Insert the following at the end: 

'CO2 content measiuvment in condensate come in handy to ascertain the ionic 
load on resin.' 



(CHD 13) 



Reprognq)hy Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 1994 

TO 

IS 11970:1987 GUIDE FOR CONDENSATE POLISHING 

(POWER PLANT) 

( Page 7, clause 2.2 ) — Insert Ihc following after (vi): 

'vii) Hollow fibre filter in conjunction with a deep mixed bed demineralizer.' 

( Page 7, clause 2.2 ) — Add the following new clause 23 after 2.2: 

*2.3 Chemical Conltrol Specifications regarding typical Condensate Polishing 
Plant Effluent for Power plant: 



Parameter 




Operation 


Ammonia Cycle 
Operation 


Cation conductivity after removal 
of ammonia/aminc ( («/cm at 25*0 ) 


<0.1 


<0.1 


Sodium, ppb 




<2 


<5 


Chloride, ppb 




<1 


<2 


Silica ( as Si02), ppb 




<5 


<5 


Soluble iron ( as Fe ), ppb 




<5 


<5 


Soluble copper ( as Cu ), ppb 




<2 


<2 


Crud, ppb 




<10 


<10 



( Page 8, clause 3.3 ) — Add the following at the end of 3 J: 

'With proper separation of cation and anion resins and sufficient ( approx. 200 
percent ) regeneration with pure regenerants ( Q less than ISO ppm in NaOH ), 
the CPP effluent water quality mentioned in 2 J may be easily achieved/ 

( Page 9, clause 4 J ) — Add the following at the end: 

'Non steady flow rates can introduce ionic impurity leakages in the effluent due 
to disturbance of the kinetic equilibrium of the bed/ 

( Page 12, clause 5 ) — Add the following at the end: 

'In addition, it would be advantageous to have an ion chromatographic system 
available for trace level analysis of important chemical control parameters 
namely, Chloride, Sodium and SiHca' 

(CHD013) 

Repiognphy Unit, BIS, New Delhi, IndU 



IS : 11970 • 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CONDENSATE POLISHING ( POWER PLANT ) 

Boiler Water Sectional Committee, CDC 57 

Chairman Representing 

Shri p. C. D. G. Samukl Madras Refinrries Ltd, Madras 

Members 

Shri J. N. Bhowmik West Bengal State Electricity Board, Calcutta 

Shri B. K. S antra ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. M. Balasubramakian Central Electrochemical Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Karaikudi 

Dr G. Vekkatachari ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. N. Banbbjjsb Development Consultants Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shui S. K. Chatter jke ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Chatter jek Delta Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Chemist &, Metallurgist II, Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
RDSO, LucKNOw 

Chemist & Mbtalluroist 
( W. R. ) ( AlUrnate ) 
Shri Somen atu Ghose Jai Guru Engineering Co ( India ), Calcutta 

Shri Anandamoy Ghose ( Alternate ) 
Shbi ViJay Kumar Goel Ministry of Industry ( Deptt of Industtial Develop- 

ment ), New Delhi 
Shri G. T. Jadeja The Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri B. K. Gandhi ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Jha Central Electrical Authority, New Delhi 

Shri Kshirsaoar Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Dr V. M. Kelkar Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri K. Rudbappa ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. R. Krishnaswamy Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Shri G. Udayabhaskar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Mahadbvan Chemical Consultants, Madras 

Dr p. K. Mathur Indra Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 

( IGCAR ), Kalpakkam 
Shbi R. Natarajan Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Tiruchirapalli 

Shri T. R. Naoabajan ( Alternate I ) 

Dr a. Pbabhakab Rao ( Alternate II ) 
Sbbx R. Natarajan Hindustan Dorr-Oliver Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Subash Vsbma ( Altemah ) 
Shbi Anil G. Pandit Thermax Pvt Ltd, Pune 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



©Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OP INDIAN STANDARDS 

Thii publication it protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 11970 . 1987 

( Continuidfrom pagt I ) 

Mtmhtrs Riprtstnting 

Shbi C. L. Patel The Gujarat Electricity Board, Ukai ( Gujarat ) 

Shhi R. G. Makoan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ram Gopal National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New 

Delhi 

Shri R. K. Dwivsdi ( Alternate ) 
SiiRi N. Ramacuandran Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. B. Tonqaonkar ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. K. Roy IEL Ltd» Calcutta 

Shri N. B. Saikaki Indian Farmers Fertilizer Co-operative Ltd, 

New Delhi 

Shri G. H. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. V. Sastry IAEC Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. R. Senqufta Hindustan Fertilizer Corpn Ltd, Durgapur 

Shri A. K. Bhattacharjeb 
( Alternate ) 
Dr V. K. Sbth Projects & Development India Ltd, Sindri 

Shri D. P. Singh Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Srri K. B. Chhabra ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. P- Singh Steel Authority of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri A. P. Sinha ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Swaminathan National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. D. Vjjayaranoam Tamil Nadu State Electricity Board, Madras 

Shri V.Tulasiraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri Satish Grander, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Membtr ) 



Director ( Chem ) 



Secretary 

Shri S. Aravamudhan 
Joint Director ( Chem ), BIS 



Code of Practice Subcommittee, CDC 57 : 2 

Convener 

Shri P. K. Mathur Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 

(IGCAR),Kalpakkam 

Members 

Shri B. B. Ajmani Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 

Shri C. D. Dixit ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Gandhi The Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 

Shri K. M. Kurdbkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Vuay Kumar Goel Ministry of Industry ( Deptt of Industrial Develop- 

ment ), New Delhi 
Shri S. Mah adbvak Chemical Consultants, Madras 

Shri C. S. Raghavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Natabajan Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri T. Balakrishnan ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 14) 



IS : 11970 • 1987 

Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR 
CONDENSATE POLISHING ( POWER PLANT ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 27 February 1987, after the draft finalized by the Boiler 
Water Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0.2 In the power industry, both nuclear and thermal, concentration of 
impurities, coming in from condenser tube leaks, in certain localized 
areas of steam generators/boilers could be of several orders of magni- 
tude higher than that indicated by routine bulk boiler water analysis. 
As boiler operating pressures and steaming rates have continually 
increased, this localized impurity concentration effect has become increas- 
ingly predominant. Surveys conducted on the operating experiences of 
high pressure boilers/steam generators all over the world have indicated 
that in addition to engineering and metallurgical choices like design, 
appropriate selection of constructional materials and fabrication techni- 
ques as well as good operational practices, an efficient boiler water 
chemistry control played a very major role in ensuring boiler tube 
integrity. It is now well recognized that an efficient boiler water and 
steam chemistry control should necessarily start at boiler feed water 
stage itself. With the present day knowledge and understanding of the 
complex nature of local concentration mechanisms occurring in power 
station boilers, particularly in nuclear steam generators, and the atten- 
dant specific corrosion problems, namely, general wastage and gouging, 
pitting, denting corrosion, crevice corrosion, transgranular and inter- 
granular corrosion, etc, use of high purity feed water ( Na < 2 ppb; 
chloride < 2 ppb; sulphate < 2 ppb; specification conductivity < OM /as/ 
cm; silica as SiOa < 10 ppb ), with all volatile treatment ( AVT ) for 
alkalinity and dissolved oxygen control, is currently recommended for 
maintaining proper boiler water and steam chemistry regime. Recently 
some of the turbine manufacturers are also specifying steam quality 
( SiOa < 10 ppb; Na < 3 ppb; chloride < 5 ppb; cationic conductivity 
< 0*2 fis/cm ) to avoid stress corrosion cracking in certain high strength 
steels used in modern compact high rating turbines. To meet the above 
mentioned feed water and steam quality specifications it becomes essen- 
tial to opt for full flow condensate polishing. Thus incorporation of a 
full flow condensate polishing plant ( CPP ) is today considered advisable 



IS : 11970 - 1987 

for plants using sea water for condenser cooling and even for those where 
condenser cooling water has salinity more than 2 000 ppm. In those 
cases where the cooling water is of less than 2 000 ppm salinity, it is 
now considered worthwhile to review the requirement of a CPP. Al- 
though the concept of full flow condensate polishing emerged with 
boiling water nuclear power reactors ( BWRs ), it is now being increas- 
ingly employed for pressurized water and pressurized heavy water 
nuclear power reactors ( PWRs and PHWRs ), fast breeder reactors and 
large modern thermal power plants using once-through or high pressure 
boilers. For once-through boilers in particular, full flow condensate 
polishing becomes inevitable as there exists no drum for accumulation 
and consequent blow down of harmful impurities. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This guide prescribes objectives, performance criteria and possible 
methods of condensate polishing for boilers for power plants, 

2. OBJECTIVES 

2.1 Condensate polishing plants have two basic functions: 

a) to cope with the ionic and non-ionic or dissolved and suspended 
impurities entering into the steam condensate due to ingresses of 
impure cooling water through condenser tube leakages; and 

b) to remove impurities generated by corrosion or erosion of 
constructional materials. These corrosion products could be both 
soluble and insoluble. 

The performance criteria of such plants are that they should 
provide the required quality and quantity of water and be able 
to cope with changing operational conditions, for example from 
commissioning to base load, to allow continuous operation with 
minor condenser leak, and to provide time for safe shut down in 
an emergency, such as a large ingress of cooling water. With 
drum type boilers, the inclusion of GPP reduces the frequency of 
chemical cleaning of the boiler and cycle heat rates can be 
improved as a result of reduced blow down. 

2.2 Types of Condensate Polishing Systems 

The soluble contaminants can be removed by demineralization and 
insolubles by Alteration. Conventional sand filters have been found to 
be inadequate for removal of corrosion products in the particle sizes 
encountered in the steam condensate and for the high flow rates they also 
occupy too much space. On the other hand pressure pre- coat candle 
type of filters ( using inert cellulose fibrous material, eg, alpha cellulose 
material for pre-coat ) have very good removal efiiciencies for 5 micron 

4 



IS : 11970 - 1987 

size particles and in addition, occupy much leaser space. However, the 
system has been almost abondened due to uneven precoating, resulting in 
unsatisfactory removal of crud, sloughage from the pre-coat filter caus- 
ing fouling of the anion resin and heavy capital cost. 

The dual purpose of filtration and demineralization can be achieved 
by the 'powdex piocess' by usin^ finely ground cation and anion resins 
(about 25 njicron size) as the pre-coat mateiial along with alpha 
cellulose. The pre-coat normally consists of 0*5 kg/m^ each of cation 
and anion resins and 0'2 kg/m^ of the fibrous inert material ( like alpha 
cellulose ) and has a retention capacity of about 65 g iron/m^. One 
clear advantage of the finely ground resin is its capacity to withstand 
higher temperatures and its better efficiency for the removal of colloidal, 
hydrated iron oxide. This makes it possible to install finely ground 
resin filter just upstream of the deaerator, thus helping in the removal 
of crud picked up from the tube side of the low pressure heaters. How- 
ever, these fihers/demineralizers are non regenerable type and the resins 
have to be discarded after exhaustion. Hence the operating costs of 
these units are about 10 times higher than that of deep bed deminera- 
lizers. In addition, these are not able to fully cope with the ionic 
impurities coming in from condenser tube leakages, and this is parti- 
cularly true for sea water cooled plants. 

Experience has shown that deep ( about 1 metre bed depth ) mixed 
bed demineralizer units provide optimum cost benefit ratio while realiz- 
ing adequate protection against ionic impurity ingresses into the steam 
condensate from condenser tube leaks. However, with these units, crud 
removal efficiency is relatively low and their use requires proper design 
and establishment of correct operating practices for smooth functioning 
and minimizing/avoiding resin fouling by crud. In addition, reliability 
of process instrumentation ( conductivity meters, flow integrators, 
differential pressure indicators, etc ) is an essential requirement. 

A comparative account of the advantages/disadvantages of powdex 
system vis-a-vis deep bed system may be given as follows: 

SI . Powdex System Deep Bed System 

No, 

1. Removes crud, and colloidal parti- Not so efficient in removal of 

cles efficiently because of large crud. 
surface area. 

2. Unit is ready in a short time ( back Takes longer time for regene- 

washing and pre-coating ) and ration and a complete 

not very elaborate equipment is regeneration system is re- 

required for this. quired. The system has to 

be located outside of tur- 
bine building to avoid dam- 
age to other equipment in 
turbine building by regenc- 
rant chemicals, fumes, etc. 



IS s 11970 - 1987 



3. Waste effluents are harmless 
small in quantity. 



and 



4. Since always fresh resin coat is 

used, so resin is in highly regene- 
rated state every time resin is 
replaced. 

5. Influent water temperature can be 

high ( up to 80*C ). 

6. Resins can not be regenerated and 

are to be discarded. 

7. Resin shelf life is very short 

( about 6 months ) and filter car- 
tridge life also is limited ( about 
1 year ). 

8. Pre-coat requires vacuum holding 

pump, which if gets interrupted 
due to power supply failure, gets 
disturbed. 

9. Cation/anion resins ratio has to be 

varied with respect to types and 
concentration of impurities and 
plant conditions ( ratio to be 
different at start-up, normal ser- 
vice time, during condenser tube 
leakage, etc ). 

10. Silica removal efficiency is low. 



1 1 . Operating capacity is limited. 



Unspent and exchanged 
chemicals go as waste efflu- 
ents during regeneration 
and their quantity is also 
large. 

Regeneration efficiency is 
limited due to incomplete 
separation of cation and 
anion components. 

Temperature 
60°C. 



restriction is 



Resins are regenerated and 
indigenously available. 

Shelf life is around 5 years if 
properly maintained. 



No such problem here. 



No such problem here. 



Silica removal efficiency is 
high. 

Operating capacity is large. 



In addition to the above two methods, namely, powdex process and 
deep bed demineralization, combinations of these two and other methods 
are also employed. These are: 

i) Pre-coat cellulose filter + strong acid cation unit + mixed bed 
unit. 

ii) Strong acid cation unit + mixed bed unit. 

iii) Pressure pre-coat filter using powdex -f- mixed bed unit. 

6 



IS 1 11970 - 1987 

iv) Magnetic and/or deep graphite bed filters/mixed bed units. 

v) Cation layered mixed bed. 

vi) Activated carbon filter + strong acid cation unit + mixed bed 
unit. 

3. CONDITIONING METHODS 

3.1 Chemical Conditioning and Condensate Polishing Plant 
Operation/Performance 

The feed water chemical conditioning regime has a considerable 
influence on CPP Operation/performance. In utilities using AVT, 
hydrazine or morpholine exchange by cation resins can hamper polish- 
ing function. As very scanty information is available in the literature 
regarding the effect of hydrazoniuni ( N2H5+ ) and morpholinium ion 
on cation exchange resin performance, subsequent discussion is restricted 
to the effect of ammonium ion alone. 

Originally low ammonia levels [ 0*2 to 0*5 ppm ( as NH3 ); ^H 8*8 
to 9*2 ] were specified in the condensate, but to take account of world 
wide experience of erosion/corrosion, various utilities have considered 
the possibility of operating at higher ^H ( 94 — 9 6 ) provided the 
system is free of copper bearing alloys in the feed train. 

The adoption of high pH conditioning would impose an additional 
load of ammonium ion on a CPP operating in the hydrogen/hydroxide 
form. There would be appioximately a three fold increase in the 
concentration of ammonium ions to be removed by raising the ^H from 
9'0 to 9*4 or a seven fold increase if the ^H were increased to 9'6. The 
following are four main approaches for treating condensate: 

a) Operation could continue with the cation resin in the hydrogen 
form thus greatly increasing the number of regenerations. 

b) The system could operate with the cation resin in the ammonium 
form, so that ammonium ion would no longer be removed and 
the service period would then be dictated by pressure drop, 
conductivity, silica slip, etc. 

c) The initial operation has the cation resin in hydrogen form and 
after ammonia break-through, the cycle is continued in ammo- 
nium form. 

d) To operate with the CPP on stand-by until condenser leaks 
occur. 

3.2 Hydrogen Cycle Operation 

Two factors control the ability of a CPP ( hydrogen form cation 
operation ) to operate satisfactorily with increased ammonia loadings. 

7 



IS : 11970 - 1987 

These are: (a) the running period that is possible before exhaustion of 
the bed, and (b) the time required to regenerate the bed. As on a 
regular basis regeneration of one bed takes substantially long time, any 
changes that could be made to offset the decreased service run lengths 
due to higher ammonia content in the condensate would be beneficial. 
Increasing the regeneration level of the acid used for the cation resin has 
been considered as one possibility. 

For the CPP with cation resin units preceding the mixed bed, it has 
been found that by applying an increased regeneration level ( 200 kg/ 
m^ ) sulphuric acid* an increased service run length could be achieved 
while treating condensate containing 2*2 ppm ammonia ( ^H 9'6 ), 
provided the inflow water characteristics are the same. Hydrochloric 
acid is also used widely for regeneration. On the other hand for the 
CPP with finely ground resin units and mixed bed, there is a much less 
inventory of cation resin and this restricts the ability of the plant for 
treating condensate of higher ammonia levels. Applying the concept 
of increasing the capacity of cation resins by employing higher regene- 
ration levels, it should be possible to treat condensate containing 1 ' 1 ppm 
ammonia ( pH 9*4 ). Thus under hydrogen cycle operation, increasing 
the level of cation resin regenerant chemical could provide a viable 
option for operating CPP at higher ^H levels in condensate. However, 
it is essential to emphasis for the design provision for adequate cation 
removal capabilities to cope with flexibility of operation with respect to 
the conditioning of feed water with ammonia. 

3«3 Ammoiiia Cycle Operation 

Another chemical option for operating CPP treating condensate at 
pH 9'6 would be to use the cation resin in ammonium form. In the 
absence of condenser leaks very long service lengths would be possible 
and the regeneration will then be dictated by differential pressure across 
the bed due to accumulation of filtered crud. However^ one has to 
consider two important points, namely, (a) production of water of 
required quality, and (b) ability of such a system to cope with cooling 
sea water ingress from condenser leaks. It should be noted that there 
is very little experience any where in the world on the use of ammonium 
form resins with sea water cooled power stations. However, it is known 
that use of cation resins in ammoniated form to reduce ammonia con- 
sumption results in higher sodium leakage during condenser tube leakage 
periods. Also there is a general agreement in the litierature that In this 
mode of operation the resins will have to be in a very high state of 
regeneration. It has been estimated that less than 0*08 percent of cation 
sites can be in the sodium form and less than 1*9 percent of anion sites 
in the chloride form in order to achieve a condensate containing less 
than 1 ppb sodium and 2 ppb chloride at pH 9*6. Comparative figures 
for hydrogen cycle operation are quite large for cation and anion resins. 

8 



IS ! 11970 - 1987 

These figures clearly indicate that extremely good separation of resins 
prior to regeneration and very eflective regeneration techniques are essen- 
tial for operation in the ammonium form, if stringent conditions for 
high purity feed water are to be maintained. 

3.4 Operation with GPP By-passed 

A third approach for operating under a high pH regime would be 
to by-pass the CPP until condenser leakage occurs. In the absence of 
the CPP unit there would be no extra dosing of chemicals and the bed 
would be maintained in a highly regenerated state. However, in this 
mode of operation, the disadvantage is the difficulty in deciding when 
to reinstate CPP , particularly if cooling water leakage is at a very low 
level. There is also a need to have a satisfactory working mechanism to 
ensure that the plant goes into service immediately when it is required. 

4. DESIGN GONSIDERATIONS 

4.1 Flow Rates 

Condensate polishing involves processing of quite high flow rates. 
To optimise on resin and equipment cost and to reduce space require- 
ment it is necessary to have high flow rate demineralizers. Mechanical 
design, resin attrition loss, acceptable impurities, leakage past deminera- 
lizer and pressure drop considerations have led to the acceptable process 
flow rates of 120 metres/hour velocity and resin bed depth of about 
1 metre. 

In CPP, where mixed bed is utilized for filtration as well as ion 
exchanger, provision has to be kept by incorporating a recirculation 
pump to see that flow rates do not drop below 60 m/h to provide an 
optimum filtration efficiency during start up conditions. Flow rates 
below this value will result in poor filtration efficiency. 

4.2 Resin Type Selection and Ratio 

High flow rate deep bed demineralization imparts certain limitations 
on physical characteristics of the ion exchange resin use. Particle size 
and grading are important from the point of view of reducing pressure 
drops. In addition, higher attrition strength is required. Particle size 
and grading are normally specified and require careful selection. The 
beads should be perfectly spherical without any surface cracks ( when 
viewed under magnifying glass ) and there should be no organic colour 
throw after initial regeneration. *Slide-test' or *Chattillion test' are 
normally followed for checking the bead strength. By field experience 
it has been observed that on an average if the resin beads require 350 g 
or more to deform or break, attrition strength of the resin can be consi- 
dered satisfactory ( no more than 5 percent of the tested water swollen 
beads should require below 200 g for deforming or breaking ). 



IS s 11970 - 1987 

Normally resins used for condensate polishing are strongly acidic 
cation and strongly basic anion polystyrene — divinyl benzene type with 
8*10 percent cross linking. The choice of the resin to be used is between 
macroporous and gel type. The former have frequently been chosen on 
the basis of their greater physical strength and for their capacity to take 
care of any organic fouling, if expected in the power plant condensate. 
However, conventional gel type of resins have advantages of (a) their 
higher operating capacity ( macroporous resins generally have 10 to 20 
percent less operating capacity for cation resins and about 30 percent 
less operating capacity for anion resins ), (b) better kinetic performance, 
and (c) being less affected by cross contamination of regenerants. 
Investigations are still in progress all over the world to determine the 
'best' resins for particular conditions in condensate polishing plants. 

Resin ratio is to be decided on the basis of whether the plant is to 
be primarily used for crud removal or for protection under condenser 
leakages. Depending upon the specific use situation and the amounts of 
chemicals ( hydrazine and ammonia or cyclohexylamine or morpholine ) 
being added to the feed water, the cation to anion resin ratio could 
vary from 2:1 by volume ( capacity ratio 3 : 1 ) to 2 : 3 by volume 
( capacity ratio 1:1). 

4.3 Regeneration Systems 

The aim of the regeneration system is to both remove particulate 
matter and chemically regenerate the resin beds. The process can be 
time consuming especially if significant amounts of particulate crud 
have to be removed. In earlier years, regeneration of a mixed bed 
polisher was carried out in sUu, However, now a days, it has become a 
rule rather than an exception to carry out the regeneration externally. 
External regeneration, not only reduces the total outage time required for 
regeneration, but has the greatest advantage of completely eliminating the 
danger of regenerants entering the system and also helps in achieving 
more thorough clean up of the resins. The cleaning of the resins can be 
carried out by one of the following methods: 

a) Back Washing — Prior to and after acid or caustic injection. Back 
washing flow rates are such that bed expansion is 100 percent 
and whole beads are not lost. During this process fine/broken 
beads are also eliminated. 

b) Air ScrubbingI Rinsing Operation — Air scrubbing of resins is done 
in the tank with water up to resin top surface ( for one minute ), 
vessel pressurized with air ( 04 to 5 kg/cm* ) and down flow 
rinse given by releasing pressure through rinse outlet for two 
minutes. This cyclic operation is repeated a number of times. 

c) Ultrasonic Cleaning — Ultrasonic cleaning devices have now been 
developed to clean the resins by ultrasonic transducers mounted 

10 



IS : 11970 - 1987 

outside a cleaning tank. The resin slurry i? introduced from top 
of the tank with reverse water flow from bottom to top to carry 
away loosened crud and resin fines. 

When a CPP is operating with high impurity burden, it is the 
regeneration time that ultimately governs the availability of the CPP. 
Therefore, a complete regeneration system plus storage for a regenerated 
spare charge of resin should be considered for each individual CPP. The 
leakage of trace impurities from CPP is a function of the regeneration 
procedure, particularly the degree of contamination of mixed bed 
resins by the wrong regenerant and the methods to minimize such con- 
tamination are quite important. The pertinent factors are: 

i) Sodium removal from all the cation resin has to be of a very 
high degree. This calls for complete transfer of all resin charges 
and better resin separation. 

ii) Anion resin contamination of cation resin must be avoided in 
order that the sulphate leakage immediately after regeneration 
is prevented. 

iii) The chosen regeneration levels must achieve the correct degree 
of conversion of both cation and anion resins. 

iv) The rinse procedures must be satisfactory. 

In the past the usual design philosophy has been to accept some 
anion resin in cation in order to minimize cation resin contamination of 
anion. The commonly used tehnique of sluicing anion resin after sepa- 
ration into a separate vessel, usually causes sufficient turbulence to lift 
some anion resin into the rise space; this resin then settles down on top of 
the cation resin at the end of the anion resin transfer period. 

The desire to avoid anion contamination of cation resin has led to 
the concept of hydraulic separation of the two resins followed by hydrau- 
lic removal of the cation resin from beneath the anion. This develop- 
ment was helped considerably by the introduction of an inert bead form 
resin of intermediate particle size and density between the cation and 
anion resins. This introduction required special grading of the ion 
exchange resins, in which the fine beads of cation resin and the large 
beads of anion rc^in have been removed in order that three distinct 
«harply divided layers are obtained on backwash. Generally now, use 
of inert resin is not recommended especially during initial stages ( plant 
commissioning stage ) because inert resin gets affected by the coating 
given on turbine blades, etc, for preservation during its erection, etc. 
The coating makes the inert resin lighter than anion resin so that during 
mixed bed back-wash for separation, inert resin comes on top of the 
anion resin. 

11 



IS 1 11970 - 1987 

5. OPERATING GUIDELINES AND ANALYTICAL 
INSTRUMENTATION 

An effluent conductivity of 0*07 /xs/cm means a total maximum leakage 
of about 7 ppb of soluble sodium chloride, sulphate and metals, etc. Abi- 
lity of condensate polishing units to maintain this level of effluent quality 
under normal and abnormal ( during condenser leakage ) conditions 
for sufficient length of time depends on (i) cleanliness of resins, (ii) extent 
of condenser tube leak, and (iii) residual ion exchange capacity of the 
resins at the time of leak. It is thus necessary to have established guide- 
lines to help the operator at the right judgement under various conditions 
of condensate polisher bed and condenser tube leaks. Cleanliness of the 
bed is ascertained by differential pressure ( dp ) measurements across 
the bed. For a specific design and resins used the 'dp' depends on the 
flow rate through the demineralizers and resin cleanliness. Hence, the 
relationship between *dp' and flow rates has to be established. When the 
*dp' approaches dirty limits, the bed is to be transferred to the regene- 
ration facility, cleaned by air scrubbing/iinsing operation and brought 
back for rinse. 

The high quality of feed and steam generator water cannot be 
achieved without adequate on line instrumentation and back up labora- 
tory analysis techniques and schedules. On-line analysers for sodium 
( using glass membrane electrodes and buffering techniques ) with 
detection limit of 1 ppb have been developed and methods uptoOi ppb 
are likely to be developed. Similar work is going on for development 
of chloride ion selective electrodes. On-line silica analysers with detec- 
tion limit up to 10 ppb are already available. It is felt that with proper 
sampling and calibration procedures, reliance can be put on the on-line 
conductivity meters with on-line sodium analysers and /;H meters serving 
a secondary function. These on-line instruments should be used to 
indicate trends and do alarm functions while exact control should be by 
proper plant design backed-up by precise laboratory measurement 
methods and good analysis schedules. 

6. ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF CONDENSATE 
POUSHING SYSTEM 

6.1 Advantages 

a) The water chemistry of the unit can be maintained within 
specified limits and the system can be kept free of corrosion 
products, deposits, dissolved and suspended impurities. In 
nuclear power plants ( BWRs ) this will go a long way in keep- 
ing the inventory of activation products low. 

b) Since make-up joins return condensate before CPS, some 
contamination of DM water in storage tanks or deterioration in 
DM water quality due to leaks from DM plants can be taken 
care of by CPS without having to reject the DM water. 

12 



15x11970-1987 

c) Provision of CPS will reduce the need of blow down of boiler, 

thus resulting in saving of DM water. 

d) Since by providing CPS, unit can be taken on full load quickly 
from cold start up, so there will be time saving as well as DM 
water saving as condensate dumping will be considerably 
reduced. • 

e) Points (iii) and (iv) v^ill also obviously, result in fuel saving^. 

f) In case of condenser leaks not being major, unit can be still 
kept on load without adversely affecting the water chemistry of 
the unit and without having to dump condensate or boiler 
water. 

g) Attempration spray water quality will be uniformaly maintained. 
6.2 Limitations 

Suitable precautions should be taken to avoid the f illowing: 

a) In case of deep bed condensate polishing system, immediately 
after regeneration the bed may leak-out some residual regene- 
rant chemicals thus contaminating feed water quality. 

b) Any disintegation of resin in CPS will directly cause contami- 
nation of feed water by disintegrated resin. 

c) Since CPS is installed in the main steam water circuit, it may 

result in operational disturbances such as excess pressure drop 
across CPS 

d) Pressure and temperature of influent to CPS may not be always 
compatible with the design conditions. 1 his may impair the 
reSin characteristics. 



13 



IS : 11970 - 1987 

( ConUnutd from page 2 ) 

Membtrs Representing 

Shbi Samib Kumar Pal Development Consultants Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi Tushar Kanti Roy ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. M. C. Pillai National Thermal Power Cordoration Ltd, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. Dasoupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Ramaohandran Ion Exchange ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. B. Tonqaonkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. A. Ram anan Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Shri J. Jha ( Alternate ) 
Db Sandip Roy IEL Limited, Calcutta 

Shri R. Bharoava ( Alternate ) 
Dr V. K. Seth Project Development India Ltd, Sindri 

Shri H. K. Mittal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Y. P* Sinoh Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Shri S. N. Jukbja ( Alternate ) 



14 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquartew. 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 3t 3311376 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices } 
Regional Offices: Te/epfione 

•Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. Marol Andherl ( East ) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 
tEastern : 1/1 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 3S 24 99 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C 
CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 6001 1 3 



2 18 43 

3 16 41 

41 24 42 
26 19 
29 16 



Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nunnohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

AHMAOABAD 380001 
<F' Block, Unity BIdg. Narasimharaja Square, 

BANGALORE 660002 

Gangotri Complex, 6th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, 
T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 761002 

53/6 Ward No. 29, R. Q. Barua Road, 6th Byelane, 
GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C L.N. Gupta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 30200& 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208006 

Patllputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

Hantex Btdg (2nd Floor), RIy Station Road, 
TRiVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Office (With Sate Point): 

Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaii Nagar, 
PUNE 411005 



r41 
J 41 
\41 



( 2 63 48 

J 2 63 49 

22 48 06 

6 67 16 

6 36 27 



23 10 83 

I 634 71 
1 6 98 32 

r21 68 76 
121 82 92 

6 23 06 

62 27 



6 24 35 



•8»lM Otfie* in Bombay It at Novelty Cbantbars, Qrant Road, 
BOMBAY 400007 . i v« , 

tS«r«s Offie* In Caloutta is at 6 Chowringhoe Approach, 
fJO. f rinoep Stroat, CALCUTTA 700072 



89 86 28 

2/efloo 

Printotf at Priritoaroph, Now jii*il)L Inclla 



