( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR ELECTRON TUBES - RECEIVING AND TRANSMITTING TUBES

( First Revision )
Electron Tubes Sectional Committee, LTDC 9 Reprcsen t ing Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

Chairman SHRI H. R. BAPU SEETHARAM Members

SHRI B. S. VENUBOPALAN ( Alternate to Shri H. R. Bapu Seetharam ) Central Electronics Engineering Research InstiDR S. S. S. AQARWALA tute ( CSIR ), Pilani DR G. S. SID~U (Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH SHRI B. C. MUKWERJEE ( Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. JAIN West Bengal Electronics and Industrial DevelopDR J. N. MAITI ment Corporation Ltd, Calcutta The Radio Electronics and Television ManufacDR P. B. PARIKH turers' Association ( RETMA ), Bombay Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE Dire;ct;;te General of All India Radio, New RESEARCH ENQINEXR SERI P. S. SARAN SHRI G. K. SARAN ( Alternafe ) SHRI SAHWAN KUMAR SHRI V. S. MITI~A ( Alternate ) COL R. K. SUD SHRI G. N. SAHAI ( Alternate ) SHRI K. K. TANEJA Posts and Telegraphs Directorate General Department, of Civil ( DGI ) of Technical Development, New Delhi New Delhi

Aviation,

Ministry of Defence

Directorate General New Delhi SERI R. SOUNDHIRARAJAN ( Alternate )

(Continued on page 2 )

@ Coppight

1983

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyight Act ( XI\ OI 1937 amu reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of thr publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 4147 - 1981
( ContinzdedJrom page 1 ) Members Dn R. C. TRIPATHI SJIRI TJ~K CHANDANI SHRI R. C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics ) (Alternate) Department Director Representing of Electronics, New Delhi Member)

General,

IS1 (I&-oficio

Secretary PAVAN KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics
SHRI

), IS1

Panel

for Receiving

and Transmitting

Tubes,

LTDC

9 : Pl

Convener

San1 B. S. VENUQOPALAN Members
SHRI

Bharat Electronics

Ltd, Bangalore

A. V. SANTHANAM ( Alternate to Shri B. B. Venugopalan ) LT COL HEMJI AQARWALA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT COL KISHAN L~L ( Al/ernate ) CONTROLLER Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI P. K. JAIN Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) S~IRI S. S. RAMAM~RTHI Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay RESEAROH ENQINEEI~ Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi

2

IS t 4147 - 1981 .

Indian Standard

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS FOR ELECTRON TUBES - RECEIVING AND TRANSMITTING TUBES

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 October 1981, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard tant characteristics types. 0.3 This standard been undertaken tubes also. deals with the methods of measurements of the imporof electron tubes of the receiving and transmitting was originally published in 1967. to include methods of measurements assistance of testing has been electron The for revision has transmitting from the

0.4 Wtiile preparin, 0 this standard, following documents: ASA C 60. 15-1963 Method Standards Association.

derived tubes.

American

IEC publication 151 Measurements electronic tubes and valves. Commission. JSS 51500 ( Part II ) of Defence. Test methods

of the electrical properties of International Electrotechnical for electron tubes. Ministry

0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*. -*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

3

IS:4147-1981 1. SCOPE .

1.1 This standard deals with the methods of measurements of the characteristics of electron tubes of the receiving and transmitting types. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, ( Part IV/Set 1 )-1973* shall apply, 3. GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 3.1 Except when the nature of a test calls for varying or abnormal conditions, all tests should be made at the normal rated conditions specified in relevant Indian Standard or as specified by the manufacturer. If the manufacturer's rating is not specific, test conditions not specified should be selected in accordance with the best judgement of the testing authority and should be clearly and fully stated as a part of the test data. In general, measurements should be made after the tube has attained temperature equilibrium at the stated test conditions. 3.2 When a filament or heater is rated in both voltage and current, the rated voltage should be employed in tests. When filaments or heaters are to be used in series, the rated current may be employed, but this condition Direct current of measurement is to be stated as a part of the test data. should be used for filament heating, except where the normal operating condition is with alternating current heating, in which case the use of the latter shoul,d be stated. When dc heating is employed, the negative filament terminal should be taken as the datum of potential. When ac heating is employed for filamentary cathode, the midpoint ( that is the centre tap on the filament transformer secondary, or the midpoint on a In the case resistor shunting the filament ) should be taken as the datum.
of indirectly of potential. heated equipolential cathodes, the cathode is taken as datum

the

definitions

given

in IS:

1885

3.3 When measuring heater or filament voltage the voltmeter should be This is of particular importance connected to the tube pins or terminals. with large tubes in which the filament current is often considerable and appreciable error arising from the voltage drop in the filament supply leads may result if the filament voltage is measured at, for example, the supply source. The voltmeter could also be connected to the socket terminations as other terminations intended to connect the tube pins or terminals to an external circuit, provided the voltage drop between the tube pins or terminals and these terminations is negligible.
( first rcoision ).

*Electrotechnical

vocabulary: Part

IV Electron

tubes, Section

1 Common terms

4

ts 8 4147 - 1981 4. METHODS OF MEASUREMENT Time for measuring heater warm-up time is shown in

4.1 Heater Warm-up 4.1.1 Fig. 1. The circuit

I

I

I

AR Vvs -

Heater

of the tube under test measuring heater terminal voltage

Series reeistor Voltmeter Source voltage ( dc or ac )

FIG, 1

CIRCUIT FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF HEATERWARM-UP TIME
R shall

The source voltage Vs and the series resistance to the values given by the following formulae: v, = 4 r'f
R =

be adjusted

3 ( Vf/lf )

where Vi and Ii are the nominal heater voltage and current respectively. The switch S is closed and the time taken for the heater terminal voltage, V, to attain 0.8 times its nominal value, is measured. 4.1.2
Precautions

4.1.2.1 Temperature before the measurement - In order that every part of the tube should be at room temperature, no voltage should be applied to the heater for a period of at least 1 hour prior to the measurement.

4.1.2.2 Source impedance - The internal resistance of the heater supply source should be negligible compared with the value R, of the series resistor. should 4.1.2.3 Indicating instrument - The internal resistance be high compared with the resistance of the heater
Series resistor -

ofthe voltmeter when hot. 1 percent of

4.1.2.4 its theoretical

Resistance

R should

be within

value.

time is the time 4.2 Cathode Heating Time - The cathode heating required for the cathode current to attain a specified value ( for example, 5

IS : 4147 - 1981
one fourth of the nominal value ) with stated electrode supply voltages applied and with stated impedance in the electrode circuits ( see Fig. 2).

_CAlHODE HEATING

CATi-IODE FIG. 2

!iEAT!l:S

TIME
TIME

RELATION BETWEEN CATHODE CURRENT AND

4.2.1 The circuit used for the measurement of cathode heating time is shown in Fig. 3. The supply voltages shall be kept constant during the The filament circuit is closed and the time is measured measurement. from this instant until the instant the indicating instrument shows the specified value.

*
Fro. 3

I

,I

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURING CATHODE HEATING TIME

4.2.2 Precautions 4.2.2.1 Temperature before the measurement - In order that every part of the tube should be at room temperature, no voltage should be applied to the heater or filament for a period of at least 1 hour prior to the measure-

ment .
6

kS : 414?.lsai
resistance of the heater or 4.2.2.2 Source impedance - The internal filament supply source should be negligible compared with the resistance of the cold heater or filament. accuracy, it is impor4.2.2.3 Indicating instrument - For acceptable tant that the indicating instrument has low damping characteristics. 4.3 Heater or Filament Current

4.3.1 The specified voltage is applied to the appropriate filament or heater terminals in series with a suitable ammeter. All the other elements are kept floating. The current is measured when equilibrium is reached allowance being made for the voltage drop across the ammeter and for the current drawn by the voltmeter. 4.4 Filament or Heater Heating Characteristic - When tubes are operated with the filament or heaters in series, it is desirable that the voltage be divided during the heating period as nearly as possible in accordance with the rated operating voltage of the individual filaments or heaters, in order to minimize the likelihood of burning out and to ensure minimum heating time of the entire heating circuits. In order to judge the heating characteristic of individual tubes in a series string, the time variation of the filament or heater resistance of each tube should be compared with the average of the entire heating circuits. 4.4.1 Measurements are made in a circuit as shown in Fig. 4 and the resulting data are plotted as percent of rated or final heater resistance against time as in Fig. 5. In Fig, 4, II and I, are a variable and a tapped transformer respectively, having ratings adequate to ensure good regulation. Switch & is for energising the complete circuit and combination of switch Ss and resistor Rm is used to protect the meter A, against excessive initial surges, the resistance R, being made equal to the impedance of the meter A. Protection against short circuits is afforded by the fuse.

FIG. 4

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FORMEASURING HEATER HEATING CHARACTERISTICS 7

1s : 4147 - 1981

a

0

4

6

12

16

TIME IN SECONDS

Fro. 5

CURVES SHOWINGPERCENTAPJEOF FINAL HEATER RESISTANCE AGAINSTHEATING TIME

4.4.2 The output voltage of Ts is to be equal to the rated heater voltage of the tube plus the drop through the low-resistance meter A or its Readings of current I are taken at known intervals. The equivalent R,. percentage of the final resistance attained at the time of any reading will be 100 IRh, where Rh is obtained from the final heater voltage at rated heater current. 4.4.3 The curves of Fig. 5 show the percciltage offinal heater resistance plotted against heating time. Curve A may be considered as average of indirectly heated tubes used in series operation, while curves B and C are for heaters having relatively fast and slow heating characteristics respectively ( when operated in series with tube having heating characteristics such as given by curve A ). It will be noted that a tube such as that having the characteristics of curve B will operate with heater temperature above the final value during part of the heating cycle and the maximum voltage across the heater will exceed the rated value in proportion to the amount by which the curve of percent of final heater resistance against time differs from the average of that characteristics for all values in the circuit. On the other hand, a tube having a characteristic like that of curve C will reach its final temperature more slowly when operated in a series circuit when the average value and the heater voltage will never exceed the rated proportional value. 4.5 Emission
Current

4.5.1 Emission - To avoid damaging the tube under test, the emission voltage shall be applied only for sufficient time to permit the emission to The duration of the test shall not reach the specified minimum value. exceed 5 seconds. When only a minimum current limit is specified, a voltage less than the value specified may be applied provided the required In testing of receiving tubes minimum emission current is thus obtained.

8

th t 4147 - 1981
when only a minimum current limit is specified, the test shall be performed by increasing the applied voltage till the specified minimum emission current is obtained and reading the voltage drop across the tube under test. 4.5.1.1 Emission at reduced filament voltage - If an emission current test is specified at reduced filament voltage, this test shall be performed prior to the emission current test at rated filament voltage. The tube shall be operated with only 90 percent of rated filament voltage applied. After allowing the cathode temperature to stabilize, the emission voltage shall be applied in the manner specified in 4.5.1. 4.5.1.2 Emission at ratedfilament voltage - The tube shall be operated with rated filament voltage applied. After allowing the cathode temperature to stabilize, the emission voltage shall be applied in the manner specified in 4.5.1. 4.5.2 Peak Emission by Voltage Drop - The tube shall be tested with the specified voltage applied to the filament or heater, with a 50 Hz anode supply sufficient to start the tube and sufficient series resistance to limit the anode current to the specified maximum current value per anode. A suitable circuit designed to permit the conduction of the specified peak current for one or two approximate half-cycles per second shall be provided. The peak voltage drop exclusive of the starting voltage measured from an anode to the reference point as shown on a cathode ray oscilloscope, or by other suitable means, shall be within the limits specified, 4.5.3 Peak Emission - The filament or heater potential shall be applied and the grids, if present, shall be connected to the anode. A suitable capacitor shall be discharged through the tube and a load resistor. The peak current shall be measured by an oscilloscope suitably calibrated. An equivalent method may be used. Pulses shall be applied in such a manner that the tube will not be damaged. The peak current shall be within the limits specified and there shall be no evidence of sparking during the test. 4.5.4 Emission by Oscillation - At the end of the power-oscillation test the filament potential shall be reduced until the rf power output has been reduced by 10 percent, at which point the filament potential shall not exceed the value specified, or the filament potential shall be adjusted to the limit value specified, at which point the power output shall be not less than 90 percent of the initial value. 4.5.5 Pulsing Emission - Either of the following or 4.5.5.2, may be used for this test. 4.5.5.1 Square potentials specified,
wave -

test methods,

4.5.5.1

Where

The tube shall be operated at the electrode pulse voltages are indicated the pulse duration

9

k3 I 4147 - 1981

shall be not less than 2 nor greater than 10 p. Time of rise shall be not greater than 10 percent of the pulse duration and time constant of fall not greater than 20 percent of the pulse duration. The duty shall be not less than 0.00 1. Variations in 80 percent of the top portion of the pulse shall not exceed & 5 percent of the maximum amplitude and no portion shall fall below the maximum amplitude by more than 10 percent. There shall be no sign of arcing during the latter half of the test and the average peak anode current shall be within the limits specified. 4.5.5.2 Sinusoid -The tube shall be operated at the electrode potential and conditions specified in the detail specification. A nominal 4 sinusoidal pulse source which meets the following requirements shall be applied. Pulse duration ( t, shall be 2 ps minimum, 10 p maximum, at the base line of the pulse; pulse repetition rate (prr ) shall be not less than 20 pulses per second. There shall be no sign of arcing during the latter half of the test. Excluding any spike the peak diode current, or peak tube drop ( whichever is specified ), shall meet the specified limits at the required peak pulse value when a stabilized reading is obtained up to a maximum of 1 minute. 4.5.6 Emission Oscillation - This test shall be made with the tube operating under the oscillation test conditions after the power oscillation test. The filament potential shall be changed as specified and the change in power output or cathode current shall be within the limits specified. 4.5.7 Pulse Emission - The tube shall be tested for pulse emission in the circuit shown in Fig. 6. A resistor shall be substituted for the tube under test for calibration purposes. RI RB and the calibrating resistor ( as shown in Fig. 6 ) shall be within f 5 percent of that specified in the detail specification and shall be non-inductive. The control grid, and the screen grid when present, shall be tied directly to the anode. The calibrated pulse voltage amplitude shall be within the value specified over 80 percent of the top portion of the pulse and shall not vary from this value by more than 5 percent. The modulator impedance shall be as specified in the detail specification. The pulse voltage characteristics shall be t, = 5.0 f 0 25 ps; time of rise tr = 0.5 ~ls maximum; time of fall tf = 1.0 ps maximum. The pulse emission shall be within the limits specified in the detail specification. 4.6 Static Characteristics
4.6.1 Introduction - The static characteristics of an electron tube are valuable as a means of predicting the performance of the tube since load characteristics may usually be computed for assumed circuit conditions. The various tube constants and the perveance may be calculated from families of static characteristics. Load characteristics may be obtained in some cases by actually operating the tube in the desired circuit and making the appropriate measurements.

10

IS : 4147 - 1981

MOOULATC

1UBE

UNDER

fEST

FIG. 6

CIRCUIT FOR TESTING PULES EMISSION

4.6.2 Static Characteristics of an Electron Tube characteristics of an electron tube are: a) Electrode c) Transfer characteristics, characteristics, and characteristics. b) Constant-current

The more useful static

arrangement for the 4.6.3 Direct Current Method - A representative determination of the characteristics of electron tubes is shown in Fig. 7. Although battery supplies are indicated, in actual practice the supplies may be derived from a well-filtered dc source, preferably a regulated power source.

FIG. 7 CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURING STATIC CHARACTERISTICS BY DIRECT CURRENT METHOD

11

IS x4147-1981 4.6.4 Pulse MethodIt is of conside~abk importance to know the static characteristics of electron tubes in the region where electrode dissipation may exceed safe values. It is impossible to obtain these characteristics by the conventional direct current methods without damaging the tube, In such cases it is necessary to employ pulse methods in which the tube is allowed to pass current only for short intervals of such duration and frequency so that it is not damaged.
Pulse methods may be employed for obtaining electrode characteristics} transfer characteristics or constant-current characteristics. The basic elements needed for pulse method are the pulse generator and the current and voltage indicators. The point-by-point pulse method consists of applying known pulse voltage to the control grid and simultaneously measuring the corresponding maximum pulse currents to the clectrories under spccificd test conditions. The applied voltages are adjusted point-by-point over the desired ranges to obtain a family of characteristic curves. The circuit arrangement for pulse method h shown in Fig, 8.

.

.

b3--VI =S Grid voltage Va = Screen Al = Grid current

voItage ~S = Plate vohage
CIRCUIT

Aa - Screen current da = Plate current

Fm. -8

ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASUSRMENT CHARAGTERISTIOS BY PULSE METIiOD

OF STATIC

4.6.4.1 PI,& gewrafor -- In the circuit of Fig. 9 the tube may bc considered as a puke amplifier in which any pulse shape applied to the control grid circuit is amplified and applied to the tube under test. This

IS t 4147-1981 circuit has the advantage of not requiring a specific terminating impedance. Several amplifier tubes may be operated in paralIcl to provide additional current if precautions usual for paraHeI operations are observed. Several arrangements of this basic circuit may be used depending orJ the location of the ground connection and the polarity, of the output pulse.
CUT OFF BIAS REACTANGULAR CONTROL PULSE /

HI
FIG.

\

I

TO TUBE UNDER TEST

9

TUBE. AS A PULSE ASCPLIFIER introduce a with a nonnet positive between the

If secondary emission effects in the tube under test n ative impedance, the pulse generator must be shunted in? uctivc load resistor of such value as to maintain a This resistor R should be located impedance at its terminals. generator and the current indicator as shown in Fig, 8.

4.6.4.2 Peak reading voliage indicatar -- Peak reading voltage hdi. cater is useful `in measuring the peak value of the pulse voltage applied to an electrode in obtaining vacuum tube characteristics bv point-by-point pulse method. In order to function successfully, the circuit consisting of the capacitor resistor and meter shown in .Fig, 10 shall have a time constant that is large w-ith respect to the time interval between successive pulses. The indicator accuracy is greatest with rectangular pulses although good accuracy may be obtained with other pulse shapes if the pulse duration is sufficient, Where the ptdse is substantially square and OFF/ON ratio is known, a moving coil or other averaging instrument may be used to measure the electrode -current. The peak current is equal to the mean current (as measured by -the meter) multiplied by the ratio of the total time to the pulse duration. The peak reading voltage indicator of Fig, 10 may be calibrated from a known dc source if correction is made for voltage drop in the high vacuum diode. The usual practices of correcting for meter current or for voltage drop in current-measuring instruments should be followed, This 13

fSr4147.1981 type of indicator may be used also to determine peak current by measuring the peak voltage drop across a non-inductive shunt resistor of known value. The use of this indicator for current measuring purposes may result in serious errors if the electrode characteristic of the tube under test exhibits a change of slope from positive to negative. Electrodes giving high secondary emission currents may have such characteristics,' and a knowledge of the tube being tested or use of a cathode-ray oscillograph for checking purposes is desirable.

PULSE BE

VOLTAGE MEAStiRED

-J 4
TO
I

HIGH

VACUUM DIODE

I

FIG. 10

PEAK READING VOLTAGE INDICATOR

4.6.4.3 Cathode-ray oscillograph current indicator - The indicator shown in Fig. 11 will be useful in measuring the peak value of electrode currents in taking tube characteristics by pulse method based upon circuit indicated in Fig. 8. With large tubes, connections may in most instances be Safety made directly to the vertical deflection plates of the oscillograph. and good performance require that this method be applied only to those oscillographs in which connection may be made directly to deflection plates operated at or near ground potential. It is usually desirable to utilize a linear horizontal sweep voltage, synchronised to the pulse generator frequency, to spread out the current In this manner the detection of possible errors caused by the trace. negative slopes of electrode characteristics is simplified. In obtaining characteristics having only a positive slope, however, the peak current value may be obtained without a sweep voltage simply by measuring the height of the vertical deflection line. The dc calibrating circuit shown in Fig. 12 provides a convenient method of reading voltage drop produced in The use of a non-inductive resisthe resistor R by the electrode current. tor is recommended, and connecting leads should be kept as short as possible. By means of the adjustable calibrating voltage, the cathode-ray 14

ItS: 4147 - i98i beam may be depressed until the peak deflection coincides with the zero axis. The dc meter reading is then equal to the peak voltage drop in the current measuring resistor if the reactance of the blocking capacitor is sufficiently small. The same current indicator may be used to measure several electrode currents by switching it across various electrode current measuring resistors.

OSClLLOSCOPE PULSE BLOCKING

I-

TO NEGik OF PULSE GENERATOR OR ELECTRODE VOLTAGE SU.PPLY

bOLTAGE

DIVIDER

FIG 11

CIRCUITARRANGEMENTFORMEASURING THE PEAK VALUE OF ELECTRODE CURRENTS

4.7 Dynamic Characteristic 4.791 lhh2
characteristics kkwrement of Load ( Dynamic ) Characteristic - The load of a tube may be measured directly by the method given

below.

4.7.1.1 The tube should be set up for the required operating condition and the desired load characteristic obtained by means of a cathoderay oscillograph, the electrode voltage being applied to one pair of deflection plates and the voltage across a current measuring resistor simultaneously applied to the other pair. 4.7.1.2 At frequencies at which transit time, tube capacitance and the tube lead inductance become important, they may have considerable It is, therefore, advisable to take load effect upon the load characteristic. characteristics at the frequency at which the tube is to be used. 15

fS : 4147

- 19rli
Precaution -

ring instrument characteristic.

4.7.1.3

Care shall be taken to ensure that the measuand its connecting leads do not effect the shape of the load

+v91

Fro. 12

TOTAL GRID CURRENT ANDITS COMPONENTS

4.8

Residual Gas and Insulation Measurements

4.8.1 Electron tubes of the same type having satisfactory static and cathode characteristics may differ from one another in the degree of vacuum and of insulation between electrodes. These properties may affect the tube life and the relative freedom from complications in tube operation. The degree of vacuum may be estimated by measuring the gas ( ionization ) current; and the insulation from the leakage current in the tube. In many cases, it is convenient and sufficient to measure both the currents in the circuit of the negatively biased control grid. 4.8.1.1 To separate gas current and leakage current it is necessary to vary the operating voltages. Variation of operating voltages, however, may cause the temperature of parts of the tube to vary. Because both gas 16

18 t 4147- i98i
current and leakage current are dependent on temperature to an extent determined by the design of the tube, it is impossible to separate a grid current into its various components with any degree of accuracy. 4.8.2 Total .Negative Grid Current - A minute electric current can always be observed in the circuit of the negatively biased control grid of an electron tube. Usually it consists of several component currents arising from various physical phenomena. The currents are superimposed upon one another and do not all flow in the same direction. These currents ( see Fig. 12 ) may result from the following causes.

4

Electrons from the cathode that reach the grid by virtue tact potential and initial velocities ( see curve i ), ii ),

of con-

b) Gas ( ionization ) ( see curve 4 Leakage ( see curve iii ), 4 Grid current ( cold ), and
e) Primary
electron emission

from the control

grid ( see curve iv ).

I I 1

I

Fro. 13

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURING THE TOTAL GRID CURRENT BYDIRECT METHOD

4.8.2.1 Direct method -With a negative bias on the control grid voltages are applied to other electrodes to establish a suitable electrod current. After thermal equilibrium is reached, the current in the grid circuit is measured by using a sensitive microammeter such as a spot galvanometer. The circuit arrangement is indicated in Fig. 13. 17

Its t 4147 - 1981 4.8.2.2 Indirect method- A sensitive method of measuring total control grid current, which is especially useful when the current is too small for convenient direct measurement by ordinary deflection instruments, is indicated in Fig. 14. With the switch S closed and the grid and anode voltage adjusted to the specified values, the anode current is read. Resistor Rgl is then inserted into the grid circuit by opening the switch, and grid bias is readjusted so that the anode current returns to its former value. The grid current Igl can be computed from the change in grid voltage n I's, necessary to main constant anode curren, since Rel The necessary value of R,l will depend ured. When a number of tubes of the same grid current, it is often sufficient to estimate noting the change in the anode current when I 01 A

vgl
upon type the S is the current to be measare to be compared for relative grid current by opened or closed,

The sensitivity of the method can be greatly improved by balancing out the normal anode current by the arrangement shown by the dotted lines of Fig. 14, in order to permit the employment of a more sensitive anode current meter. The leakage resistance across the switch S should be large in comparison with R,,.
OTHER ELECTRODE TO BE MAINTAINED AT SPECIFIED VOLTAGES

I

/

B-w-

S p

A --_

-I

T

3

FIG. 14

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENTFOR MEASURING THE TOTAL GRID CURRENT BY INDIRECT METHOD

18

IS t 4147- 1981
4.8.3 Gas ( Ionization ) Current - When the electrode voltages and current are high enough, direct measurements under desired operating conditions may be made by a microammeter, as explained in 4.8.3.1. In many cases there will not be sufficient ionization for these measurements at rated voltages. To check gas currents it is then necessary to use the indirect method as explained in 4.8.3.2. These methods serve to compare relative ionization in tubes of a given type, but do not afford a direct comparison of gas currents under operating voltages. 4.8.3.1 Subtraction method - Gas current may be determined by the circuit given in Fig. 13. First, the total negative grid current is measured as described in 4.8.2, grid bias is then increased to or slightly beyond the cut-off point and the grid current is again noted. If the primary grid emission is relatively small, gas current is approximately equal to the difference between the two readings. This is so because the gas current is included in the first readings whereas there is no gas current during the second measurement as there is no electron current to produce gas ions. The second reading includes leakage current and primary grid emission current. Leakage current may be assumed to be proportional to the grid voltage.
grid emission is not small, the results obtained by this The primary grid emission current will increase with grid voltage and may cause the d~ff~renck between the two readings to be zero or even negative. Other method is then required to evaluate the results.

method may be misleading.

NOTE -

If the primary

4.8.3.2 Ionization-gauge method - In many types of electron tubes, the degree of vacuum can be estimated without measuring the negative grid current. The method is based upon a circuit examplified by Fig. 15 in which a positive voltage greater than the ionization potential is applied to the control grid and a negative voltage is applied to one or more other electrodes. Positive ions formed by the collision of electrons with gas molecules are collected by the negative electrodes. The resulting positiveion current gives an indication of the gas density, and, therefore, gives a means for comparison of the degree of vacuum of individual tubes of the same design. Since the nature of the gas influences the measurements, it shall be considered when measurements are made with different gases. Precautions - Although the cathode temperature in this test shall be adjusted to give a sufficiently high grid current of convenient readings, the grid current should not be too high because bombardment of the grid may cause gas evolution. The degree of vacuum in tubes of the same design may be compared if the grid voltage is kept constant and if constant grid current is maintained by adjusting the cathode temperature. Retarding-field oscillations that may occur during measurements in this circuit shall be avoided by proper choice of voltage. 19

x5:4147-1981
HER ELECTRODES HAVING TERNAL TERMINALS TO BE NNECTEO TO GRIO OR ANODE UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIEO (See PRE CAUTION 1

Fm.

15

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURINCJGAS CURRENT, IONIZATION-GAUGE METHOD

4.8.4 Grid Leakage - This test applies to tubes where grid leakage is high compared to grid emission. At the conclusion of the test specified in 4.8.2 above, the filament or heater voltage shall be cut off and the grid current measured when the parts have cooled. This current shall be considered to be due to leakage and shall not exceed the limit specified.
4.8.5 Grid Current ( Cold ) - The filament switch shall be opened until the elements have cooled below visible colour. The filament switch shall then be closed and the value of the grid current at the first pause in its rising value shall not exceed the value specified. 4.8.6 Primary Grid Emission - By means of suitable rectifiers and a 50 Hz ac source, the grid shall be heated during the positive half cycles; and the primary emission measured during the negative half cycles. The voltage shall be adjusted for the input power or average grid current specified. The primary emission current shall not be greater than the limit specified. 4.8.7 Insulation of Electrodes

4.8.7.1 Tests shall be carried with each control grid to all other elements tied and each anode to all other elements tied. In the test set, the centre tap or one side of the filament transformer shall be tied to the positive terminal. When testing multi-section tubes, all elements of sections not under test shall be connected to the positive terminal. The value of the insulation resistance, measured with the applied potential specified in 4.8.7.2, 4.8.7.3 and 4.8.7.4 below as applicable, shall be not less than 100 megohms for reliable tubes and not less than 10 megohms for all other receiving tubes. This test shall be performed with the filament energised immediately after the other specified electrical tests are concluded or immediately following a minimum pre-heating time of 5 minutes.

20

IS I 4147- 1981 4.8.7.2 Receiving tubes with a maximum anode potential rating greater than 330 V dc - Receiving tubes with maximum anode potential rating greater than 330 V dc, or rectifiers whose maximum rms test voltage per anode exceeds 300 V dc, shall be tested with a negative potential of at least 500 V dc when measuring insulation resistance from anode to all other elements tied. The applied potential shall be not less than - 300 V dc when measuring insulation resistance from each control grid to all other elements tied. 4.8.7.3 Receiving tubes with maximum anodepotential rating of 330 V dc or less - Receiving tubes with a maximum anode potential rating equal to or less than 330 V dc, except those intended for dry battery operation, or rectifiers whose maximum rms test voltage per anode is less than 300 V ac, shall be tested with a negative potential of at least 300 V dc when measuring insulation resistance from anode to all other elements tied; however, the applied potential shall be a negative voltage of at least 100 V dc when measuring insulation resistance from each control grid to all other elements tied. 4.8.7.4 For tubes other resistance and the applicable Specification. than receiving, voltages shall the value of insulation be specified in the detail

Precautions - Since these measurements may include emission currents from various electrodes, care should be taken that conditi,ons are such as to preclude such emission, These conditions may be approached by heating the tube under normal operating conditions, turning off the filament or heater, and making measurements as soon thereafter as the electrodes have cooled to, the point where electron emission currents will be negligible. current between the heater 4.8.8 Heater-Cathode Leakage Current -Leakage and the cathode of a tube should be measured with the rated heater voltage applied, sufficient time being allowed for the heater and the cathode to attain normal temperature. The heater voltage may be either A voltage is applied in series with a alternating or direct, as convenient. microammeter between the heater and the cathode and the current is measured ( due allowance being made for any voltage drop across the protective resistor ). Measurements of heater-cathode leakage current may be made with alternating voltage or with direct voltage of either polarity. Because the current obtained will rarely be the same under the three conditions, the conditions of test shall be specified. Similarly, where the heater voltage is appreciable compared with the measuring voltage, the point of connection to the heater circuit shall be specified. The voltage on elements other than heater and cathode may influence the results because of stray electron currents, and should be specified in the test conditions.

21

I8 : 4147 - 1981 4.9 Inverse Electrode Currents 4.9.1 Thermal electron emission currents from elements other than the cathode may be of sufficient magnitude to affect the performance of electron tubes. Measuring methods are described below for thermal electron emission from the control-grid, screen-grid and the anode of amplifier tubes and the anode of diode rectifiers. 4.9.X.1 Secondary electron emission from control-grids affect performance and control tests may be desirable. may also

4.9.2 Thermal Grid Emission - During tube operation, the control grid is subjected to heating by radiation and by electron bombardment when the grid potential becomes positive. As a result, the grid temperature may reach the level at which grid begins to emit electrons. Consequently, an electron current from the grid to the other electrodes may %ow whenever the grid is negative with respect to these electrodes. The amount of such thermal electron emissionand the conditions under which its effect becomes appreciable may be determined by one of the following two methods. 4.9.2.1 Subtraction method - The total negative grid current measured beyond the cut-off point, as described in 4.8.3.1, consists of the leakage current and the thermal grid emission current. Since grid leakage can be measured independently, it can be subtracted from the total measured current to give the value of thermal electron current. If the leakage current is negligible, the original measurement gives the grid emission current directly. NOTE-The grid emission and leakage currents are both related to temper-

ature. Therefore, the total grid current shall be measured as quickly as possible after the cathode current is cut off. The value of leakage current measured shall be corrected to the voltage at which the total current was measured.

of thermal grid emission as 4.9.2.2 Dynamic method - Measurement a function of grid dissipation power may be accomplished by the use of the circuit shown in Fig. 16. In this arrangement the grid of the tube under test is heated by 5%~cycle power from transformer 2-1 on every alternate half-cycle through rectifier VI and ammeter A,. On the reserve half-cycle of transformer Tl, a sensitive ammeter Aa in series with rectifies Vs indicates the thermal grid emission current ( and leakage current if present ). The battery B and potentiometer R are included to provide a means of bucking out spurious currents around the VI - V, loop caused by contact Voltmeter V in series with rectifies P's potential and initial velocities. serves to indicate the voltage on the grid on the heating half-cycle. With proper regard to the form factors of the various voltages and currents, the thermal grid emission current versus grid dissipation may be calculated. If a wattmeter is used in place of ammeter Al and voltmeter V, the grid dissipation can be read directly. 22

fS : 6147 - iJi
TUBE UNDER TEST I

FIG. 16

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURINGPRIMARY GRID EMISSION,DYNAMICMETHOD

4.9.3 Secondary Grid Emission - Secondary electron emission from the grid surface as a result of electron bombardment is an ever-present phenomenon in electron tubes when positive potentials are applied to the grid statically or dynamically. Secondary electron emission current flows from the grid to other more positive electrodes as long as electron current flows to the grid. In external grid circuit the bombarding current and the secondary emission current flow in opposite directions, and only their difference may be observed on a meter. 4.9.3.1 Pronounced secondary grid emission in an electron tube amplifier or oscillator may help tube operation by increasing the output and efficiency or by reducing the grid-excitation power. It may, however, interfere with tube operation by preventing the realisation of linear amplification or by causing parasitic oscillations. Secondary grid emission may exert a detrimental effect when it is of such magnitude as to produce a negative grid resistance. Negative grid resistance is evidenced by a negative slope of the curve of grid current versus grid voltage, or even by reversal of grid current. In Fig. 17 the effect of secondary grid emission on the grid charrcteristic is shown. Curve I shows no appreciable secondary emission and curve II appreciable secondary emission. Curve III, however, shows pronounced secondary emission in which region ` a ' of the curve is a negative resistance region. 4.9.3.2 The amount of secondary emission from the grid of an electron tube cannot be measured directly. Tube of the same type, however, may be compared as to the relative amount of secondary grid emission present by projecting a grid characteristic upon the screen of a 23

fS : 4149 - 1981 cathode-ray tube or by checking by static means of a point on the grid If a static test is characteristic for chosen values of electrode voltages. used, electrode voltages shall be chosen that do not result in excessive electrode dissipation.

GRID

VOLTAGE

FIG.

17

TYPICAL GRID CHARACTERISTICSSHOWING EFFECTSOF SECONDARY EMISSION

4.9.4 Back Emission in Rectijer Diodes - Back emission in a rectifier is the inverse thermal electron current between anode and cathode. If the dissipation during the conducting part of the cycle is sufficient to cause heating of the anode to a temperature high enough to enable it to emit electrons, the released electrons will bombard the cathode during the time in which the cathode is positive with respect to the anode. A basic circuit suitable for the measurement of back emission is shown in Fig. 18. The tube under test is operated as a half-wave rectifier and loaded by RI and C. VI is a diode of very low impedance compared with that of tube under test and may conveniently be a gas-filled tube. The impedance of the rectifier V, may be higher than that of VI. Ra is a limit-resistor to protect the meter A, in the event of flash-over in the tube under test. The battery B and potentiometer R3 are included to cancel out circulating currents in the VI - Va loop due to contact potential and initial velocities. 4.9.4.1 During the conducting part of the cycle, the tube under test and VI conduct and, since V has a very low impedance compared with the tube under test, the time constants of the circuits will not be disturbed. During the non-conducting part of the cycle, any reverse current in the tube under test is fed through VB and the meter A,. This current is made 24

IS : 4147 - 1981
up of back-emission and ohmic-leakage currents through the tube under test. If a curve of back emission current against output current from the tube under test is plotted, it will take the form shown in Fig. 19.

TUBE

UNDER

==c

FIG. 18

CIRCUITARRANGEMENT FORMEASURINGBACK EMISSION

4.9.4.2 At low values of output current the reverse current consists entirely of the .ohmic-leakage current and tends to decrease in value with increase in output current. The decrease occurs because the peak-inverse voltage across the tube under test is decreasing. As the temperature of the anode rises, the thermal electron emission from it may increase rapidly, as shown in Fig. 19 by CD. 4.9.5
Operation of Rectijers

4.9.5.1 Each tube shall operate satisfactorily and without rejectable arc-backs in a rectifier circuit under the conditions specified. The criteria for rejetable arc-back and their detection shall be as specified in 4.9.5.2 to 4.9.5.4 inclusive, as applicable, or as specified. When the test conditions specify circuit constants, the dc current in the load resistor shall be within the limits specified. The duration of test shall be sufficient to obtain indication of satisfactory operation. For mercury-vapour rectifiers, the cathode shall be allowed to be heated for a period of time sufficient to distribute the mercury properly in the bulb. Inductive loading shall not be used, Unless otherwise specified, rejectable arc-backs do not apply to life tests.
25

IS : 4147 - 1981

OUTPUT

CURRENT

FIG 19

TYPICAL CURVE OF REVERSE CURRENTvs OUTPUT CURRENT IN RECTIFIER

4.9.5.2 Receiving-type rectifiers - In the operation of receiving-type rectifiers, a rejectable arc-back is one which has a peak reverse current at least 3.5 times the rated peak steady-state anode current per anode and which occurs after a delay of at least 5 input frequency cycles from the time of application of anode voltage. ( This delay distinguishes arcs attributable to the tube from those which result from transient instability of the test equipment ). The arc-back detector shall have a maximum charging time constant of 0.5 millisecond and shall be capable of detecting a single rectangular peak of 0.5 millisecond duration with an amplitude of 3.5 times the rated peak steady-state anode current per anode. The minimum test time shall be the time required for the tube under test to reach the minimum operation current, I,, specified in the detail specification. The tube may be preheated at rated heater or filament voltage at the option of the manufacturer, This is not a destructive test. 4.9.5.3 Gas rectifiers - In the operation of gas rectifiers, a rejectable arc-back is one which has a current in the reverse direction whose peak value is not less than five times the peak forward anode current obtained during this test. In the test circuit, the source impedance shall be such that the peak value of the steady-state current ia the shorting circuit, when

1s I 4147- 1981
all tubes are short circuited, shall not be less than 7.5 times the peak forward anode current obtained during this test. The arc-back detector shall be capable of detecting a rejectable arc current whose duration is equal to or greater than l/4 cycle of the frequency of applied voltage. Unless otherwise specified, the frequency of operation shall be 50 Hz. Samples shall be operated for 1 hour. of power rectifiers, 4.9.5.4 Power vacuum rectaJiers - In the operation a rejectable arc-back is one which has a peak reverse current at least 3-5 times the rated peak steady-state anode current. In the test circuit, the source impedance shall be such that the peak value of the steady-state current in the shorting circuit, when all tubes are 4hort circuited, shall be at least four times the peak forward anode current obtained during this test. The arc-back detector shall be capable of detecing a rejectable arc current whose duration is equal to or greater than l/4 cycle of the frequency The frequency of the applied voltage shall be 50 Hz. of applied voltage. Samples shall be operated for 1 hour. of thermal screen4.9.6 Primary Sxcen-Grid Emission - Measurement grid emission as a function of the power dissipation may be accomplished by use of the circuit shown in Fig. 20. By means of suitable rectifiers and a 50 Hz source, the screen is heated during the positive half-cycles and the primary emission is measured during the negative half-cycles. Appropriate direct anode voltage and control grid bias are applied to the tube, and the screen dissipation is set to the desired level by adjusting the alternating input voltage of the transformer and reading current on meter A1 and voltage on voltmeter V. VI is a diode of very low impedance compared to the impedance of the screen circuit. The current read on meter As is the primary screen emission ( usually in the order of microamperes ) under the conditions of test.

FIG. 20

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURINGPRIMARY EMISSION FROM SCREENGRID OF A PENTODE 27

IS t 4147- 1981 4.9.6.1 A wattmeter instead serve to establish screen dissipation of voltmeter V and ammeter A1 will in this test without tedious calculation.

4.9.6.2 In some cases a simplified version of this circuit will give useful information, without the direct voltage supply and with the anode and control grid tied to cathode. 4.9.7 Primary Anode Emission - Measurement of the thermal electron emission from the anode as a function of dissipation may be accomplished by the circuit of Fig. 2 1, which is similar in principle to the circuit discussed in 4.9.6 for the screen emission measurement. The desired anode dissipation is obtained by applying alternating voltage to the anode and reading current on ammeter A, and voltage on voltmeter V. Appropriate values of screen and control grid bias are applied. The primary anode emission is read on meter A,.

FIG. 21

_

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FORMEASURING PRIMARY EMISSION FROM ANODE OF A PENTODE Capacitances

4.10 Inter-Electrode

4.10.1 It is recommended that direct capacitances be measured, rather than total capacitances, each of which is the sum of two or more direct capacitances. In measurements of direct capacitances between two electrodes of multi-electrode tubes, it is customary to connect all other electrode to ground unless another connection is desired which more nearly simulates the circuit operating conditions. Published capacitance values usually specify connections for the other electrodes. In general it is customary to connect the heaters and the screen-grid to the cathode and to connect other sections or units to ground. Information as to the electrode 28

IS 84147 - 1981
connections for specific published capacitance values should be obtained from the published data sheets. The three direct capacitances of a triode are anode-grid capacitance Cae, grid-cathode capacitance C,k and anodecathode capacitance Cak. When a tube is active, its direct inter-electrode capacitances differ from the values obtained with a cold tube. The difference may be sufficient to be of importance in certain applications. Interelectrode capacitances, unless otherwise specified are measured with the cathode cold and with no direct voltages present. 4.10.2 Radio-Frequency Bridge Method -A bridge circuit for the measurement of direct inter-electrode capacitances of a tube is shown in Fig. 22. A stable oscillator, such as a crystal controlled oscillator, supplies RF Balance is indicated by through a closely coupled balanced transformer. a null-indicating tube voltmeter which is made up of a tuned amplifier, It is customary to use a diode rectifier and direct current meter indicator. For convenience, the stable communication receiver as a detector. capacitors are ganged differentially so that increase of one capacitance is accompanied by an equal decrease of the other.

FIQ. 22

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR RF BRIDGE FOR MEASURING INTER-ELECTRODE CAPACITANCES

29

IS : 4147 - 1981 4.10.2.1 Balance may then be effected by varying the two capacitance branches until they are equal ( when Cx = Cr - C, ). Then at balance cx = 12 A C, 1 = 12 A Cs 1 . Wh en an adapter is used, the tube capacitance is the difference in capacitance readings with the tube in and out of the adapter, An advantage of the bridge over the other methods is that the conductive components of the tube admittances due to insulation losses, getter deposits or other leakages may be measured and balanced out independently of the capacitance reading. The effect of capacitance to ground is negligible as point B is at centre location in the bridge, where capacitance does not influence balance; and the capacitance from C to ground is across a closely coupled low-impedance winding that does not affect the capacitance balance or the voltage supplied to the bridge.
4.10.3 Substitution Method 4.10.3.1 A substitution method of high sensitivity for small capacitances such as the anode-grid capacitance of screen-grid tubes is shown in Fig. 23. This method employs a calibrated variable voltage source and a fixed standard capacitor. A standard signal generator is convenient for this purpose. The current through the anode-grid capacitance of the tube produces a voltage across the receiver input, which is shunted by a large capacitance C. In the arrangement shown in Fig. 23 the RF oscillator is modulated, and an ac voltmeter connected across the terminals of the loudspeaker is used as an indicator.
I

`""1
I

I-------I
I

--1
t-1 I

'-----"1
I t I I

!nt I
I

f-4-l @I
I I I I

I

I I

I

'

I

;

I

0scK*Kl l
I
I I 1

J

L-J

_--

R

-__

I L--l

I I

I
I

r-1

I
I

I

r-7 ____I
1 1 I

-I 0
-a

c

I I

I I

/!

1 I
I

I
.

T

II

I I II

RERCAEq:OER 1 I I

;

L--_-J

I L-s--_--__I

I

L_______1

R = Attenuator V = ac Voltmeter tS L-Loud spkeer C = Large shunt capacitor FICA 23 CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FOR MEASURING INTER- ELECTRODE CAPACITANCE BE SUBSTITUTIONMETHOD A standard fixed capacitor Cs of the order of 0.5 pF, suitably shielded, is first used in place of the tube shown in Fig. 24 and the attenuator is set so that the impressed RF voltage is F's with a standard AF output, 30

1s : 4147- 1981
The tube to be measured is next substituted for the standard capacitor and the attenuator readjusted until an impressed RF voltage V, produces the same deflection at V. The unknown anode-grid capacitance is given by:

cag1 = -G v6!
VX
The standard capacitor may be enclosed within a vacuum tube of Two circular disks 2 cm in diameter and spaced standard dimensions. 8 mm apart, will provide a standard capacitor of the proper order of magnitude. It may be calibrated by measurements on a differential capacitance bridge. 4.10.3.2 Precautions - The leads from the attenuator to the tube shield and from the latter to the voltage measuring unit should be completely shielded, and the tube itself should be enclosed in a rather closely For a double-ended tube, the test set should be fitting cylindrical shield. provided with a small contactor to the grid ( or anode ) cap, the lead to this connector entering at the top of the shield. The lead from the anode or grid leaves at a point near the bottom of the shield. For a singleended tube shielding adequate for the elimination of capacitance components between the active tube and socket terminals should be provided. The adequacy of the shielding may be checked by readings made with the tube removed from the socket, unless the tube base itself provides the shield. The shunt capacitance C should be large compared to the anodegrid capacitance of the tube under test; ordinarily a value of 500 pF is satisfactory. 4.11 Tube Coefficients
4.11.1 This section is devoted to methods of measuring the low frequency coefficients of electron tubes. The more commonly used coefficients are anode resistance, grid-anode mutual conductance, amplification factor and conversion conductance. The methods outlined apply not only to these coefficients, but also to the less commonly used coefficients referred to any one or to any pair of electrodes such as grid resistance, conductance for rectification, grid-screen p factor, etc. 4.11.1.1 In general most tube coefficients may be evaluated from the characteristic curves or may be measured directly by a balance or null method of measurement employing an audio-frequency generator as the source of power and a null indicator ( usually a telephone receiver which is preceded by an amplifier for more precise results). The results obtained by balance methods are usually more reliable than the results obtained from the characteristics curves, particularly in the measurement of coefficients of oxide coated cathode tubes.

31

fS : 4147t-1981
4.11.2 Anode Resistance using the bridge illustrated in Fig, 24. ra is given by the relation:
4.11.2.1 Bridge method-Anode

resistance may t>e determined by At balance, the anode resistance

RI Rs `l3 = R, In bridge measurements the quadrature current is usually best balanced out by a small capacitor in an arm of the bridge adjacent to the arm containing the unknown. Care should be taken in choosing the bridge arm resistances to ensure that the current flowing to the electrode does not vary appreciably while the bridge is being balanced to a null.

FIG. 24

BASIC RESISTANCE-BALANCE CIRCUIT FOR MEASURING ELECTRODE RESISTANCE

4.11.2.2 Substitution method - This method lends itself to rapid determination of the anode resistance I~ of tubes such as the screen-grid type where the value of anode resistance is above 0.5 megohm. The circuit arrangement is shown in Fig. 25. The tube is operated at normal voltages. Switch S is open. Alternating voltage is applied as indicated and adjusted until a convenient deflection is obtained on the electronic voltmeter. The tube is then removed from the circuit and a resistor RI substituted for the internal resistance of the tube by closing switch S. RI is then adjusted to give the same deflection on the electronic voltmeter with the alternating voltage held constant at its original value. The value of RI is then the value of the anode resistance of the tube. R, should be made negligibly small in comparison with the anode resistance of the tube.

IS : 4147- 1981

FIG. 25

BASIC CIRCUIT FORMEASURING THE ANODERESISTANCE OF SCREEN-GRIDTUBESBYTHE SUBSTITUTION METHOD

The arrangement can be made into a direct reading device in the following three ways: a) By maintaining the alternating voltage constant and calibrating the electronic voltmeter in terms of anode resistance of the tube. RI may be used in the manner described above for making calibration. b) By maintaining the deflection of the electronic voltmeter constant and calibrating the alternating current voltmeter in terms of the tube anode resistance, RI being used for calibration purposes. This method gives a straight line calibration between the alternating voltage and the tube anode resistance and is more conveniently used than (a). c) By maintaining the alternating voltage constant and varying R. to give constant deflection on the electronic voltmeter. The ya will be proportional to R2, 4.11.3 Mutual Conductance 4.11.3.1 Method 1 - A balance method for measuring mutual conductance g, is shown in Fig. 26. At null condition, mutual conductance is given by the expression:
gm =

&-(
gm*

1+

$)(.I + 8)

If Rs and RI are negligibly small compared with the resistance of anodt, ( r, ) and grid ( R, ), the balance equation reduces to:

RS RI x Ra
33

1s I 1147 ml
l

FIG. 26

BASIC RESISTANCE-BALANCE CIRCUITFOR MEAWRING
MUTAL CONDUCTANCE

4.11.3.2 Method 2 - A second balance method, which is useful for measuring the mutual conductance of power tubes or in general when r, is small, is shown in Fig. 27. The null is obtained by adjusting R, and at balance the mutual conductance is given by:

The value of the resistance ment.

in the grid circuit does not affect the measure-

Fxo. 27

BASIC RESSTANCE CIRCUIT FOR MEASURING THE MUTUAL CONDUCTANCE OF POWER TUBES

34

18:4147-l!Ml 4.11.4 AmpliJication Factor - The circuit illustrated in Fig. 28 may be used for the measurement of amplification factor. In determining the amplification factor, the null detector shall ordinarily be placed in the anode circuit since the defining equation states that the alternating component of the anode current is zero. If the tube is a triode and if there is no grid current flowing, the null detector may be placed in the cathode circuit. The impedance of C's shall be negligible in comparison with resistance Ra at the test frequency. At balance, the amplification factor is given by:

0

FIG. 28

CIRCUIT ARRANQEMENT FOR MEASURING THE AMPLIFICATION FACTOR

4.11.5 General Precautions for Balance Methods - The magnitude of the impressed alternating voltage should always be sufficiently small so that the results of the measurement are unaffected by a reduction of the impressed voltage. All electrodes not directly involved in the measurement shall be maintained constant at specified voltages. 35

IS I4147 - 1981 4.11.5.1 Balance methods employing an alternating voltage generator require that consideration be given to the effects of stray capacitances and couplings, which may render balance difficult or impossible. The grounding and shielding of apparatus should be given special attention. 4.11.5.2 Batteries and, in particular, dc supplies operated from the power line may introduce excessive capacitance across the network elements unless properly located with respect to lground. In the example of Fig. 28, the anode and screen supplies are at ground potential and the capacitance of the grid supply may be neglected because of the low resistance of RI. Capacitors of sufficiently low impedance to by-pass the AF currents shall usually be shunted across the power supplies. Voltage regulated power supplies are excellent low-impedance devices for this purpose. 4.11.5.3 Audio frequency generators and amplifiers that are operated from the power line will have appreciable capacitance to ground the effect of which may usually be minimized by the use of shielded transformers. 4.11.5.4 When direct current flows through the generator or through the detector, low resistance transformers or chokes shall be used to minimize the direct voltage drop. Spurious couplings between the chokes or transformers shall then be prevented by proper shielding, orientation and spacing of the component parts. 4.11.5.5 In some circuits the direct voltage at an electrode may vary as balance adjustments are made. When this cannot be avoided by means of a blocking capacitor or by circuit rearrangement, the direct voltage is best measured at the electrode ( as in Fig. 28 by A ) with a meter of sufficiently high resistance to preclude errors due to its shunting effect. Circuit resistors shall be able to carry the electrode currents with negligible effect on their resistance value. 4.11.5.6 In the measurements of the coefficients of high mutual conductance tubes, oscillations may occur. Oscillations of the tube under test may be evident in the lack of a sharp null point or may not be evident Checks by other methods should therefore except in erroneous readings. be made to establish freedom from oscillation in setting up a new bridge or in measuring high mutual conductance values. Oscillations may be checked by the presence of grid current or by the change of anode current when the grid or anode terminal is grounded for the spurious frequency. Oscillation may be prevented by exercising care in choosing the length and location of the leads to the tube sockets, by the judicious use of by pass capacitors,' or by the insertions of a resistor in series with the appropriate electrode. 36

ISr4147-1981 4.11.5.7 Circuit and inter-electrode capacitances introduce quadrature currents that may have to be balanced out to attain an exact null. Various methods of quadrature balance are available. The mutual inductance method illustrated in Fig. 27 couples, in proper phase, voltage from the generator to the detector ( or, on occasion, to the grid, circuit if there is no grid current ). Because of the resistance, self-inductance and mutual inductance introduced in series with the detector, the balance conditions In the capacitance method a are modified and a slight error may exist. small variable capacitor is used, as for example at Cr in Fig. 28. Both of these methods require readjustment of the circuit for every change in the main balance network. This difficulty may be avoided by using an auxiliary capacitance bridge to balance out the quadrature component before the tube heater or filament is turned on. 4.11.6 Conversion Conductance

fi = f,

4.11.6.1 The definition of conversion conductance shows that if where fl is the frequency component of current and fz is the frequency component of voltage, the difference frequency will be zero, corresponding to direct current. If the two signals are in phase, the anode current will be higher than with the two signals 180" out of phase. The difference in direct anode current, caused by a reversal of the phase relation of the two signals, divided by twice the peak value of the alterIt is nating voltage on the signal grid is the conversion conductance. assumed that the voltage on the oscillator grid is adjusted to such a value that the current drawn by the grid corresponds to its rated value. tctrrement of conversion conductance is not applicable to transmitting .

4.11.6.2 In practice, measurements may be made on multi-grid converter and mixer tubes in a circuit similar to that shown in Fig. 29. With grid resistor RI and grid current as rated, a signal voltage I's is applied to the signal grid 180" out of phase with the voltage applied to the oscillator grid. The bucking circuit is adjusted to give zero reading of the anode current meter, after which the phase of the signal voltage applied to one of the grids is reversed and the reading of the anode current meter h I, noted. Conversion condutcance g, is then given by:

4.11.6.3 For precision measurements, the signal voltage applied to the signal grid should be held to as low a value as possible, and in no case should cause current to flow in the signal grid circuit. For most 37

IS t 4147- 1981
converter tubes, it is convenient to make VB equal to 0.354 volt rms. The conversion conductance in micromhos is then numerically equal to A Ia in microampheres. 4.11.6.4 In the circuit of Fig. 29 it should be noted that the transformers and regulators shall have sufficiently low leakage reactance and resistance to maintain exact phase relation between the signal and grid driving voltages. The regulators may be variable auto transformers or the equivalent. The resistance of the bucking circuit shall be high compared to the resistance of the anode current meter ( a ratio of 10 : 1 will produce an error of about 10 percent and 100 : 1 will result in an error of about 1 percent ).

SIGNI ::A t

IDE PLY

c = 5/pF C, = 2/pF 4 = Grid leak

Rz = Anode-Grid
V, = ac Voltmeter V, = ac Voltmeter

limiting resistor O-5 volts O-30 volts

Al * dc Ammeter O-IA A* = dc Multirange Ammeter O-0-I-I-1OA

FIG. 29

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT

FOR MEASURING CONVERSIONCONDUCTANCE

version

4.11.6.5 The following procedure shall be followed in making conconductance measurements when a screen-voltage dropping 38

16 t 4147 - 1981
resistor is included in the test circuit to simulate the normal circuit with the resistor by-passed: a) With the screen resistor in the circuit, adequately by-passed for 50 Hz current, and with zero signal on the signal grid and normal oscillator grid current, read the screen current; and b) Remove the screen resistor and apply a voltage to the screen equal to the supply voltage minus the voltage drop computed from the screen current determined above. Then conversion conductance is read in the usual manner.

4.11.6.6 When a tube is to be operated with grid-resistor bias, conversion conductance shall be measured with a separate bias, adjusted to give the same anode current as would be obtained with the gridresistor bias. 4.11.6.7 When a tube is to be operated with a cathode bias resistor included in the test circuit to simulate the normal circuit with the resistor by-passed, the following procedure should be used: a) With the cathode resistor in the circuit adequately by-passed 50 Hz current and with the correct oscillator-grid current specified grid resistor, the individual currents are read; and for and

b) The cathode resistor is removed or short-circuited and bias is applied to the control grid. The control grid and screen voltages are adjusted to give the same electrode currents as before. The conversion conductance is then read in the usual manner for each value, of bias resistance. In the measurement of the conversion conductance of pentodes and triodes with signal-grid injection, both the ac signals shown in Fig. 29 are applied to the signal grid. 4.11.6.8 Precaulions - The 50 Hz voltage shall be reasonably sinusoidal. Voltage regulators of the saturation type should be avoided because of waveform distortion. The regulation of the screen supply should be such as negligible effect upon the current regardless of the phase of voltage. For example, the use of a screen source having a dc of 10 000 ohms in measurements on ordinary converter tubes plus or minus 0.6 percent voltage variation with a resultant conversion conductance reading of over 15 percent. 4.12 C&rent Division to have a the signal resistance may cause error in

4.12.1 MethodA ( Long Pub ) 4.12.1.1 The dc voltages applied to the tube elements shall be as shown in the individual detail specification. The pulse duration ( tD ) shall 39

88 $4147 - 1981
be 1 000 ps minimum, or as specified, The pulse recurrence rate ( pra ) shall be 11 f 2 pulses per second or as specified. The grid voltage pulse is essentially a square wave and its magnitude is adjusted as required for either procedure (A) or (B). The input wave shape shall be a tr and a tf of 25 ps maximum each, and slope of the top of the pulse may not be greater than 0.5 percent, with a ripple not exceeding O-1 percent. The basic test circuit is shown in Fig. 30 with the general specification of the pulse used shown in Fig. 3 1.

OSClLLOSCOPE

1

NOTE 1 - Regulated power supplies ( RPS ) shall the voltage' steady over the duration of the pulse.

be capable

of maintaining be as read on

meter

NOTE2 -

The magnitude Ml which reads V dc. Meters Current

of the grid voltage to within wetted

pulse ( 1 percent.

V,)

shall

Peak reading devices which mea:ure pulse amplitude may be used in place of the oscilloscope. The amplitude of the pulse leading edge shall be measured within 30 microseconds.

NOTE 3 NOTE4 NOTE5 NOTE6 -

shall be accurate monitoring

Ry, shall be a mercury

contact

type relay or equivalent.

resistors

may be sorted out.

FIG. 30

BASIC TESTCIRCUIT

4.12.1.2 The magnitude of the grid voltage pulse is adjusted to produce the specified anode current at the leading edge of the pulse, excluding any spike. The magnitude of the drive voltage pulse ( V, ) relative to zero level is read and must fall within the limits shown in the the magnitudes of the detail specification. Wh en shown as requirements, grid current (s) isI, iss, &s and so forth, shall comply with limits shown in the detail specification.

40

Is:4147-

1981

j?IG. 31

GENERALCHARACTERISTICS OF THE PULSE
pulse is adjusted to bring The magnitude of the requirements, the grid leading edge, excluding in the individual detail

4.12.1.3 The magnitude of the grid voltage the grid to zero voltage level during the pulse. pulse anode current ( i, ) and, when shown as current (s) isr, a'sa, zg3 . and so forth, are read at the spike, and shall comply with the limits shown specification.

4.12.1.4 Pulse duration ( fp ) should be adjusted to a maximum value between the specified value stated commensurate with practical limitations of the tube element dissipations. 4.12.2

Method B ( Short Pulse )

4.12.2.1 The dc voltages applied to the tube elements shall be as specified. The pulse duration ( t, ), pulse recurrence rate ( prr ), and type of pulse used shall be appropriate for the tube under test. The magnitude of the grid-voltage pulse is adjusted as required for either procedure (A) or (B).
4.12.2.2' The magnitude of the grid-voltage pulse is adjusted to produce the specified peak anode current ( i, ). The magnitude of the peakgrid drive voltage pulse above zero level ( V,, ) is read and should fall within the specified limits. When shown as requirements, the magnitude of the peak-grid current (s) isr, &s, iss, etc, shall not exceed the specified limits, 4.12.2.3 The magnitude of the peak-grid drive voltage pulse is adjusted to bring the grid to zero voltage level at the peak of the pulse. The magnitude of the peak-pulse anode current ( i, ) and, when shown as requirements, the magnitude of the peak-grid current (s) isr, is,. i,s and so forth, are read and shall comply with the limits shown in the detail specification. 4.13 Power Output

4.13.1

Audio POWO Out&t

4.13.1.1 The power output of an electron tube is dependent upon the direct operating voltage applied to the various electrodes, the external 41

IS:4147-1981
load impedance in the anode circuit, and the magnitude of the exciting voltage applied to the control grid. In any case, the operating conditions are subject to the maximum safe values placed by the manufacturer upon electrode voltages, electrode power dissipation and space current drawn from the cathode. 4.13.1.2 For electron tubes normally used as Class A amplifiers under conditions such that the control grid is not driven appreciably positive with respect to the cathode, the power output is the power delivered to a resistive load with a sinusoidal input voltage applied to the grid. For tube in which the control grid is driven positive, as in Class B amplifiers special consideration shall be given to the impedance in the grid circuit and its effect on harmonic distortion. 4.13.1.3 In general, where harmonic distortion is undesirable, the power output available in any particular application will increase with the permissible percentage of harmonics. The amount of distortion that may be tolerated varies greatly in different applications; consequently no single criterion of permissible distortion is acceptable in all cases. A reference to the available power output for sinusoidal input should be accompanied by a statement of the maximum percentage of distortion present at this power output or at lower values of power output within the operating range. This percentage of distortion is expressed in terms of the total distortion, or the individual harmonic components of output current may be expressed separately as percentages of the current of fundamental frequency. Usually, the second and third harmonics will suffice, but higher order terms should be given where they are of the same order of importance as the second and third harmonics. 4.13.114 A circuit for the measurement of power output of a tube in An iron-cored choke L is a single-ended output stage is shown in Fig. 32. employed for shunt feed in the anode circuit; care should be exercised in its selection or design to avoid the generation. of harmonics in it as a result of the non-linear and hysteretic behaviour of the iron. A commercial type harmonic analyser is recommended. The power output may be calculated by knowing the load resistance R and the rms current through it. 4.13.1.5 The techniques used in the measurement of power output in push-pull operation are basically similar to those employed for singleended operation, but some additional precautions should be observed. Care should be taken to ensure that the input transformer produces voltages that are equal, opposite in phase and without harmonics. These requirements are most readily met if-a transformer is of adequate size for the power required and has low leakage inductance between windings. ation, When the grids are driven positive, as in Class AB or Class B operthe effective resistance and impedance of the driving source shall be

42

IS I 4147 - 1981 specified I The effects of regulation of the power supply voltages, including grid bias are particularly important in Class AB and Class B operation. If a' centre-tapped iron-cored choke is employed for shunt-feeding the anode circuit, it should be designed so that the two halves of the winding have the same dc resistance, the leakage inductance between the two halves of the winding is low and the iron core is of adequate size and correct The measurement data material to avoid the generation of harmonics. about push-pull stages using self-bias should state whether the cathode resistor was by-passed.

FIG. 32

CIRCUIT ARRANGEMENT FORMEASURING POWER OUTPUT OF A TUBE

4.13.2

R. F., Power Out/& ( Negative Grid Power Tubes ) This test is to measure that part of the total radio-frequency flowing from the tube output terminals into the matched A recommended schematic is shown in Fig. 33. Method A (for power amplijier )

4.13.2.1 output power resistive load. 4.13.2.2

The grid bias shall be set to the specified value or adjusted for maximum output. If power gain is to be determined, grid bias shall be set as specified. The anode and screen supplies values. The tuning and output possible output power. _ coupling shall be adjusted or input reflected to obtain the highest by by the the are applied and adjusted to the specified

If specified, the driving power, difference between the forward and reflectometer, shall be set as specified. 43

RF power given values measured

IS t 4147- 1981
The following a) Electrode b) Electrode c) Frequency d] Maximum shall be specified voltage, currents allowable or ranges driving of currents, power. of the RF output. in the relevant detail specification:

REFLECTOMETER

POWER

METER

MATCHED

RESISTIVE

I

I
SET-UP FOR METHOD A

(Neutralization of inherent feed back may be accomplished by known techniques to maintain stable tube operation )

FREQUENCY

METER

FIG. 33

MEASUREMENT OF RF OUTPUT POWER NEGATIVE GRID POWER TUBES 3 (for self-excited oscillator )

4.13.2.3

Method

The electrode voltages shall be adjusted to the specified values and the grid current is observed to ensure that it does not exceed the specified value. The anode to grid feedback, and the output coupling shall be adjusted to obtain the highest possible output at the specified values of anode and grid currents. The following Value Anode Electrode Frequency shall be specified voltages, and range of grid current, and or higher ) of oscillation ( may be as specified 44 in the relevant specification:

a)

of grid bias resistor, current

b) 4

d)

lSr4147-1981

4.13.2.4

Alternative methods

Methods alternative to those of Methods A and B shall be similar except that the adjustment shall be made in order to obtain at least the specified value of output power, the electrode currents being within specified values. The following shall be specified in the relevant detail specification: a) Electrode b) Frequency c) Required d) Maximum voltages and value of grid resistor for oscillator, of RF output, level of output power, value of anode current, and
as Class C and the bias

e) Range limits for grid ( and screen grid ) currents.
NOTE 1 - Grid bias is not specified as tube is operated would vary from tube to tube. NOTE2 -No reflectometer resistive load is used. 4.14 Electrode Dissipation
is needed to measure

power

output if a matched

4.14-l Anode Dissipation -When the tube is operating under steadystate conditions, the anode dissipation is given by the product of mean anode current and anode voltage. In other cases, if reasonably accurate anode dissipation figures are required, thermocouple method may be used. In this method use is made of the heat radiation from the anode which is not only due to anode dissipation but also partly due to dissipation at various other electrodes. Hence the accuracy of this method depends upon the extent to which the other electrodes contribute towards raising the temperature of the anode.

4.14.1.1 The anode radiation may be collected from one side of the anode at a time by means of a conical tubing with reflecting walls and the energy focussed upon a thermocouple. The anode is then supplied with dc power under static conditions to duplicate the previous thermocouple readings and the dc power supplied will be equivalent to the anode dissipation. 4.14.2 Grid Dissipation - Information on grid dissipation in power tubes is important to ensure that the grid is operated below the point at which The method of measurement given primary emission becomes excessive. here is applicable only at frequencies low enough so that electron transit time is negligible. It should be borne in mind that grid dissipation is a component of, but not the same as, grid driving power. 4.14.2.1 The grid dissipation may be calculated if the peak alternating grid voltage is known. This may be measured with the help of a

45

1S.: 4147-1981

tube voltmeter. The product of 0-9 times the direct grid current and the peak positive excursion of the grid voltage with respect to the cathode is the approximate grid power dissipation. This method is subject to error if secondary emission is appreciable.
4.15 Measurement 4.15.1
envelope temperature

of Envelope Temperature
of the the position for the measurement tube is specified it should be taken of the

Introduction --. Unless

at the

hottest point of the envelope. The possibility that high temperature gradients may exists should be recognized in probing for the point of highest temperature. This will normally be opposite to the centre in the case of sub-miniature tubes and may be at the foot of the tube in the case of some tube with flying leads. Particular care should be taken when carrying out the temperature measurement of the tube envelope since all the known methods are liable to errors which can be significant where long life is concerned. If temperature-sensitive paints or crayons are used to check the temperature, inaccuracy might occur due to contamination by dirt or moisture or by the mixing of different colours. In such cases, it may be necessary to take note of the timing since some colour
changes are very dependent on heating time. Paints and crayons which indicate the temperature by melting are less dependent on heating time and avoid subjective judgments of colour shades, Before using any temperature-sensitive methods, the manufacturer's instructions should be carefully studied. If a thermocouple or similar device is used, the errors may be caused by bad thermal contact between the tube and the thermocouple.

4.15.2 Measurement Methods -- The methods in accuracy and convenience of use depending stances and the manner of rating of the tubes. are indicated for:
a) measurement or b) measurement of temperature of average

used for measurement differ on the particular circumThe following two methods point on the envelope, temperature.

at a specified

circumferential

of temperature at a specified point on the envelope of a tube needs the use of a thermocouple. To attain the highest degree of accuracy, it is important tha~ a) the thermocouple be constructed of strip or wire of small crosssection, for example, wires of the order of 0.1 mm diameter but not greater than 0913 mm;
b) the wires adjacent
mal contact the junction to the junction should be held in good therwith the tube envelope to minimize the cooling of by conduction or radiation; and

4.15.2.1 Tem~erature at a fioint -- The measurement

46

1s : 4147 198i
l

c) area of contact of the thermocouple as small as possible.

with the envelope

should

be

4.15.2.2 Average circumferential temptrature - In this case also, thermo-couple is used and the wires of the thermocouple shall be welded to two diametrically opposite points on a close fiiting phosphor bronze split ring. Such a typical ring shall have a cross-section of 2.5 x 0.5 mm Depending on the design of and should fit tightly around the envelope. the envelope and the ambient conditions, this method will give temperature readings approximately 10 to 20�C lower than the method specified in 4.15.2.1. 4.15.2.3 In certain cases where neither of the methods described in 4.15.2.1 and 4.15.2.2 can be used, for example, where the envelope is surrounded by a screening can, it may be necessary to make use of ,the less accurate method employing temperature indicating paints. 4.16 Equivalent Noise Resistance . 4.16.1 The main causes of noise in tubes used in intermediate-frequency ( IF ) and the radio-frequency ( RF ) amplifiers and mixers are due to This noise is considered to be in the same shot effect and partition noise. frequency band as that over which the amplifier operates. In the case of a frequency changer, it is more complex, but in practice the noise is again considered to occupy only the signal frequency band and not the image This noise does not include flicker effect frequency band or the IF band. which occurs mainly in the audio-frequency band and which may extend up to about 1 MHz neither does it include grid noise effects which become significant at frequencies above 20 MHz. The results of measurement within the frequency range of 1 to 20 MHz will be substantially the same. 4.16.1.1 The method of measurement specified is not directly applicable to frequency changer tubes unless the input circuits are modified to restrict to the specified input bandwidth. 4.16.1.2 to transmitting Measurement tubes. of equivalent noise resistance is not applicable

4.16.2 A typical set-up, with which equivalent may be measured, is given in Fig. 34.

noise resistance

of a tube

.4.16.3 With the noise diode filament supply turned off and the attenuator short-circuited, the gain of the amplifier, whose bandwidth should lie well within the specified frequency limits, is adjusted to give a convenient reading on the indicating devise of the noise produced by the tube under test.

1s I 4147 - i981

f
OIODE L

1

c
TUBE UNDER TEST

\

/
AMPLIFIER

c
/

r
3.30 - ATTENUATOR
*

1

NOISE
., L

--@
.J

J

.

Fro. 34

SET-UP FOR MEASURINGEQUIVALENTNOISE RESISTANCE

4.16.4 The noise diode and the attenuator are then switched into circuit and the current of the noise diode is adjusted until the reading on indicating device is the same as the previous one. Under this condition, provided that the noise contribution of the amplifier following the tube can be neglected, the following equation applies:

where noise resistance; R,, = equivalent = charge of the electron = 1.60 x lo-19 coulombs; e Id = current through the noise diode, in amperes; R, k T 4.16.4-l = the load resistance = Boltzmann's kelvin; and of the noise diode ( ohms); per degree in constant = l-38 x lo-23 joules of the noise diode

= absolute temperature degree kelvin. R,, is normally quoted

resistance

for the value

T=290"K. K differs

4.16.4.2 If the temperature of the noise diode resistance appreciably from 290"K, a correction should be made. 4.16.5 Disadvantages of this method of measurement

are as follows:

a) The input capacitance of the tube being measured has a shunting effect upon the noise diode resistance; usually this effect is small for values of load resistance up to about 500 ohms. b) Difficulties may arise due to feedback through the anode to grid capacitance of the tube being measured. 4.16.6 A suitable circuit diagram for the first two stages coupled to tube under test ) is given in Fig. 35. 48 ( noise diode

PLIFIER FoLLowm

WITH CATHODE OUTPUT STAGE

Fro. 35

TYPICAL CIRCUIT DIAGRAM FOR MEASURINCJEQUIVALENT NOISE RESISTANCE

4.16.6.1 The tube under test, is first set up to the required current conditions by adjustment of the cathode resistor Rk. Typical values of the resistors RI in the diode circuit and R, in the grid circuit of the tube being measured are: 100 Q and 1 M&2 respectively 2 000 R 700 Q and 1 M hLrespectively 100 000 Q for values of Req between 100 Q and 2 000 Q and the following

for values of Req between in this circuit,

4.16.6.2 In carrying out measurement precautions should be observed: The centre a> associated

frequency of the pass-band of the amplifier and its circuits should be sufficiently high to avoid the effect of flicker noise and sufhciently low to avoid the effect of induced grid noise. b) The amplifier and the indicating device following the attenuator should be capable of handling, without distortion, signals whose peak value is approximately ten times that of their greater mean value. C) In view of the high gain necessary in the amplifier circuit and of the low signal level of the order of one microvolt encountered in this measurement, care should be taken to provide adequate screening to avoid unwanted pick-up and feedback. 49

IS:4147

-1981

d) In the case of tubes having a high mutual conductance and a relatively large anode-gride capacitance C,,, the difficulties caused by unwanted feedback may have to be eliminated by the use of normal neutralization techniques. e) If the temperature of the noise 29O'K, its value should be noted f) diode resistor is different and a correction applied. circuit of the tube from under

All resistors associated with the input test shall be of a low noise type.

4.17

Audio

Frequency

Noise

and

Microphones

4.17.1 The tube under test shall have the specified operating potentials applied to all elements and shall be tested in an acoustic chamber, with a 180 mm ( approximately ) or 200 mm ( approximately ) diameter speaker having a nominal free-air-cone-resonance of 70 Hz or lower, and a power rating of 5 watts, minimum, mounted on the 280 by 450 mm closed end and facing inward, and the tube test socket mounted approximate 80 mm The top and sides of the acoustic chamber from the opposite open end. shall be free and clear of all material that might affect the acoustic characteristics. The anode of the tube under test shall be coupled through a 0 1 PF capacitor to an audio amplifier having an input resistance of approximately 100 000 ohms and a response characteristic between 60 and 5 000 Hz, flat wrthin & 2.0 dB of the 400 Hz response with a resistor load substituted for the speaker. The power amplifier shall be capable of delivering 5 watts with less than 10 percent distortion. The speaker shall be coupled to the output of the amplifier so as to present rated load to the amplifier. The output indicator shall be a standard VU meter. The VU meter with its attenuator shall be bridged across a suitable tap on the The VU meter may have the dial calibrated in output of the amplifier. electrical or arbitrary units, but the attenuator shall be designed to retain the ballistic characteristic specified for the VU meter. The callibrated points used for setting the amplifier gain shall be the rejection points and shall be determined for each test set on the basis of the power in the At 400 Hz and 50 mW the resistor shall have been resistor load only. adjusted to the same impedance as the voice coil for which it is substituted. The amplifier gain shall be ad.justed (without the tube in the test socket ) to give the specified output with the specified calibration voltage at 400 Hz applied to the anode terminal of the tube test socket. The calibrating voltage shall be removed and the tube under test inserted ( see Fig. 36 ). When operating under the above conditions, the tube shall be tapped, with a mallet on mechanical tapping device, at least three times in each of two directions which are at right angles to each other.

50

IS : 4147 - 1981

Ml

A = Audio amplifier C, = 4 @F capacitor ( Min ) C.N = Coupling network vsig - 400 Hz signal source LS = Loudspeaker Ml = Voltmeter M2 = Output meter connected to Tad with rated impedance

Rp = Grid resistor SW = Transfer 12 Test auto transformer switch Calibrate

i = Tapped

FIN. 36 AUDIO FREQUENCY NOISE AND MICROPHONICS TEST 4.17.2 Objectionable noise or microphonism shall be defined as: microphonic, or oscillation over a) Background noise, sustained 2 seconds in duration having greater than & mW output power level. b) Clicks or scratchy noise of any sort. 4.17.3 When operating under the above conditions, no objectionable noise or microphonism shall be evident either with the tube at rest or when it is tapped. NOTE- The ballistic deflection as indicated by the output meter shall not
exceed the maximum output specified.

4.18 Hiss and Hum
4.18.1 General -

Measurement

of hiss and

hum

is not applicable

to

transmitting

tubes.

4.18.1.1 Hiss - The hiss is expressed as an equivalent rms grid voltage and should be measured by a device reading true rms voltage. Unless otherwise stated, the measuring circuit should have a frequency characteristic which does not deviate by more than 3 dB from its response at 400 Hz over the range between the half-power points 25 and 10 000 HZ.
51

IS:4147 -1981 The rate of decrease outside the frequency range should be approximately 6 dB per octave. The operating conditions of the tube shall be clearly specified, including the impedance of the external connections to all electrodes. voltage 4.18.1.2 Hum -The hum and should be measured is expressed as an equivalent rms grid by a device reading tube rms voltage. be nominally 50 Hz, the

The ac filament heater supply should harmonic content of which shall be known.

The hum should be measured through a filter having an agreed passband. This may be either a low-pass filter having a sharp cut-off at approximately 600 Hz or for certain purposes an ear filter. This latter filter is useful where the actual audible result of the hum is required to be assessed, although in this case, where the hum con- tent is very low, the figure obtained may be influenced by the presence of hiss. The operating conditions of the tube being measured shall be clearly specified, including the impedances of the external connections to all electrodes and any ac or dc voltage between filament or heater and the cathode. 4.18.2 measuring
Msasurinp

circuit

Circuit - Fig. 37 shows used for these measurements.

the

block

diagram

of the

~~~~~~~~H~~~~

Fro. 37 A typical 4.18.3

BLOCK DIAGRAM OF HISS AND HUM MEASURING CIRCUIT

circuit

diagram

is shown

in Fig. 38.

Measuring

Procedure of the amplifiers -

4.18.3.1

Calibration

tage should be applied to the signal voltage E, ( approx should then be applied to the the attenuation of the second expressed in decibels. The adjusted to a certain value E, second amplifier.

The specified dc supply volbeater by means of the switch S8, A known 3 mV ) from the 400 Hz signal generator control grid of the tube under test keeping attenuator at a sufficiently large value DO deflection M of output meter should be ( say 0 dB ) by the adjustment of gain of the

52

IS : 4147 - 1981
SHIELOEO ZOME

I = Tube being measured. Ra, &, Rg, Rk, Rs. Rsg = Resistors (values to be stated. Resistors Ra and Rg should be of a type which does not introduce additional noise ). Cq, CR, Csg = Capacitors (values to be stated ). S,, Ss, Ss = Switches. Ebb - Anode dc voltage source ( value to be stated ). Yae - AC heater voltage source ( value to be stated ). Vde = DC heater voltage source ( the same value ac Vae).

Fro. 38
4.18.3.2

TYPICAL

CIRCUIT FOR MEASURING HISS AND HUM

process mentioned in 4.18.3.1, the input signal voltage should be removed by opening the switch S1. The deflection M of the output meter should be again adjusted to the same value E, (say 0 dB ) as in 4.18.3.1, by decreasing the attenuation of the second attenuator to a value D1 expressed in decibels. The value of the hiss noise-voltage Ehlss expressed in decibels ( with respect to an arbitrarily chosen reference voltage ) at the input terminal of the tube being measured is found from the following formula:
20

Measurement

of

hiss noise-voltage -

After

the

calibration

log

+!!_ = - Do + DI s

The above equation holds true only if the hiss is negligible when compared to the calibrating signal. A reasonable accuracy to be expected is approximately 10 percent.
53

IS : 4147.1981 4.18.3.3 Measurement of hum noise-voltage - After the measurement of the hiss noise-voltage, the filter (see 4.18.1.2 ) should be switched in circuit and the specified ac voltage should be supplied to the heater by means of the other contacts of the switch Ss. The deflection M of the output meter should be again adjusted to the same value E, as in 4.18.3.1 by changing the attenuation of the second attenuator to a suitable value De. The value of the hum noise-voltage E,, um expressed in decibels ( with respect to an arbitrarily chosen reference voltage ) at the input terminals of the tube being measured is found from the following formula:

20 log +

E 8

= D, + Dp

The above equation holds true only if the hum is negligible when compared to the calibrating signal. A reasonable accuracy to be expected is approximately 10 percent. 4.18.3.4 Measurement of hiss and hum noise-voltage - Combined hiss and hum may be measured in accordance with 4.18.3.3 above, but with the heater of the tube connected to an ac supply. are applicable: 4.18.4 Pwautions - The following precautions Each measurement should be made at least three minutes after a) the application of the heater voltage. b) It is important that the ripple in the supply voltages be negligible.

4

4
4 f)

If an internal shield exists in the tube under test, it should be grounded. Care should be taken to shield the tube under test from stray magnetic and electric fields. Unless otherwise specified, it is customary to ground the lower The switch Ss allows either side or any numbered heater pin. other point of the heater to be grounded. The socket used for the measurements has considerable influence on the results obtained owing to stray capacitance and leakages. Therefore, for standardization and comparison purposes, a fully shielded socket should be used. It is recognized that, because of differences in commercially available sockets, the hum and hiss produced by a particular tube in an equipment may be different from the values obtained by the recommended method of measurement.
Resistance

4.19 Conversion 4.19.1 For

a resistance-ratio method a simplified diagram for the measurement of the conversion resistance is given in Fig. 39. The diagram does not include the power sources required for operating the tube under test. 54

ISr4143-1981

Fm. 39

SIMPLIFIED CIRCUIT FOR MEASUREMENT OF CONVERSION RESISTANCE

4.19.2 The oscillator voltage I',,, is applied to the same grid as that to This is a special which it is applied for the actual function of the tube. grid in the case of multiplicative mixing, whereas the signal grid serves as The signal voltage is a mixer grid also in the case of additive mixing. assumed to be small for the determination of all mixer characteristics; therefore, its intluence can be neglected for the measurement of the conversion resistance and only the oscillator voltage Voso is to be taken into account.

4.19.3 The frequency f m at which the conversion resistance is measured should be low enough with respect to the oscillator frequency JcosO, in order not to influence the measuring result and to allow adequate separation in the output circuit.
4.19.4 Under

derived

conditions from the equation:

of balance,
Y(C) =

the conversion

resistance

r( c ) is

R3 x R3 RI in Transmitting Tube

4.20 Intermodulation

Products

4.20.1 Intermodulation is unwanted generation of power at new nonharmonic radio frequencies as the result of simultaneous application of power at two or more frequencies to a non-linear amplifying electron device. Measurement of the level of the intermodulation products provides an indication of the distortion caused to an input signal by a tube as the result of non-linearity of its transfer characteristics,

4.20.2

Methods of Measurements

4.20.2.1 The two-frequency or two-tone method is the recommended method for measuring intermodulation products of transmitting tubes. Two equal amplitude radio frequency signals applied simultaneously to 55

If3: 4147- 1981 the input of the amplifier tube, produce, ponents of substantially equal amplitude in addition, intermodulation products. 4.20.2.2 The frequencies valent to pfl + qfa and pfl positive integers. at the output, fundamental comat radio frequenciesfl andfs and

qfewherein

of the intermodulation products are equithe coefficients p and q are any

4.20.2.3 Only the intermodulation components having integral coeEicients whose difference is unity ( p - q = 1 ) fall within the passband of the output circuit or near enough to it to have an appreciable amplitude.
care should be taken NOTE - In high-power transmittin, u tube measurements, to ensure that no intermodulation products originate in the measuring equipment because of overloading. This may require careful shielding of the measuring apparatus.

4.20.2.4 Furthermore, if modulation the two frequencies f 1 and f2, care should

techniques are used to develop be taken to ensure: equipment

a) that no modulation products arise in the low-frequency or during the process of modulation;

b) that the modulation frequencies are neither harmonically related nor related in such a fashion as to produce intermodulation having frequencies so near to each other that they cannot be resolved. 4.20.3
Choice of Frequencies

4.20.3.1 The two input frequencies should be chosen that the intermodulation products fall in clear channels.

with

care so 10 MHz. between

4.20.3,2

The preferred

frequencies separation

lie between of fi

1 MHz and

4.20.3.3 The frequency 400 Hz and 3 000 Hz. 4.20.4
Basic Circuit

and fa is usually

4.20.4.1

A recommended

circuit

is shown

in Fig. 40.

4.20.4.2 circuit except operation.

No negative feed back is to be used in the measurement that the amplifier may be neutralised if necessary for stable
for non-

NOTE - Feedback may be used in equipment operation to compensate linearity but it shall not be used in the tube measurements.

4.20.4.3

adequately

The power supplies to the tube decoupled and well regulated.

being

measured

shall

be

4.20.4.4 This applies particularly to the grid supplies regulated to & 1 percent unless otherwise stated. 56

which

shall be

ts : 4147- 1981
SPECTRUM ANALYSER AND OlJTPUl MONITOR

RESISTIVE

LOAD

CONTROL GRID VOLTAGE SREEN GRID VOLTAGE

_ ANODE VOLTAGE

FIG. 40

BASIC CIRCUIT FORMEASUREMENT OF INTERMODULATION PRODUCTS IN TRANSMITTING TUBES

4.20.4.5 AS the amplifier input impedance varies with the drive level the internal impedance of the driving stage should be less than 10 percent of the input impedance. The drive impedance shall be stated. The spectrum analyser which is coupled to the output circuit shall be capable of clear resolution of all intermodulation products when GO dB below either fundamental signal. 4.20.5 Measurements ( Peak Envelope Power ) ( P. E. P. )

4.20.5.1 In making measurements, the sequence below shall be followed: a) No negative feedback shall be used in the measurement unless required for stable operation. If neutralisation is needed the fact shall be stated; any adjustment shall be made with no anode current flowing, preferably under cold conditions and no further adjustment shall be made thereafter. b) The stated conditions are adjusted to without r.f. drive. After the no signal current ( la,-, ) is stable, the next step is followed. c) Single-frequency r. f. drive is applied. Keeping screen current within the allowed range, drive level and the variable parameters are adjusted simultaneously ( tuning and coupling in the output, etc ). Thereafter, these adjustments remain fixed. d) Single-frequency input is reduced by 6 dB and tow-frequency signal is switched. Keeping the input signals at equal amplitude, the level of drive is adjusted to achieve the same value of peak envelope power as before. $7

IS : 4147 - 1981

On the spectrum analyser the intermodulation identifying the order as necessary.

ratio

is measured

e) The

intermodulation ratio is observed whilst the level of drive is varied. The intermodulation ratio is measured at the highest level of intermodulation product and the tube operating conditions including load impedance and Qfactor of the output circuit, are stated.
Rurnout

4.21 Filament
4.21.1

The purpose of this test is to ensure that the filament suspensions is designed such that when the filament opens, no permanent short circuit occurs between the filament and any element carrying anode voltage. 4.21.2 the filament Raise the Vf until the filament opens. to elements carrying V + voltage. Test for shorts from

4.21.3 If a short circuit is indicated it shall not pass a current in excess of five times the rated filament current without burning out the short circuit. 4.21.4 4.22
4.22.1

This is a destructive

test.

Bump

This test is normally used to check the brittleness of the filaments in tubes having thoriated tungusten filaments and to check the quality of ceramic insulators. 4.22.2 Each tube shall be mounted in a vertical position in the test equipment. No electrical potential shall be applied to the tube during the test. The test shall be carried out in accordance with the methtod specified in IS : 589-1961*. 4.23
Mechanical Shock 4.23.1

The object of this test is to determine the structural integrity and performance of tubes when they are subjected to mechanical shock. The test shall be carried out in accordance with the method specified in IS : 5891961* in addition to the condition specified below. 4.23.2
Conditions of Application of Shock

4.23.2.1

successively,

Shock impulses that is:

shall be applied

to the tube in four directions

a) With the main axis of the tube and the major cross-section of the electrode assembly at right angles to the direction of the accelerating force;
*Basic climatic ment ( revised ), and mechanical durability tests for components for electrical equip-

58

IS : 4147 - 1981

b)

With the main axis of the tube at right angles of the electrode assembly major cross-section accelerating force; the main axis of the tube parallel accelerating force and with the principal the accerlating force; and

to and with the parallel to the of the facing of the facing

C>With 4

to the direction base of the tube to the direction base of the tube

With the main axis of the tube parallel accelerating force and with the principal away from the accelerating force.

4.23.2.2 The tube to which the shock is to be clamped so that the shock is transmitted to the whole be applied via the base pins only. This may be achieved the tube or by embedding in wax in a rigid container. to ensure proper transmission of shock to the tube. 4.23.3
Measuring Conditions

applied is suitably tube. It must not either by clamping Care must be taken

4.23.3.1 Tubes shall be subjected to shock in accordance or more of the defined conditions which may be as follows:

with

one

a) with the tube cold, that is no voltages b) with defined voltages applied c) with the required circuit indicators Appendix A ). 4.23.4 the test.

applied; or short( see

to the electrodes;

filament or heater voltage applied and connected to the various electrodes specification before and

The tube shall meet the laid down

after

4.24 Vibration 4.24.1 The Purpose of this test is to determine the effect on component parts of vibration in the specified frequency range. The test shall be carried out in accordance with the method specified in IS : 589-1961* in addition to the conditions specified below. 4.24.1.1 Fixturing and control points - For each axis of vibration, the tube under test shall be rigidly mounted on a suitable fixture that is free from mechanical resonance over the test frequency. The test fixture shall not cause attentuation of the energy level exhibited at the platform using accepted standards of measurements for calibration of the shock level and time duration. The tube may also be mounted directly on the vibration table. If a fixture is used, it shall be so designed as to transmit the acceleration along the required axis. The vibration input shall be monitored and controlled at a point on the fixture close to the attachment points of the tube.
ment ( revised ).

*Basic climatic and mechanical durability tests for components for electrical

equip-

59

is :4147-1981 4.24.1.2 Low-frequency ( 2.5 Hz ) vibration - The tube shall be rigidly mounted on a table vibrating with simple harmonic motion at a frequency of 25 f 2 Hz with a fixed amplitude of l-016 & 0.063 mm ( total excurEach tube shall be vibrated in positions sion of 2.032 f 0,127 mm). ` X' and `Y', except that if the cumulative result of tests on 50 or more tubes of a construction shows that more than 75 percent of the tubes have higher output voltages in one position, subsequent measurements shall be taken only in the position giving the higher readings. The voltages specified in the detail specification shall be applied to the tube during vibration. The value V, under test conditions shall be regarded as vbts) and shall be applied to the tube through the specified resistor, Rta), The impedances of anode and screen voltage supplies shall not exceed that of a 40 PF capacitor at 10 Hz ( Preconditioning of the tube at these voltages is permissible ). The value of the alternating voltage VB ( rms ) produced across the resistor ( R, ) as a result of vibration shall be measured with This device shall have an appropriate voltage range a suitable device. and shall have the ability to measure with an error of less than 10 percent, the rms value of a sine wave of voltage of all frequencies from 20 to 5 000 Hz. Thermal or VU meters may be used provided the shunting effect on the anode load does not result in error greater than the 10 percent allowed above. Unless otherwise specified, each tube shall be vibrated for a time necessary to obtain a stable reading of output voltage The stable or for a maximum period of 30 seconds in any one position. Howreading shall not exceed that specified in the detail specification. ever, if at the end of 30 seconds, the average value of the meter reading exceeds 50 percent of the maximun speaified voltage and is increasing, the tube shall be vibrated for a total time of 3 minutes, and the tube rejected if the average value of the meter reading at the end of this period exceeds When this test is conducted no measurethe maximum specified voltage. ment is made of output voltage; each tube shall be vibrated for 60 seconds The test shall not result in tap or each in positions ` X' and c Y'. permanent shorts or defects which will cause the tube to be inoperable.
4.24.1.3 High-frequency (50 Hz) vibration - The test shall be conducted as specified in clause 4.24.1.2, except the frequency of the Upon completion of the test, the tube vibrating table shall be 50 f 2 Hz. shall comply with the criteria specified in 4.24.1.2. 4.24.1.4 Operation vibration - The tube shall be vibrated in accordance with 4.24.1.2 with the specified operating conditions applied. A test load shall be arranged to pick up some power output from the tube. If the load is not vibrated witb the tube, it shall be arranged so that the frequency pulling of the tube is negligible compared to the variation in frequency due to the vibration of the tube. The total radio frequency spectrum, including any permanent change in frequency shall not exceed the limit specified in the detail specification. k'or klystrons, the test

60

IS r4147 -1981 load, as seen by the tube, shall be as specified in the detail specification. Spectrum bandwidth determination shall be made during the test, with the operating conditions held unchanged. 4.24.1.5 Non-operating vibration - The tube shall be vibrated at the specified frequency and acceleration in accordance with 2.24.1.2. The conditions of operation before and after vibration including the adjustment of the tunes mechanism and reflector voltage shall remain unchanged. The difference between the oscillation frequencies before and after vibration shall not exceed the limit specified. 4.24.1.6 Swe+$equency vibrahon - The tubes shall be fastened rigidly to the vibration platform and vibrated with simple harmonic motion over a frequency range of 50 to 2 000 Hz at peak acceleration value specified in the detail specification. If not specified, the peak The acceleration over the frequency acceleration shall be 100 m/se@. range shall be within 10 percent of the referenced acceleration at 100 Hz. At all frequencies from 50 to 2 000 Hz the total harmonic distortion of the acceleration waveform shall be less than 10 percent. The frequency shall increase from 50 to 2 000 Hz with approximately logarithmic progression versus time and shall require 4 minutes minimum, 5 minutes Each tube shall be vibrated in positions maximum, to traverse the range. X and Y, except that if the cumulative results of tests on 50 or more tubes for given construction show that more than 75 percent of the tubes have a higher output voltage on one position, subsequent measurements need only be taken in the position giving the higher readings. For special construction tubes, vibration positions shall be indicated in the detail specification.
Receiving tubes - Receiving tubes shall be tested in accordance with as mentioned above, except that the frequency range shall be traversed in 1 minute minimum, 3 minutes maximum. The specified voltages shall be applied to the tube during vibration. The value of V, under test conditions shall be regarded as Vb(&) and shall be applied to the tube through the specified resistor R8. The value of the alternating voltage, Va(rms) produced across the resistor R,, as a result of vibration, shall be measured with a suitable device. This device shall have an appropriate voltage range and shall have the ability to indicate with an error of less than 10 percent the rms value of sine wave at all frequencies as specified below. The voltage I/`, (rms ) shall be capacitance coupled to the measuring system consisting of cables, amplifier, low-pass filter, and indicator. Input impedance of the measuring system shall have a minimum value of at least 10 times the resistor, RB at 10 kHz. Combined frequency response from the capacitor input through the amplifier and filter shall be flat within f 1 dB from 50 Hz to 10 kHz, as referenced at 1 kHz shall be down 10 & 2 dB at 15 kHz and down 20 f 3 dB at 20

61

fSt4147-1981 kHz. The impedance of the anode and screen voltage supplies shall not exceed that of a 40 ,,JF capacitor at 10 Hz. The value of V, ( rms ) shall not exceed the limit specified at any point in the sweep-frequency range nor shall this result in open circuits, permanent shorts, or tap shorts. 4.24.1.7 Sweep-frequency vibration fatigue ( destructive test ) - The tubes shall be fastened rigidly to the vibration platform and vibrated with simple harmonic motion over a frequency range of 50 to 2 000 Hz at a peak acceleration value of 100 m/sets. The acceleration over the frequency range shall be within f 25 percent of the referenced acceleration at 50 Hz. The frequency of vibration shall be varied from 50 to 2 000 Hz and back to 50 Hz with the period of the sweep cycle being 10 minutes minimum to 20 minutes maximum. The tubes shall be vibrated for a total of 6 hours, that is, 2 hours in each of three planes, X, 3' and 5. For special construction tubes, vibration position shall be specified in the detail specification. Only rated filament or heater voltage shall be applied. Tubes which show one or more of the following defects shall be considered failures: a) Tubes which show permanent wing sweep-frequency fatigue or tap shorts test. or open circuits follo-

b) Tubes which do not comply with post-sweep-frequency fatigue limits as specified in the detail specification.

vibration

4.24.1.8 T'ariable-frequency vibration `- The tubes shall be vibrated under the conditions specified for low-frequency vibration and position < shall be added. The tubes shall be vibrated at a constant amplitude in each of three positions through the frequency range from 10 to 50 Hz and back to 10 Hz. The time for gradually covering the range from 10 to 50 Hz and back to 10 Hz shall be 3 to 15 minutes. Each tube shall be vibrated for 60 seconds at the frequency which gives the maximum vibration output voltage in each of the three positions. If at the end of 60 seconds, the vibration output is increasing, the vibration shall be continued until there is no further increase. The tubes shall not show vibrational output in excess of the maximum limit specified. The test shall not result in tap or permanent interelectrcde shorts or defects which cause the tube to be inoperable. 4.24.1.9 Vibration-fatigue test ( destructive test ) - The tube shall be rigidly mounted on a table vibrating with simple harmonic motion at a frequency of 25 f 2 Hz with an amplitude of 1.02 f 0.06 mm ( total excursion of 2.04 h O-12 mm ) or any equivalent combination offrequency and excursion resulting in 25 mjsecs applied to the tube under test. The tubes shall be vibrated for a total of 96 hours, 32 hours in each of three positions, X, Y and 5. Only rated filament or heater voltage shall be 62

IS : 414f) - 1981 applied. Tubes which show one or more of the following defects shall be considered failures: a) Tubes which show permanent following vibration-fatigue test. or tap shorts or open circuits limits

b) Tubes which do not comply with post-vibration-fatigue specified in detail specification. 4.25 Life Tests 4.25.1 Cathode Interface 4.25.1.1
Measurement Li) conditions

a) The tube measured shall be operated under the conditions spcified in detail specification. b) Heater voltage shall be controlled within 1 percent of the value specified. c) Preheat by applying the specified heater voltage used for the measurement for not less than 5 minutes. d) Life-tested tubes shall not be subjected to any other electrical measurements between the end of the life test and interface test. e) When testing multisection tubes, the opposite sections may be grounded, cutoff, or floating. f) If the anode current specified in detail specification cannot be obtained on an individual tube, the interface measurement shall be made at zero bias. 4.25.1.2 The tubes shall be operated for 500 hours with 110 percent of normal heater voltage applied and with other electrodes disconnected. The The tubes shall then be measured for cathode interface impedance. readings of cathode interface resistance shall not exceed the specified lifetest final measurements. This is a destructive test. 4.25.1.3
Impedance test

a) Equipment - Interface impedance may be measured by any equipment capable of meeting the calibration requirements specified below. The equipment shall be capable of measuring the calibration network to within & 15 percent of the RI value given in the calibration network of Fig. 41. b) Calibration - Calibration shall be performed by connecting the calibration networks in series with the cathode of an interface free tube operated at a maximum of 2 500 micromhos transconductance. Any tube type, capable of the specified transconductance, is satisfactory of this calibration. The calibration procedure need be performed using only one tube type.
63

IS I 4147 - 1981
c) To determine whether the calibration tube is interface free, use is made of the temperature sensitive characteristics of the interface resistance. With the calibration network in series with the cathode of the tube, interface resistance is measured at 20 percent lower than rated heater voltage and at 20 percent higher than rated heater voltage. If the difference between the two readings is less than 10 percent, the tube shall be accepted for use as an interface-free tube.

:oo
-005 UF -oi)5 iJF OHMS .oo 5 IL=

(Resistors

shall be non-inductive deposited film type of l-percent accuracy) FIG. 41

carbon

INTERFACE NETWORKS

4.25.2

Heater-cycling

L.if

4.25.2.1 A complete cycle is made in a `L-minute period as follows: 1 minute `on `, 1 minute `off `, duration of the cycling test shall be 2 000 cycles.' The heater-voltage supply shall have a regulation of not more than 3 percent ( no load to steady-state load ). Heater-cathode voltage shall remain on continuously. Any tube which shows an open heater open-cathode circuit, heater cathode short, or fails to meet any specified life-test final measurements for this test prior to the completion A leakage dc of the cycling test shall be considered a defective tube. current in excess of 0.5 mA between the heater and the cathode shall be considered a heater-cathode short. Sampling shall be as specified. This is a destructive test. 4.25.2.2 Electrical or mechanical defectives may be used for this test except for the following: a) Tubes shal,l be within initial limits for heater or filament current. b) Tubes shall meet the post-heater-cycling acceptance criteria. 4.25.3 Intermittent Lift 4.25.3.1 When intermittent life-test is performed, the tubes shall be operated under the specified test conditions with the filament or heater 64

IS : 4147 - 1981 supply interrupted periodically. There shall be 12 to 25 uniform cycles, totalling approximately 20 hours of ` on ' operation each 24 hours. The filament or heater supply shall be applied and removed instantaneously. Other potentials may be applied continuously, at the option of the manufacturer. The accumulation of the ` on ' time shall be the time considered in determining compliance with the minimum specified time value. The filament or heater-supply impedance shall not exceed 10 percent of the hot filament-load impedance. Warm up time, fk, when specified in the detail specification as a test condition for intermittent life-test, shall be adhered to at the beginning of each ` on ' period. This is a destructive test. 4.25.3.2 Tube intermittent life-test procedure - Regular life-test shall be in effect initially and shall continue in effect until the eligibility criteria for the reduced-hours life-test have been met. Sampling shall be as specified. This is a destructive test. Regular Life Test a) Regular life test shall be conducted for 1 000 hours. of the specified b) Regular life test acceptance shall be on the basis 500 and 1 000 hour life test final measurements.

Reduced-hours Life Test a) Eligibility for reduced-hours life tests is established when no first sample failure due to the regular 1 000 hours life test has occurred in the preceding 3 consecutive lots. b) Reduced-hours life test shall be conducted for 500 hours and acceptance shall be based on the 500 hour life test final measurements. TWO 500 hour life test lot failures occurring in the last 3 consecutive lots shall result in loss of eligibility for reducedhours life testing. c) The life-test sample from the first lot continue on life test for an additional life test time ). Failure of this sample test final measurements shall result in hours testing. The life-test sample accepted each month shall 500 hours ( IO00 hours total to meet the 1 000 hour life loss of eligibility for reduced-

shall be read at the following times: 0 hours + 48 hours 500 - 24 hours + 48 hours 1 000 ( when in force ) - 24 hours 65

ISr4147-1981 Additional facturer. 4.25.4 reading period may be used at the discretion of the manu-

Stability Life the stability of

4.25.4.1 The purpose of this test is to determine specified characteristics during early life.

4.25.4.2 This is a test of 2 `to 20 hour duration, under specified conditions, preceded and followed by measurements of one or more specified characteristics, and with maximum percentage characteristics changes specified for individual tubes. The AQL and sample size shall be as specified. 4.25.4.3 a) Procedure number all the tubes of the sample. on the entire under specified

Serially

b) Record sample voltage

the specified characteristic measurements after maximum operation of 15 minutes and current conditions.

c) The regular stability-life test sample shall be operated at the specified stability-life-test conditions, or equivalent, for 20 f 4 hours with an intermediate down-period reading point at 2 hours f 30 minutes ( Intermittent or continuous operation may be employed ). The regular stability life test shall be in effect initially and shall continue in effect until the eligibility criteria for the reduced-hours stability life test have been met. d) Reduced-hours stability-life-test.

for reduced-hours stability-life test shall be as i> Eligibility follows: No lot failure due to the regular stability-life has occurred in the preceding 5 consecutive lots. stability-life test shall be conducted for 2 ii) Reduced-hours hours & 30 minutes. Acceptance shall be based on the One lot failing the stability-life test final measurement. reduced-hours stability-life test shall result in loss of eligibility for the reduced hours stability-life test. test sample from the first lot accepted each iii) The stability-life month shall continue on stability-life test to the 20 f 4 hours duration. Failure of this sample to meet the regular stabilitylife test final measurement shall result in loss of eligibility for the reduced-hours stability-life test. 66

IS t 4147 - 1981 iv) Life-test conditions shall be conducted as specified except that the mean electrode potentials ( except heater or filament ) may be established at values differing by not more than 5 percent from the specified values, provided the same average electrode dissipations are obtained that occur with the specified voltages. Fluctuations of all voltages, including heater or filament voltage, shall be as small as practicable. v) Measurements of the specified characteristics at the specified reading periods are recorded. The measurements shall be taken immediately following the specified reading periods, or the tubes shall be preheated for a maximum of 15 minutes under specified voltage and current conditions and the characteristics immediately measured following the specified reading periods. 4.25.5 quality Survival Rate-Life the maintenance of

4.25.5.1 The purpose of this test is to check level in terms of early life survival. 4.25.5.2 Proccdurc are selected as specified.

a) Samples

b) Tubes are tested at 100 hours for short and discontinuity detection. When any tap-short indication is obtained, the test, shall be repeated. When any tap shorts are again obtained, the tube shall be rejected as inoperable. c) The number mined. of tubes defective at the number IOO-hour period is deter-

d) If more than the shall be rejected.

allowable

of defectives

occur, the lot

4.25.5.3 Equivalent-conditions - For survival-rate life test, the equivalent stability-life test conditions shall be interpreted as having the same heater voltage ( Vi ) and the heater cathode voltage ( Vnk ) as the stability life test; and the same interruption rate as the intermittent Iife test. The electrode voltages shall be such that the element dissipations are not less than 80 percent nor more than 100 percent of stability-life test anode dissipation. These voltages shall be maintained within the limits of 50 percent minimum and 200 percent maximum of specified voltages.

67

IS a 41;47 - 1981

APPENDIX [Clause 20.3.1
SHORT-CIRCUIT

A
(c) ]

INDICATOR

A-l. A single stage of a typical thyratron-controlled indicator which may be inserted between each pair of elements in a tube for the purpose of indicating short-circuits is shown in Fig. 42.

A+B c D s R

To elements of tube to which shock is applied To following stage To preceding stage Reset switch Potentiometer for adjusting sensitivity

Fro. 42

SHORT CIRCUIT INDICATOR

A-2. A typical setting of this indicator is when the potentiometer R is adjusted to indicate a short.circuit with a 50 000 ohms resistor connected across the terminals A and B and to give no indication with 75 000 ohms connected across A and B.

68

INDIAN
ON

BTANbARD%

ELECTRON TUBES

IS:

1885 ( Part
1885 ( Part 1885 ( Part 1885 ( Part 1885 ( Part 1885 ( . Part 1885 ( Part 1885 ( Part 2032 ( Part

2032 ( Part 2597 ( Part 2597 ( Part 2597 ( Part 2597 ( Part 2597 ( Part 2684 ( Part 2684 ( Part 2684 ( Part 2684 ( Part 2684 ( Part 3154-1965 4096-1973 4147-1981 4579-1968 4697-1968 5323-1969 5627-1970 5840 ( Part 5840 ( Part 5840 ( Part 6134 ( Part

IV/Set 1 )-I973 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron Tubes, Section 1 Common terms (jirst revision ) IV/Set 2 )-1973 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes, Section 2 X-ray tubes ( jirstrevision ) IV/Set 3 )-1970 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 1V Electron tubes, Section 3 Mircowave tubes IV/Set 4 )-1970 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes, Section 4 Cathode-ray tubes IVjSec 5 )-1972 Electrotecbnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes, Section 5. Pulse terms IV/Set 6 1-1972 Electrotechnical vocabularv: Part IV Electron tubes. I ' Section 6' Noise in microwave tubes IV/Set 7 )-1973 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes, Section 7 Camera tubes IV/Set 8 )-I973 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes, Section 8 Photosensitive devices Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part IX Electron IX )-I969 tubes (other than microwave tubes ) XIII )-1971 Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: ". Part XIII ' Microwave tubes Code of practice for the use of electron tubes: Part I Commercial I )-1964 receiving tubes II)-1967 Code of practice for the use of electron tubes: Part II Special quality receiving tubes Code of nractice for the use of electron tubes: Part III TransIII )-1969 mitting and industrial tubes Code of practice for the use of electron tubes: Part IV CathodeIV )-1970 ray tubes Code of practice for the use of electron tubes: Part V Rectifiers V )-1971 and thyratrons Dimensions of electron tubes: Part I Miniature `g-pin type ' (Jirst I )-1972 reuision ) II )-1972 Dimensions of electron tubes: Part II Mkiature ` 7-pin type ' (JFrst revision ) Dimensions of electron tubes: Part III Octal base type III ) -1971 Dimensions of electron tubes: Part IV Maenoval base tvne IV l-1971 '* Dimensions of electron tubes: Part V Locay base type V ):I972 Specification for X-ray tubes, diagnostic type Method of measurement of optical focal spot size of X-ray tubes (jkt revision ) Method of measurements on conventional receiving electron tubes (first rezivivn ) Method of measurements on television picture tubes Method of measurements on Geiger Muller counter tubes Letter svmbols and abbreviations for electron tubes Methods of measurements on cathode-ray display tubes I )-I970 Dimensions of cathode-ray tubes: Part I Tube outlines II )-I970 Dimensions of cathode-ray tubes: Part II Base type 111 )-1970 Dimensions of cathode-ray tubes: Part III EHT Terminals I )-1978 Methods of measurements on microwave tubes: Part I Common to all microwave tubes

fS: 6134 ( Part II )-1973 Methods of measurement on microwave tubes: Part II Oscilator tubes 6134 ( Part 161i )--`,",`," Methods of measurement on microwave tubes: Part I II Amplitubes: Part IV 6134 ( Part I; )-1977 Methods of measurement on microwave Magnetrons 6134 ( Part V )-1980 Methods of measurement on microwave tubes: Part V Parasitic noise 6134 ( VI )-I981 Methods of measurement of electrical characteristics of microwave tubes: Part VI Low-power oscillator klystrons 6134 ( Part VII )-1981 Methods of measurement of electrical characteristics of microwave tubes: Part VII High-power klystrons 6134 ( Part VIII )-1981 Methods of measurement of electrical characteristics of microwave tubes: Part VIII Gas-filled microwave switching devices 6134 ( Part IX )-I981 Methods of measurement of electrical characterics ofmicrowave tubes: Part IX Backward-wave oscillator tube - ` 0 ' type 6134 ( Part X )-1981 Methods of measurement of electrical characteristics of microwave tubes: Part X Crossed-field amplifier tubes Basic requirements for cathode-ray tubes 6136-1971 Phosphors for cathode-ray tubes 6214-1971 Radiation protection for an X-ray tube in a protective tube-housing, oper6567-1972 ating between 10 kV and 400 kV Implosion protection for TV picture tubes 6568-1972 Methods of measurements on gas-filled cold cathode indicator tubes 6576-1972 Methods of measurements on gas-filled cold cathode voltage stabilizing and 6577-1972 voltage reference tubes Dimensions for high tension cable terminations for X-ray tubes 6757-1972 Dimensions for high tension receptacles for X-ray tubes 6758-1972 Specification for X-ray tube shield _ 7012-1973 Methods of measurements on camera tubes 7144-1973 7146 ( Part I )-I973 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part I Basic considerations 7146 ( Part II )-1974 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part II Photo-tubes 7146 ( Part III )-1974 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part III Photoconductive cells for use in the visible spectrum 7146 (Part IV )-1974 Methods of measurements on photosensitive devices: Part IV Photomultipliers 8319 ( Part I )-1977 Dimensions of indicator tubes: Part I Tube type 1 8319 I Part II j-1977 Dimensions of indicator tubes: Part II Tube type 2 Dimensions of indicator tubes: Part III Tube-type 3 8319 ( Part III )-1973 Dimensions of indicator tubes: Part IV Tube type 4 8319 ( Part IV )-I979 Methods of measurements on incidental X-radiation from electron tubes 8441-1977 Dimensions of sign indicator tubes: Part I Tube type 1 9383 ( part I )-1979 9383 ( Part I1 )-1979 Dimensions of sign indicator tubes: Part II Tube type 2 9492-1980 Methods of measurement of RF/microwave leakage from integral circuit electron tubes

