RAT TAP IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 
Indian Standard 


AHISS Stel TR 
ATT 1 afer 


Unified Data Exchange 


Part 1 Architecture 


ICS 33.020, 35.020 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM SAN 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEMAR TH Ari, ay Reef 110002 


Ke ari MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 8 


Smart Infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Infrastructure 
Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology Division Council. 


This standard is an Integral part of IS 18002 (under development). The system design principles, high level 
architecture and other aspects mentioned in this standard are derived from IS 18002 (Data layer Key guiding 
principles, Key characteristics, and Core functions). The traceability of this standard with the IS 18002 is provided 
in the Annex A. 


The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


INTRODUCTION 


Data empowerment is a key aspect of any smart city implementation to harness maximum value from the 
enormous data cities generate. The current smart city implementations are unable to satisfy this need efficiently 
due to the proprietary and ad-hoc nature of the interfaces and their implementations. Hence, it is difficult to 
develop next generation AI/ML based applications for providing new solutions and services at scale, using the 
existing frameworks. The Data Exchange as discussed in this document aims to address this gap, by creating 
an architecture (Part 1) and interface specifications (Part 2) for interconnecting various IT systems of different 
government departments as well as external organizations. 


The data exchange will provide three key services: 


a) A catalogue service which will host a catalogue of meta-information about the various data sets, with 
information about the custodian of the data, data model for the data, the API endpoints, API methods etc. 


b) One or more authorization services that will enable a data custodian (one who is responsible for the data) 
to regulate access to their data sets. 


c) One or more resource access services which will allow a standardized way to access resources. 


Security and privacy will be incorporated by design in this architecture. This architecture should simplify the life 
of the data custodian as well as the application developer. 


The data exchange architecture will enable new applications to emerge that can take advantage of data from 
different IT Systems, to provide novel services. For example, a Women’s safety index can calculate the live 
safety index of any street, combining data from smart streetlights, video analytics from traffic cameras, data from 
police databases along with analysis of land use. Such an index can be used by trip planning apps to allow for 
determining safe routes or used by the city or police to plan on patrolling. 


By defining the architecture and specifying the interfaces and data models, the data exchange architecture 
standards will enable a whole new ecosystem of application developers to provide new, data driven, solutions and 
services. Additionally, adopting the data exchange architecture nationally, will enable economies of scale for the 
developers and will allow the same applications to run across the country. For data custodians — the data exchange 
architecture will allow a simple way to expose, provide consent, audit and track their data usage. 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


Indian Standard 


UNIFIED DATA EXCHANGE 
PART 1 ARCHITECTURE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard (Part 1) describes the 
architecture for the data exchange, interfaces of data 
exchange components and the use cases that are enabled 
in this ecosystem. It also describes the responsibilities 
of various stakeholders, their interactions with 
other stakeholders in the system, and the respective 
consequences of those interactions. 


1.2 This Standard (Part 1) also describes the high level 
architecture of the following three main components of 
the data exchange services: 


a) Catalogue service that provides APIs to manage 
meta-information about resources; 

b) Authorization service, that manages authorization 
to access the resources; and 

c) Resource access service, that 
standardized way to access resources. 


provides a 


1.3 A more detailed specification and the API definitions 
for the data exchange architecture is described in part 2. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards. 


2.1 Normative References 
The following referenced documents are necessary for 
the application of the present document. 
[1] IETF RFC 2818: “HTTP Over TLS”. 
[2] IETF RFC 3986: “Uniform Resource Identifier 
(URI): Generic Syntax”. 
[3] IETF RFC 5246: “The Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) Protocol Version 1.2”. 
[4] IETF RFC 6749: The OAuth 2.0 Authorization 
Framework. 
[5] IETF RFC 7231: “Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP/1.1): Semantics and Content”. 
[6] IETF RFC 7232: “Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP/1.1): Conditional Requests”. 


[7] IETF RFC 7946: “The Geo JSON Format”. 

[8] IETF RFC 8259: “The Java Script Object Notation 
(JSON) Data Interchange Format”. 

[9] IS 7900 : 2007: “Data elements and interchange 
formats — Information interchange — 
Representation of dates and times”. 

[10] ISO/IEC 19464 Information technology — 
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) 
v1.0 specification. 

[11] ISISOAEC 29100 2011 (en) Information 
technology — Security techniques — Privacy 


framework. 

[12] OASIS : MQTT 5.0, OASIS Standard. 

[13] Open Geospatial Consortium Inc. OGC 
06-103r4: “OpenGIS® Implementation 
Standard for Geographic 
information-Simple feature access — 


Part 1: Common architecture”. 


[14] TRADE/CEFACT/2005/24 Recommendation No. 
20 - Units of Measure used in International Trade. 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


a) The key terminologies use consolas font type and 
dark cornflower blue 3 color encoding; and 

b) The lower Camel Case is used in attribute naming. 
For nouns, UpperCamelCase is used. 


3.1 Definitions 


3.1.1 Provider 


Provider is a legal entity. Human (possibly delegated 
by an organization), organization or an organizational 
role that has responsibility to provide authorization to 
use resources. 


3.1.2 Resource Server 

Resource server is a service. Serves resources to 
authorized Apps or Consumers. 

3.1.3 Consumer 


Consumer is a legal entity. Human or organization or an 
organizational role that consumes a resource via a web 
or mobile App. Autonomous systems may also act as a 
Consumer on behalf of a legal entity. 


15 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


3.1.4 App 


App is an application. Software (like a mobile app, web 
app, device app or server app), that uses resources to 
provide a service to the consumer. 


3.1.5 Provider App 


Provider App is an Application. An App that enables a 
provider to manage the meta-data and access control in 
the data exchange, for the resources they are responsible 
for. 


3.1.6 Data Exchange 


Data exchange is a service. Hosts and manages 
meta-data about resources and interfaces to manage 
authorization for accessing the resources. 


3.1.7 Consent 


Provider’s freely given, specific and informed 
agreement to the accessing and processing of specific 
resources in their responsibility. 


3.1.8 Certificate Authority 


An entity which provides digital identities to 
participants of DX in the form of digital certificates. 


3.1.9 Personally Identifiable Information 


Any information that (a) can be used to identify the PH 

principal to whom such information relates, or (b) is or 

might be directly or indirectly linked to a PII principal. 
NOTE — To entry: To determine whether a PII principal is 
identifiable, account should be taken of all the means which 
can reasonably be used by the privacy stakeholder holding the 
data, or by any other party, to identify that natural person. 


3.1.10 PII Principal 


Natural person to whom the personally identifiable 
information (PII) relates 
NOTE — To entry: Depending on the jurisdiction and the 
particular data protection and privacy legislation, the synonym 
“data subject” can also be used instead of the term “PII 
principal”. 


3.1.11 Authorization Token 


A machine-readable token that allows a consumer to 
get access to a provider’s data. The authorization token 
is requested by a consumer for a set of resources, and 
is generated by an authorization service after running 
consent rules of a provider. The authorization token 
is to be presented to a resource server by a consumer 
while requesting for data. All authorization tokens shall 
have a valid expiration time. 


3.1.12 Catalogue 

A registry of meta-data about the resources in the data 
exchange available for consumption. 

3.1.13 Resource Item 


An entry in the catalogue that describes the 


meta-information of the resource that is hosted in an 
associated resource server. 


3.1.14 DX Authorization Service 


Authorization service of the data exchange. 


3.1.15 DX Catalogue Service 


Catalogue service of the data exchange. 


3.1.16 DX Adaptor 

Adapter service in front of a non-DX compliant 
resource server. 

3.1.17 DX Administrator 


DX administrator is a legal entity. Responsible 
for administering, managing and running the data 
exchange. 


Abbreviations 
Abbreviation | Definition 
DX Data Exchange 
XML eXtensible Markup Language 
JSON Javascript Object Notation 
API Application Programming Interface 
PII Personally Identifiable Information 
CA Certificate Authority 
RS Resource Server 
AS Authorization Service 
TLS Transport Level Security 
CSR Certificate Signing Reguest 
CCA Controller of Certifying Authorities 


4 DATA EXCHANGE ARCHITECTURE 


The data exchange (DX) is aset of services that enables 
consumption of resources (like data) by a consumer 
from one or more resource servers, based on explicit 
consent obtained from the provider of the resources. 


4.1 System Design Principles 


The architecture and design described in this Standard 
is based on the following principles: 


a) Technology Agnostic — A system is said to 
be technology agnostic if its design is neutral 
to applications, programming languages, and 
platforms. The aim of DX is to be technology 
agnostic to provide seamless and secure flow of 
electronic data between different stakeholders. 

b) Reliability and Scaling — Reliability is the 
probability of failure-free software operation 
for a specified period of time in a specified 
environment. DX systems shall be designed in 
a way that failure of one system should affect 
other systems minimally. Systems must also be 


9) 


d) 


g) 


h) 


designed to recover quickly from failures. The 
design should also allow for scaling individual 
systems when necessary. 

Privacy by Design — Privacy by design is an 
approach where privacy is taken into account in 
the design and engineering aspects from early on. 
The data exchange implementation defines the 
data sharing mechanisms, based on Electronic 
Consent and results in a non-repudiable audit 
trail. The provider of the data resources controls 
the consent to access the resources. Hence, the 
provider shall ensure that PII of PII principals are 
dealt with as per the laws of the land [b.1, b.2]. 
The data exchange will also maintain the privacy 
of consumers and all other actors who interact with 
the exchange based on international standards 
[11]. 

Security by Design — Secure by design indicates 
that a software system has been designed from 
the ground up to be secure. The software and 
systems in the DX shall be secure by design. 
There shall be end-to-end security of data (PKI, 
Digital Certificates, tamper detection) and it shall 
be network agnostic and data centric. 


Consumer Centric — Consumer experience and 
ease of use are critical to successfully deliver 
various services in an ecosystem. The DX 
should take into account the various stakeholder 
responsibilities and mechanisms to simplify 
interactions and ease the access to data and 
services for consumers. 


Consent Driven — A consent-driven architecture is 
one where data is shared with a data consumer only 
if the data provider explicitly provides consent. In 
such a system, data providers must be provided 
with enough information about the consumer 
to make the consent decision. Mechanisms for 
dynamic discovery, empowerment of the provider 
in accordance with the consent architecture 
proposed in [b.2] shall be incorporated to enhance 
trust and ensure data privacy. 


Open APIs for Interoperability — Systems should 
have standardized programmatic interfaces 
(Open APIs) for sharing and accessing digital 
resources easily. The data exchange specification 
shall define standard APIs to promote 
interoperability and deliver services that are 
designed to work with any device, form factor or 
network. 


Transparency through Data — Transparency in 
city operations can be achieved through access 
to Open Data [b.3]. Access to such open data 
will enable high-quality analytics, accurate fraud 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


detection, shorter cycles for system improvement 
and, most importantly, high responsiveness to 
consumer’s needs. The DX shall allow cities to 
adopt this model of transparency by providing 


options to host Open Data through Open APIs. 


4.2 Entities and their Responsibilities 


Table 1 outlines the roles and responsibilities of 
the various entities involved in the data exchange 
ecosystem. 


Table 1 Entities and their Responsibilities 


( Clauses 4.2 and 4.3 ) 


Entity Responsibilities 

a) Provider 1 Manages DX catalogue entries for 
resources owned. 

2 Provides data for resources 
owned. 

3 Manages access control list to 
authorize consumers. 

b) Consumer 1 Request consent if needed for 
accessing secured data-set from 
appropriate provider. 

2 Secure access token received to 
prevent any misuse. 

c) Data Exchange | Hosts and manages meta-data about 
resources and interfaces to manage 
authorization for accessing the resources. 

d) Resource Serves provider’s resources to authorized 

Server clients. 

e) App Consumer’s application, that consumes 
resources on behalf of consumers. 

f) Authorization Provides authorization tokens to 

Service consumers of a DX if the consumers 
are authorized to. It also validates an 
Authorization token, when requested by 
a resource service. 
g) Certificate Provides digital certificates. Their trust 
Authority can be traced to the root certificate 
authorities. 

h) Provider App Helper application used by providers 
to manage interactions with the data 
exchange. 

j) App Developer | An organisation or an individual 
developing applications that consumes, 
produces or manages resources. 

k) Data Exchange | Operates the data exchange. 

Provider 


4.3 High Level Architecture 


The data exchange (DX) architecture consists of 
entities described in Table 1. The entities interact using 
interfaces as shown in Fig. 1. 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


Consumer 


Needs 
Resource 


Provides 


Provider 


Authorisation for Resource 


R: Resource Interface 


A: Authorisation Interface 


D: Discover Interface 
M: Manage Interface 


C: Consent Interface 


l: Identity Interface 


Fic. | DATA EXCHANGE ARCHITECTURE 


The data exchange comprises the following interfaces: 
a) Resource interface, 
b) Authorization interface, 
c) Discover interface, 
d) Manage interface, 
e) Consent interface, and 
f) Identity interface. 


Resources, managed by a provider, are hosted on 
one or more resource servers, and are made available 
for consumption to entities via a description of its 
meta-information (like its format, provider, etc.), 
through a catalogue in the data exchange. The 
catalogue is both human readable as well as 
machine-understandable. 


The provider registers and manages the meta-data of its 
resources and their associated access control policies 
via the management interface of the data exchange. The 
provider may use a helper application, like the provider 
App. The meta-data of each resource should help an 
app developer to ease the consumption of resources in 
order to create useful applications for consumers. 


The App can register with the data exchange to get 
notified about any changes to the meta-data of the 
resources of interest to the consumer. The App obtains 


consent to consume the resources via the authorization 
interface by obtaining an authorization token. 


Any request to a provider’s resource by a consumer 
App will be checked against the existing access control 
policies. If no decision can be made, the data exchange 
may coordinate between the provider and the consumer 
to complete a consent transaction and generate the 
authorization token. The authorization token will 
be logged by the system to ensure auditability of the 
consent flows. The coordination between the provider 
and consumer is done outside the scope of this 
specification and can be built using any of the available 
messaging technologies like SMS/OTP/EMAIL etc. 
The data licensing terms and conditions will also be 
outside the scope of this specification. However, 
reference to license can be provided in the meta-data 
for the resource. 


In order to provide for a better consumer experience, the 
App seveloper may also enter into a resource licensing 
agreement with the provider. In this case, the consumer 
can be shielded from having to get consent separately, 
as long as the App developer and the App adhere to the 
licensing terms and conditions of the provider. 


The set of interfaces for this data exchange architecture 
are listed in Table 2. 


Table 2 Data Exchange Interfaces and 


Functionalities 


( Clause 4.3 ) 


Interface Functionality Remarks 

Manage Create, update, delete, | Interface for the 
list, search and view the | provider to manage 
items in the catalogue. | the resource meta-info 
Create, update, delete Jand access-control 
and view access control | Policies. 
policies. 

List and view 
information about 
consumers. 

Discover List, search, view and | Search can use 
count items in the | complex queries 
catalogue and filters involving 

geo, time and other 
attributes 

Authorization | Request, grant, revoke, | Federated 
introspect access | authorization flows. 
tokens for resources. 

Resource Get latest data, search | Retrieve latest data and 
forresources, get status, | search for resources 
get counts, subscribe, | using complex queries 
update subscription, | and filters. Search can 
unsubscribe. be on Geo, time and 
Playback of live other attributes. 
and archived media 
streams, download 
media files. Stop, Pause 
and Stop playback. 

GIS resources access. 
Service resources 
access. 

Identity Get identities This interface connects 
with external identity 
management systems. 
Defining this will be 
out of scope for this 
standard currently. 

Consent Get consent from | This interface enables 
provider consumers to get 


providers information 
to request consent for 
accessing protected, 
private or confidential 
data. Since it involves 
interactions with 
Humans - it is not 
defined as part of this 
standard currently. 
SMS/Phone/Mail etc 
can be used. Note that 
in case of embedded 


PII, provider has 
responsibility to get 
consent from PH 
principals. 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


These interfaces are specified in detail in Part 2 of this 
standard. 


There are no deployment restrictions imposed by the 
DX. Data exchange using the said architecture and the 
associated interface specifications, can be deployed 
in multiple different ways and DX does not favour or 
impose any specific deployment model. 


4.4 Establishing Identities of Participants 


The identities of the providers, App developers shall 
be established via X.509 certificates. The identity 
of consumers may also be established via ID tokens 
(Open ID connect, SAML 2.0 or industry standards). 
The provisioning and management of these certificates 
or Tokens will be outside the scope of this standard. 


4.5 Data Exchange Services 


The two main services provided by the data exchange 
(DX) are the catalogue service, that allows management 
and search of meta-data about resources, and the 
Authorization service that manages authorization to 
access the resources. These are described in detail in 
4.5.1 and 4.5.2. 


4.5.1 Catalogue Service 


On a high level the DX catalogue service enables the 
following: 


a) Discovery of Data Resources — By providing 
various search mechanisms to discover the 
resources of interest. 


1) For example, geo-based search, text search 
on meta-information, attribute search with a 
given value etc. 


b) Ease of Consumption of Data — By providing 
links to data models objects that describe various 
attributes of the given resource. This facilitates 
data interoperability and easy integration into 
various applications. 


1) Data-models may contain description of 
data types, units, value constraints, text 
descriptions, semantic context etc. for the data 
associated with a given resource. 


c) Semantic Modelling of Meta-information — By 
providing semantic contexts for the attributes 
describing meta-information which leads to 
improved machine readability, interpretability, 
operational interoperability and enables 
vocabulary reuse from other data-model stores 
and taxonomies. 


d) Ease of Access to Data from a Resource — By 


providing formal descriptions of how to access the 
data from a resource. 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


1) For example, API objects to describe REST 
based resources etc. 


e) Feedback Mechanism — The catalogue shall 
provide a feedback mechanism for consumers of 
the data to rate and review the resource. 


At the core, DX catalogue is a store of meta-information 
associated with the data assets/resources available 
with the data exchange. A meta-information object 
may be related to another meta-information object by 
providing explicit references to one another. Further, 
using concepts of linked-data”, semantic grounding 
may be provided for the attributes contained in the 
meta-information objects. The DX catalogue, built on 
top of the meta-information store, provides powerful 
search capabilities to discover resources of interest 
and their associated meta-information (for example, 
data models, api objects etc.). Additionally, the DX 
catalogue provides services to build and maintain the 
meta-information store in a consistent and collaborative 
fashion. 


The meta-information in catalog shall be in 
machine-understandable format and may use open 
standards such as JSON-LD. The meta-information for 
a resource shall support reviews from consumers. 


4.5.1.1 Catalogue interface 


DX catalogue exposes services via a set of APIs built 
on top of the meta-information store. The APIs can be 
broadly categorised into two sets: 


a) Search APIs to discover resources of interest. The 
catalogue supports the following search methods: 


1) Geo-spatial search: Discover items in a 
given geo-spatial bound (applicable to items 
containing geo-spatial attributes); 


2) Attribute search: Discover items with a given 
value for a given attribute; and 


3) Text search: Discover items that contain 
matching words in a set of textual attributes 
(for example, text descriptions etc.). 
b) Management APIs to create, update and delete 
items. 
Further details of catalogue are provided in Part 2 of 


this specification. In particular the following catalogue 
aspects will be described in detail: 


1) API Specifications; and 


2) Representational aspects of 
meta-information objects: various types of 
objects and relationships between the objects, 
representation formats etc. 


4.5.2 Authorization Service 


D https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData 


4.5.2.1 Goals and non-goals 


The main goal of the DX framework is to enable 
seamless sharing of resources while respecting 
ownership, privacy and compliance requirements. DX 
achieves this by defining a set of open standards for 
authorization, data classification, and policy authoring, 
and providing sample implementations according to 
these standards. The standards enable data providers 
and application developers to target a consistent set of 
APIs for authoring policies and accessing data across 
smart city platforms. When DX is used for sharing 
sensitive or PII, the standards ensure that PII principals 
retain control over data shared on the platform in 
accordance with the strongest privacy regulations. 


The authorization service in DX is designed to 
reduce barriers for adoption. In particular, resource 
providers should be able to start sharing resources 
with authorized entities with minimal effort. Towards 
this end, DX will support mechanisms for plugging 
existing non-DX complaint resource and authorization 
servers into the DX ecosystem with simple 
extensions. The authorization service also supports a 
simple-to-understand data classification framework 
and policy authoring tools to help providers migrate to 
the DX framework. 


The following aspects of resource sharing are out of 
scope of DX authorization service. 


a) Data Collection Mechanisms — DX does not 
mandate how data is collected from edge devices 
and transferred to the resource server. 


b) Enforcement of Policy Mechanisms — DX does 
not currently provide mechanisms for enforcing 
policies such as data retention. Data providers 
are expected to enforce policies through other 
means such as legal agreements. However, the 
DX framework shall support technologies such 
as trusted execution environments for policy 
enforcement at the time of data use. 


c) Compliance Requirements — DX does not 
mandate that policies meet specific compliance 
requirements. It is the responsibility of the 
provider to ensure that the policy they define 
meets the required compliance requirements and 
laws. For example, DX does not mandate that a 
data provider only share information for which 
consent for sharing has been obtained. 


d) Information Leakage — DX is not responsible 
for any leakage of information that may occur 
through sharing. Providers are expected to ensure 
that data is appropriately sanitized, for example, 
via anonymization. 


e) It is outside the scope of DX to prescribe what 
the consumer ought to do with the received data, 


post the retention period set by the provider. It is 
expected that the consumer disposes of the data 
in accordance with the policy requirements set 
by the provider, any legal agreement entered into 
with the provider or any regulatory framework 
governing the data. [pr(1)] 


f) DX is not responsible for the correctness of the data 
sharing policy rules of a provider. The providers 
shall ensure that their data policy rules match their 
organization’s policies; and go through the review 
process, be vetted by concerned parties, and tested 
before applying. 


4.5.2.2 Functionalities 


The authorization service in DX shall support the 
following functionalities: 


a) Authentication — A DX authorization service 
shall allow users to authenticate themselves and 
participate in data exchange with valid X.509 
certificates. 


b) Resource Access Policy Management — A 
registered resource provider should be able to 
register resources to be shared in the DX catalog 
service and enable the DX authorization server 
to authorize access to resources on behalf of 
the provider. Resources may be associated with 
scopes and policies that define the set of resource 
attributes a consumer can access. 


c) Resource Access Authorization — A consumer 
application uses the information in the catalog 
to request access from a DX compliant resource 
server. The resource server in conjunction with 
the DX authorization server determines if the 
consumer should be granted data access. Once 
authorization has been obtained, subsequent 
requests for data access may be serviced entirely 
by the resource server. 


4.5.2.3 Actors in the authorization flow 


The main actors of the architecture are: 


a) Provider — Data providers setup access control 
policies for resources they are serving via the 
policy interface exposed by the DX authorization 
server. 


b 


wm 


Consumer Application — The consumer 
application requests access to data from the resource 
server on behalf of the consumer. Consumers 
are expected to obtain X.509 certificates from a 
certificate authority trusted by the DX. The trusted 
CAs shall include certificate authorities licensed 
by Controller of Certifying Authorities, Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Government of India. The DX may also accept 
certificates from other trusted CAs. 


c) Resource Server — The resource server hosts 
resources (data and services). It grants access to 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


resources after validating tokens issued by the 
DX authorization server. 


d) DX Adapter — The DX Adapter is an optional 
entity that sits in front of a non-DX compliant 
resource server. It handles resource access 
requests from the consumer application on behalf 
of the resource server. 


e) DX Authorization Server (DX AS) — The DX 
authorization server is a DX/UMA 2.0 complaint 
auth server that can be configured to control 
access to resources on behalf of the provider. It 
exposes endpoints needed for managing policies, 
permissions and tokens. 


5 SECURITY AND PRIVACY 


This section elaborates on the prerequisites for 
maintaining security and privacy in the data 
exchange architecture. It details the means by which 
authentication, consent and identity is established. 
The manner in which Authorization policies are to 
be created by the provider is also detailed. Privacy 
requirements in particular shall adhere to the laws of 
the land [b.1]. 


5.1 Security Requirements 


a) All participants shall use TLS [1][3] to connect 
with DX. 

b) The DX shall accept client side TLS certificates 
issued by a list of trusted CAs. 

c) The list of trusted CAs shall be decided by the DX 
and shall be communicated to DX participants. 


d) Security Techniques and best practices 
specified in [b.4][b.5][b.6][b.7][b.8][b.9][b.10] 
[b.11][b.12][b.13][b.14][b.15] may be followed. 


e) Scheduled and on-demand security updates from 
the cloud to edge devices shall be possible. 


5.2 Privacy Requirements 


a) All resource-items shall be tagged as 
either “public”, “protected”, “private”, or 
“confidential”. 


b) The protocols used to access resources shall 
always use secure protocols based on TLS. 


c) The authorization token shall be sent through a 
secure and encrypted channel. 


d) The authorization token shall contain the 
authorization server and consumer ID for which 
the token belongs to. For example: 


1) auth.iudx.org.in/user@domain.com/1802 
a84d157ff4d113150aeca8bdacee 


If the request requires access to PII data, then 
along with the token, additional consent may be 
required from data principals in the form of OTP 
or biometrics. 


e 


— 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


[2] HTTPS POST /auth/v1/token 
body=<request-details> 


[1] Search catalog for data-sets 


| Dx Catalog server | | Dx Catalog server | server | | DX | Dx Auth server | | Dx Auth server | 
Consumer 


sumer is NOT authorized] 
[4] HTTP 403 Forbidden 


[3] Run resource owner's authorization policy rules 


thorized] TTT 


HTTP 200 OK 


{ 
[5] token:<token> 
token-type:IUDX 
} 


expires-in:<expiry-in-segonds> 


< 


HTTPS GET <resource-server-api> 


[6] Authorization: IUDX <token> 


[<access-token> is valid] 


HTTP 200 OK 


ou, body=<requested-data> 


[7] HTTPS POST /auth/vl/token/introspect 
body= {"token": ctoken» } 


[8] Verify resource-server's identity through DNS 


[9] Check token validity 
Ld 


HTTP 200 OK 
body = { 
"“consumer":<consumer>, 
[10] "consumer-certificate-class":« class» 
"expiry":cexpiry-times, 
"request":<request> 


[13] HTTP 403 Forbidden 


Server requires a valid certificate (TLS communication) 
Both parties require a valid certificate (TLS communication, mutually authenticated) 


5 Unspecified 


Fic. 2 AUTHORIZATION FLOW 


5.3 Authentication and Consent 


a) 


b) 


d) 


All Providers shall use certificates from DX-CA 
or trusted certificate authorities to connect with 
DX. 


The certificates shall be validated by authorization 

service and be checked against certificate 

revocation lists or OCSP. 

All providers shall be able to manage the access 

control list of their resources using their valid 

digital certificates. 

Catalog security: 

1) Only people with proper authorization shall be 
able to create, update and delete entries in the 
catalog. 


2) The entries in the catalog are linked to the DN 
of a user’s certificate. Thus, only the original 
owner shall be able to modify their own entry. 


e) Consent history: Consent history data is to be 
considered private and is only available to the 
Provider of the resource. Consent history can be 
made available to providers for audit purposes. 


5.4 Authorization Policies 


DX shall enable providers to associate a policy with 
every resource-item in the catalog. The policy should 
govern who has access to the resource described by 
the item and how entities with access should handle 
storage of resource’s data. 


A policy P is a pair of the form (C, A), where: 


a) C defines the set of consumers that are authorized 
for resource access. C may be defined in a 
policy language, such as XACML or Aperture. 
A consumer is any entity, such as an individual, 
organization, an organizational role, or a trusted 
execution environment that has been issued a 
certificate or token by a trusted CA. 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


to the list of attributes or attribute values may be made 
while maintaining backward compatibility. 


Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) may be defined 
for data usage, access rights and enforcement of 
integrity. And blockchain based technologies may be 
used to ensure data integrity. Also, business continuity 
procedures may be laid down as per ISO 22301. 


b) A is a list of attribute-value pairs which defines 


requirements on consumers who have access to 


data. 


The policy framework does not capture requirements 
around ownership of data. However, further additions 


5.4.1 Policy Labels 


In order to simplify the process of authoring policies, 
the standard defines a set of policy labels that capture 
commonly used policy specifications as shown in 
Table 4. 


Table 3 Authorization Policy Attributes and Values. 


( Clause 5.4) 


Attribute key 


Description 


Possible Values 


Authorization protocol and policy 


Specifies protocol that a consumer shall use to 
request access from a resource server 


None, OAuth/UMA, OAuth/UMA + XACML Policy, 
Token/DX + Aperture policy language 


Data locality 


Specifies requirements on where a consumer is 
allowed to store data after getting access 


Country, State, Organization (Service-based access), 
None 


Data retention 


Data storage 


data 


Specifies requirements on how long consumers 
may retain data 


Specifies in what form a consumer may store 


Fixed period, Up to a certain event or date, None 


Encrypted (using adequately protected keys), 
Encrypted at rest and in transit (using keys owned by 
data owner), Any 


Data usage 


Specifies requirements on the purpose for 
which data is used. 


Privacy preserving computation, Anonymization, 
Computation certified by a third party, Any 


Data audit 


Specifies audit requirements on data that the 
consumer shall satisfy 


Audit accesses along with time and duration of 
access, None 


Table 4 List of Policy Labels 


( Clause 5.4.1 ) 


Labels — Meaning Public Protected Private Confidential 
| 
v 
Nature of data Information which can | May contain anonymized | May contain personally | May contain personally 
be made available to | information identifiable information identifiable information 
the public. It shall not and/or other data that is 
contain any personally confidential within an 
identifiable information organization 
Authorization protocol | None Requires authorization | Requires authorization | Requires authorization 
and policy using DX/UMA using DX/UMA using DX/UMA 
Consent None Requires consent of | Requires consent of | Requires consent of 
Provider Provider and owners Providers and owners 
Data locality None None Configurable or as per | Only service based 
regulatory framework access 
Data retention None None Configurable or as per | NA 
regulatory framework 
Data storage Any Any Encrypted NA 
Data usage Any License Licensed with legal | Licensed with legal 
framework framework 
Data audit None Random audit Regular audit Regular audit 
Data Monetization Not to be monetized Provider’s decision Provider’s decision Provider’s decision 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


Classification of data shall be the responsibility of the 
data provider and needs strict regulation wherever 
deemed necessary. 


5.4.2 Identity 


The identities of the providers and consumers accessing 
private data must be clearly established using digital 
certificates, whereas consumers accessing public data 
could be anonymous. 


Identity of providers/consumers of data in DX is through: 
a) Certificates; and 
b) Tokens. 


However Individuals, app developers, or employees of 
an organization who wish to access protected private, or 
confidential data shall require a valid certificate. 


DX shall accept TLS connections using certificates from 
any licensed CA in India (certified by the CCA). 


5.4.2.1 A DX may issue certificates to users based on 
their email IDs. A DX may host a certificate authority 
(CA) which can grant certificates to: 


a) Resource servers; 

b) Individuals/App developers; 

c) Organizations; 

d) Data officers of an organization; and 
e) Employees of an organization. 


A simple email based scheme may be chosen to issue 
certificates; for example: 


Individuals and App developers can send a certificate 
signing request (CSR) as an attachment in an 
email to the DX Certificate Authority with subject 
“Certificate request’. The CA will validate the CSR and 
will respond back with a certificate. 


Organizations can send a certificate signing request 
(CSR) as an attachment in an email from their 
organization domain to DX Certificate Authority. The 
CA will validate the CSR and will respond back with 
a certificate. The certificate provided to an organization 
can only be used to grant certificates to employees of the 
organization. Thus, the domain name of the organization 
shall match with the e-mail of the employee to whom the 
certificate is granted. 


For organizations to be able to request certificates from 
CA, they shall register themselves with CA (this may 
be through an online form). All registered organizations’ 
domain names shall be added to a white-list; and DX 
shall only accept certificate requests from organizations 
in the white-list. 


5.4.2.2 Organizations while generating a certificate 
may add more details about the employee, such as 
organization, organization unit, first name, last name, 
role of the employee, state, city, etc. 


Employees of an organization may send a certificate 
signing request (CSR) as an attachment in an email to 


10 


DX Certificate Authority. The organization that will 
act as a sub-CA or a registration-authority will validate 
the CSR and will respond back with a certificate. The 
scripts/tools to grant certificates may be provided by the 
DX to organizations. 


The DX Certificate Authority shall issue 5 classes of 
certificates: 

a) Class 1: Which shall be issued to resource servers 
for validating tokens. 

b) Class 2: Which shall be issued to individuals or 
employees of an organization (which are registered 
and whitelisted with the DX). This certificate is 
expected to be used to access protected data. 


Cc 


wa 


Class 3: Which can be issued to employees and data- 
officers of an organization (which are registered and 
whitelisted with the DX). Such employees shall 
have access rights to upload and manage resource- 
items in the catalogue of the DX. This certificate 
shall be used to create/manage catalog items. 


d 


wm 


Class 4: Which is to be issued to trusted employees 
of an organization (which are registered and 
whitelisted with the DX). This certificate is expected 
to be used to access protected and private data. 

e) Class 5: Which is to be issued to trusted employees 
of an organization (which are registered and 
whitelisted with the DX). This certificate is 
expected to be used to access protected, private, and 
confidential data. 


5.5 Audit Considerations 


All interfaces shall make statistics available and log all 
events to allow audit of interactions. 


5.6 Reliability Considerations 


The systems shall be designed to be highly available, 
scalable using a distributed architecture for vertical and 
horizontal scale, and high on performance where: 


a) Reliability is defined as the ability of a device or a 
system to perform its intended function under given 
conditions of use for a specified period of time or 
number of cycles. 

Availability is defined as the property of being 
accessible and usable upon demand by an authorized 
entity. 


b 


ma 


Cc 


wa 


Scalability is defined as the property of a system to 
handle a growing amount of work/load by adding 
resources to the system. 


The public API status page may be provided by the 
authorization service provider, catalogue service provider 
and the resource server that reports the status of each API 
(along with other open data like average response time, 
latency, etc). Furthermore, these may also implement 
the heartbeat API for reporting their system uptime in 
real-time. 


The various failure scenarios that shall be handled are 
as follows: 


5.6.1 Failure to Notify Provider 


In this scenario, when the AS or RS is not able to notify 
the provider on the status of the consent flow or data flow, 
a mechanism has to be put in place to notify the provider 
at a later stage. This can be achieved by reinitiating the 
notification message to the provider or by providing 
the provider an option to check the status through an 
application, or by providing a list of all consent flows and 
data flows (with status) in the application. 


5.6.2 Response from AS does not Reach the Consumer 


In this scenario, when the response sent by AS does not 
reach the Consumer, the latter should have a mechanism 
provided by AS to initiate a request to know the status of 
the consent flows. 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


5.6.3 Response from Catalogue Service does not Reach 
Consumer 


In this scenario, when the response sent by catalogue 
service does not reach the consumer, the consumer should 
have a mechanism provided by catalogue service to 
initiate a request to know the status of catalogue services. 


5.6.4 RS is not Available to Consumer 


In this scenario, when RS is not available to consumer, 
consumer may have a mechanism to re-initiate the 
request to RS. 


6 INTERACTION SCENARIOS 


The minimal set of interaction scenarios supported by the 
data exchange ecosystem is indicated in Fig. 3. Details 
for each follows. 


| [ Provider» 
| Registration / 
Data Exchange ece 
Administrator Create and. 
( Manage Meta \ 
Data of 
“resources ~ 


Consumer 


/ Reguest ) 
\ Consent / 


? “Approve / | 
(Reject Consent 
N Request / 


— 


| Access Data ) 


Revoke 
Consent | 


( 


Fic. 3 BASIC INTERACTION SCENARIOS 
11 


Provider 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


6.1 Provider Registration 6.2 Create and Manage Metadata of Resources 


The provider needs to obtain a certificate from the CA Inthisuse case, a Provider is requesting the authorization 

to establish identity. An example workflow is given as service to allow access to use the catalogue. Once 

follows: approved, the provider can create or update an entry in 
the catalogue. 


Data Exchange 
, ProviderApp Certificate Authority 
Provider 


i Generate CSR i 
| 
| 


......... m 
H 


I 
| Send e-mail reguest for certificate with CS 


I 
| Updates certificate 
|| 

| and key 


Fic. 4 PROVIDER REGISTRATION FLOW 


Data Exchange 
. Provider App Catalogue Service 
P rovide r 


|| 

| Launches i | 
— | 
| Post with item in body using TLS certificate 
| 


i Validate 


201 Created | 
———— | 


Fic. 5 RESOURCE PROVIDER CREATING AN ITEM IN THE CATALOGUE 


12 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


the requested operation 


If a resource is not public, then the Provider can request 
an Authorization Service to set policies for data access. 


The use case allows 
Providers to set policies for 
their resources 


Summary 


A 


Resource server administrator 


[1] Install resource server certificate 


Internal/Unspecified 


Resource server 


[2] Publish data 


Summary The use case allows Providers to Pre-condition e A valid certificate 
update the catalogue provided by a trusted 
Pre-condition e A valid certificate provided by CA 
a trusted CA Actor Provider 
Actor Provider Post-condition A policy is set for the 
Post-condition | An approval is provided to perform provider’s resources. 


6.3 Discover Data 


In this use case, a consumer is using the search APIs of 
the catalogue service to find interested entities. Once 
the entities are identified, a consumer using consumer 
App can request for consent and access their data. 


I 


, Catalog server 
Provider 


[3] Create a catalog entry 


HTTPS POST /auth/1.0/ac 


[4] body=<policy> 


Server requires a valid certificate (TLS communication) 
Both parties require a valid certificate (TLS communication, mutually authenticated) 


FIG. 6 SETTING UP A PERMISSIONS FOR A RESOURCE BY THE PROVIDER 


? Consumer 
PX App 


Consumer 


Uses 


| 
i 
| 
' 
i 
' 
i 
' 
i 


: Discover items in : 
| DX Catalogue using ' 
the search interface 


Data Exchange 
Catalogue Service 


Catalogue entries 


FIG. 7 CONSUMER DISCOVERING DATA 


13 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


Summary This sine Gees GN consumes to If data requires authorization and the request does 
search the catalo gue isin g customer not contain a token, the resource server initiates 
app authorization following a DX/UMA 2.0 compliant 

= protocol. The protocol supports a subset of UMA 2.0 

Pre-condition — workflows: 

Actor Consumer a) Accept policies specified in a policy language. 

Post-condition | A list of search hits are sent to the b) Support identities based on X.509 certificates 
consumer app issued by DX CA (as described above) 

6.4 Request Consent and Access Data c) Accept claims based on X.509 certificates issued 
by a set of trusted CAs 


Aconsumer application can request access to data from 


an DX compliant resource server using any one of d) No support interactive claims gathering. All 


the supported APIs. If requested data does not require claims shall be pushed. 

authorization that is, does not have an authorization e) Include a reference to the policy object in access 
policy, or the request contains a valid access token, tokens issued 

then the resource server serves the request after token 

validation. 


Catalog server 


[1] Search catalog for data-sets 


Consumer 


Auth server Resource server 


[3] Run provider's authorization policy rules 


HTTPS POST /auth/v1/token 
body=<request-details> 


[2] 


[Consumer is NOT authorized] 
[4] HTTP 403 Forbidden 


HTTP 200 OK 

[5] Access_Token:<access-toker> 
Token_Type: IUDX 
Expires_In:<expiry-in-secondg> 


HTTPS GET <resource-server-api> 
Authorization: IUDX <access-tqken> 


[6] 


HTTPS POST Jauth/v1/introspect 
Token: <access-token> 


[8] verify resource-server's identity through DNS 


[9] Check token validity 


[<access-token> is valid] 


HTTP 200 OK 
[10] body=<request-details> 


[11] HTTP 200 OK 
body=<requested-data> 


Server requires a valid certificate (TLS communication) 
Both parties require a valid certificate (TLS communication, mutually authenticated) 


n Internal/Unspecified 


FIG. 8 CONSUMER REQUESTING ACCESS TO A RESOURCE 


14 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


Summary 


This use case allows the Consumer 
to access the requested data 


Summary 


This use case allows the Provider 
to revoke access to data 


Pre-condition 


A valid X.509 certificate 
issued by a DX compliant CA 


Actor 


Consumer Application 


Post-condition 


The reguested data is provided to 
the Consumer 


6.5 Revoke Consent 


A provider shall be able to revoke access to a particular 


resource by calling the/revoke API. 


Pre-condition 


e A valid X.509 certificate 
issued by a DX compliant 
CA 


Actor 


Provider Application 


Post-condition 


The consumer is no longer able to 
access the resource 


Data Exchange 


Authorization Service 


| HTTPS POST fauth/v1/token/revoke 
' body= {"token":"authorization_token"} 


Fic. 9 REVOKING CONSENT FLOW 


15 


Validate credentials and 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


TRACEABILITY WITH DATA LAYER REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 


The below table shows the traceability of this document 


document expand on the initial definitions and concepts 


with IS 18002 data layer reference architecture inthe data layer document. 
(Under Development). The sections detailed in this 


Section in this Document 


Section in the DL Document 


3: Terminology and Definitions 
4.1: System Design Principles 


4.2: Entities and their responsibilities 


Terminology and Definitions 
Data Layer-Key Guiding Principles 
Data Layer-Key Characteristics 


4.3: High Level Architecture 


Data Layer Core Functions (Architecture diagram) 


4.4: Entities and their responsibilities 


Data Layer-Key Guiding Principles (Accessibility) 


4.5: Data Exchange Services 


Data Layer-Core Functions 


Unified Data Layer Architecture and Components-Data 
Exchange API 


Data Exchange 


5: Security and Privacy 


Unified Data Layer Architecture and Components - Data 
Governance 


6: Interaction Scenarios 


Data Exchange-Data APIs 


16 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


ANNEX B 


( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Smart infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Amravati Smart City Development Corporation 
Limited, Mumbai 


ARM, Noida 


Centre for Development of Telematics, 
New Delhi 


Criterion Network Labs, Bengaluru 
Cyan Connode Private Limited, Bengaluru 


E-Goverments Foundation, Bengaluru 
Ericsson India Private Limited, Gurugram 
ESRI, Noida 


European Project SESEI 
Hawlett Packard Enterprise 
IEEE India, Bengaluru 


India Smart Grid Forum, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Intel India Technology Private Limited, 
Bengaluru 

Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New 

Delhi 

MoHUA Smart Cities Handholding team 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 


National Smart Grid Mission, Ministry of Power, 
Gurugram 


PHYTEC Embedded Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Pune Smart City, Pune 


Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 


PROF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Chairman) 


SHRI SIDDHARTH GANESH 


SHRI KUMAAR GUHAN 


SHRI AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
SHRIMATI ANUPAMA CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYAPRAKASH KUMAR 
SHRI KRISHNA Kumar LOHATI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NIMARE 
SHRI MANISH WIDHANI (Alternate) 


SHRI KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN 
SHRI SENDIL KUMAR DEVAR 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR 
SHRIMATI SEEMA JOSHI (Alternate 1) 
SHRI RUPESH KUMAR (Alternate II) 


SHRI DINESH CHAND SHARMA 
SHRI R. DEVARAJAN 


SHRI SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 
SHRI MUNIR MOHAMMED (Alternate) 


SHRI REJI KUMAR PILLAI 
SHRIMATI PARUL (Alternate) 


SHRI VASANTH RAJARAMAN 


SHRI C. SUBRAMANIAN 
SHRI ANANTHA NARAYANAN (Alternate I) 
SHRI SIDHARTHA MOHANTY (Alternate II) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 
SHRI PADAM VIJAY 
SHRI N. KISHOR NARANG 


SHRI MR ARUN MISRA 
SHRI GYAN PRAKASH (Alternate I) 
SHRIMATI KUMUD WADHWA (Alternate II) 


SHRI B. VALLAB Rao (VASU) 
SHRI MANOJIT BOSE 


Dr VINOSH BABU JAMES 
Dr Punit RATHOD (Alternate) 


17 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


Organization Representative(s) 
Renesas Electronics, Bengaluru RAVINDRA CHATURVEDI 
SAURABH Goswami (Alternate) 
Schneider Electric’s industrial software SHRI GOURAV KUMAR HADA 
business-AVEVA, Mumbai SHRIMATI SANGEETA GARG (Alternate) 
Secure Meters Limited, Gurugram SHRI UTTAM KOTDIYA 


SHRI ANIL MEHTA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PUNEET KHURANA (Alternate II) 
SHRI KAUSTUBH PATIL (Alternate I) 


Shrama Technologies Private Limited SHRI AMARJEET KUMAR 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai SHRI MANOJ BELGAONKAR 
SHRI Ravi MADIPADGA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRADEEP KAPOOR (Alternate II) 
SHRI VIKRAM GANDOTRA (Alternate III) 


Standardization Testing and Quality Certification SHRIMATI LIPIKA KAUSHIK 


(STQC) 
System Level Solutions (India) Private Limited, SHRI DIPEN PARMAR 

Anand SHRI Foram Movi (Alternate) 
Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai SHRI RAMESH BALAJI 

SHRI DEBASHIS MITRA (Alternate) 

Tejas Networks Limited, Bengaluru DR KANWAR JIT SINGH 
Telecommunication Engineering Center, SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR TYAGI 

Department of Telecommunications, New SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR (Alternate I) 

Delhi SHRI UTTAM CHAND (Alternate II) 
In Personal Capacity PROF SUPTENDRANATH SARBADHIKARI 
BIS Director General SHRIMATI REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 
Member secretary 


SHRI MANIKANDAN K 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


18 


IS 18003 (Part 1) 


Panel involved in the preparation LITD 28/P12 Data Exchange Architecture 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 
Aikaan 
Bosch 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Intel India Pvt Ltd 


Microsoft Research 
Pune Smart City 
HPE 

SIRPI.io 


Tejas Networks 


Representative(s) 
PROF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Convener) 
CHETAN KUMAR 
VIVEKANAND K. 
Dr ABHAY SHARMA 
ANAND S. V. R. 
DR ARUN BABU 
BRYAN ROBERT 
POORNA CHANDRA TEJASVI 
PROF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR 
RAKSHIT RAMESH 
VASANTH RAJARAMAN 


AKSHAY KADAM 
SIDHARTHA MOHANTY (Alternate I) 
SUBRAMANIAN C. (Alternate II) 


DR KAPIL VASWANI 
MANOJIT BOSE 

R. DEVARAJAN 
ANAND LAKSHMANAN 
Dr K. J. SINGH 


19 


: 2020 


IS 18003 (Part 1) : 2020 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[b.1] The Personal Data Protection Bill 2019, Govt. of India, http://164.100.47.4/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/ 
Asintroduced/373 2019 LS Eng.pdf 


[b.2] Electronic Consent Framework, Technical Specs v1.1, http://dla.gov.in/sites/default/files/pdf/MeitY- 
Consent-Tech-Framework%20v1.1.pdf 


[b.3] National Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy 2012, Govt. of India, https://data. gov.in/sites/default/ 
files/NDSAP.pdf 


[b.4] ISO/IEC 27001, Information technology — Security technigues — Information security management 
systems — Reguirements 


[b.5] ISO/IEC 27002, Information technology — Security technigues — Code of practice for information 
security controls 


[b.6] ISO/IEC 27017, Information technology — Security technigues — Code of practice for information 
security controls based on ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services 


[b.7] ISO/IEC 27018, Information technology — Security techniques — Code of practice for protection of 
personally identifiable information (PII) in public clouds acting as PII processors 


[b.8] ISO/IEC 27031, Information technology — Security techniques — Guidelines for information and 
communication technology readiness for business continuity 


[b.9] ISO/IEC 27033 (all parts), Information technology — Security techniques — Network security 
[b.10] ISO/IEC 27034 (all parts), Information technology — Security techniques — Application security 


[b.11] ISO/IEC 27035 (all parts), Information technology — Security techniques — Information security 
incident management 


[b.12] ISO/IEC 27040, Information technology — Security techniques — Storage security ISO/IEC 29100, 
Information technology — Security technigues — Privacy framework 


[b.13] ISO/IEC29101, Information technology — Security techniques — Privacy architecture framework 


[b.14] ISO/TEC 29134:2017, Information technology — Security techniques — Guidelines for privacy impact 
assessment 


[b.15] ISO/TEC 29151, Information technology — Security techniques — Code of practice for personally 
identifiable information protection 


[16] BACnet: BACnet — A Data Communication Protocol for Building Automation and Control 
Networks. http://www.bacnet.org/ 


[17] Brick: A uniform metadata schema for buildings. https://brickschema.org/ 
[18] Project Haystack: https://project-haystack.org/ 

[19] JSON-LD: https://json-Id.org/ 

[20] Business Continuity Planning: https://www.iso.org/standard/50038.html 


20 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 28 (14073). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


