( Reaffirmed 1994 )

IS I 10139- 1982

Indian Standard
PRESENTATION OF RELIABILITY, MAINTAINABILITY AND AVAILABILITY PREDICTIONS
Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee, LTDC 3
Chairman PRol S. SAMPATH Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur

Mel&US

Representing

Saar CHABANJIT SINGE Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Hyderabad SQN LDR I. M. GANDOT~A ( Altrrnatr ) SHEI P. S. DEAGAT All India Radio, New Delhi SHBI N. J. NAIL ( Alternate ) BBIO R. C. DHINGRA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL V. K. KHANNA ( Alternate ) DrDc;n, STANDARDS ( S&T ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOINT DIREOTOR ELEOTRIOALS (MRS), RDSO ( Alternate ) JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S&T )-II, RDSO ( Alternate ) DR P. K. DUTTA Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SEBI B. P. GH~SR SHRI B. C. MUK~ERJEE (Altnnatc ) SERI A. P. GUPTA Instrumentation Ltd, Kota SRRI I. S. SULARR ( Alternate) SHRI K. S. KELKAR Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI V. A. KALGAOI~KAR (Alternate ) The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturera' SH~I S. P. KULKARNI Association, Bombay SHRI S. M. KRUREALE (Alternate) SHSI H. C. MATHUR Posts & Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI U. R. G. AOHARYA ( Alternate ) SHBI S. R. MEHTA Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SERI T. C. GOSALIA ( Alternate )

( Continuedon page 2 )
INDIAN Q Copyright 1982 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in wholr or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

IS:10139-1982
( continutdffum

pagt 1 )
ReprcJcnting In

DR K. B. h4IaltA

personal capacity (Department of Eltctrical Enginttring, Indian Znstitutt of Ttchnology, Kharagpur ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi SH~I E. G. NAOARAJAN SHHI K. R. ANANDAKUYARAN NAIR Lucas-TVS Ltd, Madras SHKI C. RANQANATHAN ( Alternatt ) Bhahha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Saax D. V. PETKAR Bombay SHRI A. K. BABAR ( Afttrmtt ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S K. PRASAD Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) SHHI J. S. RAJU SHRI P. K. SHUKLA ( Alttrnatt ) ISRO Satellite Centre ( ISAC ), Bangalore SHRI K. RAM~OPAL SHRI SIHARAN DE ( Alttrnatt ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI K. S. PRAKASA RAO SHRI S. S. SONW4LKAR ( Alttrnatt ) Development & Directorate of Technical SHRI R. SOMASUNDARAX Production ( AIR ), Ministry of Defence SHHI I. C. MATHUR ( Alttrnatt ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SERI B. Vl ItESALINoAM SHPI V. MUTHAIAH ( Alttrnatt ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI VISWA NUH SHRI C. D. GUPTA ( Afttrnatr) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR R. P. WADHWA Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojkio Member) SHHI R C. JAIN, Head ( Electronics) ( Sttrtta~)

Mcmbtrs

2

ISt10139-1982

Indian Standard
PRESENTATION OF RELIABILITY, MAINTAlNABILITY AND AVAILABILITY PREDICTIONS
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 March 1982, after the draft finalized by the Reliability of Electronic and Electrical Components and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The object of this standard is to provide the writer of a prediction report with a complete listing of all items to be considered in making a proper and full presentation of prediction information. This recommended way of presentation is intended to facilitate comparisons between projects reports. The purpose of a presentation of information on a prediction is to provide the reader of the report with sufficient information for the evaluation of the prediction results and the principles and means by which these were obtained.
prediction of reliability, maintainability and availability characterisNOTE -A tics may generally be seen as a multistage model building. As an example the procedure in Appendix A is given to clarify the principle of presentation of predictions. The procedure itself is not to be considered as a standard.

0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from

the IEC document 56 ( Central Office ) 80 Draft - Presentation of reliability, maintainability and availability predictions, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on reliability of electronic and electrical components and equipment. Other standards published so far in the series are given on the fourth cover page.

1.SCOPE 1.1 This standard defines the items which should be considered for the
presentation of information regarding 3 predictions of quantitative

IS:10139-1982
characteristics of reliability, maintainability and availability of systems and equipment including hardware, software and human elements. 2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the purpose ofthis standard, the definitions covered in IS : 1885 ( Part XXXIX ) - 1979* shall apply. 3. CONTENTS OF THE PRESENTATION

3.1 The presentation of information regarding a prediction of reliability and maintainability characteristics shall be given in a report containing the items as stated in Table 1. The depth of presentation (that is, which and what amount of details to be given ) is dependent on the purpose of the prediction. For a specific prediction all procedural steps and conditions given in 4.2 to 4.10 are not necessarily applicable. For example, a pure reliability prediction of a simple apparatus may proceed without any relation to maintenance.
TABLE 1
INBO~ATION

REQUIRED

INFORMATION

CLAUSE PREDICTED CHARACTERIBTIOS Rnrnn_ ~~----~-----_~ ENOE Reliability MainAvail7__h_-_ tainability Maintained Other ability items with items redundancy

'

(1)
Summary Prediction purpose Prediction object Characteristics Initial conditions: System/equipment functions Failure definitions Quality/rrliability programme Environmental conditions Operational conditions

(2)
4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.5.1 4.5.2 4.5.3 4.5.4 4.5.5

(3)
R R R R R R R R R

(4)
R R R R R R R R R

(5)
R R R R CR CR NA CR NA

(6) R R R R R R R R R

( Continued)

*Electrotechnical vocabulary: itemr (fist f8ai&m ) .

Part XXXIX

Reliability

of electronic

and electrical

4

IS t 10139- 1982
TABLE INFORMATION 1 REQUIRED CLAUSE REBEEENQE INFORMATION PREDIOTED Confd

?-

CHABACTERIETICS -Reliability MainAvail: --rainability `Maintained Othe; ability items with items redundancy (3) R R R R (4) NA R NA NA CR

(1)
Definition of maintenance actions Preventive maintenance conditions Corrective maintenance conditions Maintenance support conditions Analysis: Reliability structure analysis Stress analysis Maintainability analysis Maintenance support analysis Models: Reliability: Structure model Model adaptation Mathematical model Maintainability: Structure model Model adaptation Mathematical model Availability: Structure model Model adaptation Mathematical model Data sources: Reliability data Maintainability data Maintenance support data Calculation principles Prediction results

(2)
4.5.6 4.5.7 4.5.8 4.5.9 4.6 4.6.1 4.6.2 4.6.3 4.6.4 4.7 4.7.1 4.7.1.1 4.7.1.2 4.7.1.3 4.7.2 4.7.2.1 4.7.2.2 4.7.2.3 4.7.3 4.7.3.1 4.7.3.2 4.7.3.3 4.8 4.8.1 4.8.2 4.8.3 4.9 4.10

R R R R

jR R NA NA

CR

NA R CR

R R R R

R R R CR NA NA NA NA NA R R R R R required

R R R

CR NA NA R R R NA NA NA CR R CR R R

NA NA NA NA NA NA R R R R R R R R

NA NA NA NA NA NA R NA NA R R

R = Required

CR = Conditionally

NA = Not applicable

5

IS : 10139 - 1982 4. DETAIL 4.0 The REQUIREMENTS OF THE PRESENTATION
in 4.1 to 4.10 enlarge upon the specific

requirements covered requirements listed in 3.

4.1 Summary -The object of the prediction, main use conditions, maintenance support policy and the result shall be summarized. Any fundamental simplifying assumptions shall be stated. Purpose - The aim of a prediction may vary, such as, 4.2 Prediction for providing a basis for specification work, design analysis or planning or maintenance. It may also be to call attention to weak pointsin the hardware and in the maintenance organization and to suggest possible improvements. The aim is to govern the choice analysis, data sources, kind and depths of reliability measures, methods of presentation of results, etc. of

Therefore, the purpose of the prediction and the relationship between the prediction and any other part of the reliability, maintainability and availability programme shall be clearly stated. .4.3 Prediction Object the object of the prediction include the following: a) System/equipment status; b) Maintenance support Information needed to completely identify This should, if applicable, shall be stated.

type,

specification, and

including

development

policy;

c) Level of maintenance

( in case of maintainability

prediction

).

Where prediction includes human performance and skill assumptions, these shall be properly described and quantified to permit proper measurement in system/equipment performance evaluation. Relevant documented information, diagrams, shall, as a minimum, be referenced such as descriptions or included. and

system/equipment 4.4 Characteristics - The ability and availability characteristic( s ) which of the prediction, shall be stated. 6

reliability, maintainis ( are) the final object

1s : 10139 - 1982

Definitions of the characteristic( following ways:

s ) shall be given in any one of the ) - 1979* and IS : 7690-

4

By reference to IS : 1885 (Part XXXIX 1975t; in the prediction report; and

b) Explicitly
4

By reference to relevant system/equipment documents, such as specifications of reliability, maintainability and availability requirements.

4.5 Initial Conditions - Where possible all predictions should be based on predetermined requirements and conditions. 4.5.1 System/Equipment Functions - A system or equipment may be intended to function in many ways or to carry out sequences of Any such function or sequence of functions covered by the functions. prediction shall be stated. Any function or equipment excluded from the prediction and the reason for its exclusion shall also be stated. 4.5.2 Failure Dejinitions - The reliability and availability are generally dependent on the failure definitions used. characteristics

The applicable definition of failures of the system/equipment shall therefore be stated. Failure definition shall also be stated for all items for which quantitative data are used in the prediction models. 4.5.3 Ql~ality/Reliability Programme - The quality, maturity of the system/equipment shall be stated, instance, in terms of the following: a) System/equipment burn-in, b) Reference to quality/reliability and components, and c) Component screening. Any assumption shall be stated. regarding reliability or maintainability growth programme of system/equipment properties as applicable, and for

4.5.4 Environmental Conditions - The environmental conditions, for which the prediction is performed, shall be stated. The conditions should, if *Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part XXXIX Reliability of electronic items ( jfst revision ), fMathematica1 guide to the terms and definitions for reliability &@ipm&kt arid components ( or parts ) used therein.
7
and electrical of electronic

IS : 10199 - 1982
possible, be stated with reference environmental factors in accordance to degrees of severity of applicable with IS : 9000 ( Part I )-19'W.

In some cases, it may also be pertinent to make predictions for 8everal different combinations of environmental factors and severities, covering, for instance, storage, transport and operation. 4.5.5 Operational Conditions - The operational conditions for which the prediction is performed shall be stated. At least the following categories of conditions shall be considered: a) Input and output loading, including type, intensity and duration of equipment functions used; b) Actual handling of the system or equipment; and c) Operational consumables. support, such as supply of power, coolants,

4.5.6 Dejinition of Maintenance Actions - It shall be stated on which system/equipment complexity level corrective maintenance shall be performed, such as failure localization of replaceable units or failure localization down to component level. Such decisions will be derived from a maintenance analysis based on actual operation failure modes, modularization and test functions. As a result a list of maintenance actions shall be given. The maintainability analysis shall be referenced or given in the prediction report. The tasks included in a completed maintenance action, for example, failure detection, failure localization, (scheduled ) exchange of unit/ component, functional check-out shall therefore be stated, 4.5.7 Preventive Maintenance Conditions - The preventive maintenance conditions for which the prediction is performed shall be stated in the form of: a) Categories and qualities of preventive maintenance resources ( see 4.5.8 ); b) Categories of preventive maintenance actions; c) Criteria covering the scheduling of preventive maintenance, for example, fixed interval between actions, degree of wear-out; and d) effects on system readiness for operation. *Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Put I General.

a

IS : 10139- 1982 corrective maintenance following: a) Replacement b) C) d) e)
4.5.8 Corrective Maintenance Conditions - Categories and qualities of This may include the resources shall be defined.

units,

Spare components, Test equipment, Tools, Test programmes, and

f) Documentation, g) Personnel.

4.5.9 Maintenance Supijort Conditions - Availability and certain reliability and maintainability characteristics are generally dependent on the amount of resources and on the organization of maintenance support. The maintenance support conditions for which the prediction is performed shall be stated, for instance, probability of spares shortage, availability of repair men. 4.6 Analysis

4.6.1 Reliability Structure Analysis - The reliability structure analysis gives a reliability model. This model is a graphical description of the equipment. The chosen methods of analysis shall be stated. choice should also be given. The reason for the determine of

4.6.2 Stress Analysis - Principles and procedures used to values of all relevant stress parameters shall be stated.

4.6.3 Maintainability Analysis - All tasks, sub-tasks and sequences tasks necessary to perform each maintenance action shall be stated.

4.6.4 Maintenance Support Analysis - All factors which influence the ability to perform required maintenance ( corrective or preventive) shall be stated. Such factors may be technical, personnel and administrative resources, for instance, rules for stocking and replenishment of spare components. , 4.7 Models 4.7.1 Reliability with the justification,
4.7.1.1 Structure model -

A reliability assumption and 9

model shall be given together relevancy for selection. The

X6:10139-1982
referred models are either block diagrams, failure trees, state diagrams or suitable combinations. Graphs used shall be accompanied by sufficient information needed to interrelate the items of the reliability model, both with the system/ equipment parts and with the applied mathematical model relevant to the reliability characteristics. The significance of symbols used for the graphical reliability model shall be stated. description of the

4.7.1.2 Model adaptation - All assumptions, simplifications and approximations made when transforming the structure model into the corresponding mathematical model shall be given. Particularly any dependence on maintenance support conditions or maintainability and availability properties shall be stated, for instance, maintainability properties of redundant units or degree of preventive maintenance. 4.7.1.3 Mathematical model - The mathematical model used for each reliability characteristic and the derivation of applied formulae shall be stated or referenced. If the reliability prediction is performed by a procedure which proceeds stepwise through several functional levels of the system/equipment the mathematical models used shall be presented separately for each reliability characteristic. 4.7.2
Maintainability

model - A maintainability model shall be given together with the justification, assumption and relevancy for selection. `The model may be of the type listing of maintenance tasks and sub-tasks or maintenance actions, flow charts, sequence diagrams.

4.7.2.1 Structure

The models used shall be accompanied by sufficient information needed to interrelate the items of the maintainability model both with the system/equipment parts and maintenance conditions and with the applied mathematical model relevant to the maintainability characteristic. 4.7.2.2 Model adaptation - All assumptions, simplifications and approximations made when transforming the structure model into the corresponding mathematical model shall be given. In particular, any dependence on reliability characteristic and availability properties shall be stated, for instance, failure rate of units/components for estimating frequency of maintenance tasks or for calculating system maintainability parameters in redundant designs. model used for each 4.7.2.3 Mathematical model - The mathematical maintainability characteristic and the derivation of applied formulae shall be stated. 10

IS

:10139-1982

If the maintainability prediction is performed by a procedure which proceeds stepwise through several functional levels of the system/equipment the mathematical models used shall be presented separately for each level and for each maintainability characteristic. 4.7.3 Availability

4.7.3.1 Structure model - The availability structure model shall be given either by reference to reliability and maintainability models or separately by means of, for instance, block diagrams, failure trees, state diagrams or suitable combinations. 4.7.3.2 Model adaptation - All assumptions, simplifications and approximations made when transforming the structure model into the corresponding mathematical model shall be given. 4.7.3.3 Mathematical model - The mathematical model used for each availability characteristic and the derivation of applied formulae shall be stated. If the availability prediction is performed by a procedure which proceeds stepwise through several functional levels of the system/equipment the mathematical models used shall be presented separately for each level and for each availability characteristic. 4.8 Data Sources - The source( s) of the data used shall be stated together with available relevant information regarding how the data was collected and processed. Any statistical treatment of the data in order to adapt them to the mathematical model( s ) shall be described and justified. C&l ReLiabili& Data-Reliability data used, such as component failure rates or mean times between failures at unit level, shall be stated or referenced. data used, such as mean 4.8.2 Maintainability Data -Maintainability active repair times at different levels, shall be stated or referenced. 4.8.3 Maintenance SupFort Data - Maintenance support data used, such as numbers of repair men and spare parts, shall be stated either directly or in terms of probabilities. In cases where these data may be expressed in a few figures, for instance, probability of having a replacement unit available at the time of failure, it may be convenient to state them in connection with the maintenance support conditions or referenced. methods of 4.9 Calculation Principles - Approximations and numerical calculations used for the intermediate and final results shall be stated.
11

4.10 Prediction Results - The numerical results, other conclusions and discussion of uncertainties shall be clearly presented in accordance with the purpose of the prediction and the chosen reliability, availability and maintainability characteristics. The applicability of the prediction results to other environmental, operational and maintenance conditions may be pointed out.

APPENDIX ( Clause 0.2 )
PREDICTION A-O. GENERAL

A
ACTIVITIES

A-0.1 In order to clarify the principle of presentation, a flow of prediction activities is presented. This procedure is not to be considered as a standard. maintainability and availability A-O.2 A prediction of reliability, characteristics of system/equipment may generally be seen as a multistage model building. From these models conclusions are drawn regarding the characteristics of the actual system/equipment. This modelling may usually be done in many different ways and with possibly quite different final results.

By going backwards

the procedure follows six different steps ( see also Fig. 1). in the flow-chart from the desired result(s) the required activities, data sources, intermediate results and input conditions may be derived. A-l. DEFINITION OF CONDITIONS and

Generally

A-l.1 Collection of information on environmental, operational maintenance conditions, etc, and system/equipment functions. A-2. ANALYSIS A-2.1 An analysis is made to determine: a) the structure of the system/equipment, b) the stresses applied to the system/equipment c) the maintainability d) the properties of the maintenance 12 support. and its parts, and properties of the system/equipment,

INIT'IAC CONOlTlONS , ^,,^__. .

1

ANALYSIS

MODELS

MODEL ADAPTATtON~

DATA ADAPTATION

DATA SOURCES

I

r

I

MODEL ADAPTATION

JDEL

`.%,.,I

I

I

t It rl

:ALCULATIONS __-_

LEGENDS

/7b"F'~A~~N""`oN /

;$,kT

u

,r;;;ED'ATE 0

ACWITY

FIG. 1

RELIABILITY, MAINTAINABILITY AND AVAILABILITY PREDICTION,PROCEDURAL FLOW

IS : 18138 - 1982

\

A-2.1.1 Based on the analysis models are built for: a) the reliability c) the availability A-3. MODEL structure, structure, and structure.

b) the maintainability

ADAPTATION

A-3.1 Considering the accuracy required, the purpose of the prediction and available probabilistic modelling tools, mathematical models for reliability, maintainability and availability are chosen. A-4. DATA ACQUISITION

A-4.1 Data sources for reliability, maintainability and maintenance support are chosen. Data from the sources are then adapted to the mathematical models. A-3. CALCULATIONS A-5.1 Calculational means with adequate actual calculations performed. A-6. REPORT PREPARATION accuracy are chosen and the

14

