(Reaffirmed 2005)

l.!3:4166-1967

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF ILMENITE AND RUTILE
Methods Ckairman
DB A. V. SVKIATYE

of Sampling

Sectional

Committee, Represen I ing

SMDC 4

The Tnte Iron & Steel Co Ltd. Jamsbedpur

IUembers
SEBI

Light Metals curd Their Alloy Produds Sectional Committee, SMDC 10, IS1 SBBI 0. P. MATS~UB ( Alternate ) Refractories Sectional Committee, SMDC 18.181 8~x1 J. C. BA~~E~.T== Indian Iron & Steal Co Ltd. Burnpur DP U. N. BEBA~ 8~x1 A. C. M~~EEBJ~~ ( Alternate ) Precious Met& Sectional Committee, SMDC 13, DRM.g,BOSS IS1 B~ZFALLDB~~T. Rcbilwey ~oerd ( XUinistry of Railway8 ) Caxxte~ & V.D.
B~ABw~~

SOVTE

EASTIBN

RAXLWAY,

RDSO, CIUTTABAXJAN ( AIrernure ) Directorate General of Ordnance SHRIR. N. DATTA ( Ministry of Defenoe ), Calcutta SHBXD. K. CHAXBAVU~~ ( Alternure ) ( Ishepore 1 SHE16. K. mA

E~ABA&IJB CHEMIST

& %flLTALLUBOl8T-1,

Facto&n

( Murdnagar ) Saar D. S=N ( AIrernorc )

Directorate Gene2r81 of Inqction ( Mini&y of &fence ) SHBI J. B~ATTACEABJ~X ( Alrernare ) Copper and Co per Alloyr Sectioxml Cmnmit~. SHRXS. B. Fxxxr SYDC 11, &I Saar CEZNTAMA~X SBA~IIA ( Alternate ) Cht Iron k Malleeble Cae& Iron Seotional CamSHE&I A. GUHA mittee, SMDC 9, ISI Itrrlab Private Ltd, Bombay S~sr S. 8. H~NAVA~ SRBI J. P. PATEL ( Alrerttare ) Easen k Cq Bar&ore Ds N. JAYAUMAN SHBI K. N. QU~VBAJACHA~ ( Altermate ) Foundry Sectional Committee, SMDC 17, IS1 SHBI R. M. KB~HP~AN Indirn Statietiul Inrtitute, Calcutta SEBI D. B. L,AEuU DB A. MATTHAI ( Mrcrnorc )
(

Continued on page 2 )

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC
NEW DELHI 1IoooZ

IS : 4166 * 1967 ( Conrinl&djik7mpge
Members SHRIN. MAJUIKDAB

11
Representing
M0t8lS Non-Ferrous Indien Association, Calcutta M8UUfeCtUml't3'

SH~I M.M. MOUDC+ILL ( Alrernute) Statistioel Org8niP;stion ( Ministry of Defence ) DR N. T. MATREW SHBI 5. P. AQAI~WALA(.Alternute) Government of India Mint ( Ministry of Finance ) SH~I N. C. MITRA Da M. K. BOSE ( Alfernufe ) Nation81 Test House, C8loutt8 Sass S. N. MUKERJI SHSI A. K. BEA~ACHA~JEE ( Alternate ) Ferro Alloys Section81 Committee, SMDC 8, ISI; Da G. MIJKHERJEE and Steel Tubes, Pipes and Fittings Seotionel Committee, SMDC 22, IS1 Ores and Raw Materials Section81 Committee, S~BI D. S. MUSTY SMDC 16. IS1 Directorate General of Supplies & Dispossle SHRI E. K. N. NAMBIAR (Ministry of Works, Housing & Supply ); Steel Castings Sectional Committee, SMDC 20 161; and Pig Iron Sectional Committee SMDC 24. IS1 Directorate Generrrl of Supplies & Disposals SHRI G. V. HALWE ( Ministry of Works, Housing & Supply ) ( Alternote ) Steel Forgings Sectional Committee, SMDC 21. IS1 Sam A. PADMANABHAN Lecrd, Zinc, Tin, Antimony and Their Alloys SHRI M. K. RAO Sectional Committee, SMDC 12, IS1 Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, SERI D. K. RAY SMDC 5, IS1 Analysis Seotional Methods of Chemical REPRESENTATIVE Committee, SMDC 2, IS1 Indian Bureau of Mines ( Ministry of Steel, Mines SHRI G. V. D. UPAD~YAYA and Metals ), Nagpur SHRI V. V. S. R. H. RAO ( Alternate ) Methods of Physic81 Teats Sectional Committee, SHRI S. VISWANATIXAN SMDC 3. IS1 DR B. N. SINOH, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) Deputy Dim&or ( Ststietics ) sccrerury SHBI Y. K. BEAT Deputy Director ( St8ti&iCS ), 181

Subcommittee
Convener
SHRI B. B. GE~EXAL

on Sampling
In. permnsl

of Ores,

SMDC 4 : 3

C8psCity ( Ananab

Chetidunga, Asunsol, District Members
Da RAMAN C. Avrxw Therapeutios Bomb8y chernid

Bhavun, Upper Burdwan )
Corporation,

Research

SH~I M. V. VAIDYA ( Alternate) SHRI S. K. BXATTACHAIUEE Hindu&tan Steel Ltd, Renchi ( Conked

on page 12 )

2

E:4146-1967

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR SAMPLING OF ILMENITE AND RUTILE

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 26 June 1967, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Sampling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division*Council. 0.2 The beach sand deposits found mostly in the western coast of India contain large concentrations of heavy minerals like ilmenite and rutile. Recently their' production has been increasing considerably and their It is importance in the export market has also been well recognized. therefore, desirable that, due consideration is given to scientific methods of sampling which will help in the proper and objective assessment of the chemical characteristics of the material. Accordingly, the methods of sampling for the concentrated ilinenite and rutile sands as given in this standard arc intended to serve this purpose. 0.3 Taking into consideraiion and consumers, the Sectional to the sampling procedures ilmenite and rutile as also for the views of producers, testing authorities Committee felt that it should be related generally followed in this country for other ores in bulk.

0.4 This standird is one of a series of Indian Standards on sampling of ores and aggregates. Other standards on methods of sampling in this series are: IS : 14051966 Iron ore (jirsr

revision )

IS : 1449-1961 Manganese ore IS : 1811-1961 Foundry sands IS : 1999-1962 Bauxite IS : 2109-1962 IS : 22451962 IS : 2246-1963 IS : 4156-1967 Dolomite, Quartzite Fluorspar Barytes. betlimestone ( fluorite ) and other allied materials

0.5 This standard contains clause 7.1 which call's for an agreement ween the purchaser and the supplier. 3

fS :4166-3967 0.6 In reporting
the results of test or analysis, if the ilnal value observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down the procedure to be followed in collecting
and preparing samples from a lot in order to determine ore sizes, moisture content and the chemical composition of ilmenite and rutile;

`1,l.l It details the procedures from stock piles and from bags.

for the sampling of ilmenite and rutile

1.1.2 This standard also includes a method for reporting the quality of the bulk of the mineral sands ( ilmenite and rutile ) sampled. 2. `I!ERMIN.OLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this standard,
apply.

the following definitions shall

2.1 Lot - The quantity of ilmenite or rutile sand indicated to be of the same type and grade offered for inspection at one time. A lot may consist of the whole or a part of the quantity ordered for, or may consist of a part shipment or full shipment. quantity of ilmenite or rutile in each of the portions 2.2 Sub-lot -The into which a lot is divided for the purpose of sampling. -2.3 Increment - The quantity of ilmenite or rutile collected by filling up the sampling scoop to its capacity in a single motion of the scoop or the quantity obtained by mixing up two or more spear or pokeful/(as found necessary). The total weight of the increment is about 2 kg only. 2.4 Unit Sample - The quantity of ilmenite or rutile drawn to be representative of a portion ( section ) of a sub-lot. Ail the material collected from an auger from a hole of 15 cm diameter encased by a steel casing. 2.5 Gross Sample - The quantity of ilmenite or rutile obtained by mixing together all the increments or unit samples collected from the same sub-lot. 2.6 Laboratory Sample - The quantity of ilmenite or rutile obtained by reducing a gross sample following a specified procedure and intended for laboratory test.ing. *Rules for.roundingoff numerical velues ( ml&). 4

IS : 4166- 1967

2.7 Composite Sample -The

quantity of ilmenite or rutile obtained by mixing together in equal proportions all the laboratory samples obtained from all the gross samples and reduced following the specified procedure for laboratory testing. 2.8 scoop - A small shovel-like instrument with handle, rectangular in shape with straight sides on 3 sides and open on the fourth side, measuring 175 x 100 x 50 mm and with a capacity to hold approximately 2 kg of the material. metallic narrow grooved object with 2.9 Spear or Pqke - Elongated handle-groove length being at least 200 mm, width 5 to IOmm and depth 3 to 5 mm. The handle is proportionately rounded and its length might vary from 12 to 15 cm. Each spear&l of sample weighs from 100 to 200g. 2.10 Riffle Sample Divider -A wide chutes. Jones Riffle whereby microsplitter a part with 3 mm is

2.11 Sample Division - The process retained and the remainder rejected.

of the sample

is a screw type of &eel 2.12 Sampling Auger and Casing Pipe -Auger drill with a grab at the tip. With a .contrivance at the handle the grab may be made to open or close. The grab of the auger when fully open is slightly less in diameter than the internal diameter of the casing pipe. A easing pipe is a cylindrical The length of the auger handle varies. steel pipe open at both ends and with an internal diameter of 15 cm. The length of the casing pipe and the auger used depend on the height of stock pile to be sampled.

3. SAMPLiNG

FROM STOCK PILE

3.0 Stock piles vary greatly in size, particularly

in height and hppce the collection of representative samples from the stock piler(,beCQmc difficult and costly. For obtaining reliable conclusions, it is recogplended that as far as possible ilmenite and rutilt be aamplcd when in motion., that is, during loading or unloading of stock piles ( see 3.1). When sampling of stationary stock piles becomes inevitable, sectional sampling ( see 3.2.1.1) or trench sampling ( see 3.2.1.2 ) may be used for stock piles up to a maximum height of 1.2 m, after levelling the stock piles to a uniform height. This levelling becomes essential especially in the case of sectional sampling since fine materials like ilmenite and rutile in the sides of the open pits collapse rapidly and flows into the pit. 3.1 Sampling During Loading or Unloading of Stock Pile or unloaded

3.1.1 Sub-lots - The quantity of ilmenite or rutile to be loaded into from a stock pile shall be considered as divided into the
5

-IS : 4166- 1967
number of sub-lots of approximately equal weight, specified below:

Weight of the lot ( tonnes )
1001 2001 3501
up to

Number of Sub-lots
z 4 5

1000 ,, 2ooo ), 3500 ,, 5000

3.1.1.1While loading or unloading the quantity of ilmenite or rutile constituting a sub-lot, the number of increments specified under c increment sampling' in Table 1 shall be collected at regular intervals dtiring the whole period of loading or unloading the sub-lot. The increments, each weighing about 2 kg, shall bi collected from one or more baskets or bags, as the case may be, filled with ilmenite or rutile.
TABLE 1 NUMBER OF UNIT SAMPLES OR INCREMENTS TO BE COLLECTED FROM A SUB-LOT (Clauses
WEK+HT cm TEE SUB-LOT

3.1.1.1, 3.2.1.X. 3.2.1.2 and 4.1.1 )
SEOTIOIUALSAMPLING ( Nu~~~~)UNXT *INOPEYEIW SAMPLINO ( NVMBEB or INOBEBIIWIS ) :: 30 46 60 For

( TONNES )

$: to E 401 :; 600 601 ,, 800 301 ,) 1000

: 2 2 3

higher stack piles they would be proportionately

*The number of increments refer to only a stock pile of l-2 m high.

more.

3.1.2 Gross Samples - All increments collected from the same sub-lot shall be mixed together to constitute a gross sample. 3.2 Sampling a Completed Stock Pile 3.2.1 Sub-lots - The stock pile is divided into a number of sub-lots of approximately equal weight specified in 3.1.1 by suitably marking the line of demarcation on the surface of the stock pile. The ore surface in the sub-lot shall be levelled before sampling.' The sub-lots shall be sampled either by the method of sectional sampling ( see 3.2.1.1) or by the method of treqch sampling ( see 3.2.1.2 ). number of unit samples to be 3.2.1.1 Sectional sampling -The collected from a sub-lot shall depend upon the quantity of the ore in the sub-lot in accordance with Table 1 provided the height of the lot is not

6

Is:4166-1967.
more than I*2 m. For collecting these unit samples, an equal number of points shall be located at random on the ore surface in the sub-lot. At every selected point, a unit sample shall be collected by taking the whole section of the ore from top to bottom over an area of a circle of 15 cm diameter. For doing so a sampling auger is used in a casing Before using the auger the pipe with an internal diameter of 15 cm. casing pipe whose length is slightly more than the height of the sub-lot, is pushed vertically down till it touches the bottom of the lot. Then the entire material from the inside of the casing pipe is removed by the auger. The entire quantity of ore removed from the casing pipe forms a unit sample. following manner:

3.2.1.2Trench sampling - Each

sub-lot shall be trenched

in the

4 b) 4

The direction and pattern of trenches should be at random without following definite pattern. The pattern should be changed from sub-lot to sub-lot. The trench should extend right up to the bottom until the ground level is exposed. of the stack

In addition to the trenches, the sides of the stack should be opened to expose the ore inside the stack at places where the trench does not expose the ore inside.

From the entire cross-section of the exposed sides of the trenches from top to bottom, minimum number of increments, as specified in The weight of each increment shall be 2 kg. Table 1 shall be taken. 3.2.2 Gross Sample - All the increments or unit samples collected from the same sub-lot shall be mixed together to constitute a gross sample. 3.3 Thus, a lot will be represented by as many gross samples as the number of sub-lots into which it has been divided. Each gross sample shall be processed further individually in accordance with 5 and 6 and tested in accordance with 7. 4. SAMPLING FROM BAGS

4.0 Representative samples of ilmenite or rutile may be collected from stacked bags or bags in motion from the stack to boats or bags laying in boats. 4.1 Silb-lot - For the purpose of sampling all the bags in the lot shall be divided into the number of sub-lots of approximately equal weight specified in 3.1.1. 7

Is:4166-1967
of ilmenite or rutile in stacked bags, the number of increments specified For every under increment sampling in Table 1 shall first be noted. increment specified 10 bags are selected and from each bag two pokeful or spearful of sample is drawn from opposite ends of the bags or across the diagonals so that the 20 spearful (or pokeful ) that go to make up one increment, would weigh about 2 kg. If the bags are piled in regular rows the total number of bags forming the lot are divided into sub-lots as given in 3.1.1 and then the first bag is taken at random and the subsequent bags are taken at regular intervals both horizontally and vertically throughout the sub-lot so that 10 bags are collected for every increment as prescribed in increment sampling of Table 1. From each selected bag two spearful of ore is taken so that the total of 20 spearful forming an increment is nearly 2 kg in weight. 4.2 Gross Sample - All the increments collected' from the same sub-lot shall be mixed together to constitute a gross sample. 4.3 Thus, a lot will be represented by as many gross samples as the Each gross sample number of sub-lots into which it has been divided. shall be processed further individually in accordance with 5 and 6 and tested in accordance with 7. 5. DETERMINATION OF ORE SIZES

4.1.1 Sampling from Stacked Bags or Bags in Motion - For sampling

5.1The Bize distribution of the ilmenite and rutile sand shall normally be estimated as recommended below:

a) Over O-4 mm, b) Under O-4 rqq~ and over O-25 mm, C>Under 0.25 mm and over 0.20 mm,
cl Under O-15 mm and over 0.10 mm, and f 1 Under 0.10 mm.
5.2 Eachgross sample shall be screened successively through the relevant sieves and the quantity of ore retained on each of the sieves as also passing through the smallest sieve shall be weighed separately and recorded.

4

Under O-20 mm and over 0.15 mm,

5.2.1 The percentage calculated as follows:
Size percentage =

of each size in a sub-lot

( on weight basis ) is

weight of each size group x 100 total weight of the gross sample 8

of each size group in the entire lot is 3.2.2 When the percentage required, this shall be calculated as follows: 41 + a* + . . . . . . . . . . . . x 100 Percentage in each size group = w + w + where
1 4 ............

a,, as . . . . . . . . . are the corresponding weights of the respective size group in each of the sub-lots, and are the weights of the different gross samples. WI,&......... OF A- GROSS SAMPLE

6. REDUCTION

6.1 Each gross sample shall be reduced separately. The entire quantity of gross sample obtained shall be mixed well and reduced in stages either by coning and quartering or by using Jones Riffle microsplitter Moisture sample is separated from till a quantity of 10 kg is obtained. the quality sample at this stage, 5 kg being quality sample and 5 kg Now the laboratory sample (quality ) and being moisture sample. moisture sample are separately reduced till each sample weighs not less than 600 g. The 600 g of quality sample may be further ground to pass through 150-micron IS Sieve. 6.1.1 Reduction by Coning and Quarfering - The ore shall be well mixed and then scooped into a cone-shaped pile. Care shall be taken to drop each scoopful exactly over the same spot, otherwise the central axis of the cone will be slackened and an uneven distribution of lumps After the cone is formed, it shall be flattened b! and fines will result. pressing the top of the cone -with the smooth surface of the scoop. Then it is cut into quarters by two lines which intersect at right angles at the centre of the cone. The bulk of the sample is reduced by rejecting any two diagonally ,opposite quarters. 6.1.2 Reduction by Using Jones Rifle Microsplitter - The oreshall be well mixed and poured into the riffle. This process shall be repeated using different size riffles according to the size of the crushed ore. 6.2 The material in each laboratory sample shall be thoroughly mixed and divided into four approximately equal parts. All the four parts are carefully packed and sealed. One sealed sample is taken up for chemical The moisture sample is analysis and estimating the main ingredients. sealed in moistureproof packing, either clean glass bottles, clean tins or plastic bags and sent to the laboratory for moisture determination. One sealed quality sample shall be given to the buyer and one to the seller as the case may be and one sealed sample is kept as a reference sample. 6.2.1 All the samples shall be labelled with full identification, such as the source of the ore, the type of the ore, supplier's name, the lot number and the date of sampling.

9

1s : 4166 - 1%7 7. NUMBER OF TESTS 7.1 All the moisture sampks
representing a lot shall be tested individually for moisture content. All the laboratory samples for chemical analysis shall be tested individually for important characteristics, for the remaining, a composite sample prepared by mixing equal quantities The of the ore from each of the laboratory samples shall be analyzed. chemical characteristics for which each laboratory sample is to be analyzed individually and also those for which a composite sample is to be tested shall be as given below, unless otherwise agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier:

Chemical Constituents of Ilmenite and Rutile for Which
`Laboratory Samples are Analyzed Individually ~__L_-----7 Rutile Ilmenite Fe0 FesOs l Monazite TiO, EO Moiazite A Composite Sample is Analyzed r_ -_-~---__L7 Ilmenite CrsOs AlsO, MnO SiOs CaO Ma0 P*Os Rutile Fe0 FesOs MnO CrsOs Also, ZrO, SiO, CaO MgO PsOs

8, REPORTING 8.1 Reporting of ChemiCal Composition 8.1.1 For those characteristics, where a composite sample has been tested, only one test result will be available and that result shall be reported as the value of the characteristic for the lot sampled. 8.1.2 When only two laboratory samples have been analyzed individually from a lot, the average of the two available test results shall be The reported as the value of the characteristic for the lot sampled. individual test results shall also be reported to give an indication of the range of variation in quality. 8.1.3 When three or more laboratory
samples have been analyzed

*Determinedeither radiometricdly or by mioroscopio examination. 10

is : 4166 - I%7
individually from a lot, the quality of the lot sampled with reference each of the characteristics shall be reported as follows: to

Let Xr, Xs, Xs . . . . . . . . . X,, be the results of analyzing n laboratory samples for a particular characteristic, then, Average ( %) = ( X, + Xs + X* + . . . . . . . . . -.. X, ), and II the maximum and the

fiwe (RI
The average as E

= the difference between minimum values. level of that characteristic

in the lot shall be reported

The limits of variation in the average level of that characteristic in the lot shall be reported as ( T f hR ) where h is a factor, the value of which depends upon the number of laboratory samples analyzed. The'appropriate value of the factor h shall be as given below: Number

of laboratory' Samples Analyzed
3
5"

Value of the Factor h
l-30 O-72 0.51

8.2 Reporting of Moisture Content - The results obtained by testing all the moisture samples representing a lot individually shall be reported in accordance with 8.1.2 or 8.1.3.

11

Is : 4166 - .f%7
( Continued from pa* 3 ) Members Representing

Indian Iron & Steel Co Ltd. Bumpur DB U. N. B~surrr SHBI A. C. MUKIDSBJEE ( Alternate ) Export inspection Council of Indis, Calcutta SHE1 G. c. DE Sam P. K. CRATTERJBE( Alternke ) _ Directorate Gene-1 of Supplies k Dispos~le SHBI G. V. HALWE ( Ministry of Works, Housing & Supply ) S~BI S. N. DASOUPTA ( Alternote ) Italeb Private Ltd, Bombsy SHBI S. S. HoNAV'AB SEBI J. C. DEY IAfternate J --( cilcutta ) . ' S~isr J. P. PATEL ( Alternate 1 ( Bombay ) Minerals & Metals Trading Corporation of India SE'BI N. G. JAIN Ltd. New D&i Esscn & Co, Bengalore DBN. JAYABAMAIU SHBI Y. R. G. SHABMA ( Alternate_ ) Nat;~&~t;llurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ) SHBXG. P. MATHUB SXBI A. S. -EA S~rn 116.N. Mm%A SHar M. I& MouDomL SHBIG. RA~WABA~AX SHBI I& R. ROY SEBI A. cEAUD33oPY (

( Alternate

Yitn 8. K. private Ltd. Calcutta ) Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta N&h& g%igal Development Corporation Ltd, InsGz$ Testing Co (India

) Privets Ltd.

SHM S.

SUBBAYAMAY

Akrnate

General Superintendence Co ( India ) Private Ltd. of Goa. D&n and Diu, Penjim

)

Smu Hraatm P-o Sass SUSESH NABAIN

(

Alternate ) Govemnwnt

12

