UDC

621'922'025

: 614-8

IS : 1991 (Part

7)-1987

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

SAFETYREQUIREMENTS FORJHE USE,CARE AND PROJECTION OF ABRASIVE GRINDING WHEELS
PART (
c :

7

STANDARD

SPEEDS

Second

Revision

)
It

1. Scope - This standard ( Part 7 ) covers the maximum operating speed of grinding wheels. also covers the responsibilities of the machine builders, wheel users and wheel manufacturers. 2. Standard Speeds

2.1 Standard Maximum Speeds - The maximum operating speed of each wheel shall be established by the wheel manufacturer. Table 1 indicates maximum surface speed in m/s for various classes of wheels. The use of classification in Table 1 takes precedence over the general wheel type. The number of revolutions per minute ( rpm ) may be increased as the diameter reduced through wear, provided the original surface speed is never exceeded. It shall responsibility not to exceed these maximum operating speeds. of a wheel is be the user's

The maximum operating speeds specified in Table 1 have proved satisfactory for the wheels as classified. The maximum operating speed as determined by the manufacturer is dependent on the wheel shape and strength. It is the responsibility of the wheel user to make sure that under no conditions is a wheel to be operated faster than the maximum surface speed established by the wheel manufacturer.

z z ._
E
E c

The maximum surface speed can be determined by converting the maximum revolutions the full size wheel to m/s. The maximum operating speed is not necessarily the most efficient results are frequently obtained at lower than maximum operating speeds.

per minute ( RPM ) for grinding speed. Better

2.1.1 Manufacturer's fesfs - All abrasive wheels designed to operate at speeds indicated in Table 1 shall be tested in accordance with Table 2. In those cases where the shape, size, construction or conditions of use of wheels make the speed tests impracticable or unnecessary, the wheel manufacturer shall establish the maximum operating speed by other equally effective tests or past experience. The wheel marking shall indicate highest permissible operating speed by the use of a phrase `Maximum operating speed of . ..__. . . . . . . rpm' [ see IS : 551-1966 Marking system for grinding wheels ( revised ) 1. 2.2 Machine Builder's Responsibility - All wheels classified for use under Table 1, shall be used on grinding machines designed and equipped in accordance with the following: a) IS : 1991 ( Part 3 ) General machine b) IS : 1991 ( Part 4 ) Safety guards c) IS : 1991 ( Part 5 ) Flanges
The repeated machinery should abrasive wheels. references be familiar applicable parts and regulations to other with these parts. Their proper application are important. All designers of grinding has a direct relationship to the safe use of

requirements

2.3 Wheel User's Responsibility - All abrasive wheels shall be used in conformance with instructions given in the following parts and shall be handied, stored and inspected in accordance with `arts 2 and 6 of this standard: a) IS : 1991 ( Part 1 ) Scope and definitions b) IS : 1991 ( Part 3 ) General machine requirements c) IS : 1991 ( Part 4 ) Safety guards d) IS : 1991' ( Part 5 ) Flanges e) IS : 1991 ( Part 6 ) Mounting and inspection rules
shown in Table 1, shall be subject to the additional require-

f) IS : 1991 ( Part 7 ) Standard speed g) IS : 1991 ( Part 9 ) General operating
Abrasive wheels used at speeds higher ments outlined in Par? 8 of this standard.

than those

The repeated references to other applicable sections and regulations are important. All users of abrasive wheels should be familiar with these sections. Their proper application has a direct relationship to the safe use of abrasive wheels.

Adopted

23 November

1987

0 April I OF
BHAVAN,

1989, BIS I

Gr 3

BUREAU
MANAK

INDIAN
9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZA!=AR MARG

IS : 1991 ( Part 7 ) - 1987

TABLE

1

STANDARD

MAXIMUM

SPEEDS

( Clauses 2.1 and 2.4.1 )

Classification No.

Type

of Wheel

Maximum Vitrified Low strength Bond

Surface

Speed

( m/s ) Bond High strength 48

Organic Low strength 33

Medium strength 30

High strength 33

Medium strength 40

I

Straight wheels (except classification 6 and 7 below ), taper side wheels, recessed and dovetailed wheels, dish wheels, saucer wheels Cylinder inserted wheels including nut and projecting plate stud mounted,

28

2 3 4 _-~ 5

25 23 23 25

28 25 28 30

30 30 33 33

25 30 30 28

30 38 40 35

35 43 48 43

Cup shape tool grinding wheel (for fixed base machines ), straight side cups, flaring cups Cup shape snagging machines ), straight wheels ( for portable side cups, flaring cups nut;

Abrasive discs; plate mounted, inserted projecting stud, solid or segmental Reinforced wheels: Dia 100 mm, Max; Thickness Dia 250 mm, Max; Thickness

6

5 mm, Max I3 mm, Max

-

-

-

:: 33

60 1: 40

80 Gi 48

7

All other diameters and thicknesses --_ Wheels for bench and pedestal grinders and for surface grinders in following sizes only: 180 mm dia, up to 50 mm thick, and up to 50'8 mm hole; and 200 mm dia up to 50 mm thick and up to 50'8 mm hole Diamond wheels, Metal bond Resin bond Vitrified bond cutting-off:

28

32

33

33

28

32

38

33

40

48

8 ---I 9

-

-

t;

1 -

1

80 50

Cutting-off wheels, larger ing reinforced organic Cutting-off including Thread

than

400 mm includ-

-

-

48

60

71

IO

wheels, 400 mm dia reinforced organic wheels grinding

and

smaller,

-

-

-

40

60

80

11 I2 13

and flute grinding and camshaft wheels

40 wheels 28

50 40

60 43 -

-40 33

50 40

60 48 60

Crankshaft

Type I snagging

dia 400 mm; and 400 mm

Larger, organic bond including reinforced, used on swing frame grinders designed for this speed Used on semi-automatic designed for this speed 14 I5 Internal wheels-Types [See IS snagging grinders

-

-

-

-

-

83

I and 5, Dia 150 mm, Max

28 -

40 -

43 50

33 -

43 -

48 50

Mounted wheels for limitations

: 1991 ( Part IO )-1987.1

speed of a mounted Note - The safe operating size of the wheel and the overhang. *Safety requirements revision 1. for the use, care and protection

wheel depends of abrasive

upon grinding

the diameter wheels:

and

length

of

mandrel,

the

Part IO Mounted

wheels

(second

2

IS : 1991 ( Part 7 ) -1987
2.4 Wheel Manufacturer's 2.4.1 Speed testing shall be speed tested Exceptions Wheels that need not be speed tested Wheels Ball grinding Segmental Regulating Mounted Diamond 1. Metal 2. Organic wheels, disc wheels, and cubic bonded, bonded, boron and at surface speed of 12.5 m/s or less.
operating with safe

Responsibility to be operated with Table 2. within the standard speeds as listed in Table 1,

- All wheels in accordance

are:

a) b) d) 4 f)
9)

less than 150 mm in diameter,

cl Segments,
wheels and disc wheels which are not plate mounted, ), classifications: wheels ( for centreless nitride type grinders whee!s

of the following

and

h)

Other wheels

for operation

The test speed subjects an abrasive wheel to significantly greater forces than does the safe maximum speed. This test establishes an adequate factor of safety provided the wheels are used in accordance practices outlined in this standard and have not been altered, damaged or abused after speed testing. The speed test does not justify operation of the wheel at higher than the maximum operating by the wheel manufacturer. The maximum speed must never be exceeded because the safety factor speed test covers other normal grinding stresses.

speed established established by the

TABLE 2 WHEEL MANUFACTURER'S
( Clauses 2.1:1

TESTING

SPEEDS

and 2.4.1 )
Operating Speed
Test Factor*

Class of Wheel

Minimum m/s

I

Cutting-off

wheels

All

speeds

1'20 1'25

All bonds and wheel types (except cutting-off wheels) All bonds and wheel types (except cutting-off wheels)

Up to 25

Faster than 25

1'50

*Actual operating speed shall be multiplied minimum speed at which wheels shall be tested

by this test factor to establish by the wheel manufacturer.

2.4.2 Speed marking - An abrasive wheel speed in revolutions per minute ( rpm ). Exception

or its

package

shall

show

the

maximum

operating

Mounted wheels ( see Part 1 of this standard maximum operating speed.

for definition

) and their

package need not show

In the case of mounted wheels, because of the overhang factor which is established by the user at the time of mounting, it is impossible for the wheel manufacturer to indicate maximum operating speed. Therefore, the user must determine from the speed tables given in Part 10 of this standard, the maximum operating speed ( rpm ) for any mounted wheel as used. 3

IS : 1991

( Part

7 ) - 1987

3. User's Responsibility 3.1 Speed Check ofMachines - The user shall establish a programme to ensure rhat grinding machines do not subj'ect abrasive wheels to speeds greater than the maximum operating speeds marked on the wheel or package. In the case of variable speed machines, the number of revolutiors per minute ( rpm ) may be increased as the diameter of a wheel is reduced through wear provided the original surface speed is never exceeded. It shall be the user's responsibility not to exceed these maximum operating speeds. It is of special importance that portable air grinders should be checked to ensure that proper air pressure is
maintained and that the machine governor mechanism is clean, is in good operating condition, and is functioning properly. This reference to air grinders is not intended to overlook the necessity for a regular check of the speed of wheel spindles on all types of grinding machines. The user should assign this responsibility to competent personnel using equipment properly designed for speed check purposes such as a tachometer or stroboscope. The user should also keep a permanent record of such speed checks. A tachometer is suitable for use on majority of machines to check the spindle standpoint, this tachometer check should be made without the grinding wheel, loose spindle. A stroboscope sible or impractical types, see Appendix is also recommended to use a tachometer. A. to check the speed For recommended speed ( rpm ). From a safety flange, or nut mounted on the

( rpm ), specially
frequency of

on those machines where it is imposspeed measurement for various machine

3.2 Speed Adjustmenf Control --- If the speed of the machine wheel spindle is adjustable to compensate for wheel wear, the speed adjustment shall be under the supervision and control of competent and authorized persons only. The speed control setting shall be checked for proper speed whenever a wheel change is made and after maintenance or repair that could affect the speed of the machine.
Certain machines are designed with adjustable speeds to permit maintenance of efficient surface speeds by increasing the wheel spindle speed ( rpm ) to compensate for wheel wear. Never exceed the maximum surface spe- 4 established by the wheel manufacturer. This can be interpolated from the rpm marked for the full size wheel. Special care must be exercised under proper supervision to ascertain that the foregoing procedure is followed.

APPENDIX

A

( Clause 3.1 )
RECOMMENDED A-l.
The speed shall Type of Grinder be measured Type

FREQUENCY OF SPEED MEASUREMENT VARIOUS MACHINE TYPES
at the time of installation of all machines. Frequency

FOR

of Drive

Recommended

Portable grinders

Air driven

Measure the speed of governor controlled grinders every 20 hours of actual use or once a week, whichever comes first. Measure speed of all types of grinders, after maintenance or repair, whenever a grinder is issued from tool crib and at each wheel change. Several readings should be taken.

Electric driven ( Hi-cycle )

Measure monthly and repair that could machine.

after any maintenance of affect the speed of the

All other grinders ( except portable grinder )

Direct drive ( single speed ) Belt driven ( single speed )

Measure after any maintenance or repair could affect the speed of the machine.

that

Measure monthly and after any maintenance or repair that could affect the speed of the machine, Measure once a week and after any maintenante or repair that could affect the speed of the machine. On variable speed machines, other than semi-automatic snagging grinders, measure speed whenever a wheel change is made. 4

Variable speed machine

IS : 1991 ( Part EXPLANATORY NOTE

7 ) - 1987

The safe operation of abrasive wheels requires the understanding and cooperation of many &verse groups and of all individuals concerned with their use or operation. This has been the basic viewpoint in establishing these safety requirements for the guidance of manufacturers, users and others involved in handling these products. A thorough knowledge of nature and characteristics of abrasive wheels, the grinding machines on which they are used and the safety and protection devices which can and shall be used to limit, if not eliminate, injury or damage in case of accidental wheel breakage, is necessary for proper understanding of these safety requirements. These safety requirements may be used as a guide and not as an alternative to constant educational programmes at all levels which are the best insurance against those unforeseen conditions or circumstances which result in an industrial accident. The mandatory requirements are printed in normal ( 10 points ) type and the explanatory information in smaller ( 8 point ) type. This is intended to facilitate a condensed document of The explanatory information mandatory requirements together with supporting tables and a figure. gives the basic reasons for the rules to encourage their implementation in practice. However, it may The explanatory material has been included to encourage not be termed as part of the standard. compliance and it is given only where it amplifies or clarifies a requirement. Operating rules are not included in these safety requirements unless they are of such a nature as to be important safety requirements equal in importance to other requirements included In this standard. ;i This standard was first issued in 1962 and its first revision was taken up in 1973, based on ANSI B 7.1-1970. In order to review the individual section at any time and also reasons alike, this standard has been split-up in the following ten parts: Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part 1 Scope and definitions 2 Handling 3 General 4 5 6 7 and storage machine requirements for technical and drafting

Safety guards Flanges Inspection and mounting Standard speeds rules

8 Special speeds 9 General operating wheels

Part 10 Mounted

While splitting, this part ( Part 7 ) of the standard has also been revised been made more explicit. More data has also been included. While revising this standard, assistance

and the details

have

has also been taken from the following

publications: wheels', issued wheels',

`European safety by the Federation

requirement for the use, care and protection of abrasive of European Producers of Abrasive Products ( FEPA ).

ANSI B 7.1-1978 `Safety requirement for the use, care and protection issued by the American National Standards Institute, USA.

of abrasive

Printed

at New India

PrlntinQ

Press,

Khuria,

India

