( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 3554 - 1966

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING ELECTROPLATING
Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee, SMDC 23
Chairman
SHRI M. 2. KHAN Geep Flashlight

TO

Refiresenting
Industries Ltd, Allahabad

Members
SHRI F. V. BADAMI Directorate General New Delhi of Technical Development,

SHRI K. N. R. SHARMA (AZternate) S. Mitra and Company, Bombay SHRI A. K. BHIMANI SHRI H. C. SAMPAT (AZternate) Sen-Raleigh Ltd, Asansol SHRI D. K. CHATTER~EE Kohinoor Electra-Gilders, Bombay SHRI KANTILAL T. DALAL SHRI JAYENDRA K. DALAL (AZternate) Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies SHRI C. D. DANDEKAR and Disposals, New Delhi Directorate General of Technical Development. DR P. DAYAL Metallurgical Industries Directorate, New Delhi Nickel Information Bureau Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. N. GANDHI Directorate General of Posts and Telegraphs GENERAL MANAGER, POSTS AND (Ministry of Transport and Communications), TELEGRAPHS WORKSHOPS Calcutta DEPUTY GENERAL MANAGER (Alternate) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI G. N. KESHA~AMURTHY The Metal Box Co of India Ltd, Calcutta SHRI G. S. LITTLEJOHN DR S. S. MALHOTRA (AZternate) The Indian Tube Company (1953) Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI P. MITRA Ministry of Railways SHRI 0. P. PANDYA SHRI M. C. SINGHAL (AZternate) Central Electrochemical Research Institute (CSIR), DR K. S. RAJAGOPALAN Karaikudi SHRI B. A. SHENOI (Alternate) Hindustan Motors Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. M. RAJU Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore PROF T. L. RAMACHAR Ministry of Defence (DGI), New Delhi; and Indian SHRI, D. V. REDDI Institute of Metals, Calcutta The Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. K, ROKADE SHRI P. K. DESHPANDE (AZternate)

(Continued

on page

2)

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG
1

IS: 3554 - 1966
(Continued from .$age 1) Members Repesenting

Geep Flashlight Industries Ltd, Allahabad SHRI R. C. ROY Hindustah Aeronautics Ltd. Bangalore SHRI A. S. SANTIAGO SHRI C. D. VARGHESE (Alternate) Directorate General of Ordnance Factories (Ministry SHRI A. SOUNDRARAJ of Defence), Calcutta SHRI Y. S. TRIVEDI (AItevnate) (Bombay) SHRI V. KRISHNAN (AZternate)
SHRI D.

(Ca+utta)

S. TANDON

SIIRI B. S. KRISHNAMACHAR, Director (Strut & Met)

Laboratory Metallurgical National Jamshedpur Director General, ISI (Ex-o@cio Member)

(CSIR),

`Secretary
Deputy SHRI S. L. BALI Director (Metals),

IS1

2

IS : 3554 - 1966

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING ELECTROPLATING
0. FOREWORD.

TO

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 10 March 1966, after the draft finalized by the Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. \ 0.2 This standard has been' prepared to assist in correct interpretation of common terms used in the field of electroplating. These definitions correspond to interpretations as applied to electroplating and do not necessarily correspond to the definitions used in other fields. Certain fundamental terms which have not been included in this standard may be found in IS: 1885. (Part I)-1961". 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications : A. KENNETH GRAHAM, Ed. Electroplating engineering handbook. 1962. Ed 2. ReinhOld Publishing Corporation, New York. ASTM Part 7 1965 Nonferrous metals and alloys (including corrosion tests) ; die-cast metals; electro-deposited metallic coatings; metal powders; nonferrous filler metal, American Society for Testing and Materials 0.4 Terms dealing with corrosion and heat-treatment of metals will be covered by separate Indian Standards which are now under preparation. 0.5 This standard is intended mainly to cover technical definitions of terms relating to electroplating, and it does not necessarily include all the legal meanings of the terms.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard gives definitions of terms relating to electroplating.

2. DEFINITIONS 2.1 The definitions alphabetical order. in this standard have been given in the following

*Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part I Fundamental definitions.

3

IS: 3554 - 1966 A Activation - Elimination Addition Agent -A
for the purpose of a passive condition on a surface. to a plating _ bath

material added in small.iuantities of modifying the character of the deposit.

Adhesion - The attractive force that `exists between an electro-deposit and its substrate that may be measured as,the force required to separate an electro-deposit and its substrate. Alloy Plate - An electro-deposit
intimately eye. mixed or combined Co-deposition which Current containing two or as not to be distinguishable of two or more metals. will deposit silver at the rate of flowing at the rate of one coulomb per of any more metals so to the unaided \

Alloy Plating -

Ampere -The current `0*001118 0 g per second. second. Angle of Repose -The
loose solid material

angle of maximum slope at which a heap will stand without sliding. ion. negative reactions

Anion -A Anode -The
discharged,

negatively-charged

electrode in electrolysis, at which positive ions are formed, or other oxidizing efficiency as applied

ions occur.

are

Anode Efficiency - Current Anode Film the anode. or reaction

to the anodic

process.

(a) The portion of solution in immediate contact with (b) The outer layer of the anode itself consisting of oxidation products of the anode metal.

Anode Pblarization - See `Polarization'. Anodic Cleaning - See under Anodic Coating -An
`Cleaning'. electrolytic oxidation process in which the surface of a metal particularly of aluminium, when anodic, is converted to a coat having desirable protective, decorative, or functional properties.

Anolyte -The portion a diaphragm is present, of the diaphragm. Anti-pitting
venting the formation

of electrolyte in the vicinity it is the portion of electrolyte

of the anode. If on the anode side of pre-

Agent - An addition

agent for the specific purpose of pits or large pores in the deposit.

(a) Full - Mechanical plating in which the cathodes are conveyed automatically through successive cleaning and plating tanks. (b) Semi - Mechanical plating in which the cathodes are conveyed automatically through only one plating tank,

Automatic Plating -

IS : 3554- 1966 B Back emf (Electromotive Force) - The potential set up in an electrolytic cell which opposes the flow of current, caused by such ,factors . as concentration polarization and electrode films. Barrel Finishing (or Tumbling) - Bulk processing of work in rotating barrels in presence of abrasive particles, which may be suspended in water or some special solution, for the purpose of improving the surface finish [see also `Burnishing (Ball)`]. plating (or cleaning) in Barrel Plating (or Cleaning) -Mechanical which the work is processed in bulk in a rotating container. metal that oxidizes readily or dissolves to form ions. Base Metal -A The opposite of noble metal. Basis Bath Metal (or Material) Voltage -See Material upon which coatings are deposited. `Tank Voltage'.

electrode that is not directly connected to the Bipolar Electrode -An power supply but is so placed in the solution between the anode and the cathode that the part nearest the anode becomes cathodic and the part nearest the cathode becomes anodic. Blue Dip - A solution containing a mercury compound used to deposit mercury upon a metal by immersion, usually prior to silver plating. Bright Dip (Non-electrolytic) on a metal. A dip used to produce a bright surface

Brightener-An addition agent which leads to the formation of a bright plate; or which improves the brightness of the deposit. Bright Plating - An electro-deposit in the as-plated condition. which possesses specular reflection

range of current densities within which Bright Plating Range -The a given plating bath produces a bright plate. Bright Throwing, Power - The measure of the ability of a plating solution or a specified set of plating conditions to deposit uniformly bright electroplate upon an irregularly shaped cathode. Brush Plating -A method of plating in which the plating solution is applied with a pad or brush, within which is an anode and which is moved over. the cathode to be plated. Buffer - A substance which when added to a solution, causes it to resist any change in hydrogen ion concentration upon addition of acid or alkali. Each buffer has a characteristic limited range of $H' over which it is effective.

5

IS : 3554 - 1966 Bllffing - The smoothing of a surface by means of flexible wheels to the surface of which fine abrasive particles are applied in liquid suspension, paste or grease stick form. . Building Up -Electroplating
sions of an article. or undesirable building up of deposit on corners with a for the purpose of increasing the dimen-

Build Up - Overplating or edges during plating. Burnishing -The
hard

smoothing tool or an object.

of surface

especially

by rubbing

Burnishing (Ball) - The smoothing of surfaces by means or other special metal shapes in a rotating container. Burnt Deposit -A
electro-deposit anode and produced cathode rough, non-adherent by the application section,

of metal

balls

or otherwise unsatisfactory of excessive current density. for carrying current to the

Bus Bar (Bus) - A rigid conducting
bars.

C

Calomel

Electrode

(kalomel

Half Cell) -A

a mercury electrode in contact with specified concentration and saturated

half cell containing a solution of potassium chloride of with mercurous chloride (calomel).

The electrode at which Cathode - The negative electrode in electrolysis. positive ions are discharged, negative ions are formed, or other reducing reactions occur.

Cathode Efficiency -The
process.

current

efficiency

applied

to the adjacent

cathodic to the

Cathode Film -The
cathode.

portion

of solution

immediately

Cathode Polarization - See `Polarization'. Cathodic Cleaning -See Catholyte - The portion
in a divided cell the portion positively ion. 6 under `Cleaning'.

of the electrolyte in the vicinity of the cathode; on the cathode side of the diaphragm. ion. capable of forming a chelate compound

Cation -A
with a metal

charged

Chelating Agent - A compound

IS: 3554 3 1966 Chemical Polishing - The improvement in surface smbothness of a mefal by simple immersion in a suitable solutioti [see also `Bright Dip I (Non-electrolytic) `I. Chrome Plating - This term is sometimes used to mean to plate with chromium. Cleaning - The removal of grease or bther foreign material from surface.
Alkaline Clea%ng - Cleaning by means of alkaline solutions. Anodic Cleaning T Electrolytic cleaning in which the work is th;

4

anode. cleaning in which the work is Catlzodic Cleaniltg - Electrolytic 4 the cathode. d) Diphase Cleaning - Cleaning by means of solutions that contain a solvent layer and an aqueous layer. Cleaning is effected both by solvent and emulsifying action;' 4 Direct-Cwrent Cleaning - See `Cathodic Cleaning'. \ f ) EEectrolytic Cleaning - Alkaline cleaning in which a current is passed through the solution, the work being one of the electrodes. Em&ion Cleaning - Cleaning by means of solution containing EC) organic solvents, water, and emulsifying agents. h) Immersion Cleaning - See `Soak Cleaning'. 9 Reverse Current Cleaning T See `Anodic Cleaning". k) Soak Cleaning - Cleaning by immersion without the use of current, usually in alkaline solution. 4 So&ventCleaning - Cleaning by means of organic solvents. 4 Spray Cleaning - Cleaning by means of spraying. Cleaning by any chemical means aided by P) Ultrasonic Cleaningultrasonic energy. Colloidal Particle - An electrically-charged particle, generally smaller in size than 200 rnp, dispersed in a second continuous phase. Colloidal Solution or Suspension -A mixture of two or more phases, at least one of which consists of colloidal particles dispersed in one of the other phases. Colouring (or Colour Buffing) -Light the purpose of producing a high lustre. Complexing Agent - A compound with a metal ion, bu'ffing of metal surfaces for

b)

capable of forming a complex ion

Complex Ion -An ion composed of two or more ions of radicals both of which are capable of independent existence [for example, cuprocyanide ICu(CN),l]-". 7

metals.

Composite Plate - An electro-deposit consisting of layers of two or more

Conductance - Conductance is the reciprocal of resistance, and is measured by the ratio of the current flowing through a .conductor to the difference of potential between its ends. It is usually expressed in mhos. Conducting Salt -A
conductivity. salt added to the solution in order to increase its

Coaductivity/Specific Conductance - The current transferred across unit area per unit potential gradient. K= amperes/cm2 divided by volts per centimetse. The reciprocal of resistivity. Contact Potential -The
dissimilar metals. potTntia1 difference at the junction of two

Corrosion -

(a) Gradual destruction of a material usually by solution oxidation or other means attributable to a chemical process. (P) (of anodes in plating) : solution of anode metal by the electrochemical action in the plating cell.

Coulomb - The quantity of electricity which passes through any section of an elektric circuit in one second when the current in the circuit is one 118 0 gram ampere. The quantity of electricity which will deposit O*OOl of silver. Coulometer -An electrolytic cell arranged to measure the quantity of electricity by the chemical action produced in accordance with Faraday's Laws. / Covering Power - The ability of a plating solution to produce a deposit
at very low current densities.

Current Density (CD) - (a) Average -Total current divided by total (b) True -The value of the current area of electrode in the solution. density at a given point on the electrode. Current Efficiency - The proportion, usually expressed as percentage,
of the current that is effective in carrying out a specified process in aocordance with Faraday's Law. (For example, in electso-deposition, the proportion of the current used in deposition OS dissolving metal; the remainder usually being used in evolving hydrogen or oxygen). or buffing for the purpose of removing

Cutting Down - Polishing roughness or irregularities.

8

IS : 3554 - 1966 D Deburring - The removal chemical, or electrochemical of burrs, means. sharp edges, or fins by mechanical,

Decomposition Potential - The minimum potential (exclusive of IR drop) at which an electrochemical process may take place at an appreciable rate. Degreasing The removal of grease and oils from by by immersion solvent of a surface. in liquid vapours purifying organic

a) Solvent Degreasing - Degreasing solvent. b) Vapour Degreasing - Degreasing on the parts being cleaned. Deionization/Demineralizatioti ion exchange. -A

condensing water by A

process

Depolarization-A decrease in the polarization change from an excessively to a normally polarized Depolarizer Deposition A substance which produces Range'. that possesses

of an electrode, condition.

depolarization.

Raige

See `Plating

Detergent-A soiled surfaces.

surface-active

agent

the

ability

to clean anode and or from an

Diaphragm - A porous or permeable cathode compartments of an electrolytic intermediate compartment.

membrane separating cell from each other

Diffusion Coatings - (a) Coatings produced by immersion at high temperatures so that the coating metal diffuses into the basis metal and produces an alloy `case' of graded composition; (b) Composite electrodeposited coatings which may subsequently be inter-diffused. Diphase Cleaning See under `Cleaning'. `Cleaning'. or other means for physically that adheres to to the material the material

Direct-Current

Cleaning

See under

Divided Cell - A cell containing a diaphragm separating the anolyte and catholyte. Drag-In - The quantity introduced into a bath. Drag-Out - The quantity removed from a bath. of ,water or solution of solution that

adheres

9

IS : 3554 - 1966 Dummy (or Dummy Cathode) -A cathode in a plating solution which is not to be made use of after plating. Often used for removal or decomposition of impurities. Dummying Duplex Plating with dummy cathodes. `Composite Plate'. E Electrochemical Equivalent - The weight of an element, compound, radical or ion involved in a specified electrochemical reaction during the passage of unit quantity of electricity, such as a Faraday ampere-hour, or coulomb. Electrode - A conductor of the metallic class through which a current enters or leaves an electrolytic cell; at which there is a change from conduction by electrons to conduction by charged particles of matter or vice versa. Electra-deposition -The electrode by electrolysis. process of depositing a substance upon an

Coating -See

Electrode Potential - The difference in potential between an electrode and the immediately adjacent electrolyte referred to some standard electrode potential as zero. Dynamic EP - The electrode potential measured when current is passing between the electrode and the electrolyte. Equilibrium EP - An electrode potential measured when the electrode and the electrolyte are in equilibrium with respect to a specified electrochemical reaction. Standard EP - An electrode potential measured, for an electrode in contact with an electrolyte in which one or more specified ions have a specified ion activity. Static EP - The electrode potential measured when no current l's flowing between the electrode and the electrolyte. Electroforming deposition. Electrogalvanizing The production or reproduction of articles by electroElectra-deposition of zinc coatings.

Electrolysis - Production of chemical changes by the passage of current through an electrolyte. Electrolyte - (a) A conducting medium in which the flow of current is accompanied by movement of matter. Most often an aqueous solution of acids, bases or salts but includes many other media as fused salts, ionized 10

IS : 3554 - 1966 gases, some solids, etc. (b) A substance which when dissolved in-a solvent {usually water) produces a conducting medium. Electrolytic Cell -A unit apparatus in which electrochemical reactions are produced by applying electrical energy, or which supplies electrical energy as a result of chemical reactions and which includes two or more electrodes and one or more electrolytks contained in a suitable vessel. .Electrolytic Cleaning See under `Cleaning'. the standard

tilectromotive Series-A table that lists in order electrode potentials of specified electrochemical reactions.

Electroplating/Electra-deposition - Is a process for depositing a metal from a solution of a metal salt by passage of current. .Electropolishing - The improvement in surface finish of a metal effected by making it anodic in specifically formulated solutions. Electrotyping emf -Electroforming Force) -An as applied to printing plates. electrical potential. (Electromotive

Emulsion - A suspension of small droplets of one liquid in an`other in which it is insoluble. For the formation of a stable emulsion, an emulsifying agent shall usually be present. Emulsion Cleaning See under `Cleaning'. Equivalent Conductivity - In an electrolyte, the conductivity of the solution divided by the number of equivalents of conducting solute per unit volume, that is the conductivity divided by the normality of the solution. F Faraday-The number of coulombs (96 490) required for an electrochemical reaction involving one chemical equivalent. Paraday's Laws - (a) The amount of chemical change produced by an electric current is proportional to the quantity of electricity. (b) The amounts of different substances liberated by the same quantity of electricity are proportional to their chemical equivalent weights. Filter Aid -An inert, insoluble material, more or less finely divided, used to assist in filtration by preventing excessive packing of the filter cake. ( Flash (or Flash Plate) (see also `Strike'). A Gery thin deposit of metal less than 2.5 pm

Flocculate - To aggregate into larger particles; to increase in size to the point where precipitation occurs. 11

IS : 3554 - 1966 Formula Weight -The weight in grams obtained by adding the atomic weights of all elemental constituents in a chemical formula. Free Cyanide - (a) True - The actual concentration of cyanide radical or equivalent alkali cyanide not combined in complex ions with metals in solution. (b) Calculated - The concentration of cyanide, or alkali cyanide present in solution in excess of that calculated as necessary to form a specified complex ion with a metal or metals present in solution. (c) AnalyticalThe free cyanide content of a solution, as determined by a specified analytical method.
G

by electrochemical

Galvanic Cell - An electrolytic cell capable of producing electrica: energy
action.

Galvanic Series - A list of metals and alloys arranged according to their relative potentials in a given environment (see also `Electromotive Series'). Gassing - The evolution during electrolysis.
of gases from one or more of the electrodes

Glass Electrode-A half cell in which the potential measurements are made through a glass membrane. Grinding - The removal of metal by means of rotating rigid wheels containing abrasive distributed throughout them.
malleable cast iron.

Grit Blasting -Abrasive

blasting with small irregular pieces of steel or

H Half Cell - An electrode immersed in a suitable electrolyte, designed for measurement of electrode potential. It may be designed to yield a known constant potential in which case unknown potentials may be measured against it, for example, the calomel half cell. Hard Anodizing - Anodic treatment of metals particularly aluminium
to form an oxide film which has got resistance to abrasion. decorative

Hard

Chromium - Chromium
applications.

plated for engineering rather Not necessarily harder than the latter.

than

Hard Water - Water containing calcium or magnesium ions in solution
which will form insoluble curd with soap. 12

IS : 3554 - 1966 Haring
principal throwing

Cell - A rectangular

box of non-conducting material, with and auxiliary electrodes so arranged as to permit estimation of power or electrode polarizations and potentials between them. operations, of a metal article most exposed and hence, having the highest lustre. to buffing

High Lights - Those portions
or polishing

trapezoidal box of non-conducting material with electrodes arranged to permit observation of cathodic or anodic effects over a wide range of current densities.

Hull Cell -A

Hydrogen
absorption

Embrittlement
of hydrogen

- Embrittlement
pickling, cleaning

during

of, a metal or plating with

caused process. liberation

by of

Hydrogen
hydrogen.

Overvoltage

- Overvoltage
I

associated

Immersion Indicator
medium conditions ,solid.

Cleaning - See under (pH) -A
substance

`Cleaning'. colour when the pH of the in the electrolyte under the

which changes

is changed. prevailing in the electrolysis. most of ions usually between a solution and a commonly effected by ion exchange resins.

Inert Anode - An anode which is insoluble Ion Exchange - An exchange
In practice

IR Drop - The voltage across a resistance
E = IR; E = Potential

in accordance with Ohm's Law, (Voltage) ; I = Current; R = Resistance.

L Levelling
smoother

Action - The ability
than that

of a plating of the `substrate.

solution

to produce

a surface

Current Density - (a) Cathodic - The maximum current density at which satisfactory deposits are obtained. (b) Anodic -The maximum current density at which the anode behaves normally, without excessive polarization. Limiting M Mandrel matrix. A form used as a cathode in electroforming ; a mould or

Matrix - See `Mandrel'. Matt$; Dip -A
dip used to produce a matte surface on a metal.

13

Matte Matte

Finish-A Surface-A

dull

finish. with low specular reflectivity. upon

surface

Metal Distributiori two specified parts I Micron (pm) -

Ratio i The ratio of the thickness of metal of a cathode (see also `Throwing Power'). of a millimetre (O*OOl mm).

One thousandth

Microthrowing set of plating Mil -

Pdwer conditions

-The ability of a plating solution or a specified to deposit metal in pores or scratches. of an inch, 0.001 in = 25.4 pm. N

One thousapdth

Noble Metal - A metal which is not easily oxidized or reacted upon when in contact with a solution. Some noble metals occur in the free state in nature, for example, gold. A metal is said to be more,noble than another metal if it occupies a position closer to the noble metals in the electromotive series and is displaced from solution by the less noble metal. 0 Occlusion-A condition of uniform molecular adhesion between precipitate and a soluble substance or between a gas and a metal. a

Ohm (Unit of Electrical Resistance) - The electrical resistance between two points of a conductor when a constant potential difference of one volt, applied to these points, produces a current of one ampere in the conductor, provided no emf is generated in the conductor. Ohm's Law - The current (I) in an electric circuit is directly proportional to the electromotive force (E) in the circuit, that is, E = IR. Orange peel. Peel -A finish resembling the dimpled appearance of an orange

Orifice Meter -A form of gas or liquid flow-meter consisting of a diaphragm in which there is an orifice placed transversely across a pipe; the difference in pressure on the two sides of. the diaphragm is a measure of I flow velocity. Overvoltage-The electrdchemical over and above Oxidation sometimes, Oxidizing becoming irreversible excess of potential required for an reaction to proceed actively at a specified electrode, the reversible potential characteristics of that reaction.

-A reactiqn in which electrons are removed from a reactant more specifically, the combination of a reactant with oxygen. Agent-A reduced. compound that causes oxidation, thereby itself

14

IS: 3554 - 1966 P Passivity-The condition of a metal that retards its normal reaction in a specified environment and associated with the assumption of a potential more noble than its normal potential. Peeling - The detachment of a plated metal coating from the basis metal due to lack of adhesion.
reversed periodically.

Periodic Reverse (PR) - A method of plating in which the current is
(a) Measure of alkalinity or acidity of a solution. Scientifically it is defined as negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity of a medium as follows: < $H = --log (H+) = log (l/H') (b) CoZorz%etric $H - The $H as measured by a calorimeter, using indicators, or by pH papers. (c) Electrometric pH The pH as determined by half-cell methods.

pH -

Pickle - An acid dip used to remove oxides or other compounds from the surface of a metal by chemical action. Pickling - The removal of oxides or other compounds from a metal surface by means of a pickle.
a) Alzoaic Pick&g-Electrolytic the anode. b) Cathode Pickling -Electrolytic the cathode. pickling in which metal is made pickling in which metal is made

c) Electrolytic Pickling -Pickling during which a current is passed through the metal and the pickle.

Pit -A small depression or cavity produced in a metal surface during electro-deposition or by corrosion. PlastisolColloidal dispersion of a polymeric resin (such as polivinyl chloride) in a plasticizer with some minor additive, such as pigments. It is in the form of a highly viscous gelatinous mass. It is applied by dipping the cleaned and pretreated article and when baked the dispersion polymerizes to form a continuous film of plastic (PVC) without any significant loss of the constituents of the dispersi,on. Hence the coating is said to be a 1.n electroplating it is used to coat racks and 100 percent solid coating. jigs.
electroplate is deposited.

Plating Range -The

current density range over which a satisfactory

15

1s : 3554- 1966
Polarization -The change in the potential of an electrode produced during electrolysis, such that the potential of an anode always becomes more noble and that of a cathode less noble than their respective equilibrium potentials. Equal to the difference between the static potential and the dynamic potential. Polishipg -The smoothing of a metal surface by means of the action of abrasive particles attached by adhesive to the surface of wheels or belts usually driven at high speed. Pore -A minute through a coating. cavity or channel extending all or part of the way

Porosity -A condition of an electrodeposit The number of such pores in a given area. Power Factor-The ratio of actual power

in which

pores are present. power. over the

to apparent

Primary Current Distribution - The distribution of thecurrent surface of an electrode in the absence of polarization.

Q
Quick Dip (Quickening Dip) See `Blue Dip', Quinhydrone Electrode in contact with a solution -A half cell with a platinum or gold electrode saturated with quinhydrone [C,H40,.C,H4(OH),]. R Rack (Jig) - A frame used for suspending one or more articles during electrodeposition. and conducting current to

Rectifier -A device which converts alternating current into direct current by virtue of a characteristic permitting appreciablb flow of current in only one direction. Reducing becoming Agent -A oxidized. compound which causes reduction, thereby itself

Reduction-A reaction in which electrons are added to a reactant. More specifically, the addition of hydrogen or the abstraction of oxygen. Such a reaction takes place, for example, at the cathode in electrolysis. Reflowing - The melting of an electrodeposit, so that the surface takes on the appearance rather than electroplated (especially of tinplate). Relieving - The removal of material metal surface by mechanical means, followed of being by refreezing ` hot-dipped '

from selected portions of a coloured to achieve a multicoloured effect. 16

IS : 3554 - 1966 Resist (Noun) - A material applied to render the surface non-conducting. Reverse Ripple ponent Current Cleaning to a part of a cathode `Cleaning'. current when this comor plating rack

See under

(dc) - The ac component of a pulsating is small relative to the dc component.

rms (Root Mean Square) `- Square root of the mean of the sum of the squares of the distances, above or below a mean reference line, or corresponding points on a surface. A measure of surface roughness. Robber Rochelle See `Thief'. Salt Sodium potassium tartrate
S

(NaKC,H,O,

4H,O).

SaponificationThe alkaline hydrolysis of fats whereby a soap is formed, more generally the hydrolysis of an ester by an alkali with the formation of an alcohol and a salt of the acid. portion. Satin which Finish - A surface finish that is lustrous but not mirror-like. behaves as a diffuse reflector and film

Scale - An adherent oxide coating referred to as tarnish.

that is thicker

than the superficial

Sealing of Anodic Coating -A process reaction or other mechanism, increases the to staining and corrosion, improves the in the coating, or imparts other desirable

which, by acsorption, chemical resistance of an anodic coating durability of colours produced properties.

Sequester (Sequestration or Sequestering) Agent-A sequestering agent forms soluble complex ions (or sequesters) with a simple ion, thereby inhibiting the activity of that ion. Thus in water treatment, the effects of hardness may be suppressed by adding agents to sequester calcium and magnesium (see also `Chelating Agent'). Shadowing (Shielding) -The interference of any part of an anode, cathode, rack or tank with uniform current distribution on a cathode. Sometimes purposely employed to control current distribution. Shield (Noun) - A non-conducting bution on an anode or cathode. medium for altering the current distrior

Shield (Verb) -To alter the normal current distribution cathode by the interposition of a non-conductor. Slurry Soak -A suspension -See
I

on an anode

of solids under

in water. /

Cleaning

`Cleaning'.

17

IS : 3554 - 1966 of a surface Spalling - The chipping or fagmenting caused; for example, by differential thermal expansion Spotting Out - The delayed of finished surface. Spray Cleaning See under appearance `Cleaning'. or surface coating or contraction. on plated

of spots and blemishes ,

Stopping electrode

Off (Stop Off) - The application (cathode, anode or rack).

of a resist to any part than the intended

of an circuit,

Stray Current - Current through paths other such as through heating coils or the tank. Strike metal.

(Noun) - (a) A solution used to electro-deposit a thin initial film of (b) A thin initial film of metal to be followed by other coatings. density,

Strike (Verb) - To plate for a short .time at a high initial current which is, then reduced to the normal operating current density. Strip (Verb) -To remove a coating from the basis metal

or undercoat.

Substrate

The basis

metal. in which an alternating-current plating current.

Superimposed ac - A form of current component is superimposed on a direct

.

Surface Active Agent-A substance that affects markedly the interfacial or surface tension I$ solutions even when present in very low concentrations.

T -The total Tank V&age plating bath or electrolytic sum of: a) the equilibrium b) the IR drop, c) the electrode voltage between the &ode and cathode of a cell duri&j electrolysis. It is equal to the potential,

reaction and potentials.

dulling, staining or discoloration of metals Tarnish -Surface superficial corrosion. The film so fgrmed (see also `Scale').

due

to

Thief - An auxiliary cathode so placed as to divert to itself some current from portions of the work which would otherwise receive too high a \ current density. Throwing Power - (a) The improvement of the metal distribution ratioOf a solution over the primary current distribution ratio on' a cathode. 18

IS: 3554 - 1966
a measure of its ability shaped cathode. to deposit metal uniformly upon. an irregularly to deposit Throwing

(b) Sometimes used in bright plating, referring to the ability `Bright bright plate in recesses and low current density areas. Power' would be a better term for this property. (c) Sometimes used incorrectly where to describe, the ability to `throw' some metal without regard to its thickness.

`Covering Power' is meant into recesses or deep holes,

of cyanide expressed as the radical (CN) or alkali cyanide whether present as simple or complex ions. The sum of both the combined and free cyanide content of a solution.

Total Cyanide - The total content

Transference/Transport/Migration
the electrolyte associated carried with

- The movement of ions through the passage of the electric current. Number - The proportion
kind. of the

Transference
total current

Number/Transport

by the ions of a given

Tree -Branched
electro-deposition

or irregular projection `formed on a cathode during especially, at edges and other high current density areas.

Tripoli-Friable and dust-like silica, used as an abrasive. Tumbling - See `Barrel Finishing'. U Ultrasonic Cleaning - See under
`Cleaning.'

V Volt - The voltage
resistance which will produce of one-ohm. potential a current

I of one ampere

\ through a

Voltage

Efficiency - The ratio,

equilibrium reaction bath voltage.

usually expressed as percentage, process in a given electrochemical

of the to the

Voltameter

- See `Coulometer'. W

Water Break -The
surface signifying contamination. current

appearance of a discontinuous film of water on a non-uniform wetting and usually associated with a surface

Watt - An energy rate of one joule per second, or the power of an electric
of one ampere with an intensity of one volt.

19

IS : 3554 - 1966 Wet Blasting - A process for cleaning
abrasive thereby formed storage in water causing directed it to spread or finishing at high velocity against by means of slurry the work piece. of

Wetting,Agent - A substance Whisker - Metallic

which reduces the surface tension more readily on a solid s,urface.

of a liquid,

filamentary during electro-deposition or service, after finishing.

growth, often microscopic, sometimes and sometimes spontaneously during being platkd or otherwise finished.

Work (Plating) - The material

20

