**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8821-3 (1990): Inland vessels - steering gear, Part 3: 
Method of shop testing [TED 18: Inland, Harbour Crafts and 
Fishing Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 8821 ( Part 3 ) :1990 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



Indian Standard 
INLAND VESSELS -STEERING GEAR 

PART 3 METHODS OF SHOP TESTING 



UDC 629'122-014-5 : 620'1 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OFINDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1990 Price Group 1 



Inland and Harbour Craft Sectional Committee, TED 18 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 22 April 1990, 
after the draft finalized by the Inland and Harbour Craft Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 

This standard lays down the shop testing requirements for steering gears. The steering gear 
shall be tested as complete unit, that is, the prime mover hydraulic actuator and controls. The 
terms 'port' 'stbd' have been used in the test of the standard which have relevance with starboard 
use. But, the commonality of use should permit this nomenclature during shop testing as well. 
No trim, rolling or other sea conditions are required to be simulated during shop test. 

This standard is brought out in the following three parts: 

Part 1 Values of torque; 

Part 2 Hand hydraulic steering gear; and 

Part 3 Shop testing. 



IS 8821 (Part 3): 1990 



Indian Standard 
INLAND VESSELS — STEERING GEAR 

PART 3 METHODS OF SHOP TESTING 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) covers the require- 
ments pertaining to shop testing of steering gear 
installed in crafts for operation on inland 
water and harbour limits. 

2 TYPE TESTS 

2.1 Hydraulic Test 

The hydraulic actuator is to be tested against 
leakage sealing against the pressure of 1*5 times 
the design pressure. The prime mover, if 
hydraulic, is to be tested for continuous running 
over a period 30 minutes against the rated 
pressure and flow. All high pressure valves, 
pipes are to be tested against 1'5 times the 
working pressure. 

2.1.1 At the end of the hydraulic test the relief 
valve setting pressure are to be checked and 
relief valve is to be sealed. 

2.2 ffo Load Test 

The steering gear is to be rigged as a system as 
closely simulating the ship-board condition as 
possible in the workshop and should be run 
continuously for 1 hour in the mode of 35° port 
to 35° stbd. At the time of the test the 
following shall be checked: 

a) Tightness against oil leakage; 

b) Maximum temperature rise; 

c) Presence of abnormal noise and vibration; 

d) Voltage, current and speed of electric 
motor; and 

e) Time taken to move the actuator from 
35° port to 35° starboard with single pump 
operation. 

2.3 Full Load Test 

Steering gear shall be rigged up as per 2.2 and 
rated torque shall be applied on the dummy 
rudder stock fitted with steering gear actuator, 
and the system is operated in the same manner 
as that of no load test for a period of 100 hours. 
During the test the delivery pressure and 
delivery angles shall be suitably altered. At the 
end of the test, the following are to be checked 
and compared with manufacturer's specification: 

a) Tightness against oil lekage; 



b) Presence of abnormal noise and vibration; 

c) Maximum 7 temperature rise; 

d) Voltage, current and speed of electric 
motor; 

e) Relief valve setting of the main control 
valve and also of the hydraulic actuator; 

f) Time taken to move the actuator from 
30° port to 30° starboard. This time shall 
not be more then 15 seconds with single 
pump operation; 

g) If there is an auxiliary control of steering 
gear the same shall be checked for proper 
operation over a movement of rudder 
from 10° port to 10° starboard. The 
effort at the hand wheel should not be 
more than 200 N on a wheel of 1 100 mm 
^ maximum and the number of turns of 
the wheel for the above mentioned range 
should not exceed 20 in the case of steering 
gears of rated torque 10 4 N.m and below. 
The limitation of number of turns, 
however is not applicable to steering gear 
of torque capacity more than 10 4 N.m; 

h) Alignment of the indicators up to limit of 
± 2° maximum; 

j) Checking of alarms and anunciators; and . 

k) The unit shall be opened up for exami- 
nation after the test. 

2.4 Test on Electrical Epuipment 

a) Electric motors shall be tested as per 
related regulations; and 

b) Controls shall be tested against proper 
operation, continuity, insulation, high 
voltage, as per related regulations. 

3 ROUTINE TEST 

3.1 The remaining steering gears shall be tested 
for hydraulic and no load tests as given in 2.1 
and 2.2 above and the following shall be 
observed: 

a) Tightness against oil leakage; 

b) Temperature of oil; 

c) Excessive noise and vibration; 

d) Voltage, current and speed of electric 
motor; and 

e) Total time taken for movement of the 
actuator from port 30° to starboard 30°. 



IS 8821 ( Part 3 ) : 1990 

4 SAMPLING steering gears. 

4.1 When a batch of 20 or more similar steering 5 TEST CERTIFICATE 

gears are supplied at a time, tests on one 

steering gears as indicated in 2 shall be carried 5.1 The results of the tests shall be consolidated 

out at the manufacturer' s works. The tests as and shall be stated in the form of a test 

given in 3 shall be carried out on remaining certificate. 



Standard Mark 



The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau oj Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products 
covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with 
the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked 
products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safe- 
guard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted 
to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act* 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification 
of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), 
BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc: No. TED 18(770) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 37 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India 



