NAT HIAF IS 4167 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


ag waor À afaa UT 
eara 


( FET FRAT ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
Air Pollution 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS No. 01.040.13 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 9 


Air Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 35 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Air Quality 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Air pollution control, today, is a precondition of high priority for the improvement of the quality of life in highly 
industrialized countries as well as in developing countries. Pollution control in this context depends, among 
others, on the advances in the related technology. 


Standards may define what we may or may not put into the air based on the best available scientific knowledge. 
They may place limits on the pollutants that can be tolerated without endangering the health and welfare of human 
beings and of the ecological systems in which we live. In order to avoid misunderstanding in the interpretation of 
scientific knowledge and data and to facilitate interaction between different sets of people, it becomes necessary 
to define terms typical to air pollution technology. 


This standard was originally published in 1966. The first revision was carried out in 1980. Due to advances in 
technology and instruments for detection of air pollution, it has become necessary to review and update the 
existing glossary of terms. Consequently, this revision has been prepared incorporating few additional terms and 
deleting some terms depending on their usage and meaning in the present context. 


Should any difference exist between the definitions in this standard and those in the individual standards, the latter 
shall prevail. 


This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical definitions of terms, and it may not necessarily include all 
the legal interpretations of terms. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING 
TO AIR POLLUTION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines the terms relating to air pollution. 
2 TERMINOLOGY 


A 


Abatement — Reduction or lessening (of pollution) or 
doing away with (a nuisance). 


Absorption 


a) The taking up usually of a liquid or gas into the 
body of another material (the absorbent). Thus, an 
air pollutant may be removed by absorption in a 
suitable absorbent. 


b) The taking up of radiation by a material it 
encounters or passes through. This can be the 
basis of measuring a number of substances. 


Absorption Spectroscopy (AS) — Absorption 
spectroscopy, refers to spectroscopic techniques that 
measure the absorption of radiation, as a function of 
frequency or wavelength, due to its interaction with 
a sample. The sample absorbs energy, i.e., photons, 
from the radiating field. The intensity of the absorption 
varies as a function of frequency, and this variation 
is the absorption spectrum. Absorption spectroscopy 
is performed across the electromagnetic spectrum. 
Absorption spectroscopy is employed as an analytical 
chemistry tool to determine the presence of a particular 
substance in a sample and, in many cases, to quantify 
the amount of the substance present. Infrared and 
ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy are particularly 
common in analytical application. 


Accretion — A phenomenon consisting of the increase 
in size of particles by the process of external additions; 
for example, water to salt particles. 


Accuracy— Closeness of agreement between the true 
value and the mean result which would be obtained by 
applying the experimental procedure a large number of 
times (see also Error). 


Acid Rain — Acid rain is a term used to refer to 
rainfall where the rain water turns acidic. Acid Rain 
has been reported from areas having high atmospheric 
concentration of acidic gases such as oxides of Sulphur 
and oxides of Nitrogen. 


NOTE — When pH of rainwater is 5.6 or less, it can be 
considered as acid rain. 


Actinograph — An instrument for recording the 
incoming solar radiation (see also Actinometer). 


Actinometer — An instrument to measure the 
incoming solar radiation (see also Actinograph). 


Active Sampling — This involves the collection of 
samples, by physical or chemical means, for subsequent 
laboratory analysis. Typically, a known volume of air 
is pumped through a filter or chemical collector for a 
known period of time - the collector then subjected to 
laboratory analysis. 


Acute — Used in relation to the effects of certain 
concentrations of air pollutants to describe a response 
coming rapidly to a climax. 


Adiabat, Dry —A line on a thermodynamic diagram ( 
for example Tephigram) depicting the variation of the 
temperature of a parcel of dry air asitspressure changes. 
Since in atmosphere pressure decreases with height, 
often in lower atmosphere a dry adiabat is taken to be a 
line on a height-temperature graph such that the slope 
is 0.98°C/100 m. 


Adsorbable Organohalides (AOx) — Adsorbable 
Organohalides (AOx) is an organic sum parameter 
comprising such organics that contain chlorine, bromine 
or iodine atoms and are adsorbable to activated carbon. 


Adsorption — Adsorption is the adhesion of atoms, 
ions, or molecules from a gas, liquid, or dissolved solid 
to the surface of a material (the adsorbent). Several air 
pollutants are known to adsorb quite well to activated 
charcoal and certain molecular sieves. 


Advection — The process of transfer of an atmospheric 
property (for example, heat, moisture, pollution) by 
horizontal motion of the air. 


Aerodynamic Diameter — Aerodynamic Diameter 
is a term used to specify the size of an irregular 
shaped particle of unknown composition / density. 
Aerodynamic diameter (d,.) is defined as the diameter 
of a sphere of unit density (density = 1 g/cm?) that has 
the same settling velocity in the atmosphere as the 
particle in consideration. 


Aerosol —Finely divided solid or liquid particles of 
microscopic size suspended and dispersed in a gas or in 
atmosphere as in the case of mist, fog, haze or smoke. 
The term is applied to the system of dispersed phase 
and dispersing medium together, while particles alone 
are called “aerosol articles”. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


After burner — A device fitted after the main point 
of fuel combustion in a stationary plant or a vehicle 
to produce more nearly complete combustion of the 
exhaust gases. It may be a burner fitted to incinerate 
polluted process gas. 


Agglomeration — The clustering or adhering together 
of a number of small particles to form a body or 
structure (an agglomerate) which then acts as a larger 
single particle. 


Agglomeration, Sonic — Agglomeration caused by 
sound waves. 


Aggregate 


a) Similar to agglomerate, but having weaker 
bonding. 


b) Sand and rubble used to make concrete. 
Air Pollution — See Pollution. 
Air Pollution Control — See Control, Air Pollution. 


Air, Primary — The air supplied to the fuel in its early 
stages of combustion. 


Air Quality — The term usually refers to the 
concentration in air of one or more pollutants. For many 
pollutants the air quality is expressed as a concentration 
over a certain period of time, for example, ug/mover24 
hours. 


Air, Secondary — Air introduced above or beyond the 
bed of burning fuel to promote complete combustion 
of volatile material produced in the first stage of 
combustion. 


Air, Standard — See S.T.P. 


Aitken Nuclei — Particles ranging in size from 0.005 
um to 0.1 um with or without electrical charge. 


Albedo — The ratio of the amount of electromagnetic 
radiation reflected by a body or a surface to the amount 
incident upon it (see also Reflectance). 


Allergy — The abnormal reaction of a living body to 
physical, chemical or biological agents to which certain 
body cells are supersensitive. The final effect may be 
redness, itching, inflammation, tissue damage or other 
forms of morbidity. These effects, depending on the 
nature of the material and root cause of exposure, may 
be localized over a part of body or widespread. 


Ambient — Surrounding. It is used to describe physical 
properties of air (temperature, humidity, pressure, etc) 
or air pollution concentration in the open air, as against, 
at the point of emission or indoors, for example, 
ambient temperature, ambient air quality. 


Amenity — In air pollution this means pleasantness 
and it usually refers to the general quality of the 
environment distinct from hazards of air pollution can 
cause physical damage. 


Analysis, Instantaneous — It refers to a pollution 
measuring system in which the analysis is so quick that 


the results represent the current situation as in the case 
of optical techniques. 


Anemometer — An instrument for measuring wind/ 
air speed. 


Anoxia — Deficiency of oxygen in the blood or thereby 
in body tissues. 


Anthracite — A high calorific value coal yielding little 
ash and volatiles— hence low smoke production. It is 
slow burning and not normally used on open fires. It is 
cleaner to handle than most other coals. 


Antibody — A substance, protein in nature, synthesized 
and released in to the body’s system specifically in 
response to invasion by an antigen. 


Anticyclone — The condition of atmospheric pressure 
distribution in which pressure increases towards 
the centre. This is usually associated with fine, calm 
weather and with fog in winter. 


Antigens — Foreign substances of different chemical 
types which when introduced into the body, cause the 
production of specific antibodies capable of reacting 
with them. 


Antiknock Additives — Compounds added to petrol 
to allow its use in higher compression ratio engines 
than otherwise permissible and with greater thermal 
efficiency without the phenomenon of ‘knock’. The 
additives are generally organic lead compounds. 


AQI — Air Quality Index is a color- coded index for 
reporting air quality information and forecast to the 
public. 


Area Source — An area sources of air pollution are 
air pollutant emission sources which operate within 
a certain locale. Locomotives operating on certain 
linear tracks are examples of a line source, whereas 
locomotives operating within a rail yard are an example 
of an area source of pollution. Other area sources of air 
pollution are: multiple flue gas stacks within a single 
industrial plant, open burning and forest fires and 
evaporation losses from large spills of volatile liquids 
etc. 


Aromatics — Hydrocarbon compounds containing, as 
part of their structure, rings of atoms like those found 
in benzene and other similar cyclic molecules and 
generally having strong aroma. 


In petroleum products, this term distinguishes these 
hydrocarbons from those which are chainlike in 
structure (paraffins). Aromatics tend to have higher 
octane ratings. 


Arrester — A device used to affect arrestment. 


Arrestment — Arrestment of a pollutant from a gas 
stream is the process of its trapping or removal by an 
arrester or cleaning device. 


Aspiration — Passing fluid through a medium or over 
an object by suction. Thus, air is aspirated through 


a filter medium or over a thermometer (see also 
Aspirator). 


Aspirator — Any apparatus, such as a squeeze bulb, 
fan, pump or venturi, that produces movement of a fluid 
by suction. 


Atmosphere 


a) The atmosphere is the envelope of air surrounding 
the earth. 


b) An atmosphere may refer to a much more local 
volume of air without implying the quality of that 
air. 


c) The term is also often used as a unit of pressure 
(1 atmosphere pressure equivalent to 760 mm of 
mercury or 1013.18 millibars). 


Atmosphere, Neutral — A neutral atmosphere is one 
in which lapse rate is dry adiabatic, that is, there is no 
change in potential temperature with height (see also 
Lapse Rate, Dry, Adiabatic). 


Atmosphere, Stable — State of the atmosphere in 
which vertical air movements are restricted. This 
happens when there is temperature inversion. 


Atmosphere, Unstable — An unstable atmosphere is 
one in which vertical movements tend to grow thereby 
substantially increasing turbulence and aiding the 
dispersion of pollution. Atmosphere is unstable when 
lapse rate is higher than adiabatic lapse rate (see also 
Lapse Rate, Super Adiabatic). 


Atmospheric Dispersion — See Dispersion. 


Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) — Atomic 
absorption spectroscopy (AAS), is a spectroanalytical 
procedure for the quantitative determination of chemical 
elements using the absorption of optical radiation (light) 
by free atoms in the gaseous state. It requires standards 
with known analyte content to establish the relation 
between the measured absorbance and the analyte 
concentration and relies therefore on the Beer-Lambert 
Law. In short, the electrons of the atoms in the atomizer 
can be promoted to higher orbitals (excited state) for 
a short period of time (nanoseconds) by absorbing 
a defined quantity of energy (radiation of a given 
wavelength). This amount of energy, i.e., wavelength, is 
specific to a particular electron transition in a particular 
element. In general, each wavelength corresponds to 
only one element. In analytical chemistry the technique 
is used for determining the concentration of a particular 
element (the analyte) in a sample to be analyzed. AAS 
can be used to determine over 70 different elements. 


Atomization—The process by which a solid or liquid 
is reduced, not to atoms but, to very small particles or 
droplets as in a fine spray. Good atomization of fuel 
oil allowing increased fuel/air mixing is necessary to 
obtain satisfactory combustion. Atomized pollutants 
may persist remaining suspended in air because of their 
small particle size. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Automatic Sampling — This is the most sophisticated 
method producing high-resolution measurements of 
a range of pollutants at a single point. The sample 
is measured on-line and in real-time, typically with 
15-minute averages or better, with data being collected 
from individual monitoring sites by telemetry. 
Instruments using physical scientific measurement 
techniques, such as  chemiluminescence, UV 
fluorescence, IR absorption and Differential Optical 
Absorption Spectroscopy (DOAS), are used. 


Autometer, Thomas — A device for continuous 
recording of sulphur dioxide based on the electrolytic 
conductivity of water through which air passes. 


Average, Moving — In a consecutive data set, of n 
elements, a moving average of r elements is taken as 
follows: first take the average of elements numbering 
1 to r. Next take the average of elements numbering 
2 tor + land so on giving running averages consisting 
of (n -r + 1) elements. 


B 


Background — The levels of pollution (in terms 
of concentration) present already in the atmosphere 
exclusive of that due to the pollution source under 
consideration. In general, the term is used to imply the 
level of any entity present exclusive of the specified 
source for example, back ground noise, background 
illumination. 


Sometimes the term is used to mean the concentration 
of the substance some distance from the particular 
source and therefore largely uninfluenced by it. 


Baghouse/Bag Filter — Fabric filter used for dust 
removal usually made into bag of tubular or envelope 
shape. The entire structure housing the bags is called a 
bag house. 


Balloon, Pilot — Balloon filled with a light gas (for 
example hydrogen or helium) released to determine the 
wind at various heights in the atmosphere. The balloon 
is tracked by theodolites and successive locations 
of the balloon are computed, from which winds can 
be estimated. This is done on routine basis at several 
stations by national weather services. Radar is also 
used for this purpose. 


BAM (Beta Attenuation Mass Monitor) — The BAM 
(Beta Attenuation Mass Monitor) measures particulate 
concentrations automatically. The mass density is 
measured using the technique of Beta attenuation. A 
small Beta source is coupled to a sensitive detector 
which counts the Beta particles. An airstream is passed 
through a filter and as the mass of particles increases 
the Beta count is reduced. The relationship between the 
decrease in count and the particulate mass is computed 
according to a known equation (the Beer-Lambert 
law). The amount by which the flow of beta radiation is 
attenuated by a solid matter is exponentially dependent 
on its mass and not on any other feature (such as density, 


IS 4167 : 2020 


chemical composition or some optical or electrical 
properties) of this matter. 


Beaufort Scale — A scale for estimating and 
reporting wind force ranging from zero for calm to 
12 for a hurricane. The latter corresponds to a wind 
speed range of 133 to 147 km/h. Wind speeds above 
this and up to218 km/h are also classed under hurricane 
having Beaufort scale up tol7 depending upon wind 
speed. 


Black Carbon — Black Carbon or BC is a component 
of fine particulate matter (PM < 2.5 um in aerodynamic 
diameter). Black Carbon consists of pure carbon 
in several linked forms. It is formed through the 
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, bio fuel, and 
biomass, and is emitted in both anthropogenic and 
naturally occurring soot. 


Black Smoke — Black Smoke consists of fine 
particulate matter. These particles can be hazardous to 
health especially in combination with other pollutants 
which can adhere to the particulate surfaces. Black 
smoke is emitted mainly from fuel combustion. 
Following the large reductions in domestic coal use, the 
main source is diesel-engine vehicles. Black smoke is 
measured by its blackening effect on filters. It has been 
measured for many years in the UK. Now interest is 
moving to the mass of small particles regardless of this 
blackening effect. 


Blank Determination — See Determination, blank. 


Bluff Body — An obstacle in the path of fluid flow, 
because of which the flow gets modified, causing, 
under certain conditions turbulence in the wake, for 
example on the leeward side. 


Boundary Layer — Where a fluid flows past a physical 
boundary, the boundary layer is that part of the fluid 
extending from the boundary into the bulk of the fluid 
in which the motion of the fluid is significantly affected 
by the frictional drag at the boundary. 


The earth’s atmospheric boundary layer is typically the 
lowest 1000 m or so of the atmosphere. This is also 
called planetary boundary layer or friction layer. 


Breathing Zone — That location in the atmosphere 
at which persons breathe. Generally, a layer 0 - 1.5 m 
above ground level is considered as breathing zone. 


Breeze, Sea — A local wind blowing on shore when 
(and because) the land surface is warmer than the sea 
surface, for example, on a sunny day. The situation 
may be reversed at night, producing an off-shore land 
breeze. 


Bronchitis — Basically, bronchitis is inflammation 
of bronchi, the two branches of the air pipe leading to 
the lungs. It is a reaction of the mucosal lining to an 
irritant. The word is less exactly, but more widely used 
to describe a variety of lung disablements which can be 
associated with air pollution and smoking. 


BTEX — BTEX is an acronym that stands for benzene, 
toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes. These compounds 
are some of the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
found in petroleum derivatives such as petrol (gasoline). 


Bubbler — An apparatus charged with water or a 
reagent selected to absorb specific pollutants when a 
sample of air is made to bubble through it (see also 
Impinger). 


Buffer Capacity — The capacity of certain solutions 
to oppose a change in properties, for example, acidity 
when acid or alkali is added. 


Buoyancy — The tendency of material immersed in a 
fluid to float up. In air pollution it is frequently applied 
to the tendency or otherwise of the hot gas emitted 
from a chimney to rise in view of their lower density 
relative to that of the surrounding air. In the atmosphere 
it implies the upward force experienced by parcels of 
air which are heated and less dense as compared with 
the surrounding air. 


C 


Calm — The air is described as calm in meteorological 
terms if the wind speed is less than 1 knot. ( 1 knot = 
1.8 km/h = 0.5 m/s approximately). 


Sometimes the term is also used when the wind speed is 
below the measurement threshold of the anemometer. 


Calorific Value — A measure of the heating quality 
of the fuel usually expressed as available heat units 
from complete combustion of a unit mass of fuel. For 
example, kJ/kg for solid or liquid fuels and kJ/m*for 
gaseous fuels. There are gross and net calorific values 
for hydrogen containing fuels depending respectively 
on whether the heat of condensation of water produced 
is included or excluded. 


Cancer — A malignant growth, a tumour. 


Carbon — Carbon (C) is the building block of life. It is 
the basic element in all living things, including 50% of 
the dry weight in the human body. In the form of carbon 
dioxide, carbon is a powerful greenhouse gas. However, 
the term ‘carbon’ used in discussing climate change 
does not just to refer to carbon dioxide. It includes 
the other powerful greenhouse gases, such as methane 
and nitrous oxide. Scientists are able to lump these six 
gases together under the name ‘carbon’ by figuring out 
their carbon dioxide equivalent. So when we talk about 
‘carbon footprint’ and ‘carbon neutral,’ for example, 
we are referring to all the major greenhouse gases, not 
just carbon dioxide. 


Carburation — The mixing of air with a volatile fuel 
to provide a combustible mixture for use in the internal 
combustion engine. The device in which this occurs is 
the carburettor. 


Carcinogen (Carcinogenic Substance) — A 
carcinogen is any substance, chemical, radionuclide, or 
radiation that is an agent directly involved in causing 


cancer. This may be due to the ability to damage the 
genome or to the disruption of cellular metabolic 
processes. Common examples of non-radioactive 
carcinogens are inhaled asbestos, certain dioxins, 
benzo[a]pyrene and benzene. 


Carcinoma — Malignant tumor of epithelium, 
regardless of its derivation. 


Cascade Impactor — See Impactor. 


Catalyst — A substance which, though not itself 
permanently changed, alters the rate of (usually speeds 
up) a chemical reaction. 


Centrifugal — The tendency of outward movement of 
an object travelling in a curved path, for example if one 
whirls a ball on a string, the ball tries to move away 
from the centre and causes tension on the string which 
is related to the centrifugal force on the ball. 


Channelling Effect — Change of normal flow of air 
when it passes through peculiar constructed topographic 
features such as valleys or streets and lawns flanked by 
buildings. Often channelling leads to increase in local 
wind velocity. Channelling is sometimes also called 
canyon effect. 


Channelling in Packed Columns/Fluidized Beds — 
This refers to the localized flow pattern of a fluid (liquid 
or gas) in packed columns or fluidized beds. 


Chimney (Stack) Height, Effective — The effective 
height of a chimney is the sum of its actual physical 
height and the plume rise. The latter is the rise of the 
effluent due to buoyancy and efflux velocity. 


Chronic — Referring to injurious effects of air 
pollution, particularly effects on health. It implies 
lasting or long term morbid effects as against acute 
effects. 


Classification — Separation of items into types. In 
relation to particles, it implies the process of separating 
them into fractions on defined size range. 


Clinker — Aggregated or sintered ash formed when 
the ash is heated strongly in a furnace. 


Coal Equivalent — A method of describing combustion 
energy of a given mass of fuel in terms of the mass of 
a standard coal which would produce an equal amount 
of heat energy. 


Co-carcinogen - Co-carcinogens are chemicals that do 
not necessarily cause cancer on their own, but promote 
the activity of other carcinogens in causing cancer. 


COH — Coefficient of haze. This is a unit for measuring 
smoke stains which depends on the reduction of light 
transmission through the filter after it has collected 
the smoke sample. Its object is to measure haze over a 
distance of about 300 m. 


Coke — A smokeless solid fuel of low volatile 
content, traditionally formed from coal by destructive 
distillation. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Coke, Gas — Solid fuel produced by the carbonization 
of bituminous coal in a closed chamber known as 
retort. 


Collection Efficiency (of a Device) — Ratio of 
the quantity of a substance retained by a device to 
that passed through it. In any air pollution control 
equipment, if M, is the mass of incoming dust, M, the 
mass of collected dust and M the mass of outgoing 
dust, then collection efficiency is: 


M, _M,-M, _ M, 


1 
M, M, M, 


Collector — A device for removing and retaining 
contaminants from air or other gases. Usually, this term 
is applied to cleaning devices in exhaust systems. 


Collector, Dust Fall, Adhesive Type — A device 
with an adhesive surface for collecting particulate 
contaminants settling out of the atmosphere. 


Combustion — The chemical combination of oxygen 
with fuel (combustible matter) with rapid heat evolution 
so that the temperature rises. 


The products of combustion are the oxidation products 
of the components of the fuel. Thus, hydrocarbons 
produce carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and 
hydrogen oxide (water). Combustion of the sulphur in 
fuels produces sulphur dioxide. 


Combustion, Catalytic — Combustion in the presence 
of a catalyst, to increase the rate of combustion, or 
affect combustion at a lower temperature. 


Concentration, Ground Level — The concentration 
(amount per unit volume) of a pollutant in air near 
ground. For physiological purposes this may refer 
to between 1 and 2 m above the ground, that is, at 
breathing level. For computation, however, zero height 
is considered. In most practical cases, there is no 
difference between the two. 


Concentration, Mass — The amount of a substance in 
unit volume of the medium, for example air, flue gas. 
Generally ambient air concentrations are expressed, in 
mg/mřor ug/m’°. In case of stack emissions, normal m° 
is used instead of m°. 


Concentration, Odour —The number of volume 
units which a unit volume of sample will occupy when 
diluted to the odour threshold. 


Concentration, Particle — Concentration expressed 
in terms of number of particles per unit volume of the 
medium, for example, air, flue gas. Also called ‘number 
concentration’. 


Concentration, Time Integrated (TIC) — The 
concentration at a point integrated with respect to time 
over a given period. If concentration is plotted against 
time, TIC is the area under this curve. It has units 
of ugs/m?( or Ci s/m? for radioactive pollutants ). TIC 
divided by the time period over which integration is 


IS 4167 : 2020 


done is therefore equal to average concentration over 
that period (see also Dose and Exposure). 


Concentration, Volume — See ppm. 


Condensate — Liquid or solid matter formed by 
condensation from the vapour phase. In sampling, this 
term is applied to those components of an atmosphere 
which have been isolated by simple cooling. 


Confidence Level — The value of the probability of a 
given interval containing the true value. 


Coning — A type of plume behaviour in which both 
vertical and lateral diffusion occurs. The plume appears 
like a cone. This takes place in an ear neutral atmosphere 
when the wind velocity is moderately high or high. 


Contaminant/Contamination — Synonyms for 
indicating the presence of a foreign component or 
pollutant in air, gas, liquid or on surfaces. 


Control, Air Pollution — The process of effecting 
reduction in the concentrations and extent of 
contaminants in atmosphere within permissible limits, 
by whatever means, such that they do not become 
injurious to human, plant or animal life, or property. 


Convection — The transfer of heat in a fluid by flow of 
parts of the fluid at different temperatures. Convection 
currents can be set up in air with the rise of hotter, less 
dense parts and downward flow of cooler, more dense 
parts (see also Buoyancy). 


Correlation — A mathematical term which deals with 
the relationship between two factors or variables. The 
degree or intensity of linear relationship is measured by 
correlation coefficient which lies between -1 and +1. A 
value of zero indicates absence of correlation. 


Cracking — The refinery process of chemically 
breaking up the heavier petroleum distillates to obtain 
greater quantities of lighter products. 


Criteria (Air Quality) — Information used as 
guidelines for establishing air quality standards or 
goals, often in the form of dose-response relationships. 


Criteria Pollutants — Also known as ‘Six Common 
Pollutants’ which are known to threaten human health 
and welfare. Criteria pollutants include ‘ozone, carbon 
monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter, sulfur 
dioxide, and lead.’ There are threshold concentrations 
called National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
(NAAQS) established for each of them. 


Cupola — A firebrick-lined shaft furnace used for 
melting metals, often pigiron (with or without scrap) for 
castings. Metal, coke and flux (if used) are charged at 
the top and air is blown in near the bottom. Its operation 
involves the emission of iron oxide fume which has to 
be arrested. 


Cyclone 


a) A mechanical device for the removal of particles 
from gas streams by centrifugal force imparted by 
a whirling motion of the gas inside the device. 


b) A natural wind system rotating around a centre 
of low atmospheric pressure. A cyclonic system 
(in contrast to anticyclonic system) has a low- 
pressure centre around which strong winds 
flow anticlockwise in northern hemisphere and 
clockwise in southern hemisphere. 


D 


D50 — D represents the diameter of powder particles, 
and D50 means a cumulative 50 percent point of 
diameter (or 50 percent pass particle size). Particle size 
distribution D50 is also known as the median diameter 
or median value of the particle size distribution, it is the 
value of the particle size at 50 percent in the cumulative 
distribution. D50 is usually used to represent the 
particle size of group of particles. 


Decay — In air pollution, the decay of an airborne 
pollutant usually implies the rate at which it is lost 
from the atmosphere, for example, by absorption or 
precipitation, including its loss by transformation into 
some other chemical. For radioactive pollutants it 
implies reduction by radioactive transformation. 


Degree Day — The condition of a mean of one- 
degree difference in temperature between the outside 
temperature and a given base temperature over one day 
of 24 hours is termed ‘one-degree day’. The heating 
requirements (fuel consumption) of a building over a 
period are often taken to be proportional to the number 
of degree days, that is, the sum of the degree day values 
for the days of the period. 


Deposit Gauge — An instrument designed to assess 
the rate of deposition of material from the air. In 
most instances, the gauge receives material through a 
horizontal opening and the results can be expressed in 
terms of amount deposited on a given area in a given 
time. 


Deposition velocity — A parameter describing the rate 
at which a pollutant from air deposits on a surface. It 
is the ratio of the rate of deposition per unit area of the 
surface to the concentration near the surface. Though 
having the dimensions of velocity, it is only a parameter 
and not a real velocity. 


Desorption — The removal of absorbed or adsorbed 
material. 


Desulphurisation — Literally the removal of sulphur. 
To reduce sulphur dioxide emissions it is possible 
to use ‘fuel desulphurisation’ so as to reduce the 
sulphur present in the fuel when it is burnt or ‘flue 
gas desulphurisation’ in which the sulphur dioxides 
removed from the gases formed by combustion. 


Determination, Blank — When a sample is analysed for 
assessment of a given pollutant using some procedure, 
equipment and material, an identical assessment is also 
made using only the collecting medium for example, 
a filter paper or a bubbler reagent through which air is 
passed, not containing the material to be assessed. This 


latter assessment is called blank determination, sample 
or run, and is carried out to determine the background 
contribution due to impurities inherent in the medium, 
equipment or process. 


It is necessary to take this into account in the normal 
sample analysis. 


Dew Point — The temperature to which the sample of 
air has to be cooled to make it saturated with respect to 
water at its existing pressure and humidity mixing ratio. 
It is a measure of moisture content of air. The higher the 
moisture content, the higher is the dew point. 


Diameter, Mass Median — The mass of a sample 
of particulate matter in terms of the diameter above 
and below which the masses of all large and smaller 
particles are equal (see also Median). 


Differential Optical Absorption Spectroscopy 
(DOAS) — Differential optical absorption 
spectroscopy, is used to measure concentrations of trace 
gases. When combined with basic optical spectrometers 
such as prisms or diffraction gratings and automated, 
ground-based observation platforms, what we have is a 
cheap and powerful means for the measurement of such 
trace gas species as ozone and nitrogen dioxide. 


Diffusion 


a) On the scale of molecules, diffusion is a mixing 
of substances caused by molecular motion 
(Molecular Diffusion). 


b) In atmosphere it implies the spread of pollutants 
by turbulence or eddy motion (also called 
Atmospheric Diffusion). 


Dispersion — The method by which a pollutant 
spreads from its point of emission and becomes diluted 
in the atmosphere. It includes transport by winds 
and simultaneous spread by turbulence (atmospheric 
diffusion). 


Disposal — Getting rid of, by suitable process and 
treatment, for example, disposal of the gases to 
atmosphere and disposal of gaseous wastes after 
treatment for desulphurisation. 


Distance, Exclusion — A distance from or area 
surrounding a source of pollutant from a given plant 
entirely under the control of the plant and within which 
no habitation is permitted. 


Distillate — Any product obtained by vapourization 
from a still or distillation apparatus. The term distillate 
fuel is often applied to a fraction heavier than petrol or 
to paraffin (kerosene or gas oil). 


Diurnal — An adjective describing the variation of 
some parameter during a typical day or over 24 hours. 


Dose —The amount taken in or received. Time 
integrated exposure to pollutants, for example, dose 
of exposure for 1 h to an average sulphur dioxide 
concentration of 1 000 ug/m’. In radiology, it refers to 


IS 4167 : 2020 


the amount of energy absorbed by a unit mass of body 
tissue from radiation such as gamma or X-rays (see 
also Exposure and Concentration, Time Integrated). 


Down Wash (Down Draught) — A downward 
movement of smoke or other emissions on the leeward 
side of stack (chimney) or other obstacles such as 
buildings, hills, etc, due to aerodynamic characteristics 
of flow past obstacles (bluff bodies). The downward 
motion of air itself may be called downdraught whereas 
downwash applies to the pollutant. Downwash causes 
reduction in the effective height of emission. 


Driving Cycle — In relation to the testing of motor 
vehicles, particularly to their pollution emission 
characteristics, they may be made to perform standard 
driving cycles which are fixed patterns of steady 
speeds, accelerations and decelerations typical to some 
particular form of driving, for example, urban use. 


Droplet — A small liquid particle of such size and 
density that it falls under still conditions but may 
remain suspended under turbulent conditions. 


Dust — Small particles in the size range 1 to 200 um 
in diameter. Particles above 75 um size would come 
into the category of grit. Below about 1umthe particles, 
if air borne, would tend to remain in suspension rather 
than settle due to gravity (see also Fume). 


Dust Fall — The rate at which dust is deposited from 
the air on a horizontal surface. 


Dust Loading — Mass of dust per normal unit volume 
in a gas or air stream. When applied to equipment, it is 
expressed as mass per unit time. 


E 


Ecology — The relation or interaction of living systems 
with each other and their environment. 


The term is also used to denote the branch of science 
dealing with the above. 


Eddy — A fluctuation from the mean motion of a fluid; 
also used for parcels of air having circular whirlpool 
type of motion in the atmosphere. Eddies are the result 
of turbulent motion of the atmosphere. 


Effect, Cumulative — Increasing or building up of the 
effect with successive or continuing exposures. 


Efficiency, Fractional — The emission collection 
efficiency of a specific size fraction of a contaminant. 
This term is commonly applied to the performance of 
air cleaning equipment intended for particulate matter 
in various sizes and ranges. 


Effluent — Literally anything which flows out or is 
discharged. Usually applied to the discharge of a waste 
material into a water body or the atmosphere. 


Efflux Velocity — The speed with which something is 
discharged from an orifice, for example gases from the 
top of a chimney. Also called discharge velocity. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Ejector — A device which uses a fluid under pressure, 
such as steam, air or water to move another fluid by 
developing suction. Suction is developed by discharging 
the fluid under pressure through a venturi. 


Electrostatic — A general term describing something 
having an electrical charge. 


Electrostatic Precipitator — A device for removing 
particles from a gas by making them electrically 
charged and then making them to adhere to a plate or 
plates by application of electrostatic field. 


Elemental Carbon — Elemental carbon also known as 
black carbon is formed by the pyrolysis of the organic 
carbon. A form of carbon, refers to the inorganic 
form of carbon which can be found in crystalline and 
amorphous forms. 


Elutriation — A process for separating the particles 
into sized fractions by their different rate of settling 
down under gravity in a stream of fluid. 


Emission — Discharge of effluent into the atmosphere. 
The term is often used to express an emission rate, 
for example mass per unit time or an emission 
concentration, in terms of volume or mass of material 
per unit volume of total emitted gas. 


Emission Factor — An emission factor gives the 
relationship between the amount of a pollutant 
produced and the amount of raw material processed or 
burnt. For example, for mobile sources, the emission 
factor is given in terms of the relationship between the 
amount of a pollutant that is produced and the number 
of vehicle miles travelled. By using the emission factor 
of a pollutant and specific data regarding quantities 
of materials used by a given source, it is possible to 
compute emissions for the source. This approach is 
used in preparing an emissions inventory. 


Emission Standard — The amount of pollutants 
permitted to be discharged from a pollution source. 
Emission standards are commonly described in one or 
more of the following ways: 


a) Mass of pollutants over a certain time, for example 
kg/h or tonnes/day; 


b)Mass of pollutants per unit mass of material processed, 
for example, 2.5 kg per tonne (approximately 0.25 
percent); and 


c) Volume of pollutants (if gaseous) per unit volume 
of discharged gas, for example, parts per million. 


Emphysema — Pulmonary or lung emphysema is a 
distension or swelling of the lung air spaces due to 
destruction of the alveoli which diminishes the area for 
exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide between the air 
and the blood. 


Engine, Internal Combustion — An engine in which 
a fuel/air mixture is burnt within a chamber and the 
resulting pressure of hot gas is converted to mechanical 
energy. In contrast, external combustion as in a boiler 


furnace involves the transmission of energy by a 
separate agent, for example, steam cycle. 


Environment — Literally, surrounding. May apply to 
the indoor or working conditions but commonly refers 
to man’s total surroundings, natural and manmade. 
Parts of the environment are often specified. For 
example biological environment, water environment, 
air environment, marine environment, etc. 


Epidemiology — The scientific study of the frequency 
and distribution of a disease within a population and 
often extended to include the relationship of the disease 
with external factors such as air pollution. 


Equivalent Diameter — In relation to airborne 
particles, it is used to describe the way in which a 
particle of generally irregular shape behaves as if it 
were a sphere of a certain diameter (and often of a 
standard density). 


The settling rate equivalent diameter of a dust particle is 
defined as a diameter ofa sphere with unit density which 
has the same settling rate as the particle in question in 
air at 20°C and 1.103 bar (760 mm mercury). 


Error — The difference between a measured value of 
an entity and its true value, due to defects in instruments 
or due to inaccuracy of observation. 


Error, Analytical — The deviation of the analytical 
result from the true com position of the entity analyzed. 


Error, Sampling — Part of the total estimation 
error of a parameter due to the random nature of the 
sample. 


Error, Total Estimation L — In the estimation of a 
parameter, the difference between the calculated value 
of the estimator and the true value of this parameter. 
It may be due to: (a) sampling error, (b) measurement 
error, (c) rounding off values, (d) bias of estimator, or 
(e) other errors. 


Exhaust — Vent or aperture from which gases are 
discharged out. 


Exposure — A measure or description of the extent 
to which an object or organism has been subjected or 
exposed to a particular pollutant (see also Dose and 
Concentration, Time Integrated). 


Extrapolation — Estimating the value of something 
beyond the range in which it has been measured, for 
example, estimating pollution levels in the near future 
from a number of values over past years may be called 
extrapolation of pollution levels in time. Estimation 
of winds at higher levels from those measured at two 
or more levels below may be called extrapolation in 
height. 


F 


Fanning — A type of plume behaviour under extreme 
inversion conditions where mostly lateral diffusion 
takes place with very little vertical mixing. 


Fallout — A radioactive pollutant in the air caused 
after the explosion of a nuclear device; its degree of 
contamination depending on several factors, such as 
distance, wind and power of the device. 


Sometimes also used to mean, depending upon context, 
heavy grit, dust and ash depositing near the source 
(chimney). 


Filter 


a)In air pollution or analytical chemistry, it means a 
medium for separating solids from liquid or gas, 
by passing the liquid or gas through the medium. 


b) In optics it means a device which allows rays or 
radiation of a given wavelength range only to pass 
through. 


c)In spectral analysis of turbulence, it has an analogous 
meaning signifying a mathematical device which 
allows only a given frequency of turbulent 
oscillations to pass through. 


Flame Ionisation — Certain gaseous compounds, 
notably those containing carbon can be estimated by 
the extent to which they are ionised in a hydrogen 
flame. The technique is called flame ionisation. 


Flame Ionization Detector (FID) — Flame Ionization 
Detector used in gas chromatography for detection of 
organic compounds. 


Flash Point — The lowest temperature at which a 
liquid fuel will give off a flammable vapour which 
will burn momentarily on application of a small flame. 
There are several methods of measuring the flash point, 
for example, using an open (Cleveland) or closed cup 
(Pensky - Martens) apparatus for test. 


Flow Meter — An instrument for measuring the rate of 
flow of a fluid moving through a pipe or duct system. 
The instrument is calibrated to give volume or mass 
rate of flow (see also Rotameter, Venturi). 


Flue Gas — The gaseous product of combustion from 
a combustion equipment, for example, a boiler furnace 
or a kiln. 


Fluidised Bed — A chemical engineering term to 
describe a bed of solid particles through which air or 
any other gas is made to flow upwards in such a fashion 
as to support the particles and to make them act, in 
many ways, like a liquid. Furnaces have been devised 
in which oil or powdered or granulated coal can be 
introduced into such a (heated) bed where it can burn 
evenly and produce an even temperature throughout the 
bed. 


Fluorine (F)/Fluorides — In air pollution the term 
fluorine is often used to cover both the element of that 
name and its compounds, mostly fluorides. Fluorine and 
its soluble compounds can be toxic. They are pollutants 
particularly associated with brick and aluminium 
production. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Flux — The rate of passage or transfer of a quantity 
per unit area. 


Fly Ash — The finely divided particles of ash readily 
entrained in flue gases arising from the combustion 
of fossil fuels (mainly coal). The particles of ash may 
contain partially burnt fuel. 


Fog — Atmospheric obscuration caused by liquid water 
droplets. In meteorological terms fog implies reduction 
of visibility to less than 1 km. 


Fog, Radiation — With a clear sky and light wind 
there can be substantial cooling of the air during the 
evening and night due to earth losing heat by radiation. 
Where the air temperature falls below the dew point, a 
fog can be formed. Fog formed by this process is called 
radiation fog. 


Fossil Fuels —A general term covering coal, mineral 
oil, natural gas, etc., which are fuels derived from 
organic deposits in ancient geological periods. They 
consist mainly of carbon and hydrocarbons. By 
comparison wood and nuclear fuel are not fossil fuels. 


Freeze — Out Trap — A device to retain specific 
pollutants by cooling to low temperatures. 


Freons — A range of hydrocarbons with hydrogen 
replaced partly or totally by fluorine or chlorine. These 
wholly manmade compounds are used as refrigerants, 
in fire extinguishers and as aerosol propellants. 


Frequency Distribution — A graphical or 
mathematical method of showing the frequency of 
occurrence of values of some parameter against the 
value of that parameter. 


Front, Cold — The sharp boundary between two 
extensive air masses where cold air is replacing warm air. 


Front, Warm — The sharp boundary between two 
extensive air masses where warm air is replacing the 
cold air. 


Fuel, Authorized — A fuel with specified performance 
characteristics from the point of view of smoke and 
other pollutants, on the basis of which it may be 
authorized for use in smoke-controlled areas. 


Fume — Very fine solid or liquid particles, 0.001 to 
1 um in diameter, arising from chemical reactions or 
condensation of vapour (often metal vapour). 


The word fumes is commonly used to imply unpleasant 
and smelling airborne effluents. 


Fumigation — When atmospheric conditions are 
such that there is an unstable layer of atmosphere 
above ground, topped by a stable inversion layer, 
the pollutants in the unstable layer often experience 
a thorough vertical mixing raising the ground level 
concentration. This is called fumigation. It may occur 
early in the morning when night time inversion breaks 
up after sunrise or may exist near the coast when sea 
breeze brings cold air over the warm air on land. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


G 


Gas Chromatography — Gas chromatography (GC) 
is acommon type of chromatography used in analytical 
chemistry for separating and analyzing compounds 
that can be vaporized without decomposition. Typical 
uses of GC include testing the purity of a particular 
substance, or separating the different components of a 
mixture (the relative amounts of such components can 
also be determined). In some situations, GC may help 
in identifying a compound. 


Grain — In air pollution this is often encountered 
as a unit of mass (One grain = 0.064 8 g). This old 
apothecaries’ unit is still used in certain regulations 
for describing permissible concentrations (1 grain/ft? = 
2.3 g/m*) of pollutants in process emissions. 


Green House Effect — Retention of heat by the earth 
and the atmosphere owing to the carbon dioxide in 
air being ‘transparent’ to incoming shortwave solar 
radiation but ‘opaque’ to long wave radiation back 
from the earth. This term comes from analogy of green 
houses where glass and water vapour inside cause 
shortwave sun’s radiation to enter but does not allow 
long wave radiation to pass out. 


Greenhouse Gases (GHGs) — Several important 
gases in the earth’s atmosphere: carbon dioxide, 
methane, nitrous oxide, ozone, other trace gases and 
water vapour are known to absorb infrared energy. 
Surrounding the earth like a giant greenhouse, they 
maintain the earth’s climate. However, in excessive 
concentrations they contribute to accelerated global 
climate change/global warming which may adversely 
affect various aspects of ecosystem. The six greenhouse 
gases included under the Kyoto Protocol are: carbon 
dioxide (CO,), methane (CH,), nitrous oxide (N,O), 
sulphur hexafluroide (SF), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). 


Grit — Particles of solid ranging from 75 to 200 um 
in diameter in the air or flue gases which fall out or 
deposit under their own weight (see also Dust). 


Ground Level Ozone — Ozone gas present near the 
surface of the earth is referred to as Ground Level 
Ozone. It is a secondary pollutant and is produced in 
the presence of sunlight through a complex reaction 
involving oxides of nitrogen and several hydrocarbons 
often called ozone precursors. 


Ground Roughness — Natural terrain is not smooth 
but consists of rocks, grass, trees, buildings, etc., which 
affect the air flow near the surface of the earth. Thus, 
forest will be rougher than short grass. A roughness 
parameter usually denoted by Z, is defined such that in 
neutral atmosphere, the wind U changes with height Z 
according to the law, 


Z 
Ua log — 
87 


0 


10 


Guideline, Air Quality — Air quality guideline 
indicates the level and duration of air pollution by a 
pollutant above which effects on materials, vegetation 
or health are produced. 


H 


Haze — Fine aerosol dispersed through a portion of 
the atmosphere. The particles are so small that they 
cannot be felt or individually seen with the naked eye, 
but they diminish the horizontal visibility and give 
the atmosphere a characteristic opalascent appearance 
which subdues all other colours. 


Blue haze is found due to the combustion of sulphur or 
its compounds or some other organic compounds. 


High Performance Liquid Chromatography — High- 
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), formerly 
referred to as high-pressure liquid chromatography, is 
a technique in analytic chemistry used to separate the 
components in a mixture, to identify each component, 
and to quantify each component. It relies on pumps to 
pass a pressurized liquid solvent containing the sample 
mixture through a column filled with a solid adsorbent 
material. Fach component in the sample interacts 
slightly differently with the adsorbent material, causing 
different flow rates for the different components and 
leading to the separation of the components as they 
flow out the column. 


Histogram — A graphical representation of the 
frequency distribution of a continuous variable. Classes 
are represented by continuous intervals on X-axis and 
absolute (or relative) frequencies of the classes are 
represented by rectangles on Y-axis, with the areas 
proportional to the absolute frequencies of the classes. 


Homeostasis The maintenance of internal 
constancy and independence of the environment 
within a living substance. Thus, despite changes in 
ambient temperature, body maintains a nearly constant 
temperature. Similarly, in spite of deteriorated air 
quality, the body maintains its functions through proper 
compensation. There is, however, a limit beyond which 
the compensation is not possible leading to permanent 
damage. 


Humidity/Relative Humidity — The water vapour 
content of atmosphere is its humidity. Relative 
humidity is the ratio (expressed as percentage) of the 
quantity of water vapour in the atmosphere (per unit 
volume) to that of the quantity at that temperature if it 
was saturated with water vapour. 


Hydrometer — An instrument for measuring the 
humidity or relative humidity of the air. 


I 


Immission — Strictly this means intake by a receptor of 
pollution. Since this is often related to the concentration 
of the pollutant in the air there has been a tendency to 


speak of the immission concentration or even immission 
as the same as ground level concentration. 


Impaction — A forcible contact of particles of matter 
on any surface. This term is often used synonymously 
with ‘Impingement’. The impacting particles adhere to 
the surface; a property used in air sampling. 


Impactor — A centrifugal separation device often used 
for collection of particles, having a specific size, of dust 
entrained in an air stream. An impactor system usually 
comprises of a jet / nozzle which accelerates the air 
stream that is directed towards an impaction surface 
placed a small distance away from the tip of the nozzle. 
The air stream is thus forced to bend its trajectory 
leaving behind dust particles on the impaction surface. 


Impingement — The act of bringing matter forcibly in 
contact with any surface. In air sampling, it refers to a 
process for the collection of particulate matter in which 
the gas being sampled is directed forcibly against a 
surface. 


Impingement, Dry — The process of impingement 
so carried out that particulate matter carried in the 
gas stream is retained upon the surface against which 
the stream is directed. The collecting surface may be 
treated with a film of adhesive. 


Impingement, Wet — The process of impingement 
carried out within a body of liquid, the latter serving to 
retain the particulate matter. 


Impinger — A sampling instrument employing 
impingement for the collection of particulate matter 
and gases. 


Incineration — A waste disposal process by means of 
which solid, liquid and gaseous combustible wastes are 
converted, through controlled combustion, to a residue, 
which contains virtually no combustible matter, and to 
gases. 


Inductively Coupled Plasma — Mass Spectroscopy 
(ICP-MS) — Inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP-MS), is a type of mass spectrometry 
which is capable of detecting metals and several non- 
metals at concentrations as low as one part in 1015 
(part per quadrillion, ppq) on non-interfered low- 
background isotopes. This is achieved by ionizing the 
sample with inductively coupled plasma and then using 
a mass spectrometer to separate and quantify those 
ions. Compared to atomic absorption techniques, ICP- 
MS has greater speed, precision, and sensitivity. 


Inductively Coupled Plasma — Optical Emission 
Spectroscopy (ICP-OES)/(ICP-AES) — Inductively 
coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP- 
AES), also referred to as inductively coupled plasma 
optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), is an 
analytical technique used for the detection of trace 
metals. It is a type of emission spectroscopy that uses 
the inductively coupled plasma to produce excited 
atoms and ions that emit electromagnetic radiation 


11 


IS 4167 : 2020 


at wavelengths characteristic of a particular element. 
The intensity of this emission is indicative of the 
concentration of the element within the sample. 


Industry, Chlor Alkali — Industry connected with 
the manufacture of chlorine, caustic soda and caustic 
potash and/or related products. 


Ingestion — The taking in of a substance to the 
stomach. 


Insolation — Incoming solar radiation falling on a unit 
horizontal surface (of the earth). This may consist of 
the radiation directly received from the sun plus that 
received after scattering by the atmosphere and clouds. 


Intensity (Rainfall) — Rate at which rain falls. In 
practice this is determined by measuring the rainfall 
over some given time or by measuring time required 
for a given rainfall. It is important that this time interval 
should be mentioned. 


Intensity (Turbulence) — Square root of the mean 
square wind speed fluctuation divided by the mean wind 
speed. The fluctuations may be measured in downwind 
direction, cross wind direction or in vertical direction 
separately. Thus, intensity of vertical component of 
turbulence or horizontal component of turbulence may 
be defined. 


Interference — Effects on the determination of a 
pollutant, due to the presence of other pollutants or 
impurities. 

Internal Combustion Engine — see Engine, Internal 
Combustion. 


Interpolate — To estimate the value of an entity at 
points between actual measured or known values, for 
example estimating pollution levels at points between 
sites at which pollution measurements are actually 
made. Interpolations can also be done in time, that is, 
in between two instants. 


Inversion — In meteorology an inversion exists 
when the air temperature increases with height. Under 
such conditions, vertical movements are damped and 
vertical spread of the pollutants is attenuated. Inversion 
may occur in isolated layers also. During inversion, 
atmosphere is said to be stable. 


In Vitro/In Vivo — These two terms differentiate 
the experimental reproduction of biological processes 
in isolation from the living organism and biological 
process occurring within the living organism. The 
former is called ‘in vitro’ and the latter ‘in vivo’. 


Isokinetic — Isokinetic sampling implies sampling 
in such a way that the velocity of the gas entering the 
sampler is the same as that of the gas being sampled. 
The sample can thus be expected to have the same 
particulate content as the gas being sampled. 


Isopleth — A line drawn on a map linking places with 
the same value of some parameter, for example, height, 
annual rainfall, pollutant concentration. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Isothermal — Literally, at constant temperature. An 
isothermal layer in the atmosphere is one in which there 
is no temperature variation with height within the layer. 
An isothermal process is that in which temperature 
does not change. 


Ionisation Chamber — A device for detecting 
and measuring radioactivity or nuclear radiation. It 
consists of a chamber containing a suitable gas and two 
electrodes having a potential difference high enough 
to prevent recombination of ion pairs produced when 
an ionising particle passes through it. Ion pairs are 
collected by the electrodes and the resulting pulses or 
current amplified and recorded. 


K 


Knock — The situation in a spark ignition where part 
of the air/fuel mixture detonates flame front has reached 
it. The tendency of a fuel to knock in a petrol engine 
can be reduced by the blending of suitable compounds 
in the fuel or by antiknock additives. 


L 


Labile — A labile material is one which is unstable or 
reactive. 


Lachrymator — A substance which, on contact with 
eyes, causes irritation and flow of tears. 


Lapse Rate — The decrease of an atmospheric variable 
with height, the variable being temperature unless 
otherwise specified. 


Lapse Rate, Dry, Adiabatic — Rate of decrease of 
temperature at the rate of0.009 8 °C/m. It is the rate 
at which parcel of unsaturated air will cool if lifted 
adiabatically. Also called neutral lapse rate. 


Lapse Rate, Super Adiabatic — Atmospheric lapse 
rate in which the decrease in air temperature with 
elevation is greater than the normal adiabatic lapse rate. 
Under this condition, vertical motions are accelerated, 
and the atmosphere is said to be unstable. 


Laser Technique, Raman — A technique in which 
laser is used as the source of monochromatic light. The 
scattered beam is scanned for the Raman Lines for a 
given pollutant which gives the concentration of the 
pollutant in the path of the beam. 


Layer, Mixing, or Layer, Mixed — A layer bounded 
between two surfaces in which pollutants can disperse 
and mix well in the vertical direction. Usually, the 
lower surface is ground and the upper surface may 
be the lower boundary of a layer having temperature 
inversion. 


Lead Dioxide (Peroxide) Candle — A device in which 
sulphur dioxide in the air reacts with a film of lead 
dioxide to produce lead sulphate which is subsequently 
measured. The device thus gives an indication of 
sulphur dioxide in the air. Its performance is influenced 
by condition such as wind and humidity. 


12 


Lean Mixture — The air/fuel mixture in an internal 
combustion engine is described as lean if it contains 
a low proportion of fuel while a mixture with a high 
proportion of fuel is described as rich. 


Level, Adverse — Referring to level of concentration 
of a pollutant in the atmosphere at which remedial 
action is necessary. 


Lidar — Laser radar used to study the location and 
concentration of pollutants, both particulate and 
gaseous by the reflection or absorption of a laser 
beam. 


Line Source — A line source is a source of air, noise, 
water contamination or electromagnetic radiation that 
emanates from a linear (one-dimensional) geometry. 
The most prominent linear sources are roadway air 
pollution, aircraft air emissions, traffic noise. 


Lofting — A type of plume behaviour characterised 
by vertical mixing above a specific level, caused by 
an unstable condition above and a stable (inversion) 
condition below the level. 


Looping — A type of plume which has a wavy 
character. It occurs in a highly unstable atmosphere 
because of rapid mixing. 


Lung Function — Literally the function of a lung, that 
is, the transfer of oxygen from the air to the blood and 
the disposal to the air of carbon dioxide from the blood. 
More specifically it is a measure of efficiency of lung 
performance. 


M 


MAC — Maximum Allowable Concentration. A term 
similar to the TLV. 


Mass Spectrometry — A mass spectrograph in which 
the charged particle are detected electrically. A vacuum 
system in which positive rays of various charged atoms 
are deflected through electric and magnetic fields 
so as to indicate in order the charge to mass ratio for 
detection of atomic masses. 


Mean, Arithmetic — Sum of the values divided by the 
number of observations. 


Mean, Geometric — The nth root of the product of n 
values. 


Means, Best Practicable — The overall approach of 
anti—pollution legislation towards industrial emissions 
which considers available technology and cost of 
pollutant abatement. A scheduled process should be 
provided with the best practicable means for abatement 
of pollution. 


Median — The middle most value of a series of 
observations arranged according to the ascending or 
descending order of magnitude of a characteristic. In 


aa th value, if n is odd. If n 


2 \th and ( Jih values. 


a sample of size n, it is ( 


n 
—+1 


is even, it is the average of [ 
2 


Microclimate The distinctive pattern of 
meteorological variables within the lowest layers of 
atmosphere or (sometimes) within a limited area, for 
example, a town. 


Micrometeorology — Study of physical phenomena in 
the very lowest layers of the atmosphere (of the order of 
100 m) or occasionally, over a restricted area, generally 
of a few kilometres in extent. 


Millibar (mb) — A unit of pressure, one thousandth of 
the basic unit bar. The millibar is equal to 100 Newtons 
per square metre or 1 000 dynes/cm? and approximately 
0.75 mm of mercury. 


Mist — A suspension or dispersion of liquid droplets 
in a gas. Usually applied to water droplets in air where 
visibility has a value of 1 km or more. Natural mists 
may be aggravated by air pollutants. 


Mist Eliminator — A device used for removing mist. 
It generally consists of wire mesh for mist removal. 


Mixing Height — The height in the atmosphere within 
which emitted pollutants are dispersed and mixed 
vertically, the vertical mixing being attenuated by 
presence of inversion layers above that height. 


Mixture, Lean — see Lean Mixture. 


Model, Mathematical An air pollution 
mathematical model is a numerical simulation of the 
emission, dispersion and chemical and other processes 
controlling ambient pollutant concentrations. 


Model, Physical — A physical simulation, like in a 
wind tunnel, of the emission and dispersion processes 
controlling ambient pollutant concentrations in a 
model, used as an aid to understanding the process. 


Monitoring — Generally this is used interchangeably 
with surveillance to mean measuring concentration 
levels continuously or regularly over a period of time. 
More specifically it may imply checking that the level 
of an air pollutant is within prescribed limits. Stack 
monitoring implies the monitoring of the concentrations 
in the stack effluents from which total emission rates 
can be estimated. 


Month — For reporting analyses of outdoor air on a 
monthly rate results are calculated to a base of thirty 
days, irrespective of the calendar month having 28 to 
31 days as defined in Gregarian Calendars. 


N 


N.T.P — Normal temperature and pressure. Usually 
refers to a temperature of 0 °C and pressure of 760 mm 
Hg. 


Necrosis — Localized death of a cell or cells in the 
living body tissues. 


Nephelometer — An instrument for measuring the 
amount of light scattered or absorbed by a suspension 
of particles (aerosols). It is used to determine suspended 
particle concentrations or particle size. 


13 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Newton (N) — The SI unit of force; a force required to 
produce an acceleration of one metre per second when 
applied to a mass of 1 kg. It is equal to 10° dynes or 
0.102 kg force. 


NOx (Nitrogen Oxides) — Refers to all the oxides of 
nitrogen, but usually to nitric oxide (NO) and nitrogen 
dioxide (NO,) in matters of air pollution. Nitrous oxide 
(N,O) the anaesthetic laughing gas is a third reasonably 
stable oxide of nitrogen. 


Nomogram — A form of chart containing scales 
for the variables (usually 3) involved in a particular 
formula or calculation. For any values of two of 
the variables, the corresponding values of the third 
lie in a straight line with the values of the other two. 
The basic three variable structure is often extended 
progressively to cover more variables, taken three 
at a time, for example, A and B give C, C and D 
give E. 


Nonpoint Source — Pollution that comes from many 
sources, such as motor vehicles, rather than one source, 
such as an industrial facility. 


Noxious — Harmful. 


O 


Obscuration — Concealing from sight. In meteorology 
it relates to restriction of visibility. 


Octane Rating — An indicator of the tendency of a 
motor gasoline to knock in a spark ignition internal 
combustion engine, higher octane ratings being 
required for engines of higher compression ratios. 
The octane number is the percentage by volume of 
the hydrocarbon iso - octane in a mixture with normal 
heptane which has the same knocking characteristics as 
the fuel under test. The higher the octane number, the 
lower the tendency to knock. 


Odour Concentration — see Concentration, Odour. 


Oil, Gas — A liquid petroleum distillate having 
a viscosity and distillation range between paraffin 
(kerosene) and light lubricating oil. It is in the 
same boiling point range as diesel oil. Often used 
for heating purposes, it has a relatively low sulphur 
content. 


On-Line 


a) A method of measuring a variable in a process 
continuously and rapidly as the process continues. 


b) The arrangement of a computer to process without 
delay input data obtained from the process, and 
present output result, say to control a plant, is 
described as on-line operation. 


Opacity Rating — A measurement of the opacity of 
emissions, defined as the apparent obscuration of an 
observer’s vision to a degree equal to the apparent 
obscuration of smoke of a given rating on the 
Ringelmann Chart. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Organoleptic — Affecting an organ. Thus, organoleptic 
methods of estimating odour depend upon its perception 
by the human nose. 


Orifice Meter — A flow meter, employing as the 
measure of flow rate the difference between the 
pressures measured on the upstream and downstream 
sides of the orifice (that is, the pressure differential 
across the orifice) in the conveying pipe or duct. 


Oven, Coke — Large ovens in which hard caking 
bituminous coal is subjected to a long process of 
carbonization at high temperatures. 


Oxidants — Material which have an oxidising action 
on other materials, that is, generally adding oxygen to 
them chemically or extracting hydrogen. 


Typical atmospheric oxidants are ozone and nitrogen 
dioxide whose action on vegetable material can be 
damaging. 

Ozone Depletion — Thinning (depletion) of the 
protective ‘ozone layer’, a fragile band of gases floating 
in the stratosphere, about 25 km above the earth. This 
thinning is caused by ozone-depleting chemicals such 
as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which are released by 
human activities and products. The ozone layer acts 
like a giant sunscreen enveloping the earth. It filters out 
most of the sun’s harmful ultraviolet (UV) radiation. 
Depletion of the ozone layer is allowing more UV rays 
to reach the earth. 


Ozone Depleting Substance (ODS) — Substances 
responsible for depletion of the ozone layer in the 
stratosphere. They primarily contain chlorine, fluorine 
and/orbromineatoms. ODS includecarbontetrachloride, 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons 
(HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), brominated 
fluorocarbons (Halons), methyl bromide and methyl 
chloroform. 


These substances are widely used in refrigeration units, 
insulating foams, as well as cleaning agents, solvents 
and fire extinguishing agents. Some other substances 
are being used as transitional substances before their 
use is phased out because of high global warming 
potentials. 


P 


PAN — Peroxyacetylnitrate. This is an eye irritant 
compound associated with photochemical smog. 


Particle — A small discrete mass of solid or liquid 
matter. 


Particle Concentration — see Concentration, Particle. 
Particle Fall — see Dust Fall. 


Particulates — Particulate matter in the air usually 
refers to small solid particles of material found in the 
atmosphere in addition to gases. Less frequently, it is 
applied to small liquid aerosol particles. 


14 


Passive Sampling — This refers to diffusion tubes 
or badges that provide a simple and inexpensive 
indication of average pollution levels over a period of 
weeks or months. Plastic tubes or discs, open at one 
end to the atmosphere and with a chemical absorbent 
at the other, collect a sample for subsequent analysis in 
the laboratory. The low cost per tube allows sampling 
at a number of points and is useful in highlighting 
‘hotspots’ where more detailed study may be needed. 


Peak, Instantaneous — It refers to a short-term high 
value, for example of a pollutant concentration. 


Percentile — One of the set of numbers on the random 
variable axis which divides a probability distribution 
into 100 equal areas. It is a quantity equal to one — 
hundredth of total population. 


Persistent Organic Pollutant (POPs) — Persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) are organic compounds that 
are resistant to environmental degradation through 
chemical, biological, and photolytic processes. Because 
of this, they have been observed to persist in the 
environment, to be capable of long-range transport, bio 
accumulate in human and animal tissue, bio accumulate 
in food chains and to have potential significant impacts 
on human health and the environment. Some examples 
of POPs are Dioxin, some pesticides. 


Several compounds have been identified as hormone 
disruptors which can alter normal function of endocrine 
and reproductive systems in humans and wildlife. 
Cardiovascular disease, cancer, obesity, and diabetes 
have also been linked to POPs. There are many risks and 
effects of having these chemicals in our environment. 
After these pollutants are put into the environment, 
they are able to stay in the system for decades causing 
problems such as cancer, birth defects, learning 
disabilities, immunological, behavioural, neurological 
and reproductive disorders in humans and animals. 


Photochemical Smog — The result of reactions on 
the atmosphere between nitrogen oxides, organic 
compounds and oxidants under the influence of 
sunlight, leading to the formation of oxidizing 
compounds or possibly causing poor visibility, eye 
irritation or damage to material and vegetation, if 
sufficiently concentrated. 


Photo Ionization Detector (PID) — Photo Ionization 
Detector used in gas chromatography for detection of 
organic compounds. 


Phytotoxic — Poisonous to plants. 


Plume — The flow or path of effluent from a specific 
outlet such as a chimney stack or vent. While for 
smoke, the plume is visible, for many pollutants it may 
not be so. 


PM, —PM1I orPM. refers to particles in the atmosphere 
with an aerodynamic diameter of less than or equal to 
1 micrometers. 


PM, ,— PM2.5 or PM,, refers to particles in the 
atmosphere with an aerodynamic diameter of less than 
or equal to 2.5 micrometers. It may be noted that PM, . 
set of particles is a subset of PM, 


PM,— PMS or PM, refers to particles in the atmosphere 
with an aerodynamic diameter of less than or equal to 
5 micrometers. 


PM,, — PM10 or PM, refers to particles in the 
atmosphere with an aerodynamic diameter of less than 
or equal to 10 micrometers. 


Pneumoconiosis (or Pneumonoconiosis) — A term 
applied to various diseases of the lung caused by the 
inhalation of dust particles in such occupations as coal 
mining, quarrying and asbestos working; an excess 
of fibrous tissue forms in the lungs round the dust 
particles. 


Pollen — The small grains from the anthers of 
flowers which contain the male reproductive nuclei. 
Transported in the air certain of these grains in the 
air can induce hay fever or asthma in some people by 
action in the nose. They are thus natural air pollutants. 


Pollutant (Primary and Secondary) — A pollutant 
is something which pollutes the air. A primary air 
pollutant is one which is put into the air in that form. A 
secondary pollutant is not emitted as such, but forms in 
the air from primary pollutants. 


Pollution, Air — The presence in ambient atmospheres 
of substances, generally resulting from the activity of 
man, in sufficient concentration, present for a sufficient 
time and under circumstances such as to interfere with 
comfort, health or welfare of persons or with reasonable 
use or enjoyment of property. 


Polyaromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) — Polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), also poly aromatic 
hydrocarbons, are hydrocarbons (organic compounds 
containing only carbon and hydrogen) that are 
composed of multiple aromatic rings (organic rings in 
which the electrons are delocalized). PAHs are neutral, 
non polar molecules. They are found in fossil fuels 
(oil and coal) and in tar deposits, and are produced, 
generally, when insufficient oxygen or other factors 
result in incomplete combustion of organic matter 
(e.g., in engines and incinerators, when biomass burns 
in forest fires, etc.). 


Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) — Polychlorinated 
biphenyl (PCB), is a synthetic organic chemical 
compound of chlorine attached to biphenyl, which 
is a molecule composed of two benzene rings. There 
are 209 configurations of organochlorides with 1 to 
10 chlorine atoms. The chemical formula for a PCB is 


Polychlorinated Dibenzodioxins (PCDDs) 
Polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), or simply 
dioxins, are a group of polyhalogenated organic 


15 


IS 4167 : 2020 


compounds that are significant environmental 
pollutants. They are commonly but inaccurately 
referred to as dioxins for simplicity, because every 
PCDD molecule contains a dibenzo-1,4-dioxin skeletal 
structure, with 1,4-dioxin as the central ring. The word 
“dioxins” may also refer to other similarly acting 
chlorinated compounds. 


Point Source — A stack, vent, duct, pipe or other 
confined air stream from which chemicals may be 
released to the air. A point source of pollution is a 
single identifiable source of air, water, thermal, noise 
or light pollution. A point source has negligible extent, 
distinguishing it from other pollution source geometries. 
The sources are called point sources because in 
mathematical modeling, they can be approximated as a 
mathematical point to simplify analysis. Pollution point 
sources are identical to other physics, engineering, 
optics, and chemistry point sources and include: Air 
pollution from an industrial source, rather than an 
airport or a road, considered a line source or a forest fire 
which is considered an area source, or volume source. 


Ppb (European) — A billion in European usage is a 
million times a million (10!”) so ppb is parts per million 
million, that is one part in 10”. 

ppb (US) — In America a billion is used to mean a 
thousand million as against a million million in Europe. 
Thus 1 ppb (US) = 1 000 ppb (European). 

pphm — Parts per hundred million. 

ppm — Parts per million. In pollution of the air by a 
gaseous pollutant, it refers to the number of parts by 


volume of the gaseous pollutant in one million parts of 
the total air. 


The quantity ppm is related to ug/m*by the relation. 


[r 


273 
273+T 


2 


P 


Concentration, in “g/m? = 44.64 x M | 


where 


M= molecular weight of the pollutant; 


T= temperature, in °C; 
P = pressure at NTP; and 
P,= air pressure. 


NOTE — It is recommended that instead of ppb or ppm, 
ug/m*should be used. 


Precipitation 
a) The formation of solid particles in a solution. 
b) A process of separation of particles from a fluid. 


c) In meteorological parlance, moisture falling on 
the earth’s surface as rain, hail or snow. 


Precipitation, Thermal — A process consisting of 
the separation of particulate matter from air and other 
gases under the influence of a sufficiently steep thermal 
gradient. In the thermal precipitator (a sampling 


IS 4167 : 2020 


instrument),the air or gas is drawn slowly through a 
narrow chamber across which extends a heated wire, 
the particulate matter being deposited upon the adjacent 
collecting surface. 


Precipitator, Electrostatic — see Electrostatic 
Precipitator. 
Precision — Closeness of agreement (or smallness 


of variability) among the results obtained by applying 
the test procedure several times under the prescribed 
conditions. 


Precursor — Something which goes before. Commonly 
applied to substances in the air which subsequently 
react or are transformed to produce new air pollutant, 
for example hydrocarbons are precursors of ozone and 
other compounds associated with photochemical smog. 


Pressure, Critical— The pressure at which a gas may 
just be liquefied at its critical temperature (see also 
Temperature, Critical). 


Pressure, Gauge — The difference between pressure 
existing within a system and that of the atmosphere. 
Zero-gauge pressure is equal to atmospheric pressure. 


Pressure, Static — The pressure of a fluid at rest or in 
motion exerted perpendicularly to the direction of flow. 


Pressure, Total —The pressure representing the 
algebraic sum of static pressure and velocity pressure 
at the point of measurement. 


Pressure, Velocity (or Dynamic) — The pressure 
caused by and related to the velocity of the flow of 
fluid. It is a measure of the kinetic energy of the fluid. 


Probe — A tube used for sampling or for measuring 
pressures at a distance from the actual collection or 
measuring apparatus. It is commonly used for reaching 
inside stacks and ducts. 


PUF Sampler — PUF is an acronym for Polyurethane 
Foam. PUF Sampler refers to a complete air sampling 
system that traps all airborne organics at flow rates up 
to 280 l/min in polyurethane foam. 


Pulmonary — Related to lungs. 


Pump — A device which forces air or other fluids from 
one place to another. This is usedin forcing air to pass 
through a sampler such as filter paper or bubbler. 


Pyrheliograph — see Actinometer. 


R 


Radiosonde — A balloon borne instrument which 
transmits data on temperature, pressure and humidity 
as it rises and moves with the wind. 


Rain, Orographic — Rain caused by the raising and 
cooling of moist air as it passes over mountains. 


Rainout — The mechanism whereby small particles in 
the air are removed by raindrops as they form in the 
cloud. 


16 


Raman Effect — Appearance of additional lines in 
the spectrum of the light scattered by a substance when 
illuminated by monochromatic light. The lines are 
characteristic of the substance and the phenomenon is 
used to identify and measure its quality. 


Ratio, Benefit/Cost — The benefit/cost ratio seeks to 
compare the benefits of a particular action with its cost. 
In the case of pollution control expenditure the benefits 
have to be assessed in terms of the effect of reduced 
pollution. A benefit/cost ratio of 10:1 implies that for 
every | rupee spent on controlling the pollution, the 
benefits can be valued at Rs 10. 


Recycling — Recovery and reuse of the material 
generally to make the same sort of products. In some 
cases reuse for another purpose is included in the 
term recycling in that it assists material conservation. 
Exhaust gases from motor vehicles may be recycled 
in the air input to reduce the overall production of air 
pollutants. 


Reference Method — A reference method or analysis 
is one against which others are compared. Usually 
it is a method of high accuracy and precision, and 
therefore, is not always as simple to perform as a 
routine method. 


Reflectance — The reflectance of a surface is a 
measure of the extent to which it reflects light or other 
radiation of specific wavelength. When the radiation is 
not monochromatic, the term Albedo is used. 


Remote Sensing — Detection or measurement of 
a property of a medium(like atmosphere) such as 
temperature, concentration of pollutants, etc., from a 
distance. For example, using radar, rain can be detected 
or using Laser beam, concentration of pollutants can be 
measured along the path of the beam by analysing the 
scattered radiation from the beam. This is in contrast 
to in situ sampling or measurement where the sensor 
measures the property in the immediate vicinity of the 
sensor. 


Reproducibility — The closeness of agreement among 
the test results obtained by the same method on identical 
test material but under different conditions (different 
operators, different apparatus, different laboratories 
and/or different times). It is defined as that difference 
between two such single and independent results as 
would be exceeded in the long run in only one case in 
twenty in the normal and correct operation of the test 
method. 


Residence Time — Average time for which any 
pollutant or particulate matter remains in the atmosphere 
before settling on earth’s surface. It is equal to the time 
required for the removal of half the quantity of matter 
divided by 0.693 or the time required for the contents 
to reach 1/e or 36.8 percent of original value, where e 
is the base of log.. 


Respirator — A device used by a person for breathing 
filtered air, or artificial air from a cylinder while 
working in an area having air contamination. 


Response — Reaction or effect of something to a 
stimulus or influence, for example the effect of a 
pollutant concentration upon a living organism or 
responses of an instrument to a given signal. 


Response Time — Time taken by an instrument to 
change the indication from the initial level to 1/e times 
(e = base of natural logarithms = 2.712) the final level 
on giving a step incremental input. 


Retention Factor — Fraction of a contaminant 
breathed that is retained in the body of the person. 


Ringelmann Chart (Scale) — A chart for assessing 
the darkness of a plume of smoke by visual comparison 
with a numbered set or grade differing from each 
other in the width and spacing of black lines printed 
on a white background. Thus Ringelmann 1 is 
equivalent to 20 percent black. The percentage of 
blackness represented by Ringelmann numbers is as 
follows: 


Ringelmann Percent of Blackness 


1 20 
2 40 
3 60 
4 80 
5 100 


‘Dark smoke’ is smoke which is as dark as or darker 
than Ringelmann 2 and ‘Black smoke’ is as dark as or 
darker than Ringelmann 4. 


Room Temperature — Temperature of a laboratory 
workplace ranging between 27 + 5 °C. 


Rotameter — A device, based on the principle of 
Stoke’s Law for measuring the rate of fluid flow. It 
consists of a tapered vertical tube having a circular 
cross — section and containing a float which is free 
to move in a vertical path to a height dependent upon 
the rate of fluid flow upward through the tube (see also 
Flow Meter and Orifice Meter). 


Run, Blank — see Determination, Blank. 


Running Average— see Average, Moving. 


S 


Sample, Cumulative — A sample obtained over a 
period of time, the collected atmosphere being retained 
in a single vessel, or with a separated component 
accumulating into a single whole such as dust 
sampling in which all the dust separated from air is 
accumulated in one mass of fluid; acid gas is absorbed 
in an alkaline solution; and air is collected in a plastic 
bag or gasometer. Such a sample does not reflect 
variations in concentration during the period of 
sampling. 


17 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Sample, Grab — A sample taken or grabbed at a single 
point in a short time rather than accumulated over a 
period. This is representative of only the conditions at 
the particular time of sampling. This is also known as 
Snap sample. 


Sampling — Taking or withdrawing a fraction of a 
substance usually for study as representative of the 
whole. 


Sampling, Continuous Sampling without 
interruptions throughout an operation or for a 
predetermined time, that is, uninterrupted sampling 
of air, usually at a fixed rate. Where the sample can 
be analysed continuously, the stream of gas may be 
passed through a measuring instrument continuously. 
Otherwise, the sample is collected in an uninterrupted 
fashion for a given period and the entire sample is 
finally analysed to give the mean composition of the air 
over whole period. 


Sampling, Cumulative — A process or system in 
which the sample is accumulated either by sampling 
continuously or for finite periods at regular intervals to 
give a single sample whose composition is regarded as 
representative of the whole period of its accumulation. 


Sampling, Jn-situ— Sampling of a property of a 
medium (for example atmosphere) by using sensors or 
detectors at the actual place where sampling is desired 
(see also Remote Sensing). 


Sampling, Instantaneous — Obtaining a sample of an 
atmosphere in a very short period of time, such that this 
sampling time is insignificant in comparison with the 
duration of the operation or the period being studied. 
It implies sampling at one point in time (instantaneous 
sampling is possible with electrical and optical devices). 


Sampling, Intermittent — Sampling successively 
for limited periods of time throughout an operation or 
for a predetermined period of time. The durations of 
sampling periods and ofthe intervals in between are not 
necessarily regular and are not specified. In contrast to 
continuous sampling, intermittent sampling means that 
sampling occurs at intervals for only a fraction of the 
total time. 


Sampling, Random — Random sampling is a 
sampling scheme without a predetermined pattern. 
Proper random sampling involves the express selection 
of sampling units or times so that there is no bias 
towards selection of particular units or times and the 
sample is likely, as far as possible, to be representative 
of the whole. 


Sampling, Running — Withdrawal of a portion of 
the atmosphere over a period of time with continuous 
analysis or with separation of the desired material 
continuously and in a linear form such as withdrawal 
of the atmosphere accompanied by absorption of a 
component. In a flowing stream of absorbent or by 
filtration in a moving strip of paper. Such a sample 


IS 4167 : 2020 


may be obtained with a considerable concentration 
of the contaminant but it still indicates fluctuations 
in concentration which occur during the period of 
sampling. 

Sampling, Source — Sampling of air containing 
contaminants at the place of origin of the contaminant. 


Sampling Devices, Inertial — Devices, such as 
depository trays, dust fall gauges and collectors, to 
determine the total amount of material settling in them 
in a given time. 

Sampling Efficiency — see Collection Efficiency. 


Saturation — The point where a substance is charged 
with the greatest possible amount of another substance 
or property. In meteorology or air pollution work it is 
frequently used in respect of air being saturated with 
moisture in which case air put in contact with a plane 
surface of water at that temperature will neither gain 
nor lose water vapour. 


Scrubbing/Scrubber — An absorption operation 
in which gaseous or fine particulate pollutants are 
removed from a stream of air or gas by contact with a 
liquid spray or a bath or wetted packing/wet surfaces 
in a tower. The apparatus/equipment used is known as 
scrubber. 


Sea Breeze — see Breeze, Sea. 


Secondary Pollutants Secondary Pollutants 
are pollutants formed by chemical reactions in the 
atmosphere, either with other chemicals or with 
light, for example, Ozone (O,) and photochemical 
smog. 


Sensitivity 
a) In chemical analysis the sensitivity of a method 


is a measure of the minimum value which can be 
estimated by the method. 


b) It is also used to describe an abnormal reaction of 
the body to certain substances. 


c) Sensitivity of an instrument is used to denote 
lowest measurable change in a variable that the 
instrument can measure. 


Settling Velocity, Terminal — The maximum velocity 
reached by a falling particle when the gravitational 
force on it (its weight) is balanced by the viscous drag 
of the fluid through which it is falling. 


Size Distribution, Particle — A method of expressing 
the make-up of a population of particles (in any dust, 
aerosols, etc) in terms of either the mass or number 
of particles between certain size limits, for example 
equivalent diameter of 0 to 1 wm, 1 to 5 um, 5 to 10 wm 
(see also Impactor, Cascade). 


Smelter — A place where fusion of an ore or concentrate 
is carried out with suitable fluxes, to produce a melt 
consisting of two layers; on top a slag of the flux, and 
below, molten impure matter. 


18 


Smog — The word ‘smog’ refer to the unique 
atmospheric condition resulting from a combination of 
smoke and fog. Smog now refers to the yellow-brown 
haze that is a mixture of pollutants, mainly ground- 
level ozone and particulate matter (PM, .). Smog is a 
mixture of air pollutants, smoke, dust, aerosols, etc. 
that can degrade air quality and visibility. Smog was 
traditionally used to refer to ground-level ozone in an 
urban pollution plume. 


Smoke — Smoke is a collection of airborne solid and 
liquid particulates and gases emitted when a material 
undergoes combustion or pyrolysis, together with the 
quantity of air that is entrained or otherwise mixed 
into the mass. It is commonly an unwanted by-product 
of fires (including stoves, candles, oil lamps, and 
fireplaces). 


Smoke Scale, Bacharach — A scale of 10 shades 
from white to black for the assessment of smoke in flue 
gases. A smoke stain obtained by sampling flue gases 
through a filter paper in a prescribed manner is graded 
according to the scale. 


Smuts — Small aggregates of soot, unburnt solids or 
fly ash which may be emitted from chimneys and then 
be deposited in the vicinity. In certain circumstances, 
the production of sulphur trioxide during combustion 
may give rise to acid smuts which are corrosive. 


Solarimeter — see Actinometer. 


Soot — Soot is impure carbon particles resulting 
from the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons. It 
is more properly restricted to the product of the gas- 
phase combustion process but is commonly extended 
to include the residual pyrolysed fuel particles such as 
coal, cenospheres, charred wood, petroleum coke, and 
so on, that may become airborne during pyrolysis and 
that are more properly identified as cokes or chars. 


Sorbent — A liquid or solid medium in or upon which 
materials are retained by absorption or adsorption. 


Sorption — A process consisting of either absorption 
or adsorption. 


Source (of Pollution) — A point or place from which 
effluents are discharged into air. 


Spectroscopic Method — The method using optical 
absorption or emission properties of a substance. The 
light absorbed by or emitted from a substance when 
made to do so is measured using a spectrometer. The 
wavelength and quality of light absorbed or emitted is 
used to detect the substance and measure its quality in 
a sample. 


Spectrometry, NDIR — ‘Non-Dispersive Infra-Red’ 
spectrometry. While in conventional spectrometry, a 
light beam is first dispersed using a prism or grating 
and a (effectively) monochromatic beam is selected, by 
changing a suitable angle, in the NDIR spectrometry 
a beam in infrared region of the spectrum is made 


monochromatic using an interference filter. Absorption 
of this beam by a sample gas is measured to determine 
the quality of gas in the sample. 


Spectrophotometry — The measurement of the 
concentration of a substance in solution by the amount 
of light emitted or absorbed of a colour(wavelength) 
characteristic of the substance being measured. 


Stable (Compound) — A stable compound is one 
which is not easily decomposed or does not react 
readily. 


Stack Solids — The solid content of the gas stream 
going up a stack or chimney. 


Stain, Smoke — This term is applied to the darkness of 
a filter through which air has been sampled. The filter 
retains smoke particles and the stain can be expressed 
as a concentration of equivalent standard smoke. 


Standard Air — see S.T.P. 


Standard Deviation — A widely used measure 
of dispersion of a number of observations of some 
quantity. It is the square root of the average of the 
squares of the differences of each observation from 
the mean of those observations. It is a parameter in the 
Gaussian distribution and represents the value of the 
variable measured on either side from the mean with in 
which 68.45 percent of the probability is covered. It is 
the square root of the variance. 


Standard Level — In respect of air quality it may 
imply a commonly agreed level above which effects 
of some type or other are believed to occur. It also 
represents an air quality or emission level which 
should not be exceeded at all or for specified periods. 
It may also refer to the maximum permitted level of air 
contaminant as established by a legal authority. 


Standard Smoke For certain smokes the 
relationship has been measured between the darkness 
of stain produced by sampling on a filter and separate 
gravimetric measurements of the smoke concentrations. 
This allows filter stains to be expressed in terms of a 
concentration of equivalent standard smoke. 


STEL — Short Term Exposure Limit is defined as 
the concentration to which workers can be exposed 
continuously for a short period of time usually 15 
minutes without suffering from irritation or other 
harmful effects. STEL is a term used in occupational 
health, industrial hygiene and toxicology. 


S.T.P. — Standard Temperature and Pressure for air 
parameter measurements. It refers to a temperature of 
25 °C and a pressure of 760 mm Hg. When referring to 
air, a relative humidity of 45 - 65 percent is assumed. 


Survey (Surveillance) — An air pollution survey 
is an examination of the condition of the air usually 
at a number of points and/or over a length of time. 
Surveillance, usually from safety consideration, 


19 


IS 4167 : 2020 


implies surveying over time. Monitoring is often used 
in the same sense. 


Survey, Damage — Assessment of damage caused by 
the pollutant in a specified area. 


Suspended Particulates — Particles which are too fine 
to have an appreciable falling velocity and therefore 
tend to stay suspended in atmosphere for a considerable 
period. 


Synergistic — Referring to additive or mutually 
supporting or aggravating effect of toxic substances on 
living things. 

Synoptic — Affording an overall view. In meteorology 
a synoptic chart displays the state of atmosphere over a 
large area at one time. By extension, synoptic is used to 
refer to features, for example cyclones or anticyclones, 
which appear in such charts. 


T 


Tar — A thick dark brown or black viscous liquid 
obtained by distillation of wood, coal, peat, crude, oil 
etc. 


The distillation need not be in a still. Distillation may 
occur in a domestic grate and chimney. 


Telemetering — The transmission of signals from 
a measuring instrument by cables or by wireless to 
a distant point where the results can be displayed or 
recorded. Telemetering enables the levels of pollution 
at a number of locations to be displayed at a single 
point. 


Temperature, Critical — The critical temperature of 
a given gas is the temperature above which it cannot be 
liquefied. 


Temperature, potential — Temperature that a parcel 
of air in the atmosphere would attain if it is brought 
adiabatically to a pressure of 1000 mb (see also Lapse 
Rate, Dry, Adiabatic). 


TEOM The tapered element oscillating 
microbalance (TEOM) is used to continuously 
measure particulate concentrations. It measures the 
mass collected on an exchangeable filter cartridge by 
monitoring the corresponding frequency changes of 
a tapered element. The sample flow passes through 
the filter, where particulate matter collects, and then 
continues through the hollow tapered element on 
its way to an electronic flow control system and 
vacuum pump. An electrical circuit places the tube 
into oscillation, and the resonant frequency of the tube 
is proportional to the square root of the mass on the 
filter. 


Tephigram — A thermodynamic diagram or chart 
depicting graphically relations between physical 
variables of a gas, for example between temperature, 
pressure, potential temperature of air in the atmosphere 
with different moisture content. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Thoracic Fraction — Nature has gifted the human 
respiratory tract with several mechanisms for removing 
particulates inhaled with the air we breathe. The mass 
fraction of inhaled particles penetrating beyond the 
larynx is usually referred as the ‘Thoracic Fraction’. 


Threshold, Odour — The lowest concentration of 
an odour bearing gas at which only half of a panel of 
sniffers can detect its presence. 


TLV — Threshold Limit Value. This is the concentration 
of any of a number of pollutants recommended as 
a maximum to which healthy adult workers may be 
exposed 8 hours a day for five continuous days a week 
without adverse effects. 
NOTE —— The list is compiled by the American Conference 
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists but is used extensively 
in many countries. Although 1/30 or 1/40 of the TLV is often 
used as a rule-of-thumb guide to an acceptable ambient 
concentration of a pollutant for ‘the general public’, there are 
many exceptions and the ACGIH specifically warns against the 
practice. 
Topography — The layout of an area in terms of 
height, the natural features and/or buildings, etc. 


Total Organic Carbon (TOC) — Total organic carbon 
(TOC) is the amount of carbon bound in an organic 
compound and is often used as a non-specific indicator 
of water quality. 


Tower, Flare — An outlet, generally elevated, to 
exhaust inflammable gases after igniting them. Also 
called ‘flare stack’, or ‘flare’. 


Tower, Prilling — A tower in fertilizer industry, where 
a hot concentrated solution of ammonium nitrate or urea 
is sprayed and in which it crystallizes as it descends 
through a rising current of atmospheric air. 


Toxic Air Pollutants — Air toxics or toxic air 
pollutants, also known as hazardous air pollutants, 
are those pollutants that are known or suspected to 
cause cancer or other serious health effects, such 
as reproductive effects or birth defects, or adverse 
environmental effects. 


Toxicity — A measure of poisonous or damaging 
effects of a substance on a living organism. 


Tracer Technique — A method of studying pollutant 
behaviour in the air by the injection or release of a 
specifically identifiable substance. The subsequent 
distribution of the tracer is taken to be similar to that of 
the pollutant from the same starting point. 


Troposphere — The lowest part of the earth’s 
atmosphere, (about 9 to20 km deep depending upon 
latitude), in which the temperature generally decreases 
with height. 


Tube, Indicator — A tube containing a substance or 
reagent which reacts with some specific pollutant to 
give a visible indication of the quality of the reagent 
reacted with the pollutant by change in colour or 
otherwise. When polluted air of known quality is 


20 


passed through the indicator tube, the concentration 
can be approximately assessed from the degree of 
visible indication. Such tubes are often used for grab 
sampling. 


Turbidity 


a) The cloudiness ofa liquid caused by fine suspended 
particles. More precisely it describes the reduction 
of light passing through the liquid (caused by the 
suspended particles). 


b) In meteorology it refers to any condition of the 
atmosphere which reduces its transparency to 
light; a measure of reduction of transparency 
normally excluding cloud. 


Turbulence — A motion of the wind or air flow in a 
highly irregular manner both in speed and direction. 
It is the main mechanism of diffusion of pollutants in 
the air (see also Eddy). 


U 


Urban Heat Island — A zone of excess warmth 
within a city over the suburban and rural environs. The 
warmer air in this region rises upwards and then spreads 
radially outwards. The colder air from the surrounding 
countryside at the surface flows inwards towards the 
heat island to replace the rising and outspreading warm 
air. This occurs when the heat islands are intense. This 
circulation is known as Urban Heat Island Effect. 


Uncertainty of Measurement — A parameter 
associated with the result of measurement that 
characterizes the dispersion of the values that could 
reasonably be attributed to the measurand. 


Unstable Compound — An unstable chemical 
compound is one which is easily decomposed or which 
reacts readily. 


Vv 


Vapour — A gas is said to be vapour if, at the 
temperature concerned, it can be liquefied by pressure 
alone. 


Vapour Pressure — The pressure exerted by a vapour, 
either alone or mixed with other gases. The saturated 
vapour pressure of a substance at any temperature is 
pressure of the vapour of the substance in equilibrium 
with its liquid form. 


Variance — A statistical term. The square of the 
standard deviation that is, the average of the squares of 
the deviations ofa number of observations of a quantity 
from their mean value. 


Ventilation 


a) The process of replacing contaminated or stale air 
by fresh air. 


b) The movement and circulation of outdoor air. 


c) The volume of air entering or leaving the lungs in 
one respiratory cycle. 


Ventilation Coefficient — It is defined as a product of 
mixing height and average wind speed. 


Venturi — A tube which is constricted and then opens 
out again and can be used to meter the flow of gas or to 
assist the scrubbing of a gas by a liquid. 


Visibility — A measure of cleanness of the air 
expressing how far objects can be clearly seen under 
specified conditions. Light absorption and scattering by 
aerosols are the main causes of reduced visibility. 


VOC — Volatile organic compounds which readily 
turn into vapour phase at ambient temperature. 


WwW 


Washout — The removal of gases, and sometimes 
particles, from the atmosphere by their solution or 
attachment to rain drops as they fall. 


Week 


a) For in-plant use it is considered to be the number 
of workdays within a period of seven consecutive 
days. 


21 


IS 4167 : 2020 


b) For reporting analyses of outdoor air on a weekly 
rate results are calculated to a base of seven 
consecutive 24-hour days. 


Wind Rose — A diagram showing the frequency and 
strength of winds of various directions over a period in 
a particular place. 

Wind Shear — The change in speed and direction of 
the wind, usually with height. 


Y 
Year — For reporting analyses of outdoor air on a 
yearly rate, twelve 30-daymonths are to be used. 

Z 
Zone, Exclusion — see Distance, Exclusion. 


Zoning — A method of abating air pollution at a 
location by a systematic planning of sites for dwellings 
and for factories/industries which discharge effluents 
considering the micrometeorological conditions in and 
around the location. 


IS 4167 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Air Quality Sectional Committee, CHD 35 


Organization 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Avantha Centre for Industrial Research and 
Development, Yamuna Nagar 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Haridwar 


Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Road and Research Institute, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 
Delhi Technological University, New Delhi 


Dept of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of 
Technology, New Delhi 


Director General, Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institute, Mumbai 


Ecotech Instruments, Greater Noida 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Gujarat Pollution Control Board, Gandhinagar 


Himachal Pradesh State Pollution Control Board, 
Himachal Pradesh 


In personal capacity (House No. 9, Second Floor 
Sukhdev Vihar New Delhi 110025) 


In personal capacity (1221, Mahatma Gandhi Road, 
P.O. - Haridevpur, Kolkata - 700082) 


In personal capacity (H.No. 514, SSST Nagar, 
Rajpura Road, Patiala 147003 Punjab, India) 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment, 
Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 
Indian Council for Agriculture Research, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 
Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board, Ranchi 


Representative(s) 


Dr Gauri Panpit (Chairman) 


Dr NISHIKANT BHARDWAJ 
Dr Sunit Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr S. BHATNAGAR 
SHRI AMBRISH GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI R. C. TRIPATHI 
DR N. K. Srivastava (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. TYAGI 


DR NIRAJ SHARMA 
Dr Ra SINGH (Alternate) 


SMT REENA ARORA 
SHRI DHIRENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr RAKESH MEHROTRA 
Dr ANuBHA MAnpat (Alternate) 


Dr ARAVIND NEMA 


Suri M. R. RAJPUT 
SMT DHANASHREE ACHREKAR (Alternate) 


Dr RAJENDRA PRASAD 


Ms ARCHANA DATTA 
Ms Sucuismita Muxkuopapuyay (Alternate) 


SHRI K. C. Mistry 
Suri B. Y. RAtHop (Alternate) 


Dr T. B. SINGH 
Dr Mano CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH AGARWAL 
SHRI SANJIB KUMAR GOSWAMI 
Dr H. K. PARWANA 


Suri T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 
SHRI MANINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr N. J. SINGH 
Suri A. A. PAaNIwaNI (Alternate) 


Dr KANCHAN K. SINGH 
Dr Panna LAL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI S. C. BARMAN 
Dr M. P. SINGH 
Suri R. N. KASHYAP 


22 


Organization 


Maharashtra State Pollution Control Board, Mumbai 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute, Nagpur 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, 
Ballabhgarh 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Sriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 
Telangana State Pollution Control Board, Hyderabad 
The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 

The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 

West Bengal Pollution Control Board, Kolkata 


BIS Directorate General BIS 


IS 4167 : 2020 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. R. SUPATE 
Dr V. R .THAKvR (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. GOYAL 
Dr P. K. LABHSETWAR (Alternate) 


DR A. K. MUKHERJEE 
SHRI S. RAGHAVAN (Alternate) 


Dr N. K. TIWARY 
SHRI ANAND Bonra (Alternate) 


Dr SHANKAR AGARWAL 
Dr S. K. JAIN 

Dr Supuir Daniya (Alternate) 
Dr NITIN Josui 

Ms NANDINI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Dr MUKESH GARG 
SHRI RAJNEESH KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr K. V. RAMANI 

Dr N. RAVEENDHAR (Alternate) 
Cot R. K. JonRI 

Dr Sunit PAnbey (Alternate) 
SHRI SATYA SUBRAHMANYAM 

Suri MANisH Goswami (Alternate) 
Dr UJAL KUMAR MUKHOPADHYAY 

SHRI SHYAM KUMAR ADHIKARI (Alternate) 
Suri U. K. Das, Scientist ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Kreeti Das 
ScIENTIST ‘B’, CHD 


23 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 35 (10881). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


