NAT Alan IS 9137 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


Ф'зтУћа врта ат = ат 
отето cht аат — 9 at 


( Teel JAGT ) 


Code for Hydraulic Performance 
Acceptance Tests for Centrifugal, 
Mixed and Axial Flow Pumps — 
Class C 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.080 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM 5210 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 45 {И - 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2019 Price Group 12 


Pump Sectional Committee, MED 20 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Pumps Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards dealing with the acceptance tests for centrifugal, mixed and 
axial flow pumps. These standards would correspond to three classes of tests A, B and C. The use of class A and B 
is restricted to special cases when there is a need to have the pump performance more precisely defined. The class 
A is the most accurate whereas, class С is least accurate. It should be borne in mind that class A and B test require 
more accurate apparatus and methods which increases the cost of such tests. In this revision amendments 1, 2, 3 
and 4 have been reviewed and incorporated in the standard. 


The standard arrangements and procedures described are those to be employed for testing a pump individually, 
without reference to its final installation conditions or the effect upon it of any associated fittings. These are the 
usual conditions in which a pump is tested at the manufacturer’s works. 


Pump performance may be affected by conditions of the final site of installation and procedures are described for 
carrying out ‘standard tests’ on certain types of installations of which an overall performance is required. 


The conditions, in which the pumps are finally installed, however, often do not permit reliable test measurements, 
and recommendations are made concerning the procedure to be adopted where the layout precludes tests in 
conformity with the standards or where the tests cover the pump and the plant ancillary to the pump itself. 


This standard is based on ISO 9906-2012, ‘Roto dynamic pumps — Hydraulic performance acceptance tests — 
Grades 1, 2 and 3 issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standards. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


CODEFOR HYDRAULIC PERFORMANCE 
ACCEPTANCE TESTS FOR CENTRIFUGAL, 
MIXED AND AXIAL FLOW PUMPS — CLASS C 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard lays down procedures for acceptance 
testing of pumps. It defines the terms and quantities that 
are used and established for the methods of testing and 
the ways of measuring the quantities involved according 
to class C So as to ascertain the performance of the 
pump and to compare them with the manufacturer’s 
guarantee. 


1.2 This standard applies to any size of pump tested 


with clean, cold water and other liquids behaving as 
clean cold water. 


1.3 This standard does not cover the structural details 
of the pumps and the mechanical properties of their 
components. 


2 SYMBOLSAND REFERENCES 


2.1 List of Symbols Used in the Test Code — As 
Given in Table 1. 


Table 1 Symbols 
( Clause 2.1 ) 


Reference Number* Quantity Symbol Dimensions Si Units 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Mass m M kg 
Length 1 L m 
Time 0 Т s 
Temperature t 0 eC 
Area L m? 
Volume ШІ? m? 
Angular velocity T! rad/s 
Velocity у LT m/s 
Acceleration of free fall 2 LY? m/s 
Speed of rotation n T! 57 
Density p ML? kg/m? 
Pressure р ML'T? N/m? 
Viscosity u ML'T! N5/m? 
Kinematic viscosity у I?T! m/s 
Energy MET J 
Power (general term) P MLP T w 
Reynolds number Re Pure number 
Diameter D L m 
3.2.1.1 Mass rate of flow qi MT! kg/s 
3.2.1.2 Volume rate of flow Os LT m/s 
3.2.3.2 Distance to reference plane 2 L m 
3.2.3.6 Inlet total head Н L m 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Table 1 Symbols ( Concluded ) 


Reference Number* Quantity Symbol Dimensions Si Units 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
3.2.3.7 Outlet total head H, L m 
3.2.3.8 Pump total head H L m 
3.2.3.9 Specific energy L, T? J/kg 
3.2.3.10 Loss of head at inlet Hii L m 
3.2.3.11 Loss of heat at inlet Н, L m 
3.2.3.12 Net positive suction head (NSPH) L m 
Atmospheric pressure (absolute) P; ML'T? N/m? 
Vapour pressure (absolute) | ML'T? N/m? 
3.2.1.1 Pump power output P. мт»? w 
3.2.4.2 Pump power input P MDPT w 
3.2.4.3 Motor power input P. МІ2Т" W 
3.2.5.1 Pump efficiency n Pure Number 
3.2.5.2 Transmission efficiency fos Pure Number 
3.2.5.3 Motor efficiency T] Pure Number 
3.2.5.4 Overall efficiency Neg Pure Number 
3.2.6 Type number K Pure Number 
5.7.6 Friction factor Pure Number 


* where no number is given, reference may be made to various parts of IS 1890. 


+ M= Mass, L = Length, T = Time, 0 = Temperature. 

f An optional symbol for mass rate of flow is gm. 

§ An optional symbol for volume rate of flow is qv. 

| An optional symbol for net positive suction head is H,,. 


4 Also called pascal (symbol Pa). 


2.2 Alphabetical Lists of Basic Letters апа 
Subscripts — As given in Table 2 and Table 3. 


2.3 References 


The Indian Standards listed at Annex А contain 
provisions which, through reference in this text, 
constitute provision of this standard. At the time 
of publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are advised to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions with the latest amendments of the relevant 
standards. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


3.1 General Definitions 


In order to avoid any error of interpretation, it 
is preferable to reproduce here the definitions of 
quantities and units as given in various parts of 


* Recommendations for quantities and units. 


IS/ISO 80000 (Part 1 and 4)*, and to supplement 
these definitions by some specific information on their 
use in this test code. 


g= acceleration of free fall (see NOTE ). 
NOTE — For class C test, the value of g is assumed to 
be 9.81 m/s’. 
n= speed of rotation and is the quotient of the 
number of rotations by the time, 


р = density is the quotient of mass by volume. 


p= pressure is the quotient of force by area. 
Unless otherwise specified, all pressures are 
gauge pressure, that is, measured with respect 


to the atmospheric pressure. 


viscosity (dynamic viscosity, sometimes 
called absolute viscosity) and is defined by the 
expression: 


т= р 
Ш 


Table 2 Letters Used as Symbols 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Table 3 Letters and Figures Used as Subscripts 


( Clause 2.2 ) ( Clause 2.2) 
Symbol Quantity Si Units Subscript Meaning 
(1) (2) (3) () (2) 
А Area m? 1 Inlet 
D Diameter m 2 Outlet 
E Energy J a Available 
g Acceleration of free fall m/s? b Atmosphere 
H Head m Guaranteed 
H, Losses in terms of head of liquid m gr Unit (overall) 
K Type number Pure number int Intermediate 
l Length m M Manometric 
m Mass kg mot Motor 
n Speed of rotation s P Pump 
(NPSH) Net positive suction head m T Required 

р Pressure N/m? 5 Еуе 
Р Power w sp Specified* 
q Mass rate of flow kg/s t Total 
Q Volume rate of flow m/s u Useful 
R, Reynolds number Pure number У Vapor (pressure) 
t Time 5 * This indication applies to the values of quantities relating to the 
y Velocity we guarantee point. 
V Volume nm? 

Specific energy J/kg 
2 Distance to reference plane m 

Efficiency Pure number 
[2] Temperature C 

Dynamic viscosity N°/m? 
У Kinematic viscosity 112/5 

Density kg/m? 

Angular velocity rad/s 

Friction factor Pure number 

where, P= power and is the quotient of the energy 


u, = the velocity of a flat plate moving in its own 
plane while keeping parallel to a fixed flat 
wall. 


h= the distance from the flat plate to the fixed flat 
wall. 


t= the friction force of the fluid on the area unit of 
the flat plate during its motion. 
NOTE — h should be small enough to obtain laminar flow of 
the fluid between the flat plate and the fixed flat wall. 
v= kinematic viscosity is the quotient of the 
viscosity (dynamic viscosity) by the density. 
џи 


у=— 


p 


transferred during a time interval by the 
duration of this interval. 


Re- Reynolds number and is defined by the 
expression: 


3.2 Definitions Peculiar to the Test Code 


This clause gives the definitions of concepts used in this 
test code together with the associated symbols, if any 
have been allocated. Concepts, even though in current 
use, which are not strictly necessary to the application 
of this code are not defined here. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


3.2.1 Flow Rates 


3.2.1.1 In this test code, the mass rate of flow designates 
the external mass rate of flow of the pump, that is, the 
rate of flow discharged into the pipe from the outlet 
branch of the pump. 
NOTE — The following losses or abstractions are inherent to 
the pump: 
a) discharge necessary for hydraulic balancing of axial 
thrust, 
b) cooling of bearings of the pump itself, 
c) water seal to the packing, 


d) leakage from the fittings, internal leakage, etc, are not to 
be reckoned in the quantity delivered. On the contrary, if 
they are taken at a point before the flow measuring section, 
all derived quantities used for other purposes, such as: 


1) cooling of the motor bearings, and 


2) cooling of a gear box ( bearings, oil cooler ), etc, should 
be added to the measured rate of flow. 


3.2.1.2 Q — The outlet volume rate of flow has the 
following value: 


4. 
p2 


In this test code, this symbol may also designate the 
volume rate of flow in a given section*. It is quotient of 
the mass rate of flow in this section by the density (the 
section may be designated by the proposed subscripts). 


3.2.2 Velocity of Flow (v) 


The mean velocity of flow equal to the volume rate of 
flow divided by the pipe cross-section*: 


у= = 
А 


3.2.3 Неаа 
The energy per unit weight of fluid. 
3.2.3.1 Reference plane 


The horizontal plane through the centre of the circle is 
described by the external point of the entrance edges of 
the impeller blades.In case of double inlet pumps, the 
plane should be taken through the higher centre. The 
manufacturer should indicate the position of this plane 
with respect to precise reference points on the pump. 


3.2.3.2 Designates the difference between the level of 
the horizontal plane under consideration and the level 
of the reference plane. Its value is: 


a) Positive — If the plane in question is above the 
reference plane; and 

b) Negative —If the plane in question is below the 
reference plane. 


3.2.3.3 Gauge pressure (р ) 


The effective pressure, relative to the atmospheric 
pressure and the head corresponding to this pressure is: 


р 


PE 


Its value is: 
a) Positive, if this pressure is greater than the 
atmospheric pressure; and 


b) Negative, if this pressure is less than the 
atmospheric pressure. 


3.2.3.4 Dynamic head 


The kinetic energy per unit weight of the liquid in 
movement and is expressed by: 


2g 


Where, v is the mean velocity of the liquid in the 
section considered. 


3.2.3.5 Total head 


In any section, the total head is given by: 
2 
РЕЧЕ aie 
pg 2g 


This is related to atmosphere. The absolute total head in 
any section is given by: 


2 
D 
РЕ ДР M. 


pg pg 26 


3.2.3.6 Inlet total head (H ) 


The total head in the inlet section of the pump is: 
2 
H =z,+ Жеті. 
pg 2g 


3.2.3.7 Outlet total head (Н,) 


The total head in the outlet section of the pump is: 


2 
H, ay, 4 P24 52 
pg 2g 


3.2.3.8 Pump total head (H ) 
The algebraic difference between the outlet total head, 
and the inlet total head is: 


H-H,-H, 
р = р 4 Ds -v 


pg 2g 


= 2, 21+ 


* Attention is drawn to the fact that in this case О may vary for different reasons across the circuit. 


Ifthe compressibility of the pumped liquid is significant, 
p may be replaced by the mean value: 


_ Pit P2 
m 2 


3.2.3.9 Specific energy ( y ) 


The energy per unit mass of liquid. It is given by the 
equation: 


y= gH 
3.2.3.10 Loss of total head at inlet (H,, ) 


The difference between the total head of the liquid at 
the measuring point and the total head of the liquid in 
the inlet section of the pump. 


3.2.3.11 Loss of total head on delivery (H,,) 


The difference between total head of the liquid in outlet 
section of the pump and the total head of the liquid at 
the measuring point. 


3.2.3.12 Net positive suction head (NPSH) 


Gauge reading in metres taken on the suction nozzle 
referred to the pump centre line minus the vapour 
pressure in metres corresponding to the temperature of 
the liquid plus the velocity head at this point. NPSH 
as well as inlet total head, is referred to the reference 
plane. It is necessary to make a distinction between: 


a) The NPSH required at given flow and speed 
of rotation for a given pump.It is specified by 
the manufacturer. This is a function of pump 
design and varies from one design to another. 
For a cavitation free performance of pump, 
1/51 is necessary that available NPSH be higher 
than the required NPSH. The available NPSH 
represents the difference between the existing 
absolute suction head and the vapour pressure at 
the prevailing temperature. The required NPSH 
represents the minimum required margin between 
the suction head and the vapour pressure at a given 
capacity. 

The NPSH available for the same flow which is 
inferred from the installation is a function of a 
system comprising suction head or lift, friction 
head and the vapour pressure of the liquid being 
handled. By physical altering of the installation, 
it is possible to control first two parameters of 
NPSH. But the vapour pressure of the liquid cannot 
be changed without increasing or decreasing the 
temperature of the liquid and this is always not 
feasible. 


The test ( NPSH ) — See 7.1.1. 


Subscripts may be used to differentiate these 
quantities [for ехатрје( NPSH )r when the 
required value is concerned and ( NPSH ја when 
available value is concerned |. 


b 


ma 


с 


— 


IS 9137 : 2019 


3.2.4 Power 


3.2.4.1 Pump power output ( Pu ) 


The power transferred to the liquid at its passage 
through the pump: 


Pu = qgH- gy 
3.2.4.2 Pump power input( P) 
The power measured at the pump coupling. 
3.2.4.3 Motor power input ( P... ) 
The power absorbed by the pump driver. 
3.2.5 Efficiency 
3.2.5.1 Pump efficiency (n) 


Pu Pump power output 


MC P pump power input 


3.2.5.2 Transmission 
coupling, gears, etc ) 


efficiency M)  (shafting, 


Pump power input 


Nin - 
* power at motor shaft 


3.2.5.3 Motor efficiency (n...) 


mot 


. power at motor shaft 


Nmot = а 
2 Motor power input 


3.2.5.4 Overall efficiency (т, ) Ny. =N X Па * Лао 


_ Pump power output 


Motor power input 
3.2.6 Туре Number K 


1/2 
K= 2л nO 
(gH) 


*This formula is the same as the basic formula 


NOTE — Attention is drawn to the fact that in this standard, 
the type number is based on the total head of a multistage pump 
and not on the head per stage. It applies to the guaranteed flow 
rate which is not in conformity with the common practice 
where K is calculated for the flow rate corresponding to the 
maximum efficiency. 


4 GUARANTEES AND PURPOSE OF THE 
TESTS 


4.1 Guarantees 


4.1.1 Subjects of Guarantees 


It shall be agreed in the contract which values are 
guaranteed by the manufacturer and under what 


IS 9137 : 2019 


conditions. One or more of the following quantities are 
usually guaranteed: 


a) Outlet rate of flow of pump; 
b) Total head of pump; 


c) Power input or efficiency of pump or combined 
motor-pump unit (for example, submersible pump 
or monoset pump or separate pump and motor 
with overall efficiency guaranteed ); 


d) Net positive suction head NPSH; 


e) The noise of the pump or combined motor-pump 
unit shall be guaranteed as per ISO 20361; and 


f) The vibrations of the pump or combined motor- 
pump unit shall be guaranteed as per IS/ISO 5199. 


Whichever of these quantities is guaranteed, it is 
necessary to specify the speed of rotation (or in some 
cases the electrical supply frequency and voltage for 
the motor-pump unit) and the chemical and physical 
properties of the liquid to be pumped (if other than 
clean cold water). In this test code, the guarantees only 
refer to the pump including the test arrangements as 
given in 5.7. In particular, the guarantees do not apply 
to the: 


a) test of the pipe and its fittings, such as valves, etc.; 
and 


*The type number, a dimensionless quantity, is 
defined by the following formula*: 


о о" 
је 3/4 


b) general installation оп site if these parts do not 
belong to the test arrangements according to 5.7. 


The pump manufacturer is neither responsible for the 
determination of the pump guarantee point, nor for the 
arrangement of the pump and the installation on site. 
The sole exception being when he has undertaken these 
tasks as part of the order. 


4.1.2 Extent of Guarantees 


4.1.2.1 The guarantee of the flow rate covers the flow 
rate at the agreed total head and speed of rotation, 
within the permissible tolerances above and below as 
given in 9.4.1. 


4.1.2.2 The guarantee of the head covers the pump total 
head (H) at the agreed flow rate and speed of rotation, 
within the permissible tolerances above and below as 
given in 9.4.1. 


4.1.2.3 The guarantee of the efficiency covers the 
minimum value of efficiency at the guaranteed point 
QH within the permissible tolerances as given in 9.4.2. 


4.1.2.4 If the flow rate values and the efficiency stated 
are not guaranteed but are indicated on the basis of prior 


tests or are given in printed curves (for mass produced 
pumps) (see Annex В). 


4.1.2.5 For a combined motor-pump unit (for example, 
submersible pump or mono-bloc pump; or separate 
pump and motor with overall efficiency guaranteed) the 
guarantee covers efficiency of the entire unit. 


4.1.3 Implementation of Guarantees 


4.1.3.1 Flow rate and total head values 


The guarantee for flow rate and total head is fulfilled if, 
at the agreed speed of rotation, the value of the equation 
given in 9.4.1 is greater than or equal to 1. 


4.1.3.2 Efficiency 


The efficiency guarantee is fulfilled if, at the agreed 
speed of rotation, the conditions given in 9.4.2 have 
been achieved or exceeded. 


4.1.3.3 Net positive suction head (NPSH) 


When a test of NPSH is specified in the contract, the 
guarantees as defined in 4.1.3.1 and 4.1.3.2 shall be 
achieved under those conditions of NPSH that are 
specified. This does not necessarily ensure absence of 
cavitation (see7). 


4.1.3.4 Motor speed of rotation 


If the driving motor is being supplied by the pump 
manufacturer, the speed of rotation named in 4.1.2 
and 4.1.3 can be replaced by the frequency and the 
voltage. 


4.2 Purpose of the Tests 


4.2.1 Contractual Objects of the Tests 


The tests are intended to ascertain the programme of 
the pump and to compare this with the manufacturer’s 
guarantee. However, attention is drawn to the fact that 
the NPSH test in crease the cost of the test substantially. 
It shall, therefore, be specified by the purchaser in 
order/ contract, if NPSH test is to be conducted (see 
also Annex С). 


Where a number of identical pumps are to be purchased, 
and if NPSH test is specified in the contract, one pump 
shall be tested as type test, for other tests the method of 
sampling of pumps as рег 1510572 shall be followed. 


4.2.2 Range of Performance Test 


The performance test of the pump shall be carried out to 
determine the performance of the pump with respect to 
the discharged rate of flow, total head, power absorbed, 
etc. A check of the satisfactory running of the pump 
may be made from the point of view of cavitation, 
temperature of glands and bearings, axial thrust, and 
possible air or water leakage, provided the hydraulic 
test is carried out at the specified speed of rotation. 
It is also possible to observe the amount of noise and 
vibration as mentioned in 4.1.1(e) and 4.1.1(f). 


4.2.3 Liquid Used in Testing 


The liquid used in testing shall be clean cold water 
in accordance with the recommendations of 8, unless 
otherwise specified in the contract. 


5 ORGANIZATION OF TESTS 
5.1 Place of Testing 


Acceptance tests shall be carried out either at the 
manufacturer’s works or alternatively at a place to be 
mutually agreed between the manufacturer and the 
purchaser. 


5.2 Time of Testing 


The time of testing shall be mutually agreed by the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. When tests are not 
carried out in the manufacturer’s works, time should 
be allowed for preliminary adjustments by both the 
manufacturer and the installer. 


5.3 Test Validity 


It should be ascertained that conditions permit tests are 
to be made in accordance with the provisions of this 
code. 


5.4 Staff 


Accurate measurements depend not only on the quality 
of the measuring instruments used but also on the 
ability and skill of the persons operating and reading the 
measuring devices during the tests. The staff entrusted 
with effecting the measurements must be selected just 
as carefully as the instruments to be used in the test. 


Specialists with adequate experience in measuring 
operations, in general, shall be charged with operating 
and reading complicated measuring apparatus. Reading 
simple measuring devices may be entrusted to such 
helpers who, upon short prior instruction, can be 
assumed to effect the readings with proper care and the 
accuracy required. 


A chief of tests shall be appointed possessing adequate 
experience in measuring operations. Normally, when 
the test is carried out at the manufacturer’s works, the 
chief of tests is a staff member of the manufacturing 
firm. 


All persons charged with effecting the measurements 
are subordinated during the tests to the chief of tests, 
who conducts and supervises the measurements, 
reports on test conditions and the results of the tests 
and then drafts the test report. All questions arising in 
connection with the measurements and their execution 
are subject to his decision. The parties concerned shall 
provide all assistance that the chief of tests considers 
necessary. 


5.5 Test Programme 


Only the guaranteed operational data shall form the 
basis of the test. Other data determined by measurement 


IS 9137 : 2019 


during the tests shall have merely an indicative 
(informative) function and it shall be so stated if they 
are included in the programme. 


5.6 Testing Apparatus 


When the measuring procedure is being decided, the 
measuring and recording apparatus required shall be 
specified at the same time. 


The chief of tests shall be responsible for checking 
the correct installation of these apparatuses and their 
perfect functioning. 


All of the measuring apparatuses shall be covered by 
reports showing by calibration or by comparison that it 
complies with the requirements of 5.12. These reports 
shall be presented, if required. 


5.7 Test Arrangements 


5.7.1 Standard Test Arrangements 


Ideally, the flow through the inlet head measuring 
section should be such that the: 


a) velocity is uniform and axial across the section; 
and 


b) static pressure across the section is uniform. 


These are the conditions for the standard test 
arrangement, but they are impossible to achieve 
completely, and it is impracticable to check them for 
the class of test covered by this standard. 


However, significant mal-distribution and swirl can be 
avoided by keeping bends and combinations of bends, 
and divergences and discontinuities of cross-sectional 
area away from the proximity of the measuring section. 
In general, the importance of inlet flow conditions 
increases with the pump type number, and for type 
numbers greater than 1.5, it is more meaningful to 
reproduce site conditions than it is to use a standard 
test arrangement. For such non-standard conditions, 
an agreement shall be reached in the contract (see 
Annex D). 


5.7.1.1 Inlet pressure tappings 


In general, the pressure tapping shall be placed in a 
section of equal diameter, and concentric with the inlet 
branch of the pump. It should under normal conditions 
be located two diameters upstream from the pump inlet 
flange. Moreover it shall never be placed: 


a) ina diverging section, or within four diameters of 
straight pipe downstream from the divergence; 


b) within the plane of a bend, either in the bend 
itself or within four diameters of straight pipe 
downstream from the bend. It may, however, be 
agreed to site a pressure tapping in this region at 
right angles to the plane of the bend; and 


c) within four diameters of straight pipe following a 
sudden contraction or other discontinuity of cross- 


IS 9137 : 2019 


sectional area. When interpretation of readings 
in nonstandard conditions is being negotiated, 
consideration shall be given to: 


1) whether the value of inlet head itself is 
important (for example, for NPSH tests ); and 


2) the ratio of inlet velocity head to the pump 
total head. 


If this ratio is very small (less than 0.5 percent) and 
the value of inlet head itself is not important, readings 
from a tapping in the pump inlet flange may be used in 
the inlet total head equation given in 3.2.3.6 (for ratio 
20.5 percent;the readings must be taken from 
2 Dupstream ). 


5.7.1.2 Outlet pressure tappings 


Under normal conditions, the outlet pressure tapping 
should be located two diameters downstream from the 
pump outlet flange. 


For the pumps of type number equal to or less than 0.5, 
the outlet pressure tapping may be located directly at 
the pump outlet, provided it is at right angles to the 
plane of the volute or any other bend formed by the 
pump casing. 

For the pumps of type number greater than 0.5, the 
straight parallel pipe shall be coaxial with the outlet 
pipe of the pump and have the same bore. The tapping 
shall be located in the pipe wall in a plane through the 
pipe axis at right angles to the plane of the volute or 
other bend formed by the pump casing. 


5.7.2 Pumps Tested with Fittings 


If specified in the contract, standard tests shall be 
carried out on a combination of a pump and: 


a) associated fittings at the final site installation; 
b) an exact reproduction thereof; or 


c) fittings introduced for testing purposes and 
taken as forming part of the pump itself (see for 
examples,5.7.3, 5.7.4, etc,). 


Connections on the inlet and outlet sides of the whole 
combination shall be made in accordance with 5.7.1. 
Measurements shall then be taken in accordance 
with 5.11.2 and 5.11.3. 


5.7.3 Pumping Installation under Submerged 


Conditions 


Where a pump, or combination of a pump and its 
fittings, is tested or installed in conditions where the 
standard pipe connection, on either inlet or outlet 
as described in 5.7.1, cannot be made owing to 
inaccessibility or submergence, measurements shall be 
taken in accordance with 6.2.2.3 and 6.2.3.3. 


5.7.4 Borehole and Deep-well Pumps 


Borehole and deep-well pumps cannot usually be tested 
with their complete lengths of delivery main and, 
consequently the loss of head in the portions omitted 


and the power absorbed by any shafting therein, cannot 
be measured. Any thrust bearing would also be more 
lightly loaded during the test than it would be in the 
final installation (see 6.2.4.4 ). 


5.7.5 Self-priming Pumps 

In principle, the priming ability of self-priming pumps 
shall always be verified at the contractual static suction 
head with the attached inlet piping equivalent to that in 
the final installation. When the test cannot be carried 
out in the described manner, the test arrangement to be 
used shall be specified in the contract. 


5.7.6 Friction Losses at Inlet and Outlet 


The guarantees under 4.1 refer to the pump inlet and 
outlet flanges and the pressure measuring points are, 
in general, at a distance from these flanges (5.7.1 
to 5.7.5). It may be necessary to add the measured 
pump total head the head losses due to friction (H,, and 
H,) between the measuring points and the pump 
flanges. 


Such a correction should be applied, only if : 
H,, + H,, = 0.0005 H 


J2 — 


Ifthe pipe between the measuring points and the flanges 
is unobstructed, straight, and of constant circular cross 
section, 


iut 
D2g 


The value of à should be derived from: 


A sim E LE | 
МА "LReJA 3.1D 


k _ pipe roughness 


- (pure number) 
D pipe diameter 


Annex E gives guidance on how to check whether a 
correction needs to be made, and on how to calculate 
the correction if necessary. If the pipe is other than 
unobstructed, straight, and of constant circular cross 
section, the correction to be applied must be the subject 
of special agreement in the contract. 


5.8 Speed of Rotation During Test (see 4.2.2) 


The difference between the specified speed of 
rotation and the test speed of rotation may be allowed 
n—nsp 
as ( ——— ) 
nsp 


5.8.1 For Flow Rate and Head — +20 percent 
-50 percent 


5.8.2 For Efficiency — + 20 percent 


For a combined motor-pump unit, the motor efficiency 
change between specified and test speeds shall be 
established at the time of agreeing the contract. The 
lower speeds are also acceptable. The following 
formula for efficiency correction shall be applied: 


l-n; (8) 
1-1 N, 


Where, 
n, = efficiency at actual test speed; 
п, = efficiency at specified speed; 
N.— specified speed; 
М- actual test speed; and 
п- exponent established by test data, the value of 


the exponent is 0.17. 


5.8.3 For (NPSH) Tests 


+ 20 percent provided that the pump flow rate during 
the test lies within 50 percent and 120 percent of the 
flow rate corresponding to maximum efficiency. 


NOTE — For tests conforming to the requirements of 7.1.1.1, 
the above-mentioned variation may always be allowed. For 
tests conforming to the requirements of 7.1.1.2, it may be 
allowed for pumps with type numbers less than or equal to 2. 
For pumps with type numbers greater than 2, agreement shall 
be reached between the parties concerned. 


5.9 Control of Head 


The test conditions may be obtained, among other 
methods, by throttling in either or both the inlet and 
outlet pipes. When throttling in the inlet pipe is used, 
due consideration shall be given to the possibility of 
cavitation or of air coming out of the water, which 
might affect the operation of the pump (see 7.1.2). The 
flow measuring device (see 6.1.3 — 4th paragraph) or 
both. 


5.10 Execution of Tests 


The duration of the test shall be sufficient to obtain 
consistent results having regard to the degree of 
accuracy to be achieved. 


Where, multiple readings are taken to reduce the error 
margin (see 5.11), they shall be taken at equal intervals 
of time. 


Where, for special reasons, it is necessary to determine 
performance over a range of operating conditions, 
a sufficient number of observations shall be taken to 
establish the performance within the limits of error 
stated in 5.11. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


АП measurements shall be made under steady 
conditions of operation as defined in 5.11. If steady 
conditions are not achievable, agreement shall be made 
between the parties concerned on the matter. 


If the driving power available during a test on a testing 
stand is insufficient, and if the test has to be carried 
out at greatly reduced speed of rotation, the guaranteed 
characteristics can be adjusted to such reduced speed 
of rotation in accordance with 5.8.1, 5.8.2, 5.8.3, 9.2.1 
or 9.2.2 respectively. 


To verify the guarantee point, three measurements shall 
be recorded. One as close as possible to the guarantee 
point and one closely on each side of it. 


The test records shall be kept with two copies (one for 
the purchaser and one for the manufacturer).All test 
records and recording strips shall be initialed by the 
chief of tests and the representatives of both parties. 


The evaluation of the test results shall be made, as far 
as possible, while the tests are in progress and, in any 
case, before the installation and instrumentation are 
dismantled in order that suspect measurements can be 
repeated without delay ( see also Annex C). 


5.11 Test Conditions 


See also Annex F and Annex G. 


5.11.1 Definitions 


Forthe purpose ofthis standard the following definitions 
given in 5.11.1.1 and 5.11.1.2 shall apply. 


5.11.1.1 Oscillations — Short oscillation cycles about 
a mean value occurring during the time that a single 
Observation 1s being made. 


5.11.1.2 Variations — Those changes in value, which 
take place between one reading and the next. 


5.11.2 Permissible Oscillations in Readings and Use of 
Damping 

Where the construction or operation of a pump is 
such that oscillations of great amplitude are present, 
measurements may be carried out by means of an 
instrument capable of providing integration over 
at least one complete cycle of oscillation. The 
calibration of such an instrument shall comply with 
the provisions of the appropriate clauses. Restricted 
damping may be introduced in measuring instruments 
and their connecting lines where necessary to reduce 
the amplitude of oscillations within the values given 
in Table 4. Where it is possible that damping will 
significantly affect the accuracy of the readings, the 
tests shall be repeated using a symmetrical damping 
device, for example, a symmetrical orifice or capillary 
tube. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Table 4 Maximum Permissible Amplitude of 
Oscillations as a Percentage of Mean Value 
of Quantity Being Measured 


( Clauses 5.11.2 and 5.11.3.1 ) 


SI No. Measured Quantity Maximum Permissible 
Amplitude of Oscillations 
() (2) (3) 
i) Rate of flow head torque +6 
power 
ii) Speed of rotation +2 
NOTES: 


1 Where a 6 percent change in flow would result in a calculated 
12 percent change in head, the maximum permissible amplitude 
of the observed differential head shall be + 12 percent. 


2 In the case of inlet total pressure head and outlet total pressure 
head measurement, the permissible percentage oscillation shall 
be calculated on the pump total head. 


5.11.3 Number of Sets of Observations 
5.11.3.1 Steady conditions 


In steady and well controlled test conditions, only 
one set of readings of individual quantities shall be 
recorded for the specified test condition. This set shall 
be recorded only after the observers have been satisfied 
that the oscillations and variations of the readings have 
settled down within the limits specified in Table 4 and 
Table 5. 


Table 5 Limits of Variation between Repeated 
Measurements of the Same Quantity 
(Based on 95 Percent Confidence Limits) 


[ Clauses 5.11.3.1 and 5.11.3.2 (b) ] 


Number of Sets | Maximum Permissible Difference Between 
of Observations Largest and Smallest Readings of Each 
Quantity 
Rate of flow Speed of Rotation 
Head 
Torque 
Power 
Efficiency 
3 1.8 1.0 
5 3.5 2.0 
7 4.5 2.7 
9 5.8 3:3 


5.11.3.2 Unsteady conditions 


In such cases where the unsteadiness of test conditions 
gives rise to doubts concerning the accuracy of the 
tests, the following procedure shall be followed: 


a) Repeated sets of observations of the measured 
quantities shall be made at the guarantee point, 
only speed and temperature being allowed to 
be controlled. Throttle valve water level, gland, 
balance water, settings, etc, shall be left completely 


10 


unaltered. The differences between these repeated 
readings of the same quantities will be a measure 
of the unsteadiness of the test conditions, which 
are at least partly influenced by the pump under 
test as well as the installation. 


Minimum of three sets of observations shall be 
taken at the guarantee point. The value of each 
separate measurement and of the efficiency 
derived from the measurements in each set shall 
be recorded. The percentage difference between 
the largest and smallest values of each quantity 
shall not be greater than that given in Table 5. It 
will be noted that a wider tolerance is permitted 
if the number of readings 1s increased upto the 
maximum requirement of nine readings. 


b) 


These tolerances are designed to ensure that 
the errors due to scatter, taken together with the 
systematic error limits given in Table 6, will result 
in overall measurement errors not greater than 
those given in Table 7. 


c) 


The arithmetic mean ofall the readings for each quantity 
shall be taken as the actual value for the purposes of the 
test. 


If the values given in Table 5 cannot be reached, the 
cause shall be ascertained, the conditions rectified and 
a new complete set of observations made, that is, all the 
readings in the original set shall be rejected. No reading 
or selection of readings in the set of observations may 
be rejected because it lies outside the limits. 


In the case where the excessive variation is not due 
to procedure or instrumentation errors, and cannot 
therefore be eliminated, the limits of error may be 
calculated by statistical analysis. 


Table 6 Permissible Systematic Errors of 
Measuring Instruments 


[ Clauses 5.11.3.2 (c) and 5.1121 


SI Measured Quantity Permissible Limit, 
No. Percent 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Rate of flow #25 
Pump total head 
Pump power input 
ii) Electrical power input (for +2.0 
overall efficiency tests) 
Motor efficiency 
iii) Speed of rotation +14 


5.12 Accuracy of Measurement 


The limits of measurement errors laid down in this 
standard are those which refer to measurements taken 
and to quantities calculated there from. They apply 
to the maximum permissible discrepancies between 
measured and actual performances (see 9.4 ). 


For the purpose of this standard, an “error” is defined as 
a value equal to twice the estimated standard deviation. 
It is assumed that there is a 95 percent probability that 
the estimated value of the true error will not exceed 
twice the estimated standard deviation. 


This test code specifies the standard methods of 
measurement and instruments to be used for the 
determination of rate of flow, inlet total head, outlet 
total head, pump total head, speed of rotation and 
pump power input. Any device or method which, by 
calibration or comparison, has been demonstrated 
to be capable of measuring with systematic errors 
not exceeding the limits in Table 6 may be used. The 
devices or methods shall be agreed upon by both the 
parties concerned. 


If the recommendations concerning the systematic 
errors of instruments as given in Table 6, and those 
concerning the actual test procedure, are followed, it 
should be assumed that the overall limits of error will 
not exceed those given in Table 7. 


Table 7 Maximum Permissible Limits of Overall 
Errors 


[ Clauses 5.11.3.2 (с) and 5.12 ] 


SI No. Quantity Permissible 
Limit, Percent 
a) (2) (3) 

i) Rate of flow 335 
Pump total head 
Pump power input Electrical power 
input (for overall efficiency tests) 

ii) Speed of rotation %2.0 

iii) Overall efficiency (computed from + 4.5 
the rate of flow, total head and 
electrical power ) 

iv) Pump efficiency +5.0 


6 PROCEDURE FOR MEASUREMENT 
OF RATE OF FLOW, HEAD, SPEED OF 
ROTATION AND POWER INPUT 


The following methods, among others, may be used. 
6.1 Measurement of Flow Rate 


6.1.1 Weighing Tank Method 


This method is capable only for measuring the mean 
value of the flow rate during the period concerned. It 
is subjected to errors of the weighing, time measuring 
apparatus employed, time taken for the diversion of 
the flow into and from the weighing tank and those 
involved in the determination of density. 
NOTE — In the case where two tanks are used alternately 
during the measuring period, the flow being diverted from 
one to the other, only the times of initial diversion into and 
final diversion from the measuring system shall be taken into 
account, not the times of the intermediate diversions from tank 
to tank. 


11 


IS 9137 : 2019 


6.1.2 Volumetric Tank Method 


This method, as in the case of the weighing method, is 
only capable of measuring the mean value of the flow 
rate during the period concerned. 


In every case, a leakage test of the tank shall be carried 
out and correction made for leakage, if necessary. 
Where possible, initial calibration shall be carried out by 
weighing a liquid of known density into the measuring 
tank. Outdoor tanks shall be adequately sheltered so 
that the level and the level measuring devices are not 
disturbed by wind or rain. 


In the case of big outdoor tanks the method is, in general 
subject to errors in measurement of levels which are 
not stationary and which may be non-uniform. In such 
a case, the levels shall be simultaneously measured 
within stilling tubes at not fewer than four widely 
separated positions within the tank. 


Water levels may be measured with hook gauges, float 
gauges, piezometer or other instruments capable of 
maintaining the required accuracy. 


6.1.3 Orifice Plates, Venturi Tubes and Nozzles 


The measurement of flow rate may be carried out 
using devices designed and installed in accordance 
with IS14615 (Part 1)/ISO 5167-1 for orifice plates, 
nozzles and venturi tubes. Minimum straight lengths 
required upstream from the pressure difference device 
especially, are given IS 14615 (Part 1). 


For the purpose of this standard, the pump will be 
considered to cause a flow disturbance equivalent to a 
single 90° bend lying in the same plane as the pump 
volute or the last stage of a multistage pump or the 
outlet bend of the pump. 


The characteristics of these devices are calculated 
using IS 14615 (Part 1) and the calibration is not 
required. 


Care shall be taken to ensure that neither cavitation nor 
air is present in the flow measuring devices. Special 
care shall be taken to ensure that the indications 
of the device are not affected by air coming out of 
solution at the control valve. The presence of air 
can usually be detected by operating the air vents on 
the measuring device. Manometers used for 
differential pressure measurement shall be of the 
liquid column type and shall meet the requirements 
of 6.2.6. 


6.1.4 Notches,Weirs and Flumes 


The detail pertaining to methods of measurement are 
given in IS 6062, IS 6063 and IS 9108. 


For the purposes of this standard the smallest scale 
division of any instrument used for observing head 
shall be not greater than that corresponding to 1.5 
percent of the flow. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


6.2 Measurement of Head 


6.2.1 Pressure Tappings and Instrument Connecting 
Lines 


Static pressure tappings shall comply with the 
requirements shown in Fig. | and be free from burrs 
and irregularities and flush with and normal to the inner 
wall of the pipe. 


The diameter of the pressure tappings shall be between 2 
and 6 mm or equal to 1/10 of the pipe diameter, 
whichever is less. The length of a pressure tapping hole 
shall be not less than twice its diameter. 


The bore of the pipe containing the tappings shall be 
clean, smooth and resistant to chemical reaction with 
the liquid being pumped. Any coating, such as paint 
applied to the bore shall be intact. If the pipe is welded 
longitudinally, the tapping hole shall be displaced as far 
as possible from the weld. 


Pipes connecting pressure tappings to possible damping 
devices (see 5.11.2) and instruments shall be atleast 
equal in bore to the bore of the pressure tappings. The 
system shall be free from leaks. 


It is recommended that transparent tubing be used so 
as to allow determination of the amount of water or air 
in the tubing. 


6.2.2 Inlet Total Head 


6.2.2.1 Installation in accordance with 5.7.1.1 


These installations and the corresponding formulae are 
given in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 


6.2.2.2 Installation in accordance with 5.7.2 


Where a pump is tested in combination with fittings 
forming part of the site or test installation, the 
provisions of 6.2.2.1 shall be applied to the inlet flange 
of the fittings and not to the inlet flange of the pump. 


This procedure debits against the pump all head losses 
caused by fittings on the inlet side. 


6.2.2.3 Installations in accordance with 5.7.3 and 5.7.4 


The inlet total head is equal to the positional head with 
respect to the reference plane of the still surface of the 
liquid in which the pump is tested or from which it 
draws plus the pressure head equivalent to the gauge 
pressure on that surface. 


This assumption debits against the pump all head losses 
caused by fittings on the inlet side. 


6.2.3 Outlet Total Head 


6.2.3.1 Installations in accordance with 5.7.1.2 


These installations and the corresponding formulae are 
given in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 


6.2.3.2 Installations in accordance with 5.7.2 


Where a pump is tested in combination with fittings 
forming part of the site or test installation, the provisions 
of 6.2.3.1 shall be applied to the outlet flange of the 
fittings and not to the outlet flange of the pump. 


This procedure debits against the pump all head losses 
caused by fittings on the outlet side. 


6.2.3.3 Installations in accordance with 5.7.3 and 5.7.4 


These installations and the corresponding formulae are 
given in Fig. 4. However, if the pump discharges into a 
sump with a free surface, the outlet total head is equal 
to the positional head of the still surface of the liquid 
into which the pump delivers, plus the gauge pressure 
head. This assumption debits against the pump all head 
losses caused by fittings on the outlet side. 


6.2.4 Total Inlet and Outlet Heads — Special Cases 


It will prove necessary to permit exceptions from 
the above-mentioned standard arrangements in the 
following cases. 


6.2.4.1 Pumps conforming to the final site installation 


During the acceptance test, the pump shall be fitted 
with the pipe arrangements corresponding to the final 
arrangement at site. In this case, the friction losses 


THIN WALL 


L 22d where d= 2 to 6 mm ог 45 pipe diameter whichever value is the less 


Fic. 1 REQUIREMENTS FOR STATIC HEAD TAPPINGS 


12 


between the test point for measuring the inlet pressure 
and the inlet flange as well as between the outlet 
flange and the test point, for measuring the outlet 
pressure, shall be determined in accordance with the 
method mentioned in 5.7.6 and added to the sum of 
the differences of positional head of pressure head and 
velocity head. 


6.2.4.2 Pumps with inaccessible ends 


If the inlet or outlet or both sides of the pump are 
inaccessible, the procedure prescribed above shall be 
followed in measuring the pump’s head. Under certain 
circumstances, friction losses, such as mentioned in 
5.7.6 and 6.2.4.1, shall be taken into account. 


2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
(See ) 


2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
(SEE 


POSITION OF 
REFERENCE PLANE 


b) The pump inlet is under pressure 


POSSIBLE RESIDUE OF 
PUMPED LIQUID p 


2 PIPE DIAMETERS 


IS 9137 : 2019 


6.2.4.3 Submersible pumps 


If the outlet flange of this type of pump is, for practical 
purposes, defined as placed at a certain distance from 
the pump proper, and is thus preceded by an outlet pipe 
length and a bend or bends being always parts of the 
installation, the measurement of outlet head shall be 
made in accordance with 5.7.2. 


6.2.4.4 Deep-well pumps 


In this case, friction losses between the pressure 
measuring points and the inlet or outlet flanges, 
respectively, that may have to be taken into account, 
shall be determined in accordance with the method 
given in 5.7.6 and Annex E. Friction losses on suction 


02 
2g 


pM; 
p 

On the figure: 
22.150 

72.2>0 


H2 = 42.1 + 222% 


Рм 


p 
2 4 2 
pm LL 
d POSITION OF 
P d 


REFERENCE PLANE 


рм" 


p 


02 
Hie 77212 ex + 41+ АМАЛ 


On the figure: 
71.2>0 

72.2>0 

AZ1.1 always < 0 


pM, 0; 
Н = 214 + 1-42 + 
1-2 p 242 2g 


(SEE ) 
On the figure: 
Z1.1>0 
71.2>0 
АІК УЕМТ 
2 НЕ. — TUBE CONTAINING 
Ра MANOMETRIC LIQUID 


TUBE CONTAINING 
PUMPED LIQUID 


TUBE CONTAINING AIR 


The drawings show the principle but no full technical details. 


Fic. 2 TEST OF A CENTRIFUGAL Pump BY MEANS OF LIQUID COLUMN GAUGES 


13 


IS 9137 : 2019 


ATMOSPHERIC 
А REFERENCE 
PLANE 


2 PIPE DIAMETERS 


(SEE 5.7.1.2) . PRESSURE 
READING Р, 
GAUGE REFERENCE 
PLANE 
PRESSURE 
READING 


2 PIPE DIAMETERS. 
(SEE 57-44 


H = ae эне 
V1 У P i 1 p 29 
POSITION OF ~ a 19 
REFERENCE PLANE s On the figure 
P1 >0 


b) The pump inlet is under vacuum SED 


2 
.PRESSURE Н; = p1 2. V4 
READING P4 


On the figure 
P1 >0 
22 »0 


2 PIPE DIAMETERS 
(SEE 5.7.1.1) 


TUBE CONTAINING 
PUMPED LIQUID 


C) The pump inlet is under pressure ——— TUBE CONTAINING AIR 


The drawings show the principle but no full technical details. 
Fic. 3 Test оғ A CENTRIFUGAL Pump By MEANS OF BOURDON GAUGES 


14 


IS 9137 : 2019 


A, = 2, 
2 
Н,- Jug a + v2 
P28 
2 
Ho tZ +2 
P28 2g 
PRESSURE PRESSURE 
а Ао READING 
M. Cr e 
Ж "AZ 
12 
\/ 
22 
REFERENCE 
Z4 PLANE 
= REFERENCE 
= ! | PLANE 
Wa 
(a) (b) 


The drawings show the principle 


but not full technical details. 


Fic. 4 MEASUREMENT OF Pump ToTAL HEAD H FOR VARIOUS TYPES OF SUBMERGED PUMPS 


are primarily caused by resistance to flow within the 
inlet strainer, the foot valve, and the inlet pipe. All of 
these head losses shall, as far as possible,be indicated at 
the time the contract is made by the pump manufacturer 
if he supplies such accessories or by the purchaser if 
they are fitted by the latter. Should it prove impossible 
to submit such data, the purchaser and the manufacturer, 
prior to the acceptance test, shall arrive at an agreement 
concerning the flow resistance data to be applied. 


Friction losses at outlet result from resistance to flow 
within the column pipe and the outlet bend. 


Since deep-well pumps, in general are not tested with 
the entire stand pipe attached, unless the acceptance 
test is performed at site. The pipe friction losses in 
regard to the pump total head shall be estimated and 


15 


stated by the manufacturer to his purchaser ‘should it 
be considered necessary to verify the data indicated by 
an acceptance test at site, such a test shall be specified 
in the supply contract.’ 


For tests on installations conforming to the requirements 
of 5.7.2, 5.7.3 and 5.7.4, the guarantees also apply to 
fittings. 


6.2.5 Pump Total Head 


The pump total head is calculated in accordance with 
the definition given in 3.2.3.8. However, in certain 
cases the pump total head may be measured using one 
differential pressure device. 


This type of installation and the corresponding formulae 
are given in Fig. 5. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


2 


н- Ри P AH} 


ГД 22 


This equation is valid for p, = p,, which may be assumed for Class C tests. 


Fic. 5 DIRECT MEASUREMENT OF Pump ToTAL HEAD 


When this is deemed preferable, the pump total head 
may be replaced by an expression giving the increase 
in specific energy of the fluid conveyed by the pump 
(y = gH, see 3.2.3.9). 

The ‘specific energy’ increase is obtained by multiplying 
both sides of the pump total head equation given above 
by g. 


6.2.6 Instruments for Pressure Measurement 


6.2.6.1 Liquid column manometers 
No calibration is required. 


The minimum distance between two scale graduations 
shall be 1 mm. 


If possible, the use of differential liquid columns 
less than 50 mm high shall be avoided. If this is 
impossible, attention shall be specially drawn to errors 
of measurement. 


The length of the liquid column may be modified by 
using one manometric liquid in place of another. 


16 


For reading below 100 mm of liquid, the bore of 
manometer tubes shall be 6 mm at least for mercury 
and 10 mm for water and other liquids. 


The cleanliness of the liquid in the manometer shall be 
maintained to avoid errors due to variation of surface 
tension. 


The design of the manometers shall be such that 
parallax errors are minimized. 


Water column manometers may be either open ended 
(for low pressure measurement only) or closed with the 
air in the column connecting both limbs compressed to 
the amount required to permit the differential head to be 
read on the scale. 


The use of the liquid column manometer is shown 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2 and Fig. 5, to which 
reference should be made. 


Connections between the pipes where pressure is 
measured and the manometer shall be made as shown 
diagrammatically in Fig. 2. 


It is essential that there is no break in continuity 
(for example, by air pockets through failure to vent 
properly) of the water between the pipe and the reading 
surface in the manometer. 


6.2.6.2 Bourdon dial gauges 


When this type of gauge is used for inlet and outlet 
pressure measurements, to ascertain pump total head, 
it is recommended that the difference between two 
consecutive scale graduations be within 1.5 and 3 mm for 
both measurements and that this difference corresponds 
to not more than 5 percent of the pump total head. 


6.3 Measurement of the Speed of Rotation 


The speed of rotation shall be measured by counting 
revolutions for a measured interval of time by a direct 
indicating tachometer, in case of a pump driven by an 
a.c. motor, from observations of the mean frequency 
and motor slip data either directly measured (for 
example, using a stroboscope) or supplied by the motor 
manufacturer. 


Where the speed of rotation cannot be directly measured 
(for example, for immersed pumps), it is usually 
sufficient to establish the frequency and voltage. 


6.4 Measurement of Pump Power Input 


The pump power input shall be derived from 
measurement of the speed of rotation and torque or 
determined from measurements of the electrical power 
input to an electric motor of known efficiency directly 
coupled to the pump. 


6.4.1 Measurement of Torque 


Torque shall be measured by a suitable dynamometer 
capable of complying with the requirements of 5.11. 


6.4.2 Electric Power Measurements 


Where the electrical power input to an electric motor 
coupled directly to the pump is used as a means of 
determining the pump power input, the following 
conditions shall be observed: 


a) The motor shall be operated only at conditions 
where the efficiency is known with sufficient 
accuracy. 


b) Motor efficiency shall be determined in accordance 
with the recommendations of IS 4889. 


The electric power input to the driving motor shall be 
measured by the two-wattmeter method in the case of 
a.c. motors. This allows the use of two single-element 
watt meters or one double-element wattmeter or one 
single-element wattmeter and suitable switches. 


In the case of a d.c. motor, either a wattmeter or an 
ampere meter and a voltmeter may be used. 


The type and grade of accuracy of the indicating 
instruments for measuring electrical power shall be in 
accordance with IS 12481. 


17 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Where the power input to an electric motor coupled to 
an intermediate gear, or the speed of rotation and torque 
measured by a dynamometer between gear and motor, 
are used as a means for determining the guaranteed 
pump power input, it shall be stated in the contract in 
what way the losses of the gear shall be determined. 


6.4.3 Pumps with Inaccessible Ends 


In the case of combined motor-pump units (for example, 
submersible pump or monobloc pump or separate 
pump and motor with overall efficiency guaranteed), 
the power of the machine unit shall be measured at the 
motor terminals, if accessible. When a submersible 
pump is involved, the measurement shall be effected 
at the incoming end of the cables. Cable losses shall 
be taken into account and specified in the contract. 
The efficiency given shall be that of the combined unit 
proper excluding the cable and the starter losses. 


6.4.4 Deep-well Pumps 


In this case, the power absorbed by the thrust bearing 
and the vertical shafting and bearings shall be taken 
into account, since deep-well pumps, in general, are 
not tested with the entire stand pipe attached, unless 
the acceptance test is performed at site, the thrust 
and vertical shaft bearing losses in regard to power 
and efficiency shall be estimated and stated by the 
manufacturer to his purchaser. 


6.5 Measurement of Pumping Unit Efficiency 


To determine the efficiency of a pumping unit, only the 
power input and output are measured with the driver 
working under conditions specified in the contract. In 
this test, the proportion of losses between driving agent 
and pump is not established nor any losses associated 
with intermediate machinery, such as gear box or 
variable speed device. 


6.6 Measurement of Vibration and Noise 


6.6.1 The acceptable vibration limits of the pump shall 
be as per its applicable standards and specifications 
except for reciprocating engines. In case of pump 
driven by reciprocating engines, the vibration limits 
shall be mutually agreed upon by purchaser, pump 
vendor and engine supplier. 


6.6.2 If specified, the noise measurements shall be 
performed as agreed between the purchaser and the 
pump vendor. 


7 CAVITATION TESTING 


7.1 General 


When the contracts specifies that NPSH test shall be 
conducted to verify whether NPSH required by the 
pump is equal to or less than the specified/guaranteed 
NPSH. One of the test method as specified in 7.1.1 
shall be adopted to conduct NPSH test. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


In no case shall cavitation test be used to check that the 
pumps shall be free from cavitational erosion during its 
service life. 


7.1.1 Test Types 
There are two distinct possible types of cavitation test: 


a) A check may be made simply to show that the 
pump is sufficiently free of cavitation at the 
specified duty and NPSH. This type of test is 
described in 7.1.1.1. 


In the other type, cavitation performance 18 
explored more fully by reducing NPSH until 
measurable effects are noted. This type of test is 
described in 7.1.1.2. 


7.1.1.1 A test at the specified flow rate and NPSH. The 
pump characteristic can be assumed to be free from the 
effects of cavitation if, another test at a higher NPSH 
gives the same total head at the same rate of flow. 


b) 


7.1.1.2 A safety margin to be agreed in the contract 
shall be added to NPSH which causes a drop of (3+ x) 
percent in total head or efficiency at a given rate of flow, 
or in rate of flow or efficiency at a given total head. 
From this test the behaviour of the pump at various 
departures from the specified NPSH may be judged. 


TO VACUUM OR 
PRESSURE CONTROL 


SPRAY NOZZLE 


THROTTLE VALVE 


STILLING SCREENS MAY BE 
NEEDED IF V > 0.25 m/s 


The value of x shall be x = 


The resulting NPSH shall be equal to or less than the 
required NPSH. 


When negotiating the safety margin, account shall be 
taken of the type of pumps, of the number of stages, 
of the physical properties of the liquid to be pumped 
and of materials of construction and the operating 
conditions to be expected. 


7.1.2 Methods of Varying the (NPSH) 


The following methods may be used: 


7.1.2.1 The pump is installed in a closed pipe loop (see 
Fig. 6) in which the pressure level or, by an alteration 
of temperatures, the vapour pressure may be varied 
without changing the pump head or rate of flow until 
cavitation occurs in the pump. 


Cavitation in outlet and inlet regulating valves may 
make this test more difficult and special valves may be 
required. 


Arrangements for cooling or heating the liquid in the 
loop may be needed in order to maintain the required 
temperature, and a gas separation tank may also be 


FOR 


DE-AERATING WATER 


THE SETTLING TANK MAY NOT BE 
NEEDED IF AIR CONTENT OF WATER 
ISCONTROLLABLE 


FLOWMETER 


COOLING OR 
HEATING COIL 


PUMP UNDER TEST MAY BE PUT IN 
SYPHON IF (NPSH) < W IS NEEDED 


Pump under test may be put in siphon if NPSH< W is needed. 


NOTE — Cooling by means of a coil may be replaced by an injection of cool water above the liquid free surface and an extraction of 
heated water. The drawing shows the principle but not full technical details. 


Fic. 6 CavrrATION TESTS — VARIATION OF (NPSH) By Means oF A CLOsED Loop (See Ес. 1, Fi6.2 AND Fic. 3) 


18 


required. The tank shall be of sufficient size and so 
designed as to prevent the entrainment of gas in the 
pump inlet flow. 


De-aeration of water used for a cavitation test is 
necessary if the pump is to be used in practice with de- 
aerated water. 


Stilling screens may be needed if 5 0.25 m/s, where 


A is the cross-sectional area of the tank. 


7.1.2.2 The pump draws liquid through an unobstructed 
suction pipe from a sump in which the level of the free 
liquid surface may be adjusted (see Fig. 7). 


7.1.2.3 The pressure of the liquid entering the pump is 
adjusted by means of a throttle valve installed in the 
inlet pipe at the lowest practical level (see Fig. 8). 


Cavitation in the flow through a throttle valve can 
sometimes be prevented by using two or more throttle 
devices connected in series or by arranging for the 
throttle valve to discharge directly into a closed vessel 
or a large diameter pipe interposed between the throttle 
and the pump inlet. Baffles and a means for extracting 
air from such a vessel may be needed, especially when 
the NPSH is low. 


When the throttle valve is to be partially closed and it 
is situated at a distance of less than 12 inlet diameters 
from the pump inlet flange, it is necessary to make sure 
that the pipe is full of liquid at the position of the inlet 
pressure tappings. 


BEL 


ADJUSTABLE 
WATER LEVEL 


The drawing shows the principle but not full technical details 


FiG.7 CAVITATION TESTS — VARIATION OF NPSH 
CONTROL OF NPSH By CONTROL or LIQUED LEVEL 
At INLET (SEE Fic. 1 AND Fic. 2) 


TO THROTTLE 
VALVE AND 
FLOWMETER 


IS 9137 : 2019 


7.2 Determination of NPSH Required by the Pump 


Tests described in 7.1.1.2 can be conducted by 
any of the methods indicated in Fig. 6 to Fig. 8. 
However, test as per Fig. 8 is more practicable and 
is recommended for normal commercial testing 
of industrial pumps. By this method, the measured 
value of NPSH required by the pump is generally 
higher than what would be expected under simulated 
conditions (see also Fig. 9). 


7.3 Limits of Error in Determination of Specified 
NPSH 


The maximum limits of error concerning specified 
(NPSH) measurements shall be: 


a) 5.3 percent of the measured NPSH, or 
b) 0.2 m. 


Whichever is the greater, provided that the 
measurements are made with a liquid column 
manometer. The case of tests with liquids at high 
temperature or near their critical points should be 
studied with special care in the contract. 


7.4 Measurement of Pump Head, Outlet Flow Rate, 
Speed of Rotation, Power Input (If Necessary) and 
Vapour Pressure 


The requirements of 6 regarding the measurement of 
head, outlet rate of flow, speed of rotation and power 
input shall also apply during cavitation tests. If the 
test conditions are so unsteady as to require repeated 


The drawing shows the principle but not full technical details 


Fic. 8 CAVITATION TESTS — VARIATION Or NPSH ву 
MEANS OF A THROTTLE VALVE AT INLET 
(SEE Fic. 1 AND Fic. 2 ) 


IS 9137 : 2019 


readings, variations of specified NPSH are permitted 
up to a maximum of: 


a) 1.5 times the values given for head in Table 5, or 
b) 0.2 m whichever is greater. 


Particular care is needed to ensure that, in the flow 
measurement, cavitation does not affect the accuracy of 
the flowmeter. It is also necessary to take care to avoid 
the ingress of air through joints and glands. 


The vapour pressure of the test liquid entering the 
pump shall be determined with sufficient accuracy 
to comply with 7.3. When the vapour pressure is 
derived from standard data and the measurement of 
the temperature of the liquid entering the pump, the 
necessary accuracy of temperature measurement may 
have to be demonstrated. 


The active element of a temperature measuring probe 
shall be not less than 1/8 of the inlet pipe diameter 
from the well of the inlet pipe. If the immersion of the 
temperature-measuring element in the inlet flow is less 
than that required by the instrument manufacturer, then 
a calibration at that immersion depth may be required. 


Care shall be taken to ensure that the temperature 
measuring probes inserted into the pump inlet pipe do 
not influence the measurements of inlet pressure. 


8 TESTS ON PUMPS FOR LIQUIDS OTHER 
THAN CLEAN COLD WATER 


The performance of a pump may vary substantially 
with the nature of the liquid being pumped. Although, 


20 


it is not possible to give general rules whereby 
performance with clean cold water can be used to 
predict performance with another liquid, it is often 
desirable for the parties to agree on empirical rules to 
suit the particular circumstances and test the pump with 
clean cold water. 


8.1 Characteristics of Clean Cold Water 


The characteristics of the water corresponding to what 
is called in this standard ‘ clean cold water ‘ shall 
be within the limits indicated in Table 8. The total 
dissolved and free gas content of the water shall not 
exceed the saturation volume corresponding for: 
a) an open circuit to the pressure and temperature in 
the pump sump; and 


b) aclosed loop, to those existing in the tank. 


Table 8 Specification of ‘Clean Cold Water’ 
( Clause 8.1 ) 


Characteristic Unit Max. 
Temperature °С 40 
Viscosity m/s 1.75 x 10° 
Mass density kg/m? 1100 
Non-absorbent free solid content kg/m? 2.5 
Dissolved solid content kg/m? 50 


2019 


IS 9137 


змаоваа (X + CN) = H / HV хоз (HSdN) азчпояу ONININATLAC, 40 Ѕаоніяу 6 7914 


(HSdN) 


- ди и ЗАО) 
О = 1SNOD = O оцѕмәјовлецо (HSdN) 
%(X+E) Н H әліп? 
9 
1SNOO = О моя (HSdN) J - H x xe) опвројовлецо) puo 
(долр 0} ѕш8ә9 
peoy uouA ‘eI 
(HSdN) мор 10215000 10)) (HSdN) рвәц “(әуел [PA9] 102009 
UOTJEJIAEO IPI мор AJLA MOIY јәрпо мор јие15000 10} ) ( HSdN ) лојем *( HSdN ) Тәлә] лојем “ HSIN ) uo juopuedop st yoryM Jo 
jo 19510 IOV peoH ( HSdN ) ‘PLH әлүел opio PMO *oje1 мор “реон *oje1 мор ‘PLH *oje1 мор *peoH чопеџел әш sornguen() 


ѕәлүел IOI} 


(o1nsso1d 
anode ) 
олпјелод шој, 


dooq 10 
dung poso[j 


зорпо pue јој 


omnssoud 
оополојом 


dooT 
poso[5 


oyel MOJA 


yur} əy} ur o1sso1q 


доо peso[j? 


oyel MOJA 


олјел INOI} JOTUT 


dung изо 


вӘЛІРА Ooy} 
jepno pue jo[up 


[әлә 19M 


dung usdo 


әлүел JOIN} JOTUT 


олтел IOI јодпо 


dung uədo 


ƏAJLA IOI јодпо 


OATLA VOI} JOTUT 


dung uodo 


30215009) 


ојдеџе juopuedopug 


чопејјеј5иј 
jo edÁT, 


21 


IS 9137 : 2019 


8.2 Characteristics of Liquids for which Clean Cold 
Water Tests are Acceptable 


Pumps for liquids other than clean cold water may be 
tested for head, flow rate and efficiency with clean cold 
water if the liquid is within the specification given in 
Table 9. 


Table 9 Characteristics of Liquids Accepted 
as ‘Clean Cold Water’ 


( Clause 8.2 ) 
SI Characteristics of Unit Min. Max. 
No. Liquids 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Viscosity 112/5 No limit 10 x 10% 
ii) Mass density kg/m? 450 2 000 
iii) Non-absorbent free kg/m’? = 5.0 


solids content 


The total dissolved and free gas content of the liquid 
shall not exceed the saturation volume corresponding 
for: 


a) an open circuit, to the pressure and temperature in 
the pump sump; and 


b) a closed loop, to those existing in the tank. 


Tests on pumps for liquids other than those specified 
above shall be subjected to special agreement. 


In the absence of a special agreement, cavitation tests 
shall be carried out with clean cold water. Attention is 
drawn to the fact that the results may be affected by this 
procedure when the liquid to be pumped is not clean 
cold water. 


9 ANALYSIS OF TESTS 


9.1 Test Data Required for the Analysis 


The quantities required to verify the characteristics 
guaranteed by the manufacturer are given in 4.1. 
Methods for measuring these quantities are given in 6. 


9.2 Translation of the Test Result to the Guarantee 
Basis 


Such translation serves to determine whether the 
guarantee would have been fulfilled if the tests had 
been conducted under the same conditions as those on 
which the guarantee is based. 


9.2.1 Translation of the Test Results into Data Based on 
the Specified Speed of Rotation or Frequency 


All test data obtained at the speed of rotation n, in 
deviation from the specified speed of rotation n. , shall 
be translated to the basis of the specified speed of 
rotation ny 


If the deviations in speed of rotation from the specified 
speed of rotation п, do not exceed the permissible 


22 


variations stated in 5.8, the measured data on the 
discharged flow rate Q, total head H, power input P, net 
positive suction head, NPSH and the efficiency H, can 
be translated as follows: 


n 
e = Q S 

n 

n 2 
Hs -ң(%) 

n 

n 3 
263 


2 
n. 
(NPSH),, = (NPSH) (2) 
Nsp = n 


If... exceeds 20 percent variation, it shall be necessary 
to apply corrections on efficiency as given in 5.8. The 
stipulation for Н, О, and NPSH shall remain according 
to 9.2.1 irrespective of Nop variations. 


In the case of combined motor-pump units or where 
the guarantees are with respect to an agreed frequency 
and voltage instead of an agreed speed (see 4.1.3.4), the 
flow rate, pump total head, power input, and efficiency 
data are subject to the abovementioned translation laws, 
provided that no is replaced by the frequency f., and n 
by the frequency f. Such translation, however, shall be 
restricted to the cases where the frequency during the 
acceptance test varies by no more than 1 percent from 
the frequency prescribed for the characteristics under 
guarantee. If the voltage used in the acceptance test 
is no more than 5 percent above or below the voltage 
on which the guaranteed characteristics are based, the 
other operational data require no change. 


If the abovementioned tolerances, that is, 1 percent for 
frequency and 5 percent for voltage, are exceeded, it 
will be necessary for the purchaser and the manufacturer 
to arrive at an agreement. 


9.2.2 Tests Made with NPSH Different from that 
Guaranteed 


Pump performance at high NPSH cannot be accepted 
(after correction for speed of rotation within the 
permitted limits of 5.8.3) to indicate the performance 
at lower NPSH. 


Pump performance at a low NPSH can be accepted after 
correction for speed of rotation within the permitted 
limits of 5.8.3, to indicate the performance at a higher 
NPSH provided that the absence of cavitation has been 
checked in accordance with 7.1.1.1. 


9.3 Measuring Inaccuracies 


All measurements are inevitably subject to inaccuracies 
even if the measuring procedure and the instruments 
used, as well as the analysis directives, fully comply 


with prevailing acceptance rules. When comparing the 
test results with the guaranteed characteristics, these 
inaccuracies shall be given adequate consideration. 
The fact should be stressed that the term ‘measuring 
inaccuracies’ merely covers the errors that are 
unavoidable with all measurements. They refer in no 
way to the pump and the guaranteed characteristics. 
The maximum permissible limits of overall error for 
the quantities concerned for class C measurements are 
defined in Table 7. 


9.4 Verification of the Guarantee 


9.4.1 Curves ОН and Q, 


Guarantee points О.Н, and Оп, are plotted on a 
graph and a continuous curve is then drawn through 
the measured points QH and another through the points 
Ол of which О is measured and т is calculated. 


Ifthetestis madeata value of speed that is different from 
that specified as relevant to the particular guaranteed 
values, the test points shall be corrected to the specified 
speed of rotation in accordance with 9.2. Similarly, if 
the test is made at a value of frequency different from 
that relevant to the particular guaranteed values, the test 
shall be corrected to the specified frequency. 


Tolerances Xo and + X, respectively shall be applied 
to the guaranteed duty point QH. These tolerances 
include the maximum permissible limits of overall error 
e, and e, (see Table 7) and the constructional tolerance. 


In the absence of a specific agreement as to the values 
to be used, the following values may be taken: 


X= 0.07 
X,,= 0.04 


x 


IS 9137 : 2019 


If the guarantee point lies at a vertical distance + AH 
and a horizontal distance + AQ from the test curve (see 
Fig. 10), the following shall be evaluated: 


2 2 
| 4 | >1 
Thus, if the total amount is greater than ог equal to 1, 
the guarantee condition will be deemed to have been 


met.If the total amount is less than 1, the guarantee 
condition has not been achieved. 


HX, 
AH 


Qus 
AQ 


9.4.2 Efficiency 


The efficiency shall be derived from the measured QH 
curve where it is intersected by the straight line passing 
through the specified duty point О-Н. and the zero of 
the OH axes. 


The efficiency at the point of intersection shall be at 
least 95 percent of that specified. 


For combined motor-pump units, this value is 95.5 
percent. 


These values result only from the measuring errors (see 
Table 7). 


9.4.3 Pump Power Input 


The pump power input within the range defined in 9.4.1 
by the tolerances + Х E and + Х., shall not exceed that 
agreed between the manufacturer and purchaser at the 
time of contract. This value applies to the conditions of 
use of the pump as specified in the contract. 


Such an agreement may have to take into account 
different transmission losses and different gland and 
seal torques between works test and site operation. 


GUARANTEED DUTY 
POINT Осн, 


MEASURED POINTS 


--------------------- Q 


Fic. 10 Curve ОН FOR THE VERIFICATION OF THE GUARANTEE 


23 


IS 9137 : 2019 


9.5 Test Report 


After scrutiny of the test results, the latter shall be 
summarized in a report with as many copies as there 
are parties. 


The test report shall be signed either by the chief of 
tests alone or by him together with the representatives 
of the manufacturer and the purchaser. The test report 
shall contain the following information (see Annex H): 


a) Place and date of the acceptance test; 


b) Manufacturer’s name, type of pump, serial 


number, and possibly year of construction; 

c) Guaranteed characteristics, operational conditions 
during the acceptance test; 

d) Specification of the pump’s drive; 

e) Description of the test procedure and the measuring 
apparatus used including calibration data; 

f) Observed readings; 

g) Evaluation and analysis of test results; and 

h) Conclusions: 

1) Comparison of the test results with the 
guarantees, 

2) Determination whether the guarantees covering 
certain specific areas were completely or only 
partly fulfilled or not fulfilled at all, 

3) recommendation whether the pump can be 
accepted or should be rejected and under what 
conditions, 

4) if the guarantees are not fully satisfied the final 
decision whether the pump can be accepted or 
not is up to the purchaser, and 

5) statements arising out of action taken in 
connection with any special agreements that 
were made. 


9.6 The worked out examples indicating the application 
ofthe formula as given in 9.4.1 are given below: 


Example 1 
a) Guaranteed duty of pump: 
Capacity 1 000 m?/h 
Head 50m 
Speed 1480 rpm 
Efficiency 80 percent 


b) Readings corrected to 1480 rpm read as follows: 


Rate of Head Power Efficiency 
flow Absorbed 
(m?/h) (m) (kW) (Percent) 
0 55 — — 
300 54 127.5 34.6 
600 53.5 146 59.9 


24 


Rate of Head Power Efficiency 
flow Absorbed 
(m?/h) (m) (kW) (Percent) 
900 50 162 75.5 
1000 47.5 166 78 
1200 39 170 75 


c) Characteristic curves Q v/s H, Q v/s n, Q v/s P 
are drawn on graph (see Fig. 10A) AH - 2.5 m, 
Qs x XQ 


AQ = 100 m?/h 
2 2 
+ 
oS 
20x0.04 


Therefore, 
) | 000 0.07 
+ 
2.5 


Е Е ХХ. 
100 
= 0.64+0.49 =1.3 


AH 


) 

Hence, the pump characteristics аге within the 
acceptable limits. 

The duty point (1000 m?/h, 50 m) is connected 
to (0, 0) and the intersection of this line with the 
characteristics curve is determined which being 


(970 m?/h, 48.5 m). This duty, considered as the 
actual pump duty has an efficiency of 77 percent. 


1 


d 


— 


Permissible lower limit on guaranteed efficiency 
(0.95 x 0.8) - 0.76, that is 76 percent. Since, 
actual pump efficiency is 77 percent, this is also 
within the acceptable limits. 


е 


ме 


Example 2 
а) Guaranteed duty of pump: 


Capacity 200 m?/h 
Head 25m 
Speed 1480 rpm 
Efficiency 70 percent 


b) Readings corrected to 1480 rpm read as follows: 


Rate of Head Power Efficiency 
flow Absorbed 
(m?/h) (m) (kW) (Percent) 
0 26.5 — — 

50 27 15.5 23.8 
100 26.5 16.4 44 
150 255 17.3 60 
200 235 18.2 70.2 
250 21 19 75.2 
300 17 19.6 70.9 


IS 9137 : 2019 


POWER (ABSORBED) IN kW (P) 


100 


.^ ПЕН НЕ 
s х 
= во 
2 наши 
I 
-j 
Е 
“ЕЕЕ 
=. ао 
| | | | | | | | 
CO 
е T 
— 100 
E LLLA 
8 Z| 
:. РАН 
= 80 Z| 
> 
о 
= 
ш 
о нини 
uw 
& e | | 
|| || | 
шын 
o ELLE 
Pg 
ap ae 
Бави 


о 


200 400 


RATE OF FLOW IN m?/ h (а) 


AH=25m 


600 


AQ=100m%/h 


GUARENTEED DUTY = 1000 m?/ h x 50 m x 80% AT 1480 п 
ACTUAL DUTY = 970 m /h x 48.5m x 77% п АТ 1480 RPM 


Fic. 10 A CHARACTERISTIC CURVE FOR PUMP OF GUARANTEED DUTY OF 
1 ОООМУН Бізснаксв x 50 М HEAD 


c) Characteristic curves О v/s Н, О v/s n, О v/s P 
are drawn on graph (see Fig. 10B) AH = 1.5 m, 
AQ = 40 m?/h 


Therefore, 
2 2 

(Hg x Xy А Qs x XQ 
AH AQ 

Е (ЕШ (20007) 
1.5 40 

= 0.4444+0.1225 

= 0.5669 


25 


Hence, ће pump characteristics is not within the 
acceptable limits. 

d) The duty point (200 m?/h, 25 m) is connected 
to (0, 0) and the intersection of this line with 
the characteristics curve is determined from 
the graph which being (191 m?/h, 24 m). This 
duty, considered as the actual pump duty has an 
efficiency of 68.5 percent. 

е) Permissible lower limit on guaranteed efficiency 
(0.95 x 0.7) — 0.665, that is 66.5 percent. Since 
actual pump efficiency is 68.5 percent, this is 
within acceptable limits. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Example 3 b) Readings corrected to 555 rpm read as follows: 
я ded fails to meet the guaranteed power input "Виља. Head Pore DRERI 
flow Absorbed 
Guaranteed duty of pump: (m*/h) іі (kW) (Percent) 
Capacity 6 000 m?/h 0 50 -- -- 
Total head 41 т 2 000 49 562.17 47.5 
Speed 555 rpm 4 000 47.5 704.37 73.5 
Efficiency 85 percent 6 000 43 836.90 84 
Power input to pump at duty point 788.6 kW 8 000 36 881.73 89 
9 000 32 891.75 88 


TOTAL HEAD IN m (H) 


POWER (ABSORBED) IN kW (P) 


EFFICIENCY IN PERCENT (П ) 
Ф 
б 


40 


20 


RATE OF FLOW IN m?/ h (Q) 


AH-1.5m AQ-40m?3/h 
GUARENTEED DUTY - 200 m?/ h x 25 m x 70%п AT 1480 RPM 
ACTUAL DUTY = 191 m?/ h x 24 m x 68.5% n AT 1480 RPM 


Fic.10 B CHARACTERISTIC CURVE FOR PUMP OF GUARANTEED DUTY 
oF 200 m?/h DiscHARGE X 25 m HEAD 


26 


Characteristic curves Q v/s Н, Q v/s п, Q v/s P 
are drawn on graph (see Fig. 10C), AH = 2 m, 


AQ = 600 m?/h d) 
Therefore, 

_(HaxXn) ,(QoxXQ) 

AH AQ 
е 
(22098) ,/60х0071 | 
2 600 
= 0.6724 +0.49 
=1.1624 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Hence, the pump characteristics are within the 
acceptable limits. 


The duty point (6000 m*/h,41 m) is connected 
to (0, 0) and the intersection of this line with the 
characteristic curve is determined which being 
6200 m?/h,42 m.This duty considered as the actual 
pump duty has an efficiency of 85.5 percent. 
Permissible lower limit on guaranteed efficiency 
(0.95 x 0.85) — 0.8075, that 1s, 80.75 percent. 
Since, actual pump efficiency is 85.5 percent this 
is also acceptable. 


50 PETET or 
ВЕЕ 


0 1000 


1000 


2000 3000 4000 5000 


6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 


Discharge-m*/ hr 


AH = 2.0 m, 


AQ = 600 m°/hr 


Guaranteed duty = 6000 m?/h x 41 m x 85 percent at 555 rpm 
Actual duty = 6200 m*/h x 42 m х 85.5 percent at 555 rpm 


Fic. 10C CHARACTERISTIC CURVE FOR PUMP OF GUARANTEED Duty оғ 6 000 таун DISCHARGE X 41 m HEAD 


27 


IS 9137 : 2019 


f) The power input to the pump within the ranged 
defined in 9.4.1 by the tolerances X, and +X, is 
836.5 (6 000 m?/h x 43 m x 84 percent) to 856.9 
(6 600 m?/h x 41 m x 86.0 percent) kW. As agreed 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser, the 
power should not exceed 828 kW (788.6 x 1.05) to 
856.9 kW. Since, the power input within the range 
exceeds 828 kW,the pump fails to meet the power 
consumption. 


Example 4 


When pump fails to meet the guaranteed efficiency 
point: 


a) Guaranteed duty of pump: 


Capacity 300 m?/h 
Total head 7.5m 
Speed 1480 rpm 
Efficiency 54 percent 
Power input to pump at duty point 11.35 kW 


b) Readings corrected to 1480 rpm read as follows: 


Rate of Head Power Efficiency 
flow Absorbed 
(m?/h) (m) (kW) (Percent) 
0 15 — — 
50 14.5 9.88 20 
100 13.5 10.22 36 
150 12.5 10.87 47 
200 11.5 11.6 54 
250 10.5 11.72 61 
300 8.5 11.98 58 
325 6.5 12.8 45 
с) Characteristic curve Q v/s H, Q v/s H, Q v/s 


Pare drawn on graph (see Fig. 10D) АН - 0.5 m, 
AQ = 15 m?/h 


Head-m 


Discharge - m*/ hr 


Power - KW 


T 
0 50 100 150 


200 
Discharge- m?/ hr 


T 
250 300 350 400 


Efficiency - % 


200 
Discharge- m3/ hr 


250 300 350 400 


AH - 0.5m, 


AQ = 15 m?/h 


Guaranteed duty - 300 m?/h x 7.5 m x 54 percent at1480 rpm 
Actual duty = 310 m?/h x 7.8 m x 51 percent at 1480 rpm 


Fic. 10D CHARACTERISTIC CURVE FOR PUMPOF GUARANTEED Duty оғ 300 m?/h DiscHARGE х 7.5 m HEAD 


28 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Therefore, (310 m?/h,7.8 m).This duty considered as the 
actual pump duty has an efficiency of 51.0 percent. 

HoxXQY (Qux XQ) 22. d d 
= + e) Permissible lower limit on guaranteed efficiency 
AH AQ (0.54 x 0.95) = 0.513 that is, 51.3 percent. Since, 
7.5x0.04 Y (300x0.07 Y the actual efficiency 18 51 percent the pump fails 

-( 05 4 15 to meet the guaranteed efficiency. 

— 0.36 41.96 f) The power input to the pump within the range 


defined in 9.4.1 by the tolerance + XQ and +XH is 
-232 11.88 (300 m?/h х 8.0 m x 55 percent) kW to 12.74 
(315 m?/h x 75 m x 50.5 percent) kW. Since, the 
power input as agreed between the manufacturer 
and the purchaser (11.35 x 1.05 = 11.92 kW) lies 
within this range, the power consumption is within 
acceptable limits. 


Hence, the pump characteristics are within 
acceptable limits. 

d) The duty point (300 m?/h, 7.5 m) is connected 
to (0, 0) and the intersection of the line with the 
characteristic curve is determined which being 


29 


IS 9137 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2.3 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1248 : 2003 Direct acting indicating analogue 10572: 1983 Methods of sampling for pumps 
electrical measuring instruments 14615 (Part1) Measurement of fluid flow by 
and their accessories : 1999/ISO means of pressure differential 
4889 : 1968 Methods of determination of 5167-1: 1991 devices: Part 1 Orifice plates, 
efficiency of rotating electrical nozzles and venturitubes inserted 
machines in circular cross-section conduits 
ing full 
6062 : 1971 Method of measurement of flow ара . 
of water in open channels using IS/ISO 5199 Technical ^ specifications for 
standing wave flume-fall : 2002 centrifugal pumps — Class II 
6063 : 1971 Method of measurement of flow IS/ISO 80000-1 Quantities and units: Part 1 
of water in open channels using : 2009 General 
standing wave flume IS/ISO 80000-4 Quantities and units: Part 4 
9108 : 2013 Hydrometry — Open channel : 2006 Mechanics 
flow measurement using thin-plate 
weirs 
ANNEX B 


( Clause 4.1.2.4 ) 


B-1 FOR MASS-PRODUCED PUMPS 


When, for mass produced pumps, the manufacturer 


operation point, after class C tests, results not divergent 
from the values of the published curve by more than: 


makes reference in his catalogue to this test code, the BIS 0 percent а 

curves published in his catalogue shall be such that any РФ) = 8 percent for rate of flow; and 

pump corresponding to the curves gives for any chosen с) +8 percent for power input. 
ANNEX C 


( Clauses 4.2.1 and 5.10 ) 


C-1 COSTS AND REPETITION OF TESTS 


Matters of a purely commercial nature, such as the cost 
of the tests are not included in the scope of this standard 
and should be made the subject of special agreements 
between the parties concerned. 


C-2 COSTS OF ACCEPTANCE TESTS AND 
SPECIAL TESTS 


It is recommended that the costs of acceptance tests and 
special tests be clearly stated in the contract. 


30 


C-3 REPETITION OF TESTS 


In case of doubt, as to the correctness or adequate 
accuracy of the measurement data obtained, both the 
manufacturer and purchaser are entitled to demand that 
the test be repeated. Should the new measurement fail 
to justify the doubts expressed, the party demanding the 
renewed test must assume the cost of repetition. 


IS 9137 : 2019 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 5.7.1) 


EFFECT OF PRE-SWIRL INDUCED BY THE PUMP 


D-1 Errors in the measurement of pump inlet head can 
occur at part capacity due to pre-swirl. This can be 
detected and corrected on the following basis. 


D-2 The differential head is measured between the 
specified inlet measuring section and another position 
further upstream where the pre-swirl induced by the 


pump is known to be absent (for example, the sump). 
This differential head should follow a quadratic law 
with flow; any departure from this law will show the 
amount by which an inlet head measurement must be 
corrected for the effect of pre-swirl induced by the 
pump (see Fig. 11 and 12). 


GAUGE USED FOR 
DETERMINATION OF H 


(SEE FIG.2) 


Fic. 11 EXAMPLE OF INSTALLATION WITH PRE-SWIRL 


CURVE GIVEN H, FROM FIG. 2 


ONSET OF PRE-SWIRL 


Fic. 12 CORRECTION OF MEASURED INLET HEAD 


IS 9137 : 2019 


ANNEX E 
( Clauses 5.7.6 and 6.2.4.4 ) 


E-1 FRICTION LOSSES E-1.3 If the pipes are of different diameters, the diameter 
of the smaller pipe should be used. Then, if no correction 

E-1.1 The formula given in 5.7.6 for calculating head is indicated, the calculation needs not to be made. 

loss due to friction involves a lengthy calculation, which 

would lead only, in many cases, to the conclusion thata Е-1.3.1 If correction is indicated in Fig. 14, which 

correction need not be applied. applies only to steel or wrought-iron pipes handling 
cold water, may be used to determine the value of À. 

E-1.2 Figure 13 may be used as a preliminary check as 

to whether a calculation need to be made. It applies to Е-1.4 In cases where pipes are of other material or the 

straight steel or wrought iron pipes of constant circular liquid is not cold water, the graph by Moody given in 

cross-section, handling cold water. Outlet and inlet Fig. 15, may be used or the formula for A given in 5.7.6 

pipes are assumed of equal diameter and measuring may, if preferred, be solved. For the pipe roughness k 

points 2 diameters upstream and downstream of the one may take the values given in Table 10 according to 

inlet and outlet flanges respectively (5.7.1). the “Mechanical Engineers Handbook, edition 1958". 


PIPE DIAMETER (mm) 


PUMP TOTAL HEAD (m) 


Е 
Е 
Е 
Е 
Е 
Е 
2 


CORRECTION REQUIRED 


VELOCITY (m/s) 


Fic. 13 CHART SHOWING VELOCITIES ABOVE WHICH Loss CORRECTIONS ARE REQUIRED 


32 


ІКІСТІОМ FACTOR (A) 


IS 9137 : 2019 


wal IN ИЕ ИИ T 
LLL NL LLL LL LL LLL LLLLLI 
У LII Pt tT || | | || 
Ш __| _ yy | ||| 
EE 
Bn 


га 


шш 


сл 
о 


к 
Е 
= 
Ш 
Е 
EN 


ШЕ E 
E па 
E n 
N E 
‘a a 
ІХ " 
_~ || 


Аш 


Y VVAMATT LE ix 
| | AAAA AA V /| | | Д||| ||) 


PIPE DIAMETER (MILLIMETRE) 


HAHH 


HHHH- 
EL EL ES IEL LLL LA 


a 
Е 
Е 
Е 
E 
Е 
Е 
N 
Е 
E 
E 
Е 
E uu 
А === 
а 

E 

БИ 

E 

Е 

Е 

Е 

E 


TA Д У | | | | || | ||| 
„У АДАД НИ ДА ДД || Д || || ee 


БАРАЊИ 
of | LAM ДАЛА ГАЛ ЕГДЕ 


VELOCITY (m/s) 
SURFACE ROUGHNESS (1) = 5.180 x 103 m 
KINEMATIC VELOCITY (I) = 10.022 x 103 m?/s 


Fic. 14 Friction FACTOR CHART 


33 


IS 9137 : 2019 


CRITICAL ZONE 


TRANSITION ZONE 


0.025 


0.015 


ЕР VAVAVATATABTABVA 


4 
HA 

ИЛ | 
РЕ, 


EEE /  / 


" 
= 
б 
о 
= 


108 23456810 2 34568 10° 2 34568105 2 345698 17V 2 4 5 628 10° 


REYNOLDS NUMBER Re = 


0.000 001 0.000 005 


Fic. 15 VALUES OF FRICTION FActor A Moopy CHART 


Table 10 Absolute Roughness K for Pipes 


SI No. Commercial Pipe (New) Material Absolute Roughness K of the Surface 
Mm 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Glass, drawn brass, copper or lead Smooth 
ii) Wrought iron steel 0.05 
iii) Asphalted cast iron 0.12 
iv) Galvanized iron 0.15 
v) Cast iron 0.25 
vi) Concrete 0.3 to 3.0 
vii) Riveted steel 1.0 to 10.0 


34 


RELATIVE ROUGHNESS 5 


F-1 CONVERSION TO SI UNITS 


This Annex gives factors for conversion to SI units of 
some of the quantities expressed in multiples or sub- 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 5.11 ) 


IS 9137 : 2019 


The conversion factor is the number by which the value 


multiples of SI units and in units other than SI units. 


expressed in various units should be multiplied to find 
the corresponding value in SI units. 


CONVERSION FACTORS 
Quantity Symbol of SI Various Units Conversion 
Unit Name Symbol Factors 

Volume rate of m?/s litre per second l/s 10? 
flow cubic metre per hour m?/h 1/3 600 

litre per hour I/h 1/3 6 00 000 

litre per minute l/min 1/60 000 

imperial gallon per minute gal (UK) / min 0.000 075 77 

cubic foot per second ft3/s 0.028 316 8 

gallon (US) per minute gal(US)/min 0.000 063 09 

barrel (US) per hour (petroleum) Barrel (US)/h 0.000 044 16 
Mass rate of flow kg/s ton per second t/s 10? 

ton per hour t/h 1/3.6 

kilogram per hour kg/h 1/3 600 

pound per second Ib/s 0.453 592 37 
Pressure N/m? (also kilopound per square centimetre kp/em? 

known as pascal kilogram-force рег square kgf/cm? 98066.5 
: Ра) centimetre 

bar bar 

hectopieze hpz 10° 

torr torr 

conventional millimetre of mmHg 133.322 

mercury 

conventional millimetre of water mmH,O 9.806 65 

poundal per square foot pdl/ft? 1.488 16 

standard atmosphere atm 1 01 325 

pound-force per square inch Ibf/in? (psi) 6 894.76 
Density kg/m? kilogram per cubic decimetre kg/dm? 

gram per cubic centimetre g/cm? 0 

pound per cubic foot Ib/ft 16.018 5 
Power W kilowatt kW 10? 

kilopond metre per second kp.m/s 9.806 65 

I. T. kilocalorie per hour kcalIT/h 1.163 

cheval vapour* ch 735.5 

horse power* hp 745.7 

british thermal unit per hour Btu/h 0.293 071 

kilogram-force metre per second kgf.m/s 9.806 65 


35 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Quantity Symbol of ST Various Units Conversion 
Unit Name Symbol Factors 
Viscosity N.s/m? = kg/m.s | decapoise daP 1 
(dynamic : 
viscosity) poise Р 
dyne second рег square dyn.s/cm? 10" 
centimetre 
gram per second centimetre g/s.cm 
kilopond second рег square kp.s/m? 9.806 65 
metre 
centipoise cP 103 
poundal second per square foot pdl.s/ft? 1.488 16 
Kinematic 112/5 stokes St = cm?/s 104 
viscosity 
centistokes cSt 10° 
squre foot per second Ft?/s 0.092 903 0 


* No international symbol exists for this unit, the symbol shown is the most common. 


ANNEX G 
( Clause 5.11) 


G-1 CHECK LIST 


The following is a check list of items where agreement 
is recommended between manufacturer and purchaser 
before the test. It should be noted that it will not always 
be necessary to agree upon all these items during the 
elaboration of the contract. 


G-1.1 Extent of Guarantee 
a) pump without motor ( see4.1.1 ); 
b) combined pump-motor unit ( ѕее4.1.1 ); and 


c) guaranteed values [for example, flow rate, total 
head, power input, efficiency, NPSH, etc.] 
(see 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.1.3.3, 4.2.1 and 9.4.3 ). 


G-1.2 Method of Verification of Guaranteed NPSH 
(see 4.2.1 and 7.1.1) 


G-1.3 Rotational Speed Deviations Outside 


Permissible Tolerance (see 5.8.3 and 9.2.1) 


G-1.4 Voltage and Frequency Deviations Outside 
Permissible Tolerance (see 9.2.1) 


G-1.5 Method of Prediction of Pump Performance 
from a Test Using Clean Cold Water (see 8 ) 


G-1.6 Liquid to be Used for Acceptance Test 
(see 4.2.3) 


36 


G-1.7 Inlet and Transmission Losses in Vertical Well 
Pumps (see 6.2.4.4 and 6.4.3) 


G-1.8 Cable Losses (see 6.4.3) 
G-1.9 Gear Losses (see 6.4.2 ) 


G-1.10 Arrangement for Proving Priming Ability of 
Self-priming Pumps ( see 5.7.5 ) 


G-1.11 Time of Tests (see 5.2) 

G-1.12 Location of Tests (see 5.1) 

G-1.13 Test Equipment (see 5.6) 

G-1.14 Test Arrangement (see 5.7.1 and 5.7.2 ) 


G-1.15 Chief of Tests when Test is not Carried Out 
at Manufacturer’s Works (see 5.4 ) 


G-1.16 Test Costs (see 4.2.1, Annex C) 


G-1.17 Number of Pumps to be Tested in a Batch of 
Identical Pumps (see 4.2.1 ) 


G-1.18 Any Other Aspect of Pump Behaviour to be 
Checked During the Test 


H-1 PUMP TEST SHEET 


The pump test sheet illustrated in this annex is given 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 9.5 ) 


IS 9137 : 2019 


include all the information required from a pump 
test and modifications may be necessary depending 


on the type of pump, its application, and the mode of 


as guidance for presenting pump test results and to calculation. 
assist in their interpretation. It does not purport to 
Pump Test (Class C) Sheet No. Nature of Test 
Sheet 
Customer: 
Pump Type Maker's Order Number Order No. Diameter of inlet: 
Diameter of outlet: 
Guaranteed | Volume rate flow (QG) Speed of rotation (n) Power input (Ре) 
values | Total head (H,) Efficiency (,.G) Net positive suction head (NPSH) 
Pumped | Temperature (/) Kinematic viscosity (v) 
liquid Density (p) Degree of acidity ( pH ) 
Motor Maker Test Certificate Number of phases Voltage 
Type Power Speed of rotation Current 
Measuring Rate of flow Inlet Outlet | (NPSH) | Torque | Power | Speed of | Gear 
method head head rotation 
Method used 
Constant 
Test Room temperature Barometric pressure | Head correction to Inlet 
conditions Temperature of test liquid Reference plane Outlet 
Results of measurement Units |1 2 3 4 |5 6 7 8 9 10 | 11 
Speed of rotation 
Flowrate | Time interval 
Reading 
Measured flow 
Head Outlet head reading 
Inlet head reading 
Outlet head 
Inlet head 
Av2/2g 
Difference of 


measuring position 


Pump total head 


Vs2Dg 


NPSH 


37 


IS 9137 : 2019 


Power 
(torque) 


Useful power (Р) 


Voltage 


Current 


Wattmeter reading 1 


Wattmeter reading 2 


Total of wattmeter 
readings 


Motor power input 


Motor efficiency 


Torque reading 


Gear efficiency 


Motor power input 


Pump power input 


Overall efficiency 


Pump efficiency 


Values 
referred to 
specified 
speed of 
rotation 


Notes 


Volume rate of flow 


Total head 


Power 


NPSH 


Date 


Chief of 
tests 


R 


epresentatives 


of the tests 


of the manufacturer 


38 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 20 (11586). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


