ART Alan IS 17371 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Aaa — AA PERA To 
Fafe — tater 


Geosynthetics — Geogrids for 
Flexible Pavements — Specification 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2020 


anda get sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH HM, ay ect 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2020 Price Group 7 


IS 17371 : 2020 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Roads are an essential component of development and are essential for the economic growth of the country. 
These are essential systems for transfer of goods and passengers across the country and unlike the railway 
network, various classes of roads from expressways to rural roads assure the last mile connectivity. The 
growing economy requires expansion of existing carriageways into multi-lane expressways, new road routes 
and development of rural roads to carry motorized vehicles instead of the traditional animal-drawn carts. 


A typical road project has two major components: 
a) The embankment supporting the carriageway; and 
b) The pavement which may also be supported directly on treated / untreated dressed natural subgrade. 


The pavement is a structural entity which takes up cyclic stresses from various types of vehicles that are 
deemed to ply along the selected route over its designated life. The pavement surface is required to take up 
both vertical and horizontal stresses. These stresses develop strains in the components of the pavement, which, 
when exceeded beyond certain magnitudes, can cause rutting and fatigue. Horizontal stresses and corresponding 
strains are also generated by vehicle traction. The quality of the riding surface is a key factor to give comfort to 
the driver and the passengers and the pavement is designed to cater to these stresses and minimize strains over 
the designated life. 


Difficult subsoil conditions along with high economic and social costs of diversions and dearth of good construction 
material coupled with environmental constraints pose major challenges to development of the road network. These 
are overcome by judicious use of geosynthetics of all the types of geosynthetics that may be used for reinforcing 
pavement sections, this standard address geogrids. 


Pavements fall under two broad categories: 
a) Flexible pavements; and 
b) Rigid oavements. 
This standard addresses flexible pavements only. 


Geogrids are single or multi-layer materials usually made from extruding and stretching high density 
polyethylene or polypropylene or by weaving or knitting and coating high tenacity polyester yarns or glass 
fibre with appropriate coating. The resulting grid structure possesses large openings called apertures that 
enhance interaction with the soil or aggregate. The high tensile strength and stiffness of geogrids make them 
especially effective as soil and aggregate reinforcement/stabilization. Geogrids can be used above subgrade, 
within subbase and base courses, between base and bituminous course, in between wearing course and dense 
bituminous macadam (DBM), and between the old bitumen layer and new overlay. These geogrids are generally 
biaxial. 


A large variety of detrimental factors need to be envisaged and considered in the design of flexible pavements 
as well as during their maintenance and rehabilitation. These include, but may not be limited to environmental 
conditions, subgrade conditions, traffic loading, cuts made to accommodate utilities, road widening, ageing, etc., 
which contribute to a wide variety of pavement conditions and problems that are required to be addressed during 
maintenance and rehabilitation, if these are not dealt with during initial construction. Pavement maintenance 
treatments are often ineffective and short lived due to their inability to treat the basic cause of the problem and 
renew the existing pavement condition. More often than not, the main cause of distress in pavements is that they 
are pervious. A sizeable amount of precipitation surface water percolates into the pavement and weakens the 
pavement base and the subgrade, thus accelerating pavement degradation which manifest as early distress in the 
form of rutting, fatigue surface cracks and subgrade failures. 


It is therefore a prudent strategy for long term pavement performance, to build in safeguards during initial 
construction itself. These performance safeguards include stabilizing the subgrade against moisture intrusion and 


IS 17371 : 2020 


associated weakening, strengthening road-based aggregate without preventing efficient drainage of infiltrated 
water. During maintenance/rehabilitation of the pavement, select treatments may be provided to enhance stress 
absorption and moisture proofing. 


Judiciously placing geogrid material within the components of a pavement is one cost-effective method for the 
integrity of pavements. The functions of geogrid are as follows: 


1. Above the subgrade and just below the To reinforce /stabilize the subbase 
pavement structure: 
2. Within the granular components or interface To improve the resilient modulus of that layer, subject 
(subbase and base course): to the zone of influence of the geogrid reinforcement / 
stabilization. 


There are two types of pavements where geogrids may be used as reinforcement /stabilization: 


1. Temporary roads: Utility of these roads is short term and are essentially access roads to 
construction sites or temporary worksites, such as locations of oil rigs, wind 
energy generators, etc. While use of such roads may be short term, during that 
period, the traffic axle loads may be extremely heavy due to haulage of heavy 
equipment, whereas as per standard empirical definition in terms of million 
standard axles as per Indian Roads Congress (IRC) guidelines, the traffic may 
be low. In such cases, it may be advisable to analyze the reinforced pavement 
section on the basis of the most critical combination of static loads. 


2. Permanent roads: These roads are used for standard transportation purposes for goods and 
passengers. The design of such roads is according to the category of the road 
(that is, expressway, national / state highway, urban road, low volume roads, 
etc.) and would be as per the relevant IRC guidelines, appropriately modified for 
the pavement reinforcement /stabilization. The volume of traffic is invariably 
in excess of 2 msa (million standard axles) 


There are two common methods of design for the flexible pavements: 


a) The “mechanistic-empirical” method recommended by the Indian Roads Congress (IRC), IRC: 37-2018 
“Guidelines for the design of flexible pavements (forth revision)”; and 


b) The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (popularly known as AASHTO) 
flexible pavement structural number design. 


The AASHTO method of design is based on pavement performance incorporating road-user’s definition of 
pavement failure, as well as the effect of structural parameters (such as component material properties and 
thicknesses) and the magnitude and frequency of the axle loads. The method uses empirical equations developed 
from road tests. Layer Coefficient Ratio (LCR) is used in the empirical equations when geogrid is used as a 
reinforcement /stabilization. 


The Mechanistic-Empirical method advocated by IRC is based strictly on structural stress-strain concepts. The 
method uses mechanistic principles and detailed input data to minimize reliance on empirical observations and 
correlations. The method is empirical only to the extent that modulus values of individual pavement components 
are based on established but empirical relationships. By this method, one needs to determine the Modulus 
Improvement Factor (MIF) of the pavement component as an entire layer using the particular geogrid for that 
thickness. The designer in this case needs to give due cognizance to the layer thickness for which the MIF has 
been determined. 


This standard provides various properties of geogrids to be used as reinforcement /stabilization of base and 
subbase courses and / or reinforcement /stabilization for improving the load carrying capacity of the subgrade, in 
the construction of paved or unpaved pavements, areas for parking, container yards and similar installations in 
reference with national/international standards for testing and design. This standard will help engineer in selecting 
geogrids of appropriate quality for specific project requirements. Procurement of the geogrids shall be done as 
per such requirements and the material shall be selected, comparing the parametric requirements by design and 
the design value indicated in the manufacture’s data sheets. The contractor shall follow the specifications and 
installation guidelines provided by the engineer or by the geogrid manufacturer. 


ii 


IS 17371 : 2020 


The committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standards/Other publications referred 
in this standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard/ Title 
Other publication 
ISO 10320 : 2019 Geosynthetics — Identification on site 
ISO 16014-4 : 2019 Plastics — Determination of average molecular weight and molecular weight 


distribution of polymers using size-exclusion chromatography — Part 4: High- 
temperature method 


ASTM D7409 — 15 Standard test method for carboxyl end group content of polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) yarns 

GRI-GG7 Test method for carboxyl end group content of PET yarns 

GRI-GG8 Test method for determination of the number average molecular weight of PET 


yarns based on a relative viscosity value 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


111 


IS 17371 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GEOGRIDS FOR FLEXIBLE 
PAVEMENTS — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies material properties and 
specifications that are reguired for geogrids to be used 
as reinforcement /stabilization in base, subbase and 
subgrade in design of flexible pavement structures. 


1.2 This standard is a specification aid for material 
purchase and shall not be used as design or construction 
guideline. Design of geogrid reinforced flexible 
pavements shall be carried out as per standard practices 
recommended by Indian Roads Congress using the 
mechanistic empirical method, or global practices 
including Structural Number based on the AASHTO 
Method. The input parameters shall include parameters 


X 
KAAN 
KYN 
OS 
RA RARA RÈL, 


N N 
L 
KREK 


relating to interaction between the geogrids and the 
surrounding pavement component material. 


1.3 It shall be noted that there are other types of 
geosynthetics other than geogrids, that can be used 
as reinforcement /stabilization for flexible pavements 
which cannot be excluded from being considered as 
alternate solutions to geogrids. 


1.4 Figure 1 explains the common broad terminology 
for pavement components considered in this standard 
and the area of the geogrid reinforcement/stabilization 
or stabilization application is explained in Fig. 2 to 
Fig. 7. 


Bituminous treated surface + 
Dense Bituminous Mix (DBM) 


Granular Base 


Granular Subbase 


ESOS SS 
GR 
KRÈ 


RR 
SA 


ASPHALT SURFACE 
DENSE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 


GRANULAR BASE 


GRANULAR SUB-BASE 


GEOGRID 


S > —DRESSED SUBGRADE 


Fic. 2 GEOGRID PLACED AT INTERFACE OF GRANULAR 
SUB-BASE AND DRESSED SUBGRADE 


IS 17371 : 2020 


ASPHALT SURFACE 
DENSE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 


GRANULAR SUB-BASE 


DRESSED SUBGRADE 


Fic. 3 GEOGRID PLACED AT INTERFACE OF GRANULAR BASE AND GRANULAR SUB-BASE 


ASPHALT SURFACE 
DENSE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 


GRANULAR BASE 
-GEOGRID 


LR 


LAB 
E HA 
en “7 — GRANULAR SUB-BASE 


GEOGRID 
DRESSED SUBGRADE 


FiG. 4 Two LAYER OF GEOGRIDS PLACED AT INTERFACE OF GRANULAR BASE AND 
GRANULAR SUB-BASE, GRANULAR SUB-BASE AND DRESSED SUBGRADE 


E ASPHALT SURFACE 
224 — DENSE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 


Fic. 5 GEOGRID PLACED WITHIN GRANULAR BASE LAYER 


IS 17371 : 2020 


ASPHALT SURFACE 
DENSE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 


GRANULAR BASE 


GEOGRID 


GRANULAR SUB-BASE 


+——-DRESSED SUBGRADE 


Fic. 6 GEOGRID PLACED WITHIN GRANULAR SUB-BASE LAYER 


ASPHALT SURFACE 
DENSE BITUMINOUS MACADAM 


——GEOGRID 
GRANULAR BASE 


GEOGRID 
—GRANULAR SUB-BASE 


+—— DRESSED SUBGRADE 


Fic. 7 Two LAYER OF GEOGRIDS WITHIN GRANULAR BASE AND GRANULAR SUB-BASE LAYERS 


NOTE — Above figures are general representation of the 
placement of geogrids in the various granular component of 
pavement layers. Placement of geogrid shall be as per the 
designer’s discretion. 


1.5 The function of the geogrid reinforcement / 
stabilization in the application of flexible pavements 
includes: 


a) Tensile reinforcement /stabilization within the 
structural components of the flexible pavement 
section. This may include the granular subbase 
and base courses, between the base course. 


b) 


designer is required to exercise caution when 
geotextiles are used in conjunction with geogrids 
since the subgrade soil-geotextile-geogrid-GSB 
interaction need to be considered. Hence, it shall 
be judiciously evaluated. 


1.6 Geogrid reinforcement /stabilization may be 


classified according to the function within the pavement 


structure as follows: 


1.6.1 Geogrids placed within or directly beneath the base 
course are classified as base/sub-base reinforcement 
geogrid. There are two significant objectives of base / 


Tensile reinforcement /stabilization placed above 
the dressed subgrade and below the pavement 
subbase. The application is to strengthen the 
subgrade with a California Bearing Ratio (CBR) <5 
percent. It must be noted that neither flexible nor 
rigid geogrid serves the purpose of separation nor 
filtration. For these functions, appropriate woven 
or nonwoven geotextiles shall be considered. The 


sub-base reinforcement geogrids: 


a) increase the service life of the road 


and / or 


b) demonstrate an equivalent performance but with 


reduced thickness(es) of the component(s) of the 
pavement section. 


IS 17371 : 2020 


1.6.2 Geogrids placed at the subgrade/subbase 
interface are classified as Subgrade reinforcement/ 
stabilization geogrids. The basic objective of Subgrade 
reinforcement /stabilization geogrids is to strengthen/ 
stabilize the subgrade of the pavement, which may 
have very low CBR (CBR « 5 percent). Such geogrids 
would reduce vertical deformations to prevent rutting 
at the pavement surface. 


1.7 Geogrids are classified as flexible or rigid. 


1.7.1 In case of flexible geogrids, the yarns are formed 
into a dimensionally stable grid structure with uniform 
aperture. Flexible geogrids are bonded or knitted or 
woven ribs of polyester (PET) or polyvinyl alcohol 
(PVA) yam. The geogrid is then given a tough and 
durable coating to enhance dimensional stability, 
resistance to installation damage and durability. The 
resulting grid structure possesses large openings 
called apertures. Flexible geogrids interact with the 
surrounding materials essentially through friction. 


1.7.2 Rigid geogrids are generally manufactured from 
polypropylene or polyethylene. The manufacturing 
process consists of extrusion of a flat sheet of plastic, 
either high density polyethylene or polypropylene, 
followed by punching a controlled pattern of holes, and 
then stretching the sheet in either one (cross direction) 
or both directions. The resulting grid structure has 
large openings or apertures. These apertures induce 
interlocking between the rigid geogrid and the coarse 
granular (gravel size and above) that initiates interaction 
between the rigid geogrid and the pavement aggregate 
component. 


1.7.3 By the above processes, both flexible and rigid 
geogrids develop tensile strength in both machine 
and cross machine directions, as well as enhance 
dimensional stability and durability, and develop 
resistance to installation damage. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions as given 
in IS 13321 (Part 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Geogrid — A biaxial polymeric grid formed 
by a rectangular network of integrally connected 
tensile elements with apertures of sufficient size 
to allow interlocking and/or interface friction with 


surrounding soil, rock or earth to function primarily as 
reinforcement /stabilization and are commonly made 
of polymer materials, such as polyester (PET), high 
density polyethylene (HDPE), polypropylene (PP) and 
glass fibre (GF). They may be extruded or woven or 
knitted from yarns, heat-welded from strips of material, 
or produced by punching a regular pattern of holes in 
sheets of material, then stretched into a grid. 


3.1.1 Welded Strip Geogrid — A geogrid product 
formed by heat bonding (welding) discrete strips of 
polymer into a regular network. 


3.1.2 Extruded Geogrid — A determined or non- 
determined netlike polymeric material produced by 
a process of continuous integral extrusion, used with 
foundation, soil, rock, earth or any other geotechnical 
engineering related material as an integral part of the 
human made project structure or system. 


3.1.3 Woven Geogrid — A geogrid product formed 
by weaving discrete strips of polymer into a network. 
These geogrids usually require a protective coating to 
protect the polymer from pre-mature degradation. 


3.1.4 Knitted Geogrid — Geogrid product obtained 
by knitting high molecular weight and high tenacity 
continuous filament yarns into a dimensionally stable 
network of apertures providing tensile reinforcement/ 
stabilization capacity in both machine and cross 
machine directions and then coating with a UV 
stabilizer. The yarn may be polyester or glass fibre. 


3.1.5 Bonded Geogrid — Bonded Geogrids are flat 
structures, where two or more series of strip elements 
made of polyester coated with polyethylene, are linked 
at regular intervals by means of bonding. 


3.2 Apertures — The open spaces which are formed 
between the longitudinal and transverse ribs of a 
geogrid. 


3.3 Longitudinal Ribs — The elements of geogrid 
which are in machine direction as manufactured are 
called as longitudinal ribs. 


3.4 Transverse Ribs — The elements of geogrid which 
are in cross machine direction as manufactured are 
called as transverse ribs. 


3.5 Junctions — The interconnections between the 
longitudinal and transverse ribs of a geogrid which 
holds the grid structure together providing dimensional 
stability. 


3.6 Ultimate Strength of Geogrid (T,) — The 
ultimate or maximum strength of a geogrid in machine 
direction, as determined by a short-term tensile strength 
test in accordance with IS 16635. 


3.7 Junction Strength — Breaking tensile strength of 
junctions using a single rib in case of extruded geogrids 


or composite having the greater of three junctions or 
20 cm and tested at a strain rate of 10 percent per minute 
based on the gauge length. 


In case of composite multi-layer geogrids, junction 
strength shall be tested for each component of the 
geogrid. Junction strength of the composite shall be the 
lowest value. 


Junction strength is not relevant to flexible geogrids 
since the method of load transfer is by friction between 
the geogrid and the surrounding material, and not 
through interlocking of coarse granular material within 
the geogrid apertures. 


3.8 Definition Based on Design Methods 


3.8.1 Subgrade Reinforcement /Stabilization — Vertical 
compressive strains of the subgrade are reduced by 
inclusion of geogrid reinforcement/stabilization placed 
between the subbase layer of the pavement and the 
subgrade. With this application, the engineer may 
reduce or completely eliminate soil replacement and 
reduce the thickness(es) of the pavement components 
or improve the service life of the pavement. 


3.8.2 Subbase or Base Reinforcement/Stabilization — 
Vertical compressive strains of the subgrade are 
reduced by the inclusion of geogrid reinforcement/ 
stabilization placed between the subbase or base layer. 
With this application, the engineer may reduce or 
completely eliminate soil replacement and reduce the 
thickness(es) of the pavement components to increase 
the service life of the road and / or to demonstrate an 
equivalent performance but with reduced thickness(es) 
of the component(s) of the pavement section. 


3.8.3 Modulus Improvement Factor (MIF) — The 
ratio of the improved resilient modulus as against the 
original resilient modulus is known as the Modulus 
Improvement Ratio (MIR), or Modulus Improvement 
Factor (MIF). While it is necessary to conduct field and 
/or laboratory tests to determine the MIF for a particular 
style of geogrids, manufacturer’s self-certified test 
value shall be used. In absence of certified test results, 
value shall be used as per recommendation of IRC 
SP 59 : 2019 ‘Guidelines for use of geosynthetics in 
road pavements and associated works (first revision)’. 
Thus, based on the improvement in the modulus of the 
layer in which the geogrid is incorporated, it compares 
the performance of a pavement cross-section with a 
geogrid-reinforced asphalt/base/sub-base course to a 
similar cross-section without geogrid reinforcement/ 
stabilization. MIF is used in mechanistic empirical 
approach for the flexible pavement structures. 


3.8.4 Traffic Benefit Ratio (TBR) — Traffic benefit ratio 
is also known as Traffic Improvement Factor, or TIF 
and is defined as the ratio of reinforced load cycles to 
failure (excessive rutting) to the number of cycles that 


IS 17371 : 2020 


cause ultimate/serviceability failure of an unreinforced 
road section. Thus, it compares the performance of 
a pavement cross-section with a geogrid-reinforced 
asphalt/base/sub-base course to a similar cross-section 
without geogrid reinforcement/stabilization, based on 
the number of cycles to failure. The failure is defined 
as a selected depth of rut/propagation of crack through 
repetitive loading applied by a passing wheel load of 
a standard axle of 80 KN with wheel configuration of 
single wheel or dual wheel. 


3.8.5 Layer Coefficient Ratio (LCR) — The structural 
contribution of a geogrid on a flexible pavement system 
can be quantified by an empirical term defined as 
Layer Coefficient Ratio (LCR). Layer coefficient ratio 
represents the improvement/enhancement provided by 
a specific geogrid to the layer coefficient of the layer 
in which the geogrid is placed (most commonly a base 
course and subbase course or both). LCR is prominently 
used in AASHTO-2013 based design approach for the 
flexible pavement structures. However, IRC SP 59 : 
2019 ‘Guidelines for use of geosynthetics in road 
pavements and associated works ( first revision )’ shall 
be referred for suitable LCR values in Mechanistic 
Empirical Method. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 Geogrid materials shall be inert to all chemicals 
naturally found in commonly encountered soils 
not containing adverse solvents and at ambient 
temperatures. It shall not be susceptible to hydrolysis, 
shall be resistant to aqueous solutions of salts, acids 
and alkalis and shall be non-biodegradable. 


4.2 Geogrids shall be rendered resistant to UV. Rigid 
geogrids shall have minimum 2 percent (mass/mass) of 
carbon black content when tested by the method given 
in IS 2530 to inhibit attack by ultraviolet light. Flexible 
knitted / woven / bonded geogrids shall be provided 
with a suitable coating, such as polymer modified 
bitumen or PVC, or any other coating that protects the 
geogrid from UV deterioration. 


4.3 The geogrid shall be resistant to commonly 
encountered chemicals and microorganisms (rot and 
mildew) normally found in soils and shall be stabilized 
against short term exposure to solar radiation. It shall 
have no tears or defects which adversely affect or alter 
its physical properties. 


NOTE — Materials required for complete and proper 
installation of geogrid materials that are not specifically 
described herein (such as pins, nails, washers, etc.) 
shall conform to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 


4.4 In case of PET geogrids, it shall have average 
molecular weight more than or equal to 25,000 g/mol 
when tested by method given in ISO 16014-4 or 
GRI-GGS and shall have carboxyl end group content 


IS 17371 : 2020 


less than 30 mmol/kg when tested by method given in 
ASTM D7409 or GRI-GG7. 


4.5 Identification of Geogrid 
The geogrid shall be identified by: 
a) polymer; 
b) type offibre or yarn, if appropriate; 
c) type of geogrid that is, woven or knitted, etc.; and 


e) any additional information or physical properties 
necessary to describe the material as per 
ISO 10320. 


5 REQUIREMENTS FOR GEOGRIDS 


5.1 Geogrids shall be dimensionally stable and able to 
retain their geometry under manufacture, transport, and 
installation. 


5.2 Geogrids as reinforcement /stabilization for flexible 
pavement structures shall meet the performance 
requirements specified in Table 1 and Table 2 for PET 
and PP geogrids respectively. 


6MARKING AND LABELLING 


6.1 The geogrid material shall be marked with the 
following by attaching the printed labels: 


a) Identification of the geogrid material that is, 
polyester/polypropylene geogrid for reinforcement 
/stabilization for flexible pavement structures; 

b) Type of geogrid material; 

c) Style number, lot number and roll number; 

d) Date of manufacture of geogrid material; 


e) Any other information/instruction provided by the 
manufacturer; 


f) Manufacturer’s name, initials or trademark; and 


g) The country of origin. 
6.2 Bis Certification Marking 


The geogrids conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the geogrids may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


7 PACKING 


The geogrid shall be packed in rolls as per the contract 
or order. Each roll shall be protected by wrapping it in 
a film of minimum thickness of 50 microns to prevent 
it from the adverse impact of heat and moisture, oil, 
grease, dirt, dust and other stains. 


8 IDENTIFICATION, DELIVERY, STORAGE 
AND HANDLING 


8.1 The geogrid identification shall be in accordance 
with ISO 10320. 


8.2 During storage, geogrid rolls shall be elevated off 
the ground and adequately covered to protect from the 
following: 


a) Site construction damage; 

b) Excessive precipitation; 

c) Extended exposure ultraviolet radiations including 
sunlight; 

d) Aggressive chemicals for example, strong acids 
and strong bases; 

e) Flames, welding sparks or temperatures more 
than71°C; 


f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with and 
affixing to the geogrid material; and 


g) Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the physical property values of geogrid. 


8.3 Store the geogrid material at temperatures above 
minus 20°C and below 40°C. 


8.4 Lay the rolled materials flat or vertical on ends. 


8.5 Do not drag the rolls but carefully lift them off the 
ground to be carried manually or by fork lift / cranes 
with suitable jigs. 


8.6 Do not leave the geogrid material directly exposed 
to sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


8.7 Each geogrid roll shall be wrapped with a material 
that will protect it from damage due to shipment, water, 
sunlight and contaminants. 


8.8 Keep geogrids dry until installation, and do not 
store directly on the ground. 


9 SAMPLING AND 
CONFORMITY 


CRITERIA FOR 


9.1 Lot 


All geogrid rolls of same material, construction and 
type dispatched to a buyer against one dispatch note 
shall constitute a lot. 


9.2 Unless otherwise agreed to between the buyer and 
the seller, the number of geogrid rolls to be selected 
at random from a lot shall be as given in column 3 of 
Table 3. 


2020 


IS 17371 


‘Ajoyeredas pasa} usaq savy Ady} ssojun ‘Sue. ayi ur sjonpoud 19y)0 dy} 107 porjdde oq Aew 159] au JO s}[Nsor 
OYL 189] OY} 0} Rare 19d sseur ISIMO] oY} MIM Jonpord ayy ATWO 190lgns 03 JUSTOYYNs si 1 “goze Jad ssewu 107 1dagxe peonuapr sjonpoxd jo oSues e Furey nonePpeIBIP pjeoruoyo pue BULOYJEOM 104 — ALON 


UNNA SSOID (19 ORI IUN : IN 


— « (20W JANBBOU OU YIM W [+ 90U219J0J) 007 O E rp» w “q3ua] oy (m 
— — (t Fg ——— >» wu PPIM (IA 
£9€LT SI OL< OL< 01< 01< OL< 01< 7492419d “vorsrounui Y Z/ reye pourejo1 YISUIIs “99UJSISO |BLTWAYJ (A 
(z ued) z91€1 SI 0L< DI OLE 0L< OLE 0L< Juoo4ad “9msodxo Y (OS reye paurejal YBUIons “souejsIsal AN (At 
SE99T SI < YSuss opisua] gewyn JO JUEHTAA sz > umy "HUN (CO x GIN) tens juooulod ¢ ye yı3uons opiSWa], (m 
SE99I SI + YSuss opisua] gewyn jo Jussıod SI > umy "HUN (CO x GIN) Tens juoosod Z ye yıuons SUAL (u 
S£991 SI 001 x 001< 08 x 08< 09 x 09< 05 x 05< Or x 0p< OE x 0£< W/N (GO x GIN) “yısuans a]1sua] ojeumin (I 
(6) (8) (1) (9) (s) 62) (©) (2) m 
001/001 08/08 09/09 0S/05 0p/0p 0£/0£ 
o PU So 
"sat, JO POUPIN yupurambay MSLIIPEAILUZ ‘ON IS 
(Ts asno ) 


SpLI3095 Lad JO Ssjuoulgınboy | AQEL 


2020 


IS 17371 


‘Ajoyeredas pasa} U99g savy Ady} ssojun ‘asues əy} ur sjonpoud 19430 94) 107 porjdde og Ap 189] au JO SINS 
OU L SA IY} 0] LATE Jad ssew ]SAMO] AYI YM jonpoxd ayi Aquo 199lgns 0] juaroyjns SI 31 “egare rad ssew 107 daa peonuapi syonpoud Jo guer e Butaey uonepe1Bap JEOILU9YO pue BULOYJEOM 104 — ALON 


UONIIIIG SSOID (19 “UONJOJIQ MYN CN 


+ (J9UE19]0] OALSOU OU YAM UIT + JOUBIDJON) 007 IST op w “y¿3ua] TOU (1A 
+ (wu QT + souerayon) 9 0} I > u PPIM (mA 
g xouuy 082 082 082 YISUIIs [UISIIO JO YIBUENS Jusdıod “YIBUENHS UONOUN( (1A 
EIELTSI OLZ OLE OLE Juadsad “vorsrownun Y ZL rezpe pourejo1 YI3UON)S “99URJSISOI [BOTWaYJ (A 
(z ued) ZOLEL SI 0L< DI 0L< Jjuoodad “9msodxXo Y OOS reye paurejal YI3UONS “99URISISIL AN (AL 
S£991 SI 87 x 87< TZ x I< tI x FIX W/NJ (AO x CIA) “rens juoozod ç ye uns SUIL (m 
S£991 SI ZI x ZI= 6 x 6< 9 x 9< HUN (GO x GIN) ‘ules jusosod 7 je yı3uoys ASUL (u 
S£991 SI Ov x Or< 0 € x OEZ 07 x 07< HUN (GO x AN) “WBU0o1s opisuaj eu (I 
(9) (s) 02) (©) © (1) 
0p/0p 0£/0£ 07/07 
0} PU — —— —— — — 
“ISIL JO POIN yuawa.ıaınbay MSLIPEIEUZ ‘ON IS 


(T'S ann) 
SPLIS095) dd JO syuaun.ınbay 7 AQEL 


IS 17371 : 2020 


Table 3 Scale of Sampling 9.3 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria for 


( Clause 9.2 ) Conformity 


Number of test specimens and criteria for conformity 


Criteria for Conformity 


(4) 


The defective rolls/pieces do not exceed 
the corresponding number given in 


SI No. of Rolls Sample Sub-Sample Permissible shall be as given in Table 4. 
No. in Lot Size Size No. of 
Defective 
Rolls 
a) (2) 6) (4) (5) 
i) Upto50 3 2 0 
ii) 51-150 5 2 0 
iii) 151-300 8 3 l 
iv) 301-500 13 5 2 
v) 501 and above 20 5 3 
Table 4 Number of Test Specimens and Criteria for Conformity 
( Clause 9.3 ) 
SI No. Characteristic No. of Rolls 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Clause 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 5.1, tensile, elongation According to column 3 of Table 3 
strength at 2 percent strain, strength at 
5 percent, strain, junction strength, length column 5 of Table 3 
and width 
ii) All other requirements According to column 4 of Table 3 


All the test specimens shall pass the tests 


IS 17371 : 2020 


IS No. 
2530 : 1963 


13162 (Part 2): 
2010 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Methods of test for polyethylene 
moulding materials and 
polyethylene compounds 


Geotextiles — Methods of test: 
Part 2 Determination of resistance 
to exposure of ultra-violet 
light and water (xenon arc type 
apparatus) 


10 


IS No. 
13321 (Part 1): 
1992 
16635:2017 


IS 17363 : 2020/ 
ISO TR 12960 
: 1998 


Title 


Glossary of terms for 
geosynthetics: Part 1 Terms used 
in materials and properties 


Geosynthetics — Wide width 
tensile test 


Geotextiles and geotextile-related 
products — Screening test method 
for determining the resistance to 
liguids 


IS 17371 : 2020 


ANNEXB 
| Table 2, SI. No. vi) | 


TEST FOR JUNCTTON EFFICIENCY 


B-1 This method prescribes the test procedure for 
performing tension tests on geogrid junctions. The 
procedure is provided as follows for testing the junction 
efficiency. 


B-2 Calibrate and balance the testing system. Prepare 
the test specimen as shown in Fig. 8. 


B-3 Install testing clamps. The junction clamp is 
typically the upper fixture and the rib clamp is then the 
lower fixture. 


B-4 Adjust the movable parts of the junction clamp 
to fit as closely to the vertical center rib as possible, 
without touching it or influencing it (that is, within | 
mm of the edge of the junction). 


B-5 Mount the specimen carefully in the upper clamps, 
tighten it with sufficient force to prevent slipping or 


ml 


| 
[ 


C) 


A) 


damage of the specimen and see that its alignment is 
proper to mate with the lower rib clamp. 


B-6 Mount the rib in the lower clamp so that bending or 
torsion is avoided and the rib is positioned so as to be 
uniaxially tensioned with respect to the upper assembly. 


B-7 Set the constant rate of extension of the test 
machine to be 50 mm/min. 


B-8 Rebalance the test system and initiate the test by 
starting the testing machine and continue until rupture 
occurs. 


B-9 Record and report the maximum force obtained to 
cause failure. 


B-10 Repeat the above procedure for ten (10) 
representative test specimens. Calculate the average 
junction strength per rib. 


B) 


D) 


Fic. 8 TYPICAL JUNCTION STRENGTH SPECIMENS FOR VARIOUS GEOGRIDS 


IS 17371 : 2020 


ANNEX C 


(Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, 
Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Best Geotechnique Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Charankattu Coir Mfg Co (P) Ltd, Kerala 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkata 


DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Geosynthetics Testing Services Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


ICAR- National Institute of Natural Fibre Engineering & 
Technology, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar 

Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi 

Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 
Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


International Geosynthetics Society, India Chapter, 
New Delhi 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


12 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
Suri JIGAR Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH NAIK 
Dr D. ANITA RAVINDRANATH 
SHRIMATI SUMY SEBASTIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
SHRI Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
Suri MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. DEVRAJ 

Suri C. D. ATHUL Ras (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 
DR SWAPAN GHOSH 

Pror (DR) A. K. SAMANTHA (Alternate) 
SHRI ANIKET S. BHUTE 
SHRI A. K. SINHA 

SHRI Manos KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 
DR DEEPAK MANJUNATH 


SHRI MANIK BHOWMICK 
DR SANJOY DEBNATH (Alternate) 


PROF AMIT PRASHANT 
PRoF A. K. GHOSH 


DR MAHUYA GHOSH 
SHRI KOUSHIK Das (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate) 


Dr Anup RAKSHIT 
SHRIMATI Rucuita Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Organization 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, 
Navi Mumbai 


Megaplast India Pvt Ltd, Daman 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Thane 


National Highways Authority of India, Ghaziabad 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Texel Industries Limited, Gandhinagar 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


In personal capacity [Bhakta Nivas, 12-1-170/46 P, 
Hanuman Nagar, Jaipuri Colony, Nagole, 
Hyderabad 500 068] 


In personal capacity [104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak 
Marg, Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 17371 : 2020 


Representative(s) 
Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
Suri C. V. RAJESH 
SHRI HEMENDRA BEHERA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJIV KUMAR 


Dr VISHAL RAMESH THOMBARE 
SHRI MANDAR BHALCHANDRA PINGLE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH PRAKASH SINGH 
Suri Mupit GARG (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. Roy 
SHRI SOUMYADIPTA Datta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
SHRI SANJAY CHARAK (Alternate) 


SHRI AMITAABH GOENKA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH SHARMA 
SHRI V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILESH R. MEHTA 
SHRI NARESH R MEHTA (ALTERNATIVE) 


SHRI V. K. PATIL 
DRANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Dr G. V. Rao 


SHRI V. N. GORE 


Suri A. K. BERA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 


| REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI J. K. GUPTA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions”. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (14672). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VIIM, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


