NAT Alan IS 17234 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


<fl en uires 9n Tera tre en erf 
TAR oh GATT Be ARAT — 
tite fèar 


Operation and Maintenance of All 

Types of Ropeways Intended for 

Transportation of Passengers — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 93.110 


© BIS 2019 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, +ç fée — 110002 


——— MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 


www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 7 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Continuous 
Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, had been 
approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a 
tensioned wire rope supported above the ground. In ropeways handling passengers, safety, reliability, and 
conformance to high-quality good industry practices are paramount for securing the safety of the users. Aerial 
ropeways are particularly useful in regions where the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great 
advantage over railways or roads, both of which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure easy 
gradient. They are inexpensive to maintain, pollution free, environment friendly, does not affect aesthetics, their 
power demand is modest, and, they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they are 
in force. 


Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ of MED 06 responsible for the formulation of this standard is 
given at Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17234 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF ALL 
TYPES OF ROPEWAYS INTENDED FOR 
TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 


1SCOPE 


This standard covers the standard operating procedure 
(SOP), safety requirements and maintenance of all types 
of ropeways intended for transportation of passengers. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.4 Ropeway —The system of overhead ropes on 
which carriers are used for the purpose of carriage of 
passengers, animals or goods and includes trestles, 
ropes, carrier, stations, offices, machinery and other 
works used for the purpose of or in connection with 
such aerial ropeway. 


2.2 Inspecting Authority — Any competent authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect 
the aerial ropeways installation and determine its 
acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this standard 
and compliance to prevailing statutory rules and 
regulations. If required, Competent Authority may 
hire external agencies like engineering institutions/ 
independent experts for carrying out said inspection. 


2.3 Equipment/Component — Assembly or sub- 
assembly of unit, parts, devices including safety 
devices, drive and tension system that have been 
incorporated in the ropeway installation. 


2.4 Operation — Running of the system for the 
purpose of transportation of passengers or tests. 


2.5 Operator — Agency deployed for operation and 
maintenance of the ropeway. 


2.6 Servicing — Actions intended to maintain 
specified condition of the system and its parts/ 
equipment. 


2.7 Standard Operating Procedure — Procedure 
established by the operator or any competent authority 
to be followed by operating personnel to ensure safe 
and trouble free operation of the installation. 


2.8 Inspection — Action intended for assessing 
the actual condition of the installation or its parts / 


components as also conformance with the specified 
performance. 


3 REFUSAL OF RIDES 


3.1 Rides May be Refused to persons who behave in 
a way that could endanger his own safety or safety of 
other passengers or the equipment. 


4 STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE 
(SOP) 


4.1 Safety 


In addition to general safety rules as described in 
relevant Indian Standards, the following safety 
measures shall be taken: 


a) Deployment of trained operating personnel; 


b) Availability of simple and clear operating 
instruction (manual); 


c) Ensure wearing of proper personal protective 
(PPE), such as helmet, safety shoes, gloves, 
identification badge etc.; 


d) Ensure availability of medical facility (first aid, 
oxygen cylinder at altitude above 12 000 feet), 
signage, safety instructions, information or means 
of communication at various points of use; 


e) Prevent entry and movement of passengers to the 
areas not designated for public use; and 


f) Ensure availability of safety measures as defined 
in the ropeway standards. 


4.2 Operating Conditions 


4.2.1 Passenger transportation service shall take 
place only when the ropeway in-charge or the person 
designated by him is present at the installation. 


4.2.2 Before starting daily operation, a check must be 
made on the condition of the ropeway as per preset 
daily check list including a test run encompassing 
the following and a record for the same must be 
kept: 


a) the required minimum clearances from stationary 
structures are obeyed; 


IS 17234 : 2019 


b) the position of the hauling rope and the rotation of 
the sheaves/rollers on the trestles are normal and 
there are no unusual noises/vibrations; 


c) opening and Closing of the Grips are effective; 
and 


d) all safety units are active and/or in operating 
conditions. 


4.2.3 The ropeway operation for passenger service 
shall be started only with the agreement of the upper 
and lower station operators and receipt of ‘All clear’ 
message. 


4.2.4 Whenever a cross-wind makes the cabins sway 
intolerably, the system operation should be temporarily 
stopped. Similar action should be taken upon the arrival 
of a storm, or whenever there is fear for the safety of 
the installation. 


4.2.5 No operation shall be carried out in complete 
darkness. If it is required, the stations and the trestles 
must be adequately illuminated. 


4.2.6 If the system operation is interrupted by safety 
devices or technical problems, the cause must be 
eliminated and a check must then be carried out to 
ensure that functioning is normal. 


4.2.7 If a fault cannot be eliminated within a time 
acceptable to passengers who find themselves on 
the route and if it is not possible to set the ropeway 
installation in motion, passenger rescue must be 
proceeded with. 


4.2.8 Rescue operation should be carried out by trained 
personnel only and with utmost safety. 


4.2.9 Goods may be transported in separate goods 
cabin only if: 


a) the weight does not exceed 10 percent of the 
equivalent passenger load; 


b) the space taken by the load is compatible with the 
clearances; 


c) the load is adequately secured against undue 
movement; and 


d) the passengers are not unduly inconvenienced by 
the stops needed for loading and unloading. 


4.2.10 Before leaving a station, the operating personnel 
must close the entrances and exits, as well as attach 
appropriate ‘NO ENTRY’ sign. 


4.3 Passenger Information 


Information board containing directives/regulations, 
Dos and don’ts, tariff plan, opening and closing time 
etc. shall be provided in a clear and simple, mono or 
bilingual text, clearly readable and displayed in a 
conspicuous location that passengers can notice before 
entering into the plant building. Entry and exit as 


also forbidden areas shall be marked prominently by 
appropriate notice /signage. 


4.4 Duty and Responsibility of Operating Personnel 


4.4.1 Ropeway In-charge 


During operation, the in-charge or his designated 
person shall be present at the installation and shall be 
responsible for: 


a) Total administration of the installation, both 
technical and commercial; 


b) Operational safety including that of operators and 
service personnel; 


c) Deployment of operating personnel at respective 
area and for assigned duty; 


d) Ensure implementation of set instructions 
and procedure for operation and maintenance 
including any supplementary instruction; 


e) Training of operating personnel on continual 
basis; 

f) Plan requirement of spares and ensure their 
availability as per plan; 

g) Oversee that operational records are properly 
maintained; 


h) Decide on what measures to take in the case 
of a breakdown or prolonged stoppage of the 
installation; 

j) Ensure fixing of proper signage, instruction 
boards, display etc. for the passengers and their 
maintenance; 


k) Ensure that the installation as a whole and the 
equipment in particular do not become a source of 
any kind of pollution beyond the limit permissible 


by local regulations; 


— 


m 


— 


Decide and prominently display a time table on 
availability of service opening and 


closing time and closing days; 


n) Ensure enforcement of prevailing statutory laws, 
rules and regulations including labour laws; 


p) Maintaining close liaison with competent 
authority in the event of any accident, law and 
order problem, labour unrest, natural calamity etc.; 


q) Maintenance, updation and Safe custody of 
following documents (as applicable): 


1) Installation permit/agreement; 


2) land lease/acquisition document ; 


3) clearance document from all statutory 
authority; 
4) acceptance/fitness certificate ; 


5) all test and calibration reports; 

6) operation log and event logincluding accident, 
if any; 

7) parts drawing/documents; 


8 manual and 


— 


operationand maintenance 
instructions; 


9) maintenance schedule and records 
10 


— 


staff record including competence assessment 
and improvement, 


11) contact details of nearby doctors, ambulance 
service, hospitals, 


12) Medical care unit, police, fire station, local 


administration; and 


13) any other related and important documents. 


4.4.2 Operating Personnel 


Operating personal shall carry out the tasks entrusted 
to them by the ropeway in-charge and shall follow his 
instructions as under: 


a) Safe operation; 


b) Carrying out the operating checks specified 
in 5.2.3 and 5.2.4; 


c) Maintain and update operational log book; 


d) Regulate the admission and transportation of the 
passengers and loads in accordance with 3and 4; 


e) Help passengers, whenever needed, board and 
alight from cabins quickly and safely; and 


f) Inform the ropeway in-charge as soon as possible 
if any abnormalities (smoke, sound, vibration etc.) 
is noticed and await instructions. However, in an 
emergency, they shall take appropriate measures 
or stop the system. 


4.5 Normal Operation 


After the checks stipulated in 4.2.2 are satisfactorily 
done, passenger transportation shall be started and 
continued as per scheduled hours of operation provided 
the operators are stationed at their assigned position and 
in a state of performing their respective duty as defined 
in 5.4.1 and 5.4.2, weather and visibility conditions 
are good and wind velocity within design limit. 
During operation, the operating personnel shall keep 
a continuous careful watch on the correct functioning 
of the equipment. At the end of operation for the day, 
they will ensure that there are no passenger on line or at 
stations and entry is closed. 


4.6 Abnormal Operation 


The following may be considered as abnormal 
conditions: 


a) Heavy rain or snow fall; 

b) High wind or storm that are impending; 

c) Poor visibility; 

d) Failure of power supply; 

e) Excessive wear in wearable parts that crossed 
acceptable limit; and 

f) Malfunction of some safety and monitoring 
devices. 


IS 17234 : 2019 


Ropeway operation may be continued in the above 
condition provided they do not pose any risk to 
passengers or installation. Otherwise services shall be 
stopped and passengers on line evacuated. Operation 
with alternate monitoring devices or manual monitoring 
permitted. 


4.7 Unscheduled Stoppage 


If the Ropeway is stopped unscheduled through 
manual or automatic energy station or if there is a 
disruption of service, the reasons shall be investigated 
by the operators and remedied wherever required. 
If it is felt that such remedial measures shall take a 
long time, passengers shall be informed and requested 
to keep calm. For suspected prolonged stoppage, 
passengers on line shall be evacuated and operation 
suspended. 


4.8 Checks During Operation 


Ropeway in-charge or any competent operator shall 
conduct, time to time during operation, a careful 
inspection of the entire installation whether the 
operating condition stipulated in 5.2 or other stipulations 
contained in this code are met and maintained or any 
abnormalities occurring. If any violation is noticed, the 
operation shall be suspended and the fault remedied 
before resumption of operation. 


4.9 Accident 


If an accident happens resulting in injury to 
passengers, they shall be provided medical attention 
as fast as possible, either on site or at the nearest 
medical care center. 


4.10 Fire Prevention 


Each station shall have minimum measures (dry 
powder type fire extinguishers, sand basket etc.) as per 
statutory rulesprevailing in that area for combating any 
incidence of fire. The operators shall be trained to use 
them. The units shall be replaced immediately upon use 
or expiry of useable date. 


5 MAINTENANCE 


5.1 General 


The following minimum requirements shall generally 
apply in conformity with the standards listed in 
Annex A. A Preventive Maintenance Schedule 
(PMS) shall be drawn up and kept up to date. It shall 
take into account the required periodic inspections 
and maintenance operations set out in 5.2 and 5.3. 
A suggestive PMS is provided in Annex B. 


a) A clear and transparent format for maintaining 
records including break-down maintenance shall 
be prepared and made available to the maintenance 
personnel for keeping records. Suggestive formats 
are given in Annex C and Annex D respectively. 


IS 17234 : 2019 


b) The periodic inspections and maintenance 
operations shall be accordance with the PMSand 
Formatwhich contain the reference values and 
Permissible tolerances, as well as the frequency of 
replacement for the components. 


c 


— 


The specifications and defect acceptance criteria 
for visual inspections and non-destructive testing 
shall be indicated in the PMS. 

The report on each maintenance operation shall be 
confirmed by the signature of the person carrying 
out the work. 


d 


— 


e 


— 


Maintenance work carried out on safety 
components in accordance with schedule 
mentioned in the maintenance planshall be 
inspected by a second person authorized by the 
Ropeway In-charge and the inspection confirmed 
by that person’s signature. 


f) Necessary tools in good working condition shall 
be available at the installation. Also the weights 
required for loading the carriers when carrying out 
braking tests shall be kept ready in a conspicuous 
place. 


a 


The required spare parts, in a good useable 
condition, shall be properly stored so as to 
avoid damage / deformation/deterioration in a 
prominent and designated place in the vicinity 
of the installation and shall be readily available. 
For requirement of capital spares like motor, gear 
box, ropes, control drive, drive and return sheaves, 
main drive shaft, saddles, brake units etc, O and M 
manual shall be referred. 


g 


h 


— 


Lifting equipment, ropes etc., shall be kept in 
good condition and their permissible load shall be 
indicated. 


j) The equipment necessary for line maintenance 
and the protection of workers shall be provided. 


k) The special operations to be carried out on 
the ropes at regular intervals (for example, the 
renewal of sockets and the displacement of track 
ropes or grips), are to be carried out in accordance 
with applicable standards. 


5.2 Inspection 


5.2.1 General 


a) Inspection shall encompass physical measurement, 
examination and assessment of the actual condition 
of the installation; 


b) Inspections shall be carried out periodically at 
daily, weekly, monthly, yearly intervals as per 
maintenance plan set in 5.1; 

c) The results of the inspections shall be recorded in 


writing in a set format as suggested in Annex B 
and Annex C; 


d) If deviations from the specified condition are 
found, necessary corrective measures shall be 
taken immediately and repeat inspection shall be 
carried out. The installation as a whole and its 
parts/equipment shall be continuously monitored 
to ensure safe operation and long life; 


e 


wm 


Immediately after occurrence of any accident, 
heavy storm or rain, snowfall and earthquake, the 
installation shall be inspected thoroughly; and 


f) All measuring/inspection instruments shall be 
kept calibrated all the time and certificates shall 
be maintained. 


5.2.2 Daily Inspections 


Daily inspection of the items shall be carried out as 
per set plan and findings as also action taken shall be 
recorded in a format. A suggestive format is given in 
Annex C. 


5.2.3 Weekly Inspection 


Weekly inspection of the items shall be carried out as 
per set plan and findings as also action taken shall be 
recorded in a format. A suggestive format is given in 
AnnexD. 


5.2.4 The monthly inspections shall include the 
following: 


a) Performance of coupling/un coupling devices 
and conformance of relative position of Track 
rail, rope, hold down, side track etc. to the design 
values; 


b) Performance of the drive unit, main and auxiliary 
including operation of over speed preventer/ 
monitor; 


c) the external condition, position and fastening of 
the rollers, sheaves and tension devices; 


d) Smooth movement of cabins and tow-hangers 
at entry, exit, inside the station and in the 
parking; 

Performance of the brakes and condition of brake 
linings/pads. Measurement of stopping distances 
with empty cabin or tow-hangers and compare 
with preset value; 


e 


— 


f) the manual operation of onboard brakes, with 
the installation stationary and the consequential 
operation of the corresponding switches; 

g) the external condition of the carriers, door 
fastenings and locks, opening and closing devices, 
safety bars and tow-hangers; 

h) the electrical safety devices; and 

j) Condition of the trestle mounts, line sheaves, 
track rope saddles, rope catcher and guard, cabin 
guides, limit switches 


5.2.5 Inspection in the Case of Intermittent Operation 


If operation is intermittent, periodic inspections need 
not be carried out during the period of stoppage, in 
accordance with the following principles: 


a) if operation is interrupted for a period of more 
than seven days, resumption of operation shall be 
preceded by a weekly inspection in accordance 
with 5.2.3; 


if operation is interrupted for a period of more 
than 1 month, resumption of operation shall be 
preceded by a monthly inspection in accordance 
with 5.2.4; and 


if operation is interrupted for a period of more 
than 6 months, resumption of operation shall be 
preceded by an annual inspection in accordance 
with 5.2.7. 


b 


— 


c 


wa 


5.2.6 Annual Inspections 


5.2.6.1 General condition of the installation by visual 
examination 
a) Damage /deterioration of any structures due to 
the effects of accident and/or abnormal operation, 
frost, falling stones, snow creep, foundation 
settlement or similar actions; 
b) Inspection of foundations for any crack, damage, 
tilting including the state of anchor bolts; and 
c) Inspection of ground anchors. 


5.2.6.2 Ropes 
a) Electromagnetic test of the ropes in accordance 
with MRT standard (under print); and 
b) Visual check of the rope end fixings, and visual 
check of the signaling cables, their supports, 
connections and fastenings. 


6 CARRIERS AND TOW-HANGERS 


6.1 Visual check of each carrier or tow-hanger, 
including suspension, carriage and hanger. At least 
20 percent of the grips shall be subjected to visual 


IS 17234 : 2019 


check in the dismantled condition and recorded with 
an identification no. so as interval between consecutive 
checks of each grip does not exceed 1 year. The checks 
and operating tests of the grips shall be in accordance 
with the supplier's instructions. 


6.2 All grips are to be tested once a year for resistance 
to slipping at the minimum required slipping force, 
except for grips for ski-tows. 


7 MISCELLANEOUS 


The following visual checks shall be carried out 
periodically: 


a) fire protection equipment; 
b) first-aid equipment; and 
c) special tools. 


8 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTS 


Grips, drive, return /tension shafts, anchor pin and line 
pedestal shall be submitted to non-destructive tests 
according to a programme suggested below: 


8.1 All grips annually; and 


8.2 100 percent of all other item mentioned above at 
least once a year. 


9 REPAIR 


9.1 Any repair work shall be recorded in writing and 
filed. The person carrying out the work shall certify 
that he has carried it out in accordance with the 
applicable requirements and shall immediately inform 
the ropeway In-charge. 


9.2 Before undertaking the repair of any damage, 
its origin shall be determined and the initial cause 
shall, whenever possible, be eliminated beforehand, 
when this cannot be done, appropriate compensatory 
measures shall be evaluated. 


IS 17234 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.1 ) 


LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON AERIAL ROPEWAYS 


IS No. Title 
5228 : 2017 Continuous movement monocable ropeways with fixed grips — Code of practice 
5229 : 2017 Continuous movement monocable ropeways with automatic grip — Code of practice 
7649 : 1975 Glossary of terms used in connection with aerial Ropeways and Cableways 
5230 : 2017 To and fro (Jig back) movement bi-cable ropeways — Code of practice 
16620 : 2017 Jig back movement monocable ropeways with fixed grips — Code of practice 
16623 : 2017 Pulsated movement monocable ropeways with fixed grip — Code of practice 
ANNEX B 
( Clause 1 ) 
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PLAN AND SCHEDULE (PMS) 
( Suggestive ) 
PRIVENTIVE MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE — DAILY 
SI No. Item Work to be Done 
1) Cabin, hanger andgrip Visual check against any damage, breakage, missing or loosen 


bolts/ nuts, lock pin, cleanliness. 


2) Abnormal sound or vibration Search to find cause. 

3) Operation of brakes Visual check against any abnormalities or heating of thrustor, 
Power pack components. 

4) Drive, return sheave bearings, motor | Feel by hand. If felt over-heated, check with thermoster. 

bearings 

5) Diesel engine Visual check for oil level, radiator water level, battery water 
level and terminal condition. 

6) Diesel generator Visual check for oil level, radiator water level, battery water 
level and terminal condition. 
Output power voltage 

7) Safety switches at stations and line | Check tightness of bolts as also desired performance. 


IS 17234 : 2019 


PRIVENTIVE MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE — WEEKLY 


SI No. Item Work to be Done 

1) | Drive sheave liner 
2) | Return sheave liner 

Check wear and tear at both stations 
3) | Service brake liner 
4) | Emergency brake liner 
5) | Coupling bolts, bush, chain link 
6) | Main motor fixing bolts 
7) | Rescue motor fixing bolts 
8) | Cardon shaft fittings 
9) | Drive/return sheave all joint bolts 
10) | Gear ring and drive sheave connecting bolts | Check condition/ tightness in static condition 
11) | Main gear box fixing bolts 
12) | Rescue engine fixing bolts 
13) | Drive bed foundation / fixing bolts 
14) | Tensioning hydraulic pack assembly 
15) | Station all limit switch fixing bolts 
16) | Rope in position on drive andreturn sheave | Adjust if required. 
17) Locking adadini modil i une du a T 
18) | Operation of grip testing device Check tightness of bolts 
19) | Greasing at tension trolley track Apply grease, if dry. 
20) | Tre pressate for cabin hauler dd Mer limit specified in the Manual and refill, 
21) |Station structural/monorail fixing bolts Check condition/ tightness in static condition 
22) | Guide for cabin movement at station Check for proper functioning 
23) | Tower foundation and joint bolts 

Check condition/tightness in static condition 
24) | Ladder and structural bolts 
25) | Line sheave alignment with respect to rope | Adjust, if required. 
26) | Lightning arrester fixing 
27) | Anemometer fittings Check condition at line 
28) | PAsystem 
29) | Condition of earth pits / pouring of water Visually / Water pouring 


IS 17234 : 2019 


SI No. Item Work to be Done 

30) |Firefighting system 

31) | CCTV auto backup working Check condition 

32) | All PA speaker at station and line 

33) | Main Rope including splice zone Feel by hand throughout the length wearing safety 

gloves against any wire breakages, kink etc. 
34) | Line signal cable and catenary rope Check condition and sag 
PRIVENTIVE MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE — MONTHLY 
SI No. Item Work to be Done 

1) |H. rope lubrication of splice knots Lubrication 

2) | Check main motor electric connections Tightness by spanner 

3) | Check earth resistance at main motor Megger >15 Ohm 

4) mm r E "pap beween pidand bull Set as per manufacturer’s recommendation 

5) | Emergency brake, brake linear thickness Replace as per manufacturer’s recommendation 

6) | Service brake - gap between linear and disc | Set as per manufacturer’s recommendation 

7) | Service brake linear thickness Replace as per manufacturer’s recommendation 

8) | Emergency braking testing Braking test with empty cabins, check recorded 
9) | Service braking testing deceleration curve. 

10) | Emergency engine drive test run Whole cableway 

11) | Emergency electric drive test run Whole cableway 

12) | Line sheave and its pedestal / bracket Greasing 

13) "nad —— uunc URBC pele pi Tighten, if required preferably using torque wrench 
13) | nsslisave dicar ot s0pe ueoVE Check Wear whether exceeded permissible limit as 

specified in the manual. Replace, if required 

14) | Check joint bolts of tower to tower head Tightness by spanner 

15) | Drive/PLC panel all internal connections Check continuity as per circuit 

16) | Components condition in drive/PLC panel | Visual 

17) |cleanliness of drive panel Visual 

18) | Earth resistance at drive panel terminal Megger, >5 Ohm 

19) | Component Em. Motor drive panel visual / condition 

Insulation/Earth resistance of all electrical 

20) |components — between phases and phase | Check using megger 


to earth 


IS 17234 


: 2019 


PERIODICAL MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE — HALF YEARLY 


SI No. Item Work to be Done 
1) | Hauling rope clean Manually 
2) | Main gear box oil Oil consistency (WDA) 
3) |Main motor cooling fan electrical connection Proper tightness 
4) | Emergency Engine drive and gear box oil level Check visually 
5) |Emergency Motor drive gearbox oil level Check visually 


6) |Tension carriage check bolted connection 


Tightness by spanner 


7) | Tension carriage wheel bearing 


Greasing of bearing eye 


8) | Check Rope clamp force 


Use hydraulic tools 


9) | Cabin doors rubber profiles 


Visually 


10) | Hanger arms check bolted connection 


Tightness by spanner 


11) | Check joint bolts of tower head to platform 


Tightness by spanner 


12) | Measurement of tuck points in, Splice zone 


Manual by tape 


NOTE — The above list is suggestive. However, engineer in-charge may modify the same as per the requirement of exact type of 


ropeway system being maintained. 


2019 


IS 17234 


JO} OUI 
143] £9 (43) 19 vA £A TA IA Apog 9xE1q IMAS 
lojour 
° IQON UL 
ANIT NI DNINNOY NISVO Apog > ornepAH 
lopoouq uonoəuuoo C Surreoq 
Jopooug odo eoq” [ng 29 SUNIA woyog doy ° ALMS “UY 
pu E: Surieoq 
in Ssour[ueo[.) woyog dor E = ALAS MU 
jureq : É = ` 
ENSIA uonoəuuoo P P ej lojour 
mey umd Ped | Q = L DI?8DNW | 
yoq Sutxg ITV tO pog | — Q 
131009 =} xoq 
HO | ənəsəqd | 1əmojg ure] SUO.LOW jndjno mdu ° 1293 ule 
poods opis B 
(s/uppəəds Sumero (syu1)poeds uny Kemodoy opis qo 1030]A a yeys uepied 
ssourg[eoq pug g 
€-dSs cass T-dSS pued Apog SAL 100W UTIL] 
peor puo[ 3 Juərmə | du. | 
aM ma ON UARIS 100W urepA us/N ujs/T juorqury 
SUOTJBOIPUT 
[IVW 
Sunsixq 
/ TENSIA 
(A) 
a q-A A-N Ajddns urejq uoprpuoo Sšuruuni ur 3mmzeIa duro T, 
uonipuoo 
MO3HO TVOM LOATA A[quiosse duo urqeO 
Sup[10A 1070W xoed orIngipAH 2 JopulAD uorsuə l Sumu pu? yoyoviq-H K[quiesse 
peol ATrenst A dun 
peor ma oN osnes OINSsoig meg Uonejs gung jexpe1q-H pue urge) SUTYIOM pue Reni) 
peog omnssolg Aq Sumu Aq ‘urged 
peor [In4 ON Joddo}s yuo WoL / (qour) ye urəlsÁs sued ye pue Surueo[p uiqed | /K[[enstA Tre JPA 
peog uonisod Suruorsuo] 
peor pn ON Joddojs yorq wog KOIL yoyo SUDOM X207] 100q ULO 
spooI/ uovo Ag s[ooL/ uonuəo' 
Ag pəpuəyy uongA4əsqO 79 J)uəuidmb/uə)I uoum.jsu[ | %@ Q.agnəy | popuony uongA4əsqO 7? juourdmb/4/uro)[ | juəum.sul| ^9 Ajnoy 
DON US Keq Ee 
Ae Modo 193uosseq LAOdAN MOH) AVA 


G3OO 9I AHONVNALNIVIN ATIVA XOA LVWANOA 


( əaysəssnç ) 


O XINNV 


10 


2019 


IS 17234 


SALUD 
eurguo [osarq 


ƏAup 
anosay OV 
NODIS QV IH LINA NODIS Id Ad (QWHVdHd Ajddns Jomog 
L| ur o[qeordde SUNOH 5NINNO?I AVAUIdO AO "IIV.L4G 
J9A2J9QA s[enrur ‘ssurpeas *oAn29jop 105 [X] MO 405 [N HEN TVLOL 
əpins 
u)s/n US/I Á[[EnsIA uols e[qu) 
o[qeo 
JOMO} yeusispue 
ye SUI Ayjenst A, SdT 
Uuonipuoo IU 
IW K[[en SA AVS MUNT 
pue 3SION 
——— CHAN) 
:SM4EUI92[ LAO L 9-1AAOL UIDUITXEJAI poods pul 
mdy 
;sT (01484 ANTTI 
uow dm yeu 
oy) 404 Suruunu jured sj[oq Surxy/"upy K[[EnSIA 
OOM Kemodoy 
"ON AVAS 31304 | o nep? oSexeo[ [IO K[[enSIA 
Kep i SupHoA pue 
ANV JI GHO V Id 09 SNTI AAVAHS 31) 104 sšumnu 1osuos 'dutə L K[[enstA 
uonrpuoo 
UOLIS J9MO'T uonejs oddf LWuO Surio Suruuni 


US/I 


eur] 


us/n 


uonisod uy 
/ TENSTA 


jusuidmbo 


onosoW 


UONRIQIA/OSION, 


XO8 AVAD NIV 


Ag 


ur yoy 


11 


IS 17234 : 2019 


oul] 
pue uongjs ye Joxeeds Vd IIV 
Surje1odo 
SuDpoA dnyoeq ome A LOO [| Aq uontpuoo 
/ TENSTA JPD 
wojsks SunuSuərd [| 

yew ujs WNI 
Sj[Oq [emionns uones ü qed ye uontpuoo 
[En STA onejs 


S[]0q 1urof jj savays umo L| /1euuedg | ur ssouyySty, 


Sy[oq Surxij 
Ap pue JULIN 


slləq 
jurof je oAeous OATIG 


sšumu PLYS uep1e;) 


ureuo ojdr pue 
sSumnjg 10joui NISIA 


sšumu 1030U1 URW 


juonipuoo 
xou) 


soq Sununoui OJ yeorg [| 


AOO ULE 


Sur|dnoo ureqo 


DIO Oooo UA OAO 


JO yur] pue urged) 
Sj[oq TeINjoNIs pue Joppe'T HN loui 
oxe1q AouoS Jour 

Syoq [|] yeu T a 

THOU pue uoyepunoy 3mo, jureq our] JOUT] DYVIQ oorAJog 
Sj[oq uorsuodsns [En StA pue suontjs woes y0q 
pue 19001 ox? JALAS HN / 1ouuedg ye ssoudan IOUT] ƏAgƏus UMMIY [&nstA ye 179] pue 
oou? Jeam yoyo 

| | | | JOMO} O^] IOT Joui| DALAS DALI 
S'IOOL/ | NOILLVOOT NOLLVOO'I 

Ad qi S.LNHIA (NV Ag STOOL /S.L GNV 
GNOLLLV WALI NANALSNI AJLIALLOV QAIAGNOLLLV WALI NAMAALSNI ALIAILOV 
"—— 0) 7 WO 
HN on eee gy re TBO 
"IS 


AVM3dOM t139N3SSVd 


L1HOd3W 523HO ADI33M 


( adljsas3sng ) 


G3OOW9I AONVNALNIVW ATHINOW AOA LVIA?IOA 


d X INNV 


12 


2019 


IS 17234 


(uru 
U]) uorsuourrp [VULION, 


slloq SUTXT] əpins 
Sup[o»o[un-oo[ utqeO 


uolgS Je JUOWIOAOW 
urged 10J opin3 2 do L 


yew 
Jureq [en STA 
/ 1euuedg 


suongjs yog 
ye oou) 


edoioj yoodsar YIM 31uouusi[e 
ALYS OUI] pue 1ox2os 


SuIXIj xoq 1eo8 URW 


L| jured yenst A, 
/ 1euuedg 


onejs 
ur ssoujqan 


(uuu UT) 
[ | uorsuəurp 1lutoq LUEN [ e] Joye Jo Suumod Tenuen 
/ sud yeo Jo uontpuoo 
[ | wañunn woqpunos 
ye sšƏumu woy punos 
(9 (ç (p uio ined [ _ | LAL pue 91] 
TSA 9pe)s ut ye sZunyy 1Jojourotuouy ssoujusr L oul] 
[ |] UOTSUSTITIp (episur) xoq uonounf /yenstA, ye uontpuoo 
poy [ 1 uoneorunuiuioo JAMO [, Xoou? 
SUN 
(€ (c (I [ ] Jojsorre SurujqrT 
(wu up [ ] Sipoq Surxrj [Teououi e 
NOISN3IIKId SINIOd MOOL dia 
ia BENNETT _ 
[ | Kreuo[eo pue oqeo peusis əurT UOT]JEUHOJop TRIP Sel 
‘əs yugo TENSIA joseyeoiq Kjquiasse ayer 
[ |] ye odor əZerney Jo ouoz əor|ds PAI E E S ay 
OXEIq IAIO 
shoq LIQ IIMS 
d Á 
[| JOLI Ad][OI] uorsuə1 Je Surseaur) [| [ | Si SS 
Sy[oq Surxi 
mIoq / uorepunog poq Muq L| 
dis urqed Jo ssəunuSn xou? : : 
suoneys ureuo o[dr pue sjjoq 
C] cee [| "^| a COO saoo L] 
ƏAup uo uorisod ur ados UI omo : : uoneis oanp 
sy[oq xeu ye uonipuoo 


IS 17234 : 2019 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Composition of the Panel-1 on ‘Aerial Ropeways’ MED 06 


Organizations Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity Suri A. BHADRA (Convener) 
In Personal Capacity Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 
In Personal Capacity, Kolkata SHRI DWIJENDRA LAL Das (Invitee) 
CSIR-CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr DeBASISH BASAK 
CRS, Pvt Ltd, Kolkata SHRI K. BOSE 
Damodar Ropeways & Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 
Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 

Member Secretary 


SHRI A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


14 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (13573). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


