( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS 8 9440 - 1979

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR LABORATORY BALANCES
Educational
Chairman
DR B. SHAXAN

Instruments and Equipment Committee, EDC 77
Representing

Sectional

National Council of Educational Training, New Delhi

Research

and

Members Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI C. L. BATRA SHRI RAJESH K. BATRA ( Alternate ) Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi SHRI K. S. BHANDARI National Council of Educational Research and SHRI P. K. BHATTACHARYA Training ( Deptt of Education in Science & Mathematics ), New Delhi All India Federation of University & College Dn M. M. CHAKRAVARTY Teachers' Organizations, Calcutta PROF M. BRATTACHARYYA ( Alternats ) Division ), Planning Commission ( Education SHRI S. R. CHOPRA New Delhi Ministry of Industry and Industrial Development SHRI K. M. DAR~AR Directorate of Technical Education. Government of PROP N. R. DAVE Gujarat, Ahmadabad Ministry of Education & Social Welfare, New Delhi DR K. GOPALAN Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi DR P. K. KATTI Manufacturers' Ambala Scientific Instruments SIIR~ M. L. MADAN Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt SRRI S. N. DHAWAN ( Alternate ) Director of Industries, Government of Haryana, SHRI K. MANIVANNAN Chandigarh SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Directorate of Industries. Delhi Administration, SHRI H. L. MEEANDRU Delhi Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), iHR1 B. P. MITTAL Chandigarh SHRI D. S. PATHANIA ( Alternate ) COMMANDERV. B. NAIR Ministry of Defence ( NHQ) LT CD~ V. N. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) University Grants Commission, New Delhi PROF A. V. PATANKAR SHRI LAKSHMI SA~AR The Scientific Instruments Manufacturers' & Dealers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt SRRI S. P. TUTEJA ( Alternate ) ( Confinurd on page 2 ) @ Copyright STANDARDS 1980 INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9440 - 1979
( Conlinurd

from pugs1 )
Rcftrrsenting The Scientific Instrument Co Ltd, Allahabad
( Altcrnatc )

Mem hers
SHRIB. Dd N.SlNHA A: S. RAJPUT

SERI VED PRAKASH SHRI H. C. VERYA

PROF V. N. WANCIXOO SERI R. K. MOHTA ( Altcrnate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio SBRI S. CHANDRABEKHARAN, Head ( Mech Engg ) Secretary SERI S. I'. ABBEY Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), IS1

Modern Equipment Company, Ambala Cantt All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers Association, Bombay All India Science Teachers' Association, New Delhi Member )

Physical
Convener PROP N. R. DAVE Members

Sciences

Subcommittee,

EDC 77 : 1
Government of

Directorate of Technical Education, Gujarat, Ahmadabad Towa Optics ( India)

SHRI R. K. BATRA SHRI C. L. BATRA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. MANIVANNAN SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Aftcrnatc ) SHRI LAKSHYI SAQAR
&RI

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Government of Haryana,

Director of Industries, Chandigarh The

SERI

S. P. TUTBJA ( Alternate ) The Scientific Instrument Co Ltd, Allahabad B. N. SIhtHA Dn A. S. RAJPUT ( Altcrnatr ) Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), SHRI H. S. T~IARA Chandigarh SHRI H. C. ASIJA (Altrmare ) Modern Equipment Company, Ambala Cantt SHRI VED PRAKASH SHRI NEERAJ P~AKASB. ( Alternate )

Scientific Instruments Manufacturers' and Dealers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt

IS

I

9440

=

1979

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION
LABORATORY FOR BALANCES

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian

Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 December 1979, after the draft finalized by the Educational Instruments and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. known college and and

0.2 Laboratory balance is an equi-arm two pan balance, commonly as analytical, chemical or physical balance used in school and laboratories for weighing substances.

0.3 This standard deals with the requirements of laboratory balances is one of a series of Indian Standards on educational instruments equipment.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the general and constructional laboratory balances used in school and college laboratories.

requirements

of

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.9 For "PPlY * rest. 2.2 Base A platform carrying the pillar of balance. about a central at the ends. fulcrum the purpose
-

of

this

standard,

the

following the beam

definitions into

shall

2.1 Arrestment

Arrangement

for putting

play or at

bar or lever turning 2.3 Beam - A horizontal under the influence of nearly equal loads applied

2.4 Capacity - The mass which can be safely weighed by the balance without effecting any temporary or permanent change in the configuration or sensitivity of the balance. 2.5 Case An enclosure forming part of the balance. 3

IS : 9440 - 1979
2.6 Knife Edges and Bearing Planes - Parts of balance, fulcrum and for the points of suspension of the scale pans. 2.7 Levelling Screws - Threaded the base, for levelling the balance. 2.8 Pans - The parts material to be weighed. 2.9 Pillar A vertical of balance screws, with knurled used for

head fixed at

meant

for placing

weights

and

the

support

for beam. stoutwile attached to the beam. a threaded

2.10 Pointer

A pointed

metallic

- Screws moving along 2.11 Pointer Adjusting Screws portion fixed at either end or in the centre of the beam. 2.12 Pointer Scale meant for indicating - A graduated strip fitted at the base the extent of oscillations of pointer.

of the

pillar

2.13 Rider Arrangement - A device fixed in the balance case, moving along the whole effective length of the beam, for carrying, lowering and lifting of a rider, essentially used in the case of analytical balance. - The mass which changes the rest point by one 2.14 Sensitivity smallest division of the scale when the balance is loaded to its maximum capacity. the balance pans. 2.15 Suspension Stirrups - Device for suspending These stirrups having a hook or an eye hole at their lower end are mounted on the terminal knife edges of the beam. 3. CAPACITY 3.1 The capacity Balance i) Analytical ii) Chemical iii) Physical of the laboratory balance shall be as under: Capacity 100 and 200 g 100 and 200 g 250 g

IS : 9440 - 1979 4. MATERIAL 4.1 The material below:
Component i) Beam ii) Case iii) Knife edges and Bearing planes iv) Levelling v) Pans screws Brass, Agate, Brass, to be used for the various components shall be as given

Material gunmetal wood or synthetic saphire or aluminium alloy

Seasoned

rock crystal gunmetal,

bakelite

or polyamide

Non-corrosive material, such as brass, aluminium alloy, stainless steel or thermosetting plastics Stainless adjusting arrangement screw Brass Brass or aluminium Brass or gunmetal steel, brass or aluminium Brass or aluminium

vi) vii) viii) x)

Pillar Pointer Pointer Stirrups

ix) Rider

5. CONSTRUCTIONAL

AND

OTHER

REQUIREMENTS

5.1 Base - The base shall be of material which will give sufficient rigidity to the balance. In the case of analytical and chemical balance, the top surface shall be resistant to staining and acids and it shall not absorb water, The base shall be fitted with 1evellir.g screws with knurled heads.
and chemical balances, the beam 5.2 Beam - In the case of analytical shall be divided into 50 or 100 equal divisions on each side of the centre to serve as rider scale. It shall be provided with adjusting screws on both ends or at the centre. 5.3 Case - It shall be made of seasoned wood free from visible defects, such as knots and cracks. It shall be provided with glass panes on the top and on all its four sides. It shall have arrangement for opening from the sides and from the front. It shall be constructed in a manner that the It shall have balance remains free from external dust and draught of air. a locking device so as to keep the case doors closed when the balance is not in use or during its transit. 5.4 Knife Edges and Bearing Planes - The knife edges and bearing planes shall have a smooth and polished surfaces of hardness not less than seven on Moh's scale. 5

IS t 9440 - 1979 5.5 Levelling Arrangement -Suitable levelling plumb line or bubble levels shall be provided. arrangement, such as

or flat in shape and shall be of 5.6 Pans - These shall be concave reasonable thickness so as to prevent any yield under the maximum specified load. The overall diameter of the pans shall not be less than 75 mm. 5.7 Pointer - It shall be straight having length not more than 200 mm It shall be close to the pointer scale and capable of with pointed end. moving parallel to it. 5.8 Pointer Adjusting Screws - Such screws ( one or two ) provided in the balance shall move smoothly in the threaded portion of the beam. shall 5.9 Pointer Scale - The pointer scale in all types of balances have ten divisions on either side of zero, maximum separation between any two divisions being 1 mm. 5.10 Rider Arrangements the movement carriage, lowering and easy. It shall be fixed in such a manner that and lifting of rider in the beam is smooth

5.11 Stirrups - These shall be sufficiently specified load without any distortion. 6. IDENTIFICATION OF PARTS

strong

to withstand

the

6.1 In case the parts of the balance are not interchangeable, be marked with symbol `L' or `R' indicating left or right identification. 7. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH

they shall to facilitate

7.1 All the metal parts except stainless steel parts, shall be given a coat of cellulose primer, gold lacquer or black matt cellulose lacquer or shall be suitably nickel plated for prevention of rust. 7,2 The graduation on the beam scale shall be engraved uniform thickness and depth throughout. 7.3 The case shall be finished glass panes having no visible smooth and polished distortion. 6 with fine lines of

and shall be fitted with

IS t 9440 8. SENSITIVITY 8.1 The sensitivity Capacity 100 g 200 g 100 g 200 g 250 g of the various types of balances

l

1979

shall be as under: Sensitivity 0.2, 0.1, 0.05 mg 0.2, O-1, 0.05 mg 1 mg 2mg 5mg

Type of Balance Analytical Analytical Chemical Chemical Physical

NOTE- These are the minimum limits of sensitivity and correspond to the fully loaded beams with weights equal to the maximum capacity of the balance.

9. TESTS 9.1 The balances shall be designed and tested on a steady support.

9.2 Sensitivity - This shall be tested after loading both the pans of the balance up to the maximum capacity load and determining the smallest incremental mass that changes the resting point by the smallest division of the scale.
resting

Test - The balance shall be tested for constancy of the the ordinary single weighing is repeated with the loads interchanged in the pans. The position of the resting point of the pointer shall not change by more than one division in the case of analytical balance and two divisions in the case of chemical and physical balances. 9.3 Equi-arm
point, when

10. MARKING 10.1 trade Each balance shall be marked with the manufacturer's mark, if any, its model, sensitivity, capacity and type. balances may also be marked with the IS1 name and

10.1.1 The Mark.

Certification

NOTE- The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder, The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 7

IS:9440

l

1979

11. PACKING 11.1 The balance shall be supplied in a convenient wooden padded and fitted with proper supports at various points.
11.2 The balance in its case shall be properly safety during transit. packed case, suitably its

so as to ensure

a

