UNA Aa IS 15490 : 2017 
Reaffirmed 2022 
Indian Standard (Reaffirme ) 


Tae ae eh few gat oe HT A 
+Idifšq upan tre & -AE werur 
@ fa sis tia Stet faciet— farts 


( Veen FRAT ) 


Seamless Steel Cylinders for 
on-Board StoragevefrGempressed 
Natural Gas as a Fuel for Automotive 
Vehicles — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.020; 43.040 


© BIS 2017 


ada AA SR 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
@ aM TH, 9 segue wat art, ag faceit-110002 
l MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2017 Price Group 11 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 2004. In this revision all the amendments have been incorporated and 
efforts have been made to align with ISO 9809-1 : 2010 ‘Gas cylinder — Refillable seamless steel gas cylinders 
— Design, construction and testing — Part 1: Quenched and tempered steel cylinders with tensile strength 
less than 1 100 MPa’. However, considering the prevailing practices of cylinder manufacturing in the country, 
necessary additions are made wherever necessary. 


Assistance has also been taken from: 


ISO 11439 : 2013 Gas cylinder — High pressure cylinders for the on-board storage of natural gas as 
a fuel for automotive vehicles 


ISO 13769 : 2002 Gas cylinders — Stamp-marking 


Clause 3.2.3.1 of this standard has been derived mainly from IS 15958 : 2012 ‘Compressed natural gas (CNG) 
for automotive purpose — Specification’. The purpose of this standard is to provide a specification for the 
design, manufacture, inspection and testing of a high pressure cylinder for worldwide usage. The objective 
is to balance design and economic efficiency against international acceptance and universal utility. 


Periodic inspection and testing of high pressure gas cylinders is covered in IS 8541 : 2009 ‘Periodic inspection 
and testing of high pressure gas cylinders — Code of practice’. 


While implementing this standard, the manufacturer and the inspection agency shall ensure compliance with 
statutory regulations. It is the responsibility of the owners and the users to ensure that the cylinders are 
periodically tested as per norms laid down in Gas Cylinder Rules, 2004 as amended from time-to-time and as 
enforced by statutory authorities under the rules. 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


SEAMLESS STEEL CYLINDERS FOR ON-BOARD 
STORAGE OF COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS AS A FUEL 
FOR AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with seamless steel cylinders of 
water capacity not exceeding 250 litre intended only 
for on-board storage of compressed natural gas as a 
fuel, intended to be permanently fixed to the 
automotive vehicle. This standard lays down the 
minimum requirements of the material, design, 
construction, marking and testing. 


Maximum working pressure of compressed natural 
gas (CNG) cylinder on-board should correspond to 
the maximum filling pressure at 15°C, that is 20 MPa 
(200 bar/204 kgf/cm’). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below. 


IS No. 
1500 : 2005 


Title 


Method for brinell hardness test for 
metallic materials (third revision) 
Method for Rockwell hardness test 
for metallic materials (Scales A-B- 
C-D-E-F-G-H-K 15N, 30N, 45N; 15T, 
30T and 45T) (third revision) 
Mechanical testing of metals tensile 
testing (second revision) 

Method for Charpy impact test (V- 
notch) for metallic materials 
(second revision) 


1586 : 2000 


1608 : 2005 


1757 : 1988 


3224:2016 Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas LPG) cylinders — 
Specification (fourth revision) 
3745 : 2006 Identification of the contents of 
industrial gas cylinders (first 
revision) 


IS No. Title 

4379 : 1981 Identification of the contents of 
industrial gas cylinders (first 
revision) 

5844 : 2014 Recommendations for hydrostatic 
stretch testing of compressed gas 
cylinders (first revision) 

7241: 1981 Glossary of terms used in gas 
cylinder technology (first revision) 

15126: 2002 Natural gas — Standard reference 


conditions 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, in addition to the 
definitions given in IS 7241, the following definitions 
shall apply: 


3.1 Gas Cylinder — Any closed metal container 
having a volume exceeding 0.5 litre but not exceeding 
1 000 litre intended for the storage and transport of 
compressed gas, including compressed natural gas 
container fitted to a motor vehicle as its fuel tank, 
but not including any other such containers fitted to 
a special transport or under carriage. 


3.2 Service Conditions 


3.2.1 Service Life — The service life for which 
cylinders are safe shall be specified by the cylinder 
manufacturer on the basis of use under service 
conditions specified herein. The maximum service life 
shall be 20 years. 


The ultrasonic inspection, or equivalent, of each 
cylinder shall ensure the absence of flaws which 
exceed the maximum allowable size. This approach 
permits the optimized design and manufacture of light 
weight cylinders for natural gas vehicle service. The 
service life shall be demonstrated by appropriate 
design methods, design qualification testing and 
manufacturing controls. 


3.2.2 Maximum Pressure — This standard is based 
upon a working pressure of 20 MPa (200 bar) settled 


IS 15490 : 2017 


at 15°C for natural gas as a fuel with a maximum filling 
pressure of 26 MPa (260 bar) regardless of filling 
condition or temperature. 


3.2.3 Gas Composition 


3.2.3.1 General — Methanol and/or glycol shall not 
be deliberately added to the natural gas. Cylinders 
shall be designed to tolerate being filled with natural 
gas meeting the specifications of gas as follows: 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement 
() (2) (3) 
i) Water content”, mg/m’, Max 5.0 


H) Hydrocarbons (volume percent 
of total organic carbon present) 


a) Methane, Min 90.0 
b) Ethane, Max 6.0 
c) C, and higher HC, Max 3.0 
d) C, and higher HC, Max 0.5 


e) Total unsaturated HC, Max 0.5 
iii) Corrosive components 


a) Total sulphur” mg/m’, Max 20.0 
b) Oxygen volume percent, Max 0.5 


iv) Carbon dioxide and nitrogen volume 3.5 
percent, Max 


v) Other species (mole percent) 0.1 
a) Hydrogen, Max 
b) Carbon monoxide, Max 0.1 
vi) Methane number, Min 90.0 


NOTE — The requirement of oil content shall be added 
at a later stage when test method for the same is available. 


D Requirements are according to IS 15126. 


2) Total sulphur includes the sulphur content of odorant. 


3.3 Temperature Range 


3.3.1 Gas Temperature — Cylinder shall be 
designed to be suitable for the following gas 
temperature limits: 


a) The settled temperature of gas in cylinders, 
which may vary from a low of —20 °C toa 
high of +65 °C; and 

b) The developed gas temperature during 
filling, storage and discharge which vary 
beyond these limits. However, this should 
not exceed + 75 °C. 


3.3.2 Cylinder Temperatures — Cylinder shall be 
designed to be suitable for the following gas 
temperature limits: 


a) Temperature of the cylinder material which 
may vary from -20°C to +82°C, and 


b) Temperature over 65°C shall be sufficiently 
local, or of short enough duration, that the 


temperature of the cylinder never exceeds 
65 °C, except under the condition 3.3.1 (b). 


3.4 Normalizing — Heat treatment in which a 
cylinder is heated to a uniform temperature above 
the upper critical point (AC3) of the steel and then 
cooled in still air. 


3.5 Quenching — Hardening heat treatment in 
which a cylinder, which has been heated to a uniform 
temperature above the upper critical point AC3, of 
the steel, is cooled rapidly in a suitable medium. 


3.6 Tempering — Softening heat treatment which 
follows Quenching or Normalizing , in which the 
cylinder is heated to a uniform temperature below 
the lower critical point, AC1, of the steel, then cooled 
in still air. 


3.7 Yield Stress (R.) — Value corresponding to the 
upper yield stress, R.,, or, for steels that do not exhibit 
a defined yield, the 0.2 percent proof stress (non- 
proportional elongation), Rpo2- 


3.8 Batch — Quantity of up to 200 cylinders plus 
cylinders for destructive testing of the same nominal 
diameter, thickness and design, made successively 
from the same steel and same heat and subjected to 
the same heat treatment for the same duration of time. 


3.9 Working Pressure (P,,)/ Service Pressure — 
Working pressure means the internal pressure of 
the gas in the cylinders at a temperature of 15°C. 


3.10 Test Pressure (P,,) — Test pressure means the 
internal pressure required for the hydrostatic stretch 
test of the cylinders. 


NOTE — It is used for cylinder wall thickness 
calculation. 


3.11 Burst Pressure (P,) — Highest pressure 
reached in a cylinder during burst test. 


4 SYMBOLS 

a = calculated minimum thickness, in mm, of 
the cylindrical shell; 

d = guaranteed minimum thickness, in mm, of 
the cylindrical shell (see Fig. 1); 

A = percentage elongation on gauge length 
5.65x.ÍS, ; 

b = guaranteed minimum thickness, in mm at 


the centre of a convex base (see Fig. 1); 
D, = nominal outside diameter of the cylinder, 
in mm (see Fig. 1); 
D, = nominal inside diameter of the cylinder, in 
mm; 
D; = diameter, in mm of former (see Fig. 6); 


H = outside height, in mm, of domed part 
(convex head or base end) (see Fig. 1); 

I = length of cylindrical part of the cylinder, 
in mm (see Fig. 4); 

L, = original gauge length, in mm; 

n = ratio of the diameter of the bend test former 
to actual thickness of test piece (1); 

P, = measured burst pressure in bar or kgf/cm’; 

P, = hydraulic test pressure, in bar or kgf/cm’, 
above atmospheric pressure; 

P, = working pressure/service pressure in bar 

or kgf/cm’, above atmospheric pressure; 

= inside knuckle radius, in mm (see Fig. 1); 

R. = minimum guaranteed value of yield stress 
(see 3.7), in MPa or kgf/mm’; 

R. = value corresponding to the upper yield 
stress; 

R, = minimum guaranteed value of tensile 
strength, in MPa or kgf/mm’; 

R. = actual value of tensile strength in MPa or 
kgf/mm’; as determined by the tensile test 
(see 9.3.1); 

S, = original cross-sectional area of tensile test 
piece, in mm’ according to IS 1608; and 


i 


t, = actual thickness of the test specimen, in 
mm. 
5 MATERIALS 


5.1 General Requirements 


5.1.1 The steel used shall be such that its properties 
meet the requirements of the finished product. The 
steel shall be aluminium or silicon killed with non- 
aging properties, other than rimming qualities. The 
chemical composition of all steels shall be declared 
and defined at least by: 


a) Carbon, manganese and silicon content in 
all, and 


b) The chromium, nickel, molybdenum, 
vanadium and that of any other alloying 
elements intentionally added to the steel. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


NOTES 


1. In case the steel is chromium with nickel, its value 
shall be nickel 2.30 — 2.80, molybdenum 0.40 — 0.70 
and chromium 0.50 — 0.80. 


2. When aluminium or a combination of aluminium 
and silicon is used for killing. The steel, the 
requirements regarding minimum silicon content does 


not apply. 
3. When steel is aluminium and silicon killed, nitrogen 
content shall be limited to 0.01 percent. 


4. When steel is aluminium killed by aluminium alone, 
nitrogen content is limited to 0.007 percent. 


5.1.2 The cylinder manufacturer shall establish 
means to identify the cylinders with the cast of steel 
from which they are made. 


5.2 Controls on Chemical Composition 


5.2.1 The chemical composition of all steels shall 
be defined at least by: 


a) Carbon, manganese and silicon contents in 
all cases; 

b) Chromium, nickel and molybdenum 
contents or other alloying elements 
intentionally added to the steel; and 

c) Maximum sulphur and phosphorus contents 
in all cases. 


The carbon, manganese and silicon contents and, 
where appropriate, the chromium, nickel and 
molybdenum contents shall be given, with tolerances, 
such that the differences between the maximum and 
minimum values of the cast do not exceed the values 
shown in col 5 of Table 1. 


The combined content of the elements like vanadium, 
niobium, titanium, boron and zirconium, shall not 
exceed 0.15 percent. 


5.2.2 Sulphur and phosphorus in the cast analysis 
of material used for the manufacture of gas cylinders 
shall not exceed the values shown in Table 2. 


Table 1 Chemical Composition Tolerances 
(Clauses 5.2.1 and 5.3) 


SI No. Element Maximum Content Maximum Deviations Maximum Range 
in Percentage in Percentage in Percentage 

a) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

; <0.30 0.06 0.06 

i) Carbon ee 0.07 0.07 

ii) Manganese All values 0.30 0.30 
iii) Silicon All values 0.30 0.30 
I <1.50 0.30 0.30 
iv) Chromium >1.50 0.50 0.50 

v) Nickel All values 0.40 0.40 
vi) Molybdenum All values 0.15 0.15 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Table 2 Maximum Sulphur and Phosphorus Limit in 


Percentage 
(Clause 5.2.2) 
SI No. Element Maximum Content Limit 
in Percentage 
for R, < 950 MPa for R, > 950 MPa 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Sulphur 0.020 0.010 
ii) Phosphorus 0.020 0.020 
iii) Sulphur and 0.030 0.025 
phosphorus 


5.3 The cylinder manufacturer shall obtain and 
provide certificates of cast (heat) analysis of the 
steels supplied for the construction of gas cylinders. 


If check analyses be required, they shall be carried 
out either on specimens taken during manufacture 
from the material in the form as supplied by the 
steelmaker to the cylinder manufacturer, or from 
finished cylinders. 


In any check analysis, the maximum permissible 
deviation from the values specified for the cast 
analyses shall conform to the values specified in 
col 4 of Table 1. 


5.4 Typical Steels 


Two typical nationally/internationally recognized 
steel types which have provided safe performance 
over many years are: 


a) Chromium molybdenum steel (quenched and 
tempered); and 

b) Carbon manganese steel (quenched and 
tempered). 


The chemical compositions of these steels, subject 
to the controls specified in 5.2 are given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Internationally Recognized Steel 
Composition (Cast Analyses) 
(Clause 5.4) 


SI No. Element Steel Grade and Conditions 
(In Percentage) 
Cr-Mo (Q&T) C-Mn (Q&T) 
(l) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Carbon 0.25-0.38 0.38, Max 
ii) Silicon 0.10-0.40 0.10-0.35 
iii) Manganese 0.40-1.0 1.35-1.70 
iv) Phosphorus 0.02, Max 0.02, Max 
v) Sulphur 0.02, Max 0.02, Max 
vi) Chromium 0.8-1.2 — 

vii) Molybdenum 0.15-0.40 — 


5.5 Suitable steels other than above may be used 
with the prior permission of the statutory authority. 
In such a case, the yield strength of the steel taken 
for the purpose of calculating the wall thickness of 
the cylinder shall not be greater than the minimum 
specified value. 


5.6 Heat Treatment 


The actual temperature to which a type of steel is 
subjected for a given tensile strength shall not 
deviate by more than 30°C from the temperature 
specified by the cylinder manufacturer. 


After end forming, the cylinders shall be heat treated 
(quenched and tempered) to the hardness range as 
specified in the cylinder approved drawing. 


During heat treatment the following temperatures 
shall be maintained: 


Heat Treatment Material 

“ Cr-Mo C-Mn 
Hardened 820 °C, Min 820 °C, Min 
Tempered 550 °C, Min 540 °C, Min 


The cylinder manufacturer shall certify the heat 
treatment process applied to finished cylinder. It shall 
conform the requirement given at 10.1. 


6 DESIGN 
6.1 General Requirements 


6.1.1 The calculation of the wall thickness of the 
parallel wall of cylinder shall be based on the 
guaranteed minimum yield stress (R,) of the material. 


6.1.2 For calculation purposes, the value of R, shall 
not exceed 0.85 R,,. 


6.1.3 The internal pressure upon which the 
calculation of wall thickness is based shall be the 
hydraulic test pressure (P,). 


6.2 Limitation on Tensile Strength and Hardness 


Maximum tensile strength shall be limited to 
1 100 MPa and hardness shall not exceed 330 BHN. 
In case upper limit of tensile strength exceeds 
950 MPa steel shall be subjected to sulphide stress 
cracking resistance test as given in 9.3.4. 


6.2.1 Calculation of Cylindrical Shell Thickness 


6.2.1.1 The minimum wall thickness of the cylindrical 
shell of the cylinder to be calculated by following 


formulae: 
f = P,x(13 D2+0.4D2 
100 x (D 2 — D) 


a D, +1 
250 
with absolute minimum ofa = 1.5 mm 
where 
f = maximum allowable wall stress at 


hydrostatic test pressure, in kgf/mm”; 
= 5/6R,, R, being the minimum value of the 
yield strength in kgf/mm’; and 
P, = hydrostatic test pressure above 
atmospheric, in kgf/cm? (5/3 x working 
pressure). 


6.2.2 The value of the wall thickness as calculated 
from above formula shall however, be not less than 
0.136 


6.3 Calculation of Convex Ends (Heads and Bases) 


6.3.1 When convex ends (heads as well as bottoms) 
are formed by forging of cylindrical parts (see Fig. 1) 
the wall thickness in the centre of the formed end 
shall, provided that the inside corner radius r is not 
less than 0.075 D., be at least 1.5 a’ if the outside 
height of the domed partis greater than 0.25 D,, and 
at least 2 a' if the outside height of the domed part is 
less than 0.25 D, but not less than 0.2 D, and a’ being 
the guaranteed minimum wall thickness of the 
cylindrical shell. 


6.3.1.1 For cylinders manufactured from plate, the 
thickness, b, at the centre of a convex end shall be 
not less than that required by the following criteria: 


b 1.5a' for0.40>H/D, 0.20 
b a'forH/D, 0.40 


where the inside knuckle radius, r is not less 
than 0.075 D, 


6.3.1.2 In order to obtain a satisfactory stress 
distribution in the region where the end joins the 
shell any thickening of the end that is required shall 
be gradual from the point of juncture, particularly at 
the base. For the application of this rule the point of 
juncture between the shell and the end is defined by 
the horizontal line indicating dimension H in Fig. 1. 


6.3.2 Nevertheless, if the shape of the convex end 
is such that the following conditions are fulfilled 


R D 


o 


r 01D, 


IS 15490 : 2017 


where 


R= inside dishing radius, in mm; and 
r= inside knuckle radius, in mm (see Fig. 1). 


The wall thickness of the end will be acceptable, if it 
is nowhere less than the value ¢,, when calculated 
with the following formula: 


t, =axF 


where F is a shape factor, the value of which depends 
on the value of H/D, and if H/D, 0.25, also on 
tD, His the outside height of the domed part of the 
convex end. 


For wall thickness up to and including 5 mm, the 
value of F shall be obtained from Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. 


6.4 The outside height H mentioned at 6.2.2 is the 
distance from the plane of the cross-section at the 
extreme limit of the cylindrical part of the cylinder to 
the farthest point of the centre of the connecting 
formed end. For the application of this rule: 


a) The cylindrical part of the cylinder includes 
any portion with slight deviations of the 
geometrical cylindrical shape, such as more 
or less conical wall inside or outside or at 
both surfaces, reduction in diameter for a 
foot ring, etc; and 


b) The top of the cylinder bearing the valve 
shall be considered without extrusion and 
without hole in the centre (see Fig. 1). 


6.4.1 The cylinder manufacturer shall in any case 
prove by pressure cycling test as given in 8.2.3 that 
the design is satisfactory. 


6.5 Neck Design 


6.5.1 The external diameter and thickness of the neck 
end of the cylinder shall be adequate for the torque 
applied in fitting the valve to the cylinder. The torque 
may vary according to the diameter of thread, the 
form of thread and the sealant used in the fitting 
of the valve (for guidance on torque, see IS 3224 and 
IS 3745). 


6.5.2 In establishing the minimum thickness, 
consideration shall be given to obtain a thickness of 
wall in the cylinder neck which will prevent permanent 
expansion of the neck during the initial and 
subsequent fittings of the valve into the cylinder 
without support of an attachment such as a neck 
ring. Where the cylinder is specifically designed to 
be fitted with such reinforcement, such as neck ring, 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Key 
1 — Cylindrical part 
NOTE — Shape B shall not be excluded from this requirement. 


Fic. 1 TypicAL CONVEX ENDS 


or shrunk-on collar, the same shall be taken into 
account. 


6.5.3 Valve Fittings 
The cylinder neck shall be threaded to suit the type 


of valves as given in IS 3224 or any other 
specification as approved by the statutory authority. 


The threads shall be full form, clean cut even and 
without chatter, answering to gauges, and concentric 
with the axis of the cylinder. 


6.6 Design Drawing 


6.6.1 A fully dimensioned drawing shall be prepared 
which includes the specification of the material (cast 


IS 15490 : 2017 


ai 
ACC 


⁄ | l| j| 


7 
A 


Viti it i i | | | 


E 
= 
E 
Ë 
E 
E 
= 
|| 
|| 
m 
a 
Ne 
N 
SS 
B 


H/Do 


Fic. 2 VALUES OF SHAPE FACTOR F For H/D, BETWEEN 0.20 AND 0.25 


analyses), neck threads, mechanical properties 
selected for calculating the wall thickness, heat 
treatment parameters, hardness range, working 
pressure, test pressure, water capacity, length and 
weight. 


7 MANUFACTURE 


The cylinder shall be produced by any one of the 
following methods: 


a) forging or drop forging from a solid ingot or 
billet; 

b) manufacturing from seamless tube (hot/cold 
finish, flow formed); 

c) pressing from a flat plate; 

d) closing of the open ends may be done by 
any hot working processes such as 
spinning, forging, etc; and 


e) Cylinders may be designed with one or two 
openings along the central cylinder axis. 
Metal shall not be added in the process of 
closure of the end. Plugging to correct 
manufacturing defects in cylinder bases is 
not permitted. 


7.1 Examination of Cylinders before Closing in 
Operation 


Each cylinder shall be examined before final closing 
in operation for thickness and surface defects. 


7.2 Cylinder Shape and Wall Thickness 


The cylinder design shape and wall thickness shall 
be such that the requirements for performance are 
complied with and the dimensions of all cylinders 
fall within the tolerances shown on the approved 
design drawing. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


0.9 


0.7 


0.35 


H/Do 


0.40 


— un 


Fic. 3 VALUES OF SHAPE Factor F AND H/D, BETWEEN 0.25 AND 0.50 


7.3 Surface Defect 


The internal and external surfaces of the finished 
cylinder shall be free from defects which would 
adversely affect the safe working of the cylinder. See 
Annex A for examples of defects and guidance on 
their evaluation. 

7.4 Ultrasonic Examination 


Each cylinder shall be ultrasonically examined for 
defects in accordance with Annex B. 


7.5 Cylinder Neck Threads and Fittings 


7.5.1 The cylinder shall have threads as per IS 3224 
or any other threads specification approved by 
statutory authority. Threads shall be full form, clean 
cut, even and without crack, machined to gauge and 


concentric with axis of cylinder. 


7.5.2 The cylinder valve, if fitted shall be tightened 
to required torque using suitable tape or by suitable 
sealant. 


7.6 Out-of-Roundness 


The out-of-roundness of the cylindrical shell that is 
the difference between the maximum and minimum 
outside diameters at the same cross-section shall not 
exceed 2 percent of the mean of these diameters. 


7.7 Mean Diameter 


The mean external diameter of the cylindrical part 
outside the transition zones on a cross-section shall 
not deviate more than +1 percent from the nominal 
design diameter. 


Soe 


Fic. 4 CYLINDER STRAIGHTNESS 


8 


7.8 Straightness 


The maximum deviation of the cylindrical part of the 
shell from a straight line shall not exceed 3 mm/m 
length (see Fig. 4). 


7.9 Testing Requirements 


The material of the finished cylinder shall satisfy the 
requirements given in 9 (Type Approval Procedure), 
10 (Batch Test) and 11 (Test on Every Cylinder). 


7.10 Re-tests 


In the event of failure to meet the test requirement in 
hardness testing individual cylinder shall be 
hardened and tempered to meet the specific 
requirement. It shall continue to be part of original 
batch unless the repeat heat treatment temperature 
differs by more than 30 °C from the first heat 
treatment. 


In case of failure in carrying out the batch testing as 
per 9 following re-testing procedures shall be 
followed. 


7.10.1 Ifthe sample fails in any of the test specified 
in 9.3.1, 9.3.2 and 9.3.3 and if the inspecting 
authority considered that failure was due to an error 
in carrying out the test, a fresh test shall be made on 
a test piece taken from the same cylinder. The 
defective test shall be ignored but otherwise, at the 
cylinder maker discretion, one of the following 
procedures shall be adopted: 


a) The test in which the failure occurred shall 
be repeated on the cylinder or test ring 
originally tested and, in addition, the test 
specified in 9.3.1, 9.3.2 and 9.3.3 shall be 
carried out on another cylinder or test rings 
from the same batch of the cylinders. If both 
test rings comply with the test requirements 
of 9.3.1, 9.3.2 and 9.3.3 the batch may be 
accepted. 


b) The batch may be reheat-treated as given in 
5.6 and the tests specified in 9.3.1, 9.3.2 
and 9.3.3 shall be carried out on two 
cylinders or test rings at the discretion of 
inspecting authority, which have not been 
previously tested. If both the cylinders or 
test rings satisfy the test requirements, the 
batch may be accepted. 


7.10.2 If any of the tests specified in 9.3.1, 9.3.2 
and 9.3.3 fail, the batch may be reheat-treated as 
given in 5.6 and retested as given in 7.10.1 (b). If 
both cylinders or test rings satisfy the test 
requirements, the batch may be accepted. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


7.10.3 No cylinder shall, however, be reheat-treated 
more than three times. Also, if more than five 
cylinders in a batch are reheat-treated, they 
shall constitute a new batch as given in 9.3.1, 9.3.2 
and 9.3.3. 


7.10.4 Not more than five cylinders or test rings 
from batch shall be submitted to the test and the 
limitations on reheat-treatment given in 7.10.3 shall 
be complied with. 


7.10.5 If after the permitted number of re-tests and 
reheat-treatments the tests requirements have not 
been complied with, the cylinders in the batch shall 
be rendered unserviceable for holding the gas under 
pressure. 


7.10.6 Ifany cylinder fail to meet the requirements 
of hydrostatic stretch test in terms of stretch, or burst 
test, no further cylinder conforming to that drawing, 
shall be accepted from the manufacturer until it has 
been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the inspector 
that the cause of the failure has been identified and 
corrected. Also, for the batch under consideration, 
each of the remaining cylinder should be 
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the inspector, to 
be free from the defect which caused the failure. 


NOTE — If manufacturer convince that failure in burst 
test is due to heat treatment and if inspection authority 
convince about the reason, the permission may be given 
by statutory authority in consultation with inspecting 
agency. 


8 INSPECTION AND TESTING 


In order to ensure that the cylinders are in compliance 
with this standard, they shall be subject to inspection 
and testing in accordance with 9 (Type Approval 
Procedure), 10 (Batch Tests) and 11 (Test on Every 
Cylinder) by an authorized inspection body (hereafter 
referred to as ‘the inspector’) recognized by the 
statutory authority. 


9 TYPE APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
9.1 General Requirement 


A technical specification of each new design of 
cylinder [or cylinder family as defined in (f)] including 
design drawing, design calculations, steel details and 
heat treatment, shall be submitted by the manufacturer 
to the statutory authority, through the inspection 
agency. The test detailed in 9.2 shall be carried out 
on each new design under the supervision of the 
inspector. 


A cylinder shall be considered to be a new design, 
compared with an existing approved design, when: 


IS 15490 : 2017 


a) itis manufactured in a different factory; or 

b) itis manufactured by a different process; or 

c) itis manufactured from a steel of different 
specified chemical composition or 
manufacturer of the material changes; or 

d) itis given a different heat treatment beyond 
the stipulated limit; or 

e) ends or ends profile has changed for example 


convex, hemispherical, torispherical, 
ellipsoidal or also if there is a change in base 
thickness cylinder diameter ratio; or 


f) overall length of the cylinder has changed 
more than 50 percent (cylinders with a 
length-diameter ratio less than three shall 
not be used as reference cylinders for any 
new design with this ratio greater than 
three); or 


nominal outside diameter has changed more 
than 5 percent; or 


g) 
h) hydraulic test pressure has been increased 
(where a cylinder is to be used for lower 
pressure duty than that for which design 
approval has been given, it shall not be 
deemed to be a new design); or 

Jj) guaranteed minimum yield stress (r ) and/or 
the guaranteed minimum tensile strength 
(r) have changed; or 

k) design wall thickness has changed. 
9.2 Prototype Tests 


9.2.1 Aminimum of 50 cylinders which are guaranteed 
by the manufacturer to be representative of the new 
design shall be made available for prototype testing. 
However, if for special applications the total number 
of cylinders required is less than 50, enough 
cylinders shall be made to complete the prototype 
tests required, in addition to the production quantity 
in such case for the next production batch, additional 
leak before break (LBB) (see 9.2.6) on one cylinder 
shall be performed. 


In the course of the type approval process, the 
inspector shall select the necessary cylinders for 
testing and supervise the following tests on the 
cylinders selected. 


9.2.2 The tests specified in 9.3 (Material Tests) on 
one cylinder, the test pieces being identifiable with 
the batch. 


9.2.3 Pressure Cycling Test and Hydraulic Bursting 
Test 


Two finished cylinders after marked, from the first 
batch made to new design shall be subjected to 


10 


pressure cycling test. This test shall be carried out 
with a non-corrosive liquid subjecting the cylinders 
to successive pressurization at an upper cyclic 
pressure which is equal to the hydraulic test pressure 
followed by de-pressurization to lower cyclic test 
pressure. The cylinder shall withstand 12 000 cycles 
without failure. 


The value of the lower cycling pressure shall not 
exceed 10 percent of the upper cyclic pressure, but 
shall have an absolute maximum of 30 kgf/cm’. 


The cylinder shall actually experience the maximum 
and minimum cyclic pressure during the test. 


The frequency of reversals of pressures shall not 
exceed 0.25 Hz (15 cycles/min). The temperature 
measured on the outside surface of the cylinder shall 
not exceed 65°C during the test. 


The test shall be considered satisfactory, if the 
cylinder attains the required number of cycles 
without developing a leak. 


After the test, base of one cylinder shall be sectioned 
in order to measure the thickness to ensure that the 
thickness is not less than the minimum prescribed in 
the approved drawing. Another cylinder shall be 
subjected to burst test. 


9.2.4 The actual burst pressure shall be not less than 
45 MPa (450 bar). 


9.2.5 The cylinder shall burst without fragmentation. 
9.2.6 Leak Before Break Test (LBB) 


One finished cylinder shall be pressure cycled 
between 2 MPa (20 bar) and 30 MPa (300 bar) at a 
rate not to exceed 15 cycles/min. 


The cylinder shall with stand 12 000 pressure cycles 
and then the test shall be continued up to either 
45 000 pressure cycles or till it fails by leakage. It 
shall not fail by burst. 


9.2.7 Bonfire Test 


One or two cylinders as appropriate shall be tested 
in accordance with Annex C and meet the 
requirements listed therein. 


NOTE — This test is for finished cylinder complete 
with fire protection system that is, cylinder valve, PRV 
and/or integral thermal insulation. 


9.2.8 Changes of design specified in Table 4 shall 
require only the prototype testing as specified in the 
table. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Table 4 Change of Design 


(Clause 9.2.8) 
SI No. Design Change Type of Test 


Hydraulic Pressure Cyclic Leak Before Bonfire 


Bursting at Ambient Break (9.2.7) 
(9.2.3) Temperature (9.2.6) 
(9.2.3) 

a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Diameter change 20 percent x — — 
ii) Diameter change > 20 percent x x x x 
iii) Length change 50 percent x = — x) 
iv) Length change > 50 percent x x — x) 
v) Working pressure change 20 percent”) x x = = 
vi) Dome shape x x — — 
vii) Opening size x x = = 
viii) Change in manufacturing process x x — — 
ix) Pressure relief device — — — x 


D Test only required when length increases. 
d Only when thickness change proportional to diameter and/or pressure change. 


DETAIL X 


Key 

1 — Bend test pieces 

2 — Transverse impact test pieces 

3 — Longitudinal impact test pieces 
(alternative positions shown dotted) 


4 — Tensile test piece 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL LOCATION OF TEST PIECES 


11 


IS 15490 : 2017 
9.2.9 Type Approval Certificate 


If the results of the checks are satisfactory, the 
inspector shall issue a type approval certificate (a 
typical example is given in Annex D). 


9.3 Material Tests 


The following tests shall be carried out on heat 
treated steel cylinders: 


a) Tensile Test — One in longitudinal direction 
(see 9.3.1), 

b) Bend Test — Four in circumferential 
direction (see 9.3.2), 

c) Impact Test — Three each in longitudinal or 
transverse direction (see 9.3.3), and 

d) Sulphide Stress Cracking Resistance Test 
(see 9.3.4). 


NOTE — For location of test pieces, see Fig. 5. 
9.3.1 Tensile Test 


The tensile test specimen shall be made from the strip 
cut longitudinally from the finished cylinder and 
shall be carried out in accordance with IS 1608 ona 
test specimen with a gauge length equal to 5.65 

The two faces of test piece representing the inside 
and outside surface of the cylinder shall not be 
machined but shall represent the surface of the 
container as manufactured. The ends only may be 
flattened for gripping in the testing machine. The 
tensile strength, yield strength shall not be less than 
minimum specified in design and drawing and 
percentage elongation measured shall not be less 
than 14 percent. In no case actual maximum tensile 
strength R „shall exceed 1 100 MPa. 


9.3.2 Bend Test 


The bend test (see Fig. 6) shall be carried out on 
specimen obtained by cutting a ring into four strips 
of equal length. The width of the ring shall be 25 mm 
unless 25 mm is less than four times the minimum 
agreed finished thickness (including additional 


allowance, if any) in which case the width shall be 
not less than four times the agreed finished thickness. 
Each strip shall be machined only on the edges. The 
strip shall remain un-cracked when bent inwards 
around a mandrel of appropriate diameter as given in 
Table 5 until the interior edges are at a distance apart 
not greater than the diameter of the mandrel D.. 


9.3.2.1 The maximum diameter of the former (D,) shall 
be established from Table 5. For the actual tensile 
strength (R) given in Table 5. 


D, =n X t, where t is wall thickness of cylinder at 


the position of testing 


Table 5 Bend Test Requirements 


(Clause 9.3.2) 
SI No. Actual Tensile Strength Bend Test 
(MPa) Valve R, of 


0) (2) (3) 
i) Up to and including 800 4 
ii) Above 800 up to and including 880 5 
6 
7 


ili) Above 880 up to and including 950 
iv) Above 950 up to and including 1 100 


9.3.3 Impact Test 


Except for the requirements set out below, the test 
shall be carried out in accordance with IS 1757. 


The impact test pieces shall be taken in the direction 
as required in Table 6 from the wall of the cylinder. 
The notch shall be perpendicular to the face of the 
cylinder wall (see Fig. 7). For longitudinal tests, the 
test piece shall be machined all over (on six faces). If 
the wall thickness does not permit a final test piece 
width of 10 mm, the width shall be as near as 
practicable to the nominal thickness of the cylinder 
wall. The test pieces taken in the transverse direction 
shall be machined on four faces only, the outer face 
of the cylinder wall unmachined and the inner face 
optionally machined as shown in Fig. 8. The test results 
should be reported in both Joules and Joules/cm’. 


Table 6 Impact Test Acceptance Values 
(Clauses 9.3.3 and 9.3.3.1) 


SI No. Cylinder Diameter D, in mm 140 140 
a) (2) G) (4) 
i) Direction of testing Transverse Longitudinal 
ii) Width of the test piece, in mm 3=5 5-7.3 7.5 — 10 3 — 10 
ili) Test temperature, in °C” -20 -20 
iv) Impact Mean of 3 30 35 40 60 
strength specimens 
in J/cm’, Min Individual 24 28 32 48 
specimen 


D) For applications at lower temperatures the test shall be carried out at the lowest temperature specified. 


12 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Det 24 


Fic. 6 ILLUSTRATION OF BEND TEST 


9.3.3.1 Minimum acceptance values are given in 
Table 6. 


9.3.4 Sulphide Stress Cracking Resistance Test 


If the upper limit of the specified tensile strength for 
the steel exceeds 950 MPa, the steel from a finished 
cylinder shall be subjected to a sulphide stress 
cracking test in accordance with Annex E and meet 
the requirements listed therein. 


10 BATCH TEST 
Each batch of 202 or less cylinders shall be produced 


from the material of same source and subjected to 
same heat treatment. 


10.1 The following tests shall be carried on each 
batch of cylinders: 


a) Material test on one cylinder that is, 


1) tensile test as per 9.3.1, 
2) bend test as per 9.3.2, and 
3) impact test as per 9.3.3. 


b) Pressure cycling and burst test as per 10.2. 
10.2 Pressure Cycling and Burst Test 


One cylinder shall be drawn at random from a batch 
of 202 or less heat treated cylinders and shall be 
subjected to pressure cycling test as given in 9.2.3 
at upper cyclic pressure equal to working pressure 


1 — Transverse specimen 
2 — Cylinder longitudinal - axis 
3 — Charpy - V - notch perpendiculer to wall 


4 — Longitudinal specimen 


Fic. 7 DESCRIPTION OF TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL IMPACT TEST PIECES 


13 


IS 15490 : 2017 


a) TEST PIECE TAKEN FROM CYLINDER WALL 


c) TOP VIEW OF TEST PIECE IN IMPACT TESTER 


Key 


1 — Machining optional. 2 — Striker. 3 — Direction of strike. 
4 — Test piece. 5 — Centre of strike. 6 — Anvils. 


Fic. 8 DESCRIPTION OF TRANSVERSE IMPACT TESTING 


for 40 000 cycles. The value of lower cyclic pressure 
shall not exceed 10 percent of upper cyclic pressure, 
but shall have absolute maximum pressure of 
30 kgf/cm’. The test shall be considered satisfactory, 
if the cylinder attains the required number of cycles 
without developing a leak. Subsequently, same 
cylinder shall be subjected to burst test. 


11 TEST ON EVERY CYLINDER 


Following tests shall be performed on each cylinder 
of every batch: 


11.1 Hardness Test 


Hardness of each cylinder shall be recorded by 
testing on the parallel wall at the centre. None of the 
results shall be outside the limits specified on the 
design drawing. 


Hardness testing shall be carried out in accordance 
with IS 1500 or IS 1586. The indenter and applied 
load shall be such that it shall not damage the 
cylinder. The test shall be carried out after final heat 
treatment. 


14 


Test values for hardness at the top, mid-section and 
base shall be recorded for those processes where 
cylinders are quenched by vertical immersion into 
the quench tank. Where the cylinders are immersed 
horizontally into the quenchant, hardness values 
shall be recorded at two points around the cylindrical 
mid-section of the parallel wall. 


The hardness values obtained thus shall be in the 
range specified for the design. 


The cylinders which are found to have hardness 
value beyond the specified range shall be subjected 
to appropriate re-heat treatment to achieve the 
hardness values within specified range. 


11.2 Hydrostatic Stretch Test 


Test shall be carried out in accordance with the 
method specified in IS 5844. Pressure greater than 80 
percent of the test pressure shall not be applied to 
any cylinder before the test. 


The cylinder shall be rejected, if it shows a permanent 
expansion (that is volumetric expansion after the 


pressure has been released) in excess of 10 percent 
of the total volumetric expansion measured at the 
test pressure P. 


The total and permanent expansion readings shall 
be recorded together with the corresponding serial 
number of each cylinder tested, so that the elastic 
expansion (that is total expansion less permanent 
expansion) under the test pressure can be established 
for each cylinder. 


11.3 Ultrasonic Examination 


Each cylinder shall be ultrasonically examined for 
defects in accordance with Annex B. Examination of 
such cylinders shall be carried out after heat 
treatment. 


11.4 Leakage Test 


Cylinders which have been closed at the end by 
forging or spinning, and which have passed the 
hydrostatic stretch test shall be subjected to a 
pneumatic pressure equal to 60 percent of the 
hydrostatic test pressure, and shall thereupon show 
no signs of leak. 


11.5 Water Capacity 


The manufacturer shall check and record the water 
capacity of each cylinder in order to ensure 
compliance that the water capacity is within the 
tolerance of + 2.5 percent of nominal water capacity. 


12 CERTIFICATION 


Each batch of gas cylinders conforming to all the 
requirements of this standard shall be covered by a 
certificate, signed by the Inspecting Authority’s 
representative. A typical example of a suitably worded 
certificate is given in Annex F. 


Copies of the certificate shall be issued to the 
manufacturer. The original certificate shall be retained 
by the manufacturer and the copy by Inspection 
Body in accordance with the Regulations of the 
Statutory Authority. 


13 CYLINDER MARKING 


13.1 Each cylinder shall be permanently stamped 
with the following: 


a) Serial No.; 
b) Identification of manufacturer; 
c) Month and year of hydrostatic test, such 


as MM/YYYY (for example 08/2024) 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Number of this standard; 

Test pressure, in Bar or kgf/cm? at 15°C; 
The tare weight, in kg, and nominal water 
capacity, in litres; 

Inspector’s official mark; 

The design working pressure in Bar/ kgf/ 
cm? at 15°C; 

‘ONB-CNG’ to show the 
application; and 

“DO NOT USEAFTER XX/XXXX” where 
XX/XXXX identifies month and year of 
expiry. 

Minimum guaranteed wall thickness of the 
cylindrical shell, in mm; and 


intended 


k) 


m) 


n) 


Identification of cylinder thread, for example: 
1) T1S1 for Type 1 Size 1 threads mark. 

2) T1S2 for Type 1 Size 2 threads mark. 

3) T1S3 for Type 1 Size 3 threads mark. 

4) T3 for Type 2 threads mark. 

5) T4S1 for Type 4 Size 1 threads mark. 


6) T4S2 for Type 4 Size 2 threads mark. 
7) T4S3 for Type 4 Size 3 threads mark. 


NOTES 

1 The period between the dispatch date and the expiry 
date shall not exceed the specified service life. The 
expiry date may be applied to the cylinder at the 
time of dispatch, provided that the cylinders have 
been stored in a dry location without internal 
pressure, 

2 The markings shall be placed in the listed sequence 
but the specific arrangement may be varied to match 
the space available. An acceptable example is: 


a) 


Serial number, 


b) Manufacturer / Identification number, 

c) Month and year of hydrostatic test such as 
06/2004, 

d) IS Number and ISI Certification Mark, 

e) T.P. for example.334 Bar or 340 kgf/cm’, 

f) Tare weight and nominal water capacity in litre, 

g) W.P. for example 200 Bar or 204 kgf/cm? at 
15 °C, 

h) ONB-CNG, 

j) DO NOT USE AFTER MM/YYYY for example 
8/2024. 


13.2 The marking shall not be made on the body of 
the cylinder but shall be at areas in the formed neck 
where the thickness of metal is greater than the 
minimum design thickness and where it is adequate 
for marking to be carried out. 


13.2.1 The characters in marking shall normally be 
at least 6 mm in height. On cylinders below 140 mm 
diameter, the height may be reduced, but in no case 
shall the characters be less than 3 mm in height. The 
indentation shall not be excessive depth. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


13.2.2 The stamps used for marking shall have small 
radius at change of section to avoid the formation of 
sharp edges in the stamped cylinder. 


14 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 
The cylinder shall be marked with the Standard Mark. 


14.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which a license for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to the 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 


15 COLOUR IDENTIFICATION 


15.1 The cylinder shall be painted externally in 
accordance with the colour scheme specified in 
IS 4379 or as specified by statutory authority. The 
external surface of cylinder shall be painted with 
following paint system and total dry film thickness 
of minimum 70 microns shall be maintained: 


a) Epoxy Primer (two component system) 1 coat 
— Zinc Phosphate / Zinc 
Chromate/Zinc Rich 

b) Epoxy / Polyurethane (two component 
system) | coat 


15.2 Cylinder manufactured for export shall be 
painted externally as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the manufacturer. 


16 RECORDS 


Records of all the tests made at the cylinder 
manufacturer’s works shall be kept for the life time 
of the cylinder and copies of test certificates shall 
be forwarded to the purchaser of the cylinder and 
the inspecting authority. 


17 PREPARATION FOR DESPATCH 


Before being despatched from the manufacturer’s 
works, all cylinder shall be thoroughly cleaned and 
all particles of grit, filings or other matter which may 
have collected inside the cylinder during the course 
of manufacture, heat treatment and testing shall be 
removed completely and the cylinder dried internally. 
If cylinder is heated for drying the temperature shall 
not exceed 200°C. Cylinders not immediately closed 
by fitting ofa valve and safety devices if applicable, 
shall have plugs suitably designed to prevent ingress 
of moisture and to protect threads, fitted to all the 
openings. A corrosion inhibitor (for example oil- 
containing) shall be sprayed into the cylinder prior 
to despatch. The outside of the cylinder shall be 
given a suitable protective coating before despatch. 


ANNEX A 
MANUFACTURING DEFECTS 
(Clause 7.3) 


Defect Description Conditions for Rejection and/ | Repair/Reject 
or Actions 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Bulge Visible swelling of the wall All cylinders with such a defect Reject 
Dent (flats) A depression in the wall that has | a) When the depth of the dent Reject 


neither penetrated nor removed 
metal (see Fig. 9) (see also 
“excessive grinding or machining’ 
below). 


exceeds 2 percent of the external 
diameter of the cylinder. 
b) When the depth of the dent 
is greater than 1 mm and when 
the diameter of the dent is less 
than 30 times its depth. 


NOTE — On small diameter Permit repair 


cylinders these general limits 
may have to be adjusted. 
Consideration of appearance also 
plays a part in the evaluation of 
dents, especially in the case of 
small cylinders. 


16 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Defect Description Conditions for Rejection and/ | Repair/Reject 
or Actions 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 

Cut, gouge, An impression in the wall where | a) Inside defect : if not superficial Reject 

metallic or scale | metal has been removed or | with sharp notches more than 5 

impression redistributed (due basically to the | percent of wall thickness 

introduction of foreign bodies on 
the mandrel or matrix during NOTE — Consideration of 
: > : appearance and localization (in 
s drawing Operations) thicker part with lower stresses) 
can be taken into account. 
b) Outside defect : when the Repair 
depth exceeds 5 percent of the 
wall thickness times the thickness 
of the cylinders. 
Dent containing | A depression in the wall which | All cylinders with such defects Reject 
cut or gouge contains a cut or gouge (see 
Fig.10) 

Excessive Local reduction of wall thickness | a) When the wall thickness is Reject 

grinding or by grinding or machining reduced to below the minimum 

machining drawing thickness; and 
b) When it results in the See ‘dent’ 
formation of a dent. above 

Rib A longitudinal raised surface with | Inside defect : if height or depth Repair if 

sharp corners (see Fig. 11) exceeds 5 percent of wall possible or 
thickness or if the length exceeds reject 
10 percent of the length of the 
cylinders. 

Groove A longitudinal notch (see Fig. 12) | Outside defect : when the height Repair if 
or depth exceeds 5 percent of the possible 
wall thickness or when the length 
exceeds 5 x the thickness of the 
cylinders 

Crack Split, material separation a) When not removable within Reject 
thickness tolerance; and 
b) When removable within Repair 
thickness tolerance 

Neck cracks Appear as lines, which run | All cylinders with such defects Reject 

vertically down the thread and 
across the thread faces. (They 
should not be confused with tap 
marks or thread machining mark) 
(see Fig. 13) 

Shoulder folds Folding with peaks and troughs | a) Folds or cracks that are visible Repair if 

situated in the internal shoulder | as a line of oxide running into the possible 


area, which can propagate into the 
threaded area of the shoulder (see 
Fig. 14) 


threaded portion should be 
removed by a machining 
operation until the lines of oxide 
are no longer visible. 


After machining, the whole area 
should be re-inspected carefully 
and the wall thickness verified. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Defect 


(1) 


Description 


(2) 


Conditions for Rejection and/ 
or Actions 


(3) 


Repair/Reject 


(4) 


and/or shoulder 
cracks 


Cracks can start from folds in the 
internal shoulder area and 
propagate into the cylindrical 
machined or threaded area of the 
shoulder (see Fig. 15 shows 
exactly where shoulder cracks 
start and how they propagate). 


b) If folding or lines of oxide have 
not been removed by machining, 
if cracks are still visible or if wall 
thickness is unsatisfactory; and 


c) Folds which extend beyond the 
machined area and are clearly 
visible as open depressions 
where no oxides have been 
trapped in the metal, should be 
accepted provided that the peaks 
are smooth and the root of the 
depression is rounded. 


Reject 


Acceptable 


Internal cracks in 
base 


Splits in the metal of the bottom of 
the cylinder in star form 


a) When not removable within 
thickness tolerance; and 


b) When removable within 
thickness tolerance. 


Reject 


Repair 


Orange peel Orange peel appearance due to | If sharp cracks are visible in the | Acceptable for 
surface discontinuous metal flow orange peel surface non-aggressive 
gases 
Internal neck Neck threads damaged, with dents, | a) When the design permits it, Repair 
threads damaged | cuts, burrs or out of tolerance threads may be retapped and re- 
or out of checked by the appropriate 
tolerance thread gauge and carefully 
visually re-examined. The 
appropriate number of effective 
threads shall be guaranteed; and 
b) If not repairable. Reject 
Pitting Severe surface corrosion All cylinders with such defects Reject 
visible after shot blasting 
Non-conformity — All cylinders presenting such a Repair if 
with design defect possible or 
drawing reject 
Neck ring not Neck ring turns under application | All cylinders presenting such a | Repair possible 
secure of low torque, or pulls off under | defect according to 
low axial load (see 6.7.2) approved 


method only 


Arc or torch 
burns 


Partial burning of the cylinder 
metal, the addition of weld metal 
or the removal of metal by scarfing 
or cratering 


All cylinders presenting such a 
defect 


Reject 


18 


lA 


T 
s 
2 
X-X 
KEY 
1 — EXTERNAL REFERENCE NOTCH 
2 — INTERNAL REFERENCE NOTCH 
NOTE 
T (5 0.75)% SBUTO.2mmT 1mm 
W 27T, BUT IF NOT POSSIBLE THENW 1mm 
E 50mm 
Fic. 9 SCHEMATIC REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR LONGITUDINAL DEFECTS 
E 
= 
T 
ra Ke 
i W 
X-X 
NOTE 


T (5 0.75)% SBUTO.2mm T 1mm 
W 27T, BUT IF NOT POSSIBLE THENW 1mm 
E 50mm 


Fic. 10 SCHEMATIC REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR CIRCUMFERENTIAL DEFECTS 


IS 15490 : 2017 


IS 15490 : 2017 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Key 


1 — Neck cracks 


2 — Propagated crack in the neck 


Fic. 15 NECK CRACKS 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.4) 
ULTRASONIC DEFECT DETECTION AND THICKNESS MEASUREMENT 


B-1 SCOPE 


This Annex is based on techniques used by cylinder 
manufacturers. Other techniques of ultrasonic 
inspection may be used, provided these have been 
demonstrated to be suitable for the manufacturing 
method. 


B-2 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


The ultrasonic testing equipment shall be capable of 
at least detecting the reference standard as described 
in B-3.2. It shall be serviced regularly in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s operating instructions to 
ensure that its accuracy is maintained. Inspection 
records and approval certificates for the equipment 
shall be maintained. 


The operation of the test equipment shall be by 
trained personnel and supervised by qualified and 
experienced personnel certified to level 2 of 
ISNT/ASNT. 


The outer and inner surfaces of any cylinder which 
is to be tested ultrasonically shall be in a condition 
suitable for an accurate and reproducible test. 


For flaw detection the pulse echo system shall be 
used. For thickness measurement either the 
resonance method or the pulse echo system shall be 


21 


used. Either contact or immersion techniques of 
testing shall be used. 


A coupling method which ensures adequate 
transmission of ultrasonic energy between the 
testing probe and the cylinder shall be used. 


B-3 FLAW DETECTION OF THE CYLINDRICAL 
PARTS 


B-3.1 Procedure 


The cylinders to be inspected and the search unit 
shall have a rotating motion and translation relative 
to one another such that a helical scan of the cylinder 
is described. The velocity of rotation and translation 
shall be constant within + 10 percent. The pitch of 
the helix shall be less than the width covered by the 
probe (at least a 10 percent overlap shall be 
guaranteed) and be related to the effective beam 
width such as to ensure 100 percent coverage at the 
velocity of rotation and translation used during the 
calibration procedure. 


An alternative scanning method may be used for 
transverse defect detection, in which the scanning 
or relative movement of the probes and the work 
piece is longitudinal, the sweeping motion being such 
as to ensure a 100 percent surface coverage with 
about 10 percent overlap of the sweeps. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


The cylinder wall shall be tested for longitudinal 
defects with the ultrasonic energy transmitted in 
both circumferential directions and for transverse 
defects in both longitudinal directions. 


In this case or when optional testing is carried out 
on the transition areas between the wall and neck 
and/or wall and base, this may be conducted 
manually if not carried out automatically. 


The effectiveness of the equipment shall be 
periodically checked by passing a reference standard 
through the test procedure. This check shall be 
carried out at least at the beginning and end of each 
shift. If during this check the presence of the 
appropriate reference notch is not detected then all 
cylinders tested subsequent to the last acceptance 
check shall be retested after the equipment has been 
re-set. 


B-3.2 Reference Standard 


A reference standard of convenient length shall be 
prepared from a cylinder of similar diameter and wall 
thickness range, and from material with the same 
acoustic characteristics (subjected to same heat 
treatment) and surface finish as the cylinder to be 
inspected. The reference standard shall be free from 
discontinuities which may interfere with the detection 
of the reference notches. 


Reference notches, both longitudinal and 
transverse, shall be machined on the outer and inner 
surface of the standard. The notches shall be 
separated such that each notch can be clearly 
identified. 


Dimensions and shape of notches are of crucial 
importance for the adjustment of the equipment (see 
Fig. 16 and Fig. 17). 


The length of the notches (£) shall be no greater 
than 50 mm. 


The width (W) shall be not greater than twice the 
nominal depth (T). However, where this condition 
cannot be met a maximum width of 1 mm is acceptable. 


The depth of the notches (7) shall be 5 percent + 0.75 
percent of the nominal thickness (S) with a minimum 
of 0.2 mm and a maximum of | mm, over the full length 
of the notch. Run-outs at each end are permissible. 


The notch shall be sharp edged at its intersection 
with the surface of the cylinder wall. The cross- 
section of the notch shall be rectangular except where 
spark erosion machining methods are used; then it 
is acknowledged that the bottom of the notch will be 
rounded. 


The shape and dimensions of the notch shall be 
demonstrated by an appropriate method. 


B-3.3 Calibration of Equipment 


Using the reference standard described in B-3.2, the 
equipment shall be adjusted to produce clearly 
identifiable indications from inner and outer reference 
notches. The amplitude of the indications shall be 
as near equal as possible. The indication of smallest 
amplitude shall be used as the rejection level and for 
setting visual, audible, recording or sorting devices. 
The equipment shall be calibrated with the reference 
standard or probe, or both, moving in the same 
manner, in the same direction and at the same speed 
as will be used during the inspection of the cylinder. 
All visual, audible, recording or sorting devices shall 
operate satisfactorily at the test speed. 


Key 


1 — Folds or cracks 


2 — After machining 


Fic. 16 CYLINDER SHOULDER FOLDS OR CRACKS BEFORE AND AFTER MACHINING 


22 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Key 


1 — Shoulder cracks 


2 — Propagated crack in the shoulder 


3 — Folds 


Fic. 17 SHOULDER CRACKS 


B-4 WALL THICKNESS MEASUREMENT 


If the measurement of the wall thickness is not carried 
out at another stage of production, the cylindrical 
part shall be 100 percent examined to ensure that the 
thickness is not less than the guaranteed minimum 
value. 


B-5 INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 


Cylinders with indications which are equal to or 
greater than the lowest of the indications from the 
reference notches shall be withdrawn. Surface 
defects may be removed; after removal the cylinders 


shall be re-subjected to ultrasonic flaw detection and 
thickness measurement. 


Any cylinder which is shown to be below the 
guaranteed minimum wall thickness shall be rejected. 


B-6 CERTIFICATION 


The ultrasonic testing shall be certified by the 
cylinder manufacturer. 


Every cylinder, which has passed the ultrasonic 
testing in accordance with this standard, shall be 
stamp-marked with the symbol ‘UT’. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 9.2.7 ) 
BONFIRE TEST 


C-1 GENERAL 


The bonfire test is designed to demonstrate that 
finished cylinders, complete with the fire protection 
system (cylinder valve, pressure relief devices and/ 
or integral thermal insulation) specified in the design, 
will prevent the rupture of the cylinder when tested 
under the specified fire conditions. 


Precautions shall be taken during fire testing in the 
event that cylinder rupture occurs. 


C-2 CYLINDER SET-UP 


The cylinder shall be placed horizontally with the 
cylinder bottom approximately 100 mm above fire 
source. 


Metallic shielding shall be used to prevent direct 
flame impingement on cylinder valves, fittings, and/ 
or pressure relief devices. The metallic shielding shall 
not be in direct contact with the specified fire 
protection system (pressure relief devices or cylinder 
valve). 


Any failure during the test of a valve, fitting or tubing 
that is not part of the intended protection system for 
the design shall in-validate the result. 


C-3 FIRE SOURCE 


A uniform fire source of 1.65 m length shall provide 
direct flame impingement on the cylinder surface 
across its entire diameter. 


Any fuel may be used for the fire source provided it 
supplies uniform heat sufficient to maintain the 
specified test temperatures until the cylinder is 
vented. The selection of a fuel should take into 
consideration air pollution concerns. The 
arrangement of the fire shall be recorded in sufficient 
detail to ensure that the rate of heat input to the 
cylinder is reproducible. 


Any failure or inconsistency of the fire source during 
a test shall invalidate the result. 


C-4 TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE 
MEASUREMENTS 


Surface temperatures shall be monitored by at least 
three thermocouples located along the bottom of the 
cylinder and spaced not more than 0.75 m apart. 


Metallic shielding shall be used to prevent direct 
flame impingement on the thermocouples. 


24 


Alternatively, thermocouples may be inserted into 
blocks of metal measuring less than 25 mm?. 


Thermocouple temperatures and the cylinder 
pressure shall be recorded at intervals of every 30 s 
or less during the test. 


C-5 The cylinder shall be pressurized to working 
pressure with natural gas or compressed air and 
tested in the horizontal position at working pressure 
and at 25 percent of working pressure if a thermally 
activated pressure relief devices (PRD) is not used. 


Immediately following ignition, the fire shall produce 
flame impingement on the surface of the cylinder 
along the 1.65 m length of the fire source and across 
the cylinder diameter. 


Within 5 min of ignition the temperature at least one 
thermocouple shall indicate a temperature > 590 °C. 
This minimum temperature shall be maintained for 
the remainder of the test. 


For cylinders of length 1.65 m or less, the centre of 
the cylinder shall be positioned over the centre of 
the fire source. 


For cylinders of length greater than 1.65 m, the 
cylinder shall be positioned as follows: 


a) Ifthe cylinder is fitted with a pressure relief 
device at one end the fire source shall 
commence at the opposite end of the 
cylinder; 

b) Ifthe cylinder is fitted with pressure relief 
devices at both ends, or at more than location 
along the length of the cylinder, the centre 
of the fire source shall be centred midway 
between the pressure relief devices that are 
separated by the greatest horizontal 
distance; and 

c) Ifthe cylinder is additionally protected 
using thermal insulation, then two fire tests 
at service pressure shall be performed, one 
with the fire centred midway along the 
cylinder length, and the other with the fire 
commencing at one of the ends of a second 
cylinder. 


C-6 ACCEPTANCE RESULTS 


The cylinder shall vent through the pressure relief 
device. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 9.2.9) 


TYPE APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 


IS 15490 : 2017 


This Annex provides an example of a suitable form of a type approval certificate. Other formats also acceptable. 


JSSBSDVo uu sS unamasa AEEA E E REES 
(Authorized Inspection Authority) 
Applying IS Standard ici anoeie isini oa i E ous vended quqa N EE ds 
concerning 
SEAMLESS STEEL GAS CYLINDER 
Approval NO... s asssssaspacpasisqasqapancua 
Typeof Cylinder u uu uyu u a a a E E Sa 


(Description of the family of cylinders (Drawing No.) which has received type approval) 


P bar sD Saa aysasqa pusa mm OD: U adn usasapa NEA mm, 

h s.es s... ........ ... ... sss ..... min max 

a mm 

Shape of base: Dran EEI mm 
E EEEE mm, mar eeno oeer MM; Fo Qasesassamackaspusqaushapqta litre, 
ag i reinas litre 

Material and heat treatment: 

Material and characteristics: Material R sensu see aq as aaueqassa a MPA, 

yau uqayaqaqawaqaqsaqcaquaoqi MPa 


Manufacturer or agent: 
(Name and address of manufacturer or its agent) All information may be obtained from 


(Name and address of approving body) 


Date: 


Place: 


(Signature of Inspector) 


IS 15490 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 9.3.4) 


SULPHIDE STRESS CRACKING TEST FOR STEEL 


E-1 Tests shall be conducted on a minimum 
of three tensile specimens with a gauge diameter 
of 3.81 mm machined from the wall ofa finished 
cylinder. The specimens shall be placed under 
a constant tensile load equal to 60 percent of 
the specified minimum yield strength of the steel, 
immersed in a solution of distilled water buffered 
with 0.5 percent (mass fraction) sodium acetate 
trihydrate and adjusted to an initial pH of 4.0 
using acetic acid. The solution shall be 
continuously saturated at room temperature 


and pressure with 0.414 kPa hydrogen sulphide 
(balance nitrogen). The tested specimens shall 
not fail within test duration of 144 h. Specimen 
that fails outside gauge are considered as invalid 
test. 


NOTES 


1 This is a test for type of material, duly heat 
treated, and results can be used for any cylinders 
from that material, with same heat treatment. 

2 For guidance Method A — NACE standard 


tensile test procedure, as described in NACE 
standard TM0177-96 may be referred. 


IS 15490 : 2017 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 12) 


ACCEPTANCE CERTIFICATE 


This Annex provides an example of a suitable from of acceptance certificate. Other formats are also acceptable. 


Acceptance certificate for seamless steel cylinders No 


A consignment of .......... cylinders consisting of 


according to IS 15490. 


Designation or type of gas SI No. of Cylinders Oty 
Manufacturer's NOS. J............sssesesssasasaspussa to.. 
Owner's Nos Ur ah au a kaya upa ss EE E s E E 


Moaniifacturer $< uuu aaa AATRES 


Address inerse khaka i S ya u u aaa qa uta aaa qala ndn shaky 

COUN i ÁO l au E rE Ee Dalez, u uum maa n waraka qasa 

Owner/Customer?) t... . l... la usssassascsssuwas Purchase Order No. 1... Gu qauliugayiypuyaus 

Addressieun z u Suysa ua adds A Ag bee eee et S ARNAR 

COUNUY s Sasa u a y ana au uha s Sakata Dalei uqu aym EE NEEE 
TECHNICAL DATA 

Water capacity, V : Nominal” .................... litre Nominallength;...... a... mm 


Minimum” .................. litre 
Test pressure, Ps ....2...ssssssasssssaqaspaspanana bar 
Working pressure Yat 15°C, P i ............. bar 


Maximum filling charge”: .........................kg 


Material : 


Specified analysis? : C S Mn 


Percent, Max : 
Percent, Min : 
Heat treatment : 


Stamp-markings ?” : 


Date 


(without cap and without valve) 


Outside diameter, D :............... mm 
Minimum wall thickness, a:........ mm 
Drawing NO:l, a a aaa aaa aaa aaa: 
P S Cr Mo Ni 
Manufacturer 


IS 15490 : 2017 


ACCEPTANCE TESTS 


1. Measurement taken on one representative cylinder of the batch ® 


Test No. or Covering Serial | Water Mass Empty, | Minimum Measured Thickness 
Batch No. or | No............... fo................. | Capacity, kg nm 
Cylinder No. litre Wall Base 
2. Mechanical Tests” 
Test No. Cast Tensile Test Hardness Impact Test Bend Test 
No. HB 
Yield Tensile Elonga- Charpy (V)....... 180° 
Stress Strength | tion (4) % Direction Without 
(R,,) MPa} (R,,) MPa Cracking 
Minimum Average Minimum 
Values J/cm? J/cm? 


This is to certify that the cylinders covered by this Acceptance Certificate have passed the hydraulic pressure 
test and all the other tests as required in 11 of IS 15490 and they are in accordance with this standard. 


Special remarks : 


On behalf of 


(Signature of Inspector) 


D Delete as applicable. 

2) If required by customer. 
3 To be quoted or drawing to be attached. 

® Need not be filled in if test reports are attached. 


Date: 


IS 15490 : 2017 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 


New Delhi 


Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Ltd, Allahabad 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


GSPC Gas Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Kolkata 


Inox India Limited, Vadodara 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Ltd, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 


LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Ltd, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Research & Development Estt (Engineers), Pune 


Representative(s) 


Dr SUDARSHAN KAMAL (Chairman) 
SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri S. Arun (Alternate) 


SHRI. S. SRIRAM 
Suri A. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate 1) 
Suri H. D. KuATRI (Alternate 2) 
Suri K. S. R. PRASAD 


Suri ALOK K. GUPTA 
Suri P. N. Kantu (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 
SHRI ALOK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
Suri NIKHILESH K. GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK V. PATWARDHAN 
Suri Deepak V. ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
Suri. S. GoPALAIAH (Alternate) 


Suri SUNIL K. Dey 
Suri S. B. BoLmaL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
SHRI PRADEEP (Alternate) 


SHRI P. KRISHNAN KUTTY 
Dr A. KRISHNA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURALI 
Suri Arun Nayak (Alternate) 


SHRI Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. Saran (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Organization 


SICGIL India Ltd, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (SIAM), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 

The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 
Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 

Vanaz Engineers Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 


Representative(s) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri NAUZER DADABHOy (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
Suri PANKAJ K. Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr ANJANA Deva (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Suet Y. K. BEHANI SHRI R. BEHANI (Alternate) 

Dr S. S. Turse Suri S. D. RAIRIKAR (Alternate) 
Suri A. K. Jain Suri P. K. MaATHuR (Alternate) 
Suri S. J. VISPUTE SHRI A.V KULKARNI (Alternate) 


Suri T. V. SINGH, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


IS 15490 : 2017 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure Gas Cylinders 


Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 


LINDE India Limited, Kolkata 


Adani Gas Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 

All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 

Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Rama Cylinders Private Limited, Mumbai 

Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 

Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARATI), 

New Delhi 

Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


31 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


SHRI PEEYUSH TRIPATHI 
Suri Amit MALIK (Alternate) 


Suri VAY K. PARIKH 
Suri D. C. Dave (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri P. G. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 
Suri A. G. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 
Suri. V Ramaswamy (Alternate 1) 


SHRI SUDHIR Jain (Alternate 2) 


SHRI ALOK K. GUPTA 
Sarı P. N. KANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH TIWARI 
Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN K. PANDEY 


Suri D. K. GARG SHRI 
N. K. Gare (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK K. NIGAM 
Sarı Manu Kumar NIGAM (Alternate) 


Suri R. CHANDGOTHIA 


SHRI Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J.P. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHENDRA SINGH 


SHRI SANJAY MANDE 
Suri PRAMOD W SANGWAI (Alternate) 


Suri P K GUPTA 
Suri Srinivas Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MARAGATHAVEL 
Suri NAUZER DapasBuoy (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


DR S. S. THIPSE 
Suri M. K. CHOUDHARI (Alternate) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1375). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg ee 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi eae 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 | 2650206 
2650290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 JUNE 2021 
TO 


IS 15490 : 2017 SEAMLESS STEEL CYLINDERS 

FOR ON-BOARD STORAGE OF COMPRESSED 

NATURAL GAS AS A FUEL FOR AUTOMOTIVE 
VEHICLES — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


(Second cover page, foreword, para 2, last sentence) — Substitute the 
following for the existing : 


‘However, considering the prevailing practices of cylinder manufacturing in the 
country, changes have been made wherever necessary.’ 


(Second cover page, foreword, para 4, last sentence) — Delete. 


(Second cover page, foreword, para 4) — Insert the following new para 
after para 4: 


‘Normalized seamless steel cylinders are covered in IS 7285 (Part 1) : 2018 Refillable 
seamless steel gas cylinders — Specification : Part 1 Normalized steel cylinders. 
Quenched and tempered steel cylinders are covered in IS 7285 (Part 2) : 2017 Refillable 
seamless steel gas cylinders — Specification : Part 2 Quenched and tempered steel 
cylinders with tensile strength less than 1 100 MPa (112 kgf/mm/?)’. 


(Second cover page, foreword, para 5, line 1) — Substitute ‘IS 8451 : 
2018 Periodic inspection and testing of seamless steel gas cylinders — Code of 
practice’ for ‘IS 8541 : 2009 Periodic inspection and testing of high pressure gas 
cylinders — Code of practice’. 


(Page 1, clause 2) — Insert the following at the end: 


IS No. Title 


15958:2012 Compressed natural gas (CNG) for automotive purposes — 
Specification 


Price Group 3 


(Page 2, clause 3.2.3.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘3.2.3.1 General — Methanol and/or glycol shall not be deliberately added to 
the natural gas. Cylinders shall be designed suitable for filling with natural gas 
conforming to IS 15958.’ 


(Page 2, clause 3.6) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘3.6 Tempering — Toughening heat treatment which follows quenching, in 
which the cylinder is heated to a uniform temperature below the lower critical 
point, AC,, of the steel.’ 


(Page 2, clause 3.7, title) — Substitute “Yield Strength (R „) for “Yield Stress 
(R,)’ and wherever it appears in the standard. i 


(Page 2, clause 3.8) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘3.8 Batch — A quantity of up to 200 cylinders plus cylinders for destructive 
testing of the same nominal diameter, thickness and design, made successively 
from the same heat number of steel and subjected to the same heat treatment for 
the same duration of time.’ 


(Page 3, clause 4, symbol r ) — Insert the following symbol below ‘r’: 
“R. = actual value of the yield strength, in MPa, as determined by the tensile test;’ 


(Page 3, clause 4, symbol R) — Substitute ‘R for ‘R; and wherever it 
appears in the standard. i I 


(Page 3, clause 4, symbol R) — Substitute ‘R 
appears in the standard. 


` for ‘R, and wherever it 


ma 


(Page 3, Table 1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


Table 1 Chemical Composition Tolerances 
( Clauses 5.2.1 and 5.3 ) 


SI Element Maximum Content Maximum Permissible Maximum 
No. (Mass Fraction) Deviations Permissible Range 
(Mass Fraction) (Mass Fraction) 
Percent Percent Percent 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
< 0.30 0.06 0.06 
i) Carbon 
= 0.30 0.07 0.07 
ii) Manganese All values 0.30 0.30 
iii) Silicon All values 0.30 0.30 
< 1.50 0.30 0.30 
iv) Chromium 
> 1.50 0.50 0.50 
v) Nickel All values 0.40 0.40 
vi) Molybdenum All values 0.15 0.15 


(Page 4, Table 2) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


Table 2 Maximum Sulphur and Phosphorus Limits 
(mass fraction) in Percentage 


( Clause 5.2.2 ) 


SI. Element Maximum Content Limits 
No. (Mass Fraction) 
Percent 
() (2) (3) 
i) Sulphur 0.010 
ii) Phosphorus 0.020 
iii) Sulphur + Phosphorus 0.025 


(Page 4, Table 3) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


Table 3 Internationally Recognized Steel Compositions 
(Cast Analyses) (Mass Fraction) 


( Clause 5.4 ) 
SI No. Element Steel Grade and Conditions (Mass Fraction) 
(Percent) 
#——r s 
for Cr Mo (Q and T) for C Mn (Q and T) 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Carbon 0.250 - 0.380 0.380, Max 
ii) Silicon 0.100 - 0.400 0.100 - 0.350 
iii) Manganese 0.400 - 1.000 1.350 - 1.700 
iv) Phosphorus 0.020, Max 0.020, Max 
v) Sulphur 0.010, Max 0.010, Max 
vi) Chromium 0.800 - 1.200 — 
vii) Molybdenum 0.150 - 0.400 — 


(Page 4, clause 5.5) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘5.5 Suitable steels other than above may be used with the prior permission of the 
statutory authority. In such a case, the yield strength and tensile strength of the 
steel taken for the purpose of calculating the wall thickness of the cylinder shall 
not be greater than the minimum values specified by the steel manufacturer.’ 


(Page 4, clause 6.1.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


“6.1.1 The calculation of the wall thickness of the pressure containing parts shall 
be related to the guaranteed minimum yield strength (R.) of the material in the 
finished cylinder.’ 


(Page 4, clause 6.1.2) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


, 


‘6.1.2 For calculation purposes, the value of R. shall not exceed 0.90 Rg 


(Page 4, clause 6.1.3) — Insert the following sentence at the end: 


‘P, is hydrostatic test pressure above atmospheric (1.5 times the working 


pressure).’ 


(Page 4, clause 6.1.3) — Insert the following new clause: 
“6.1.4 Cylinders may be designed with one or two openings along the central 
cylinder axis only.’ 


(Page 4, clause 6.2.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘6.2.1 Calculation of Cylindrical Shell Thickness 


6.2.1.1 The guaranteed minimum wall thickness of the cylindrical shell of the 
cylinder to be calculated using Equations (1) and (2), and additionally condition 
(3) shall be satisfied. 


D 10F xR. —V3P. 
a=—x|1 = ... (1) 
2 10F xR, 


where the value of F is the lesser of 0.65 / (R/R ) or 0.85 and F is design stress 


factor (variable) 
R/R mg Shall not exceed 0.90. 
The wall thickness shall also satisfy equation (2) 


mg 


a2D /250+1 ... (2) 


with an absolute minimum of a = 1.5 mm 


The burst ratio shall be satisfied by test as given in equation (3) 


P / P, > 1.6 ... (3) 


NOTES 
1 It is generally assumed that P, = 1.5 times working pressure for compressed gases for cylinders 
designed and manufactured to conform to this standard. 


2 Ro and R. shall be in MPa, Diameter in mm and P, in bar.’ 


(Page 5, clause 6.2.2) — Delete. 


(Page 5, clause 6.3.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘The thickness, b, at the center of a convex end shall be not less than that required 
by the following criteria: 
b > 1.54 for H/D > 0.25 
b > 2d for 0.25 > H/D, > 0.2 


where the inside knuckle radius, r, is not less than 0.075 D. 
NOTE — H/D, < 0.20 is not recommended.’ 
(Page 5, clause 6.3.1.1) — S ubstitute the following for the existing: 


‘6.3.1.1 For cylinders manufactured from plate, the thickness, b, at the centre of a 
convex end shall be not less than that required by the following criteria: 


b > 1.5a for 0.40 > H / D > 0.20 
b> for H/D,>0.40 
where the inside knuckle radius, r is not less than 0.075 D 
NOTE — H/D, < 0.20 is not recommended.’ 


(Page 5, clause 6.3.2) — Delete. 
(Page 5, clause 6.4) — Delete. 


(Page 5, clause 6.4.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


“6.4.1 The cylinder manufacturer shall in any case prove by pressure cycling test 
as given in 9.2.3 that the design is satisfactory.’ 


(Page 7, Fig. 2) — Delete. 
(Page 8, Fig. 3) — Delete. 


[ Page 9, clause 9.1 j) | — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘j) guaranteed minimum yield strength (R „) and/or the guaranteed minimum 
tensile strength (Rag) for the finished cylinder have changed; or’ 


(Page 10, clause 9.2.3, para 2) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘The value of the lower cycling pressure shall not exceed 10 percent of the upper 
cyclic pressure, but shall have an absolute maximum of 30 bar.’ 


(Page 10, clause 9.2.4) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘9.2.4 The actual burst pressure shall be not less than 48 MPa (480 bar). 


(Page 11, Table 4) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
Table 4 Change of Design 
( Clause 9.2.8 ) 


No. E#——— — R r C- 
Hydraulic Pressure Leak Bonfire 
Bursting Cyclic at Before (see 9.2.7) 
(see 9.2.3) ambient Break 
Temperature (see 9.2.6) 
(see 9.2.3) 
() (2) 6) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Diameter change < 20 percent x x — — 
ii) Diameter change > 20 percent x x x x 
iii) Length change < 50 percent x = — x) 
iv) Length change > 50 percent x x — x) 
v) Working pressure change x x == _ 


< 20 percent? 


vi) | Dome shape x x — — 

vii) Opening size x x _ — 

viii) Change in manufacturing x x = — 
process 

ix) Pressure relief device — — — X 


D Test only required when length increases. 


2), Only when thickness change proportional to diameter and / or pressure change. 


(Page 12, clause 9.3.1, fourth sentence) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘The tensile strength, yield strength shall not be less than minimum specified in 
design drawing and percentage elongation measured shall not be less than 14 
percent.’ 


(Page 12, Table 5) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


Table 5 Bend Test Requirements 
( Clause 9.3.2 ) 


SI No. Actual Tensile Strength, R Value of n 
(in MPa) 
a) (2) (3) 
i) Upto and including 800 4 
ii) Above 800 upto and including 880 5 
iii) Above 880 upto and including 950 6 
iv) Above 950 upto and less than 1 100 7 


(Page 12, Table 6) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


Table 6 Impact Test Acceptance Values 


( Clauses 9.3.3 and 9.3.3.1) 


SI. Cylinder Diameter D, > 140 < 140 
No. inmm 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Direction of testing Transverse Longitudinal 
ii) Width of the test piece 3-5 >5-7.5 >7.5-10 3-10 
iii) | Test temperature, in °C” -20 -20 
iv) | Impact Mean of 3 30 35 40 60 
strength” in | specimens 
Hem’, Min | Io dividual 24 28 32 48 
specimen 


D For applications at lower temperatures the test shall be carried out at the lowest temperature specified. 


2) The impact value J/cm? is calculated by dividing the impact energy (J) by the actual cross-sectional area 


below the notch (cm?) of the Charpy test specimen. 


(Page 15, clause 11.4) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘11.4 Leakage Test 


Cylinders which have been closed at the end by forging or spinning, and which 
have passed the hydrostatic stretch test shall be subjected to a pneumatic pressure 
not less than two third of the hydrostatic test pressure, and shall thereupon show 
no signs of leak.’ 


(Page 16, clause 15) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘15 Colour Identification 


15.1 The cylinder shall be painted or powder coated externally in accordance with 
the colour scheme specified in IS 4379 or as specified by statutory authority. 


15.2 The external surface of cylinder shall be painted or powder coated. 


15.2.1 For painting use the following paint system and total minimum dry film 
thickness of 70u shall be maintained: 


a) Epoxy Primer (two component system) 1 coat — Zinc Phosphate / Zinc 
Chromate / Zinc Rich; and 


b) Epoxy / Polyurethane (two component system) | coat 


15.2.2 For powder coating use the coating system with final coat of powder and 
final minimum coating thickness of 70u. 


15.3 Cylinder manufactured for export shall be painted or powder coated 
externally as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer.’ 


(MED 16) — U77777 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


