NAT AWA IS 15908 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


ana Geren a Aes A fore Piao atte 
TI SAC Ch MATa, HEAT 
a tarata — tt afiar 


( Teel TREAT ) 


Selection, Installation and 
Maintenance of Control and 
Indicating Equipment for Fire 
Detection and Alarm 
System — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.220.20 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 10 


Firefighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Firefighting Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


In fire alarm systems, control and indicating equipment (CIE) are the backbone of the entire network and performs 
three important functions, namely: 


a) Continuous and automatic monitoring and control of circuits external to the equipment (such as fire 
detection and fire alarm device circuits) and also supply of power to these circuits. 


b) Indication of fire signals, fault signals and their location. 


c) Manual control to facilitate actions, such as testing, disablement of devices, triggering of fire signals, 
silencing of audible fire warning and resetting the system after a fire signal. 


As these facilities are required by different people at different times, all these facilities need not always be 
provided at a single location. For example, according to the premises, indication of faults might be required by an 
engineering personnel, who might not require detailed information on fire signals whereas accurate information 
on the location of a fire is essential to the safety/security personnel, who might need specific information about 
system fault(s). 


In small and simple systems, the control indicating and power supply equipment for the system is normally 
housed within a single enclosure. In large and complex premises, the main control equipment circuitry might 
be installed at one location, power supplies might be distributed around the building, while main indicating 
equipment incorporating certain basic controls is installed at another location, such as near a main entrance to 
the building; and lastly, repeat indicating equipment (with or without control) may be installed at other locations 
(such as security or control rooms). 


Since premises vary in size, complexity and fire strategy, it is essential that the nature and location of manual 
controls and all indicating equipment, in particular, is suitable for the fire and evacuation procedure that are 
to be adopted and for the person that shall use the system, including security or safety staff and fire-fighter 
attending a fire. Location of control circuitry and power supplies shall more likely to be determined by engineering 
considerations and the preference of the personnel who are going to use the system. This standard was formulated 
in 2011 to address all the above and lay down the planning, design, maintenance and performance requirements 
of CIE to detect fire and raise alarm thereon. 


In this revision, the following major changes have been made: 
a) Detailed generic information on control and indicating equipment have been included. 
b) Requirements about control and indicating equipment have been included, in detail. 
c) Terminology has been updated. 


d) All references to the cross referred Indian Standards have been updated and the list made 
comprehensive. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of specified value in this standard. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 
CONTROL AND INDICATING EQUIPMENT 
FOR FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM 
SYSTEM — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers planning, design, maintenance 
and performance criteria for control and indicating 
equipment for fire detection and alarm systems. 


1.2 This standard covers minimum level of protection. 
Nothing in this standard prevents to install systems 
designed for higher degree of protection, for special risks, 
etc. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed at Annex A contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the terminology in 
IS 8757 and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Access Level — One of several states of a control and 
indicating equipment (CIE) in which selected: 


a) controls can be operated; 

b) manual operations can be carried out; 
c) indications are visible; and 

d) information can be obtained. 


3.2 Acknowledge — To confirm that a message or signal 
has been received, such as by the pressing of a button or 
the selection of a software command. 


3.3 Active Multiplex System — which signaling 
devices, such as transponders are employed to transmit 
status signals of each initiating device or initiating device 
circuit within a prescribed time interval so that the lack 
of receipt of such a signal can be interpreted as a trouble 


signal. 


3.4 Addressable Device — A fire alarm system 
component with discrete identification that can have 


its status individually identified or that is used to 
individually control other functions. 


3.5 Addressable Point — Point which can be 
individually identified at the CIE. 


3.6 Alert Tone — An attention-signal to alert occupants 
of the pending transmission of a voice message. 


3.7 Alphanumeric Display — Indicator capable of 
giving information by the display of the messages 
consisting of text and/or numeric characters. 


3.8 Annunciator — A unit containing one or more 
indicating lamps, alphanumeric displays or other 
equivalent means in which every indication provides 
status information about circuit location or condition. 


3.9 Average Ambient Sound Level — The term 
average ambient sound level is also called the equivalent 
A-weighted sound level measured over ¢ hours, where 
t is the time period over which the measurement is 
made. 


3.10 Confirmation Signal — Signal from a fire 
detector or manual call point which terminates a first 
alarm state. 


3.11 Detection Circuit — Transmission path which 
connects various points to CIE. 


3.12 Earth Fault — Unwanted connection between 
earth potential and any part of the CIE or transmission 
paths between parts of the CIE. 


3.13 Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP) — A 
component of the fire alarm system, provided with 
primary and secondary power sources, which receives 
signals from initiating devices or other fire alarm control 
units, and processes these signals to determine part or 
all of the required fire alarm system output function(s). 


In addition to the functions mentioned above, FACP 
may also have an integral operator interface, supply 
power to detection devices, notification appliances, 
transponder(s), or off-premises transmitter(s) or 
any combination of these. The control unit might 


IS 15908 : 2021 


also provide transfer of condition to relay or devices 
connected to the control unit. There can be multiple fire 
alarm control units in a fire alarm system. 


3.14 First Alarm Signal — Signal from a fire detector 
or manual call point which is interpreted as a fire alarm, 
but following which the CIE enters a first alarm state. 


3.15 First Alarm State — State of the CIE following 
the receipt of a first alarm signal during which 
mandatory functions of the CIE may be inhibited. 


3.16 Functional Condition — Condition of the CIE 
characterized by its indication at the CIE as follows: 


3.16.1 Disabled Condition — A condition when the 
disablement of functions is indicated. 


3.16.2 Fault Warning Condition — Condition when a 
fault is indicated. 


3.16.3 Fire Alarm Condition — Condition when a fire 
alarm is indicated. 


3.16.4 Quiescent Condition — Condition when no 
other functional condition is indicated when power 
supply is on for the CIE. 


3.16.5 Supervisory Signal Condition — Condition 
when a supervisory signal in indicated. 


3.16.6 Test Condition — Condition when the testing of 
various functions are indicated. 


3.17 Impairment — An abnormal condition where a 
system, component, or function is out of order and the 
condition can result in the system or unit not functioning 
when required. 


3.18 In-Building Fire Emergency Voice/Alarm 
Communications System — Dedicated manual or 
automatic equipment for originating and distributing 
voice instructions, as well as alert and evacuation 
signals pertaining to a fire emergency, to the occupants 
of a building. 


3.19 In-Building Mass Notification System — A 
system used to provide information and instructions to 
people in a building(s) or other space using intelligible 
voice communications and including visible signals, 
text, graphics, tactile, or other communication methods. 


3.20 Indicator — A device that can change its state to 
give information. 


3.21 Indication — Information provided by an 
indicator. 


3.22 Mandatory — Qualification applied to those 
functions required to be provided on all CIE and the 
function’s requirements and to the requirements of 
any optional functions that have requirements, if such 
optional functions are provided. 


3.23 Multiplexing — A signaling method characterized 
by simultaneous or sequential transmission, or both, 
and reception of multiple signals on a signaling line 
circuit, a transmission channel, or a communications 
channel, including means for positively identifying 
each signal. 


3.24 Non-volatile Memory — Memory elements 
which do not require the presence of energy source for 
the retention of their contents. 


3.25 Notification Appliance — A fire alarm system 
component, such as a bell, horn, speaker, light, or text 
display that provides audible, tactile, or visible outputs, 
or any combination thereof. 


3.26 Point — Component connected to a detection 
circuit able to transmit or receive information in 
relation to fire detection. 


3.27 Program — Software necessary for a CIE to 
comply with at least the requirements of this standard, 
including initializing data, reset and interrupt vectors, 
operating code and declarations. 


3.28 Public Address System — An electronic 
amplification system with a mixer, amplifier, and 
loudspeakers, used to reinforce a given sound and 
distributing the ‘sound’ to the general public around a 
building. 


3.29 Reset — Operation capable of terminating the 
fire alarm condition and/or the fault warning condition. 


3.30 Response — Actions performed upon the 
receipt of a signal. 


3.31 Running Data — Alterable data subject to 


temporary modification during operation, either 
automatically or by manual controls. 
3.32 Silencing — Manual operation for switching 


off the audible signal of a sounding device which is 
capable of being automatically sounded by the new 
event. 


3.33 Site-specific Data — Alterable data required for 
the CIE to operate in a defined system configuration. 


3.34 Supervising Station — A facility that receives 
signals from protected premises fire alarm system and 
at which personnel are in attendance at all times to 
respond to these signals. 


3.35 Transmission Path — Connection external to the 
cabinet of CIE for transmission of information and/or 
power: 


a) between the CIE and other components of a fire 
detection and fire alarm system; and 


b) between parts of CIE contained in different 
cabinets. 


3.36 Volatile Memory — Memory elements which 
require the presence of an energy source for the 
retention of their contents. 


3.37 Window — Part of an alphanumeric display 
used for information relating to one functional condition 
at a given time. 


3.38 Wireless Network — The method of 
communications used in a public emergency alarm 
reporting system when it consists of a wireless type of 
communications infrastructure. 


3.39 Wired Network — The method of 
communications used in a public emergency alarm 
reporting system when it consists of a wired type of 
communications infrastructure. 


3.40 Zone — Geographical sub-division of the 
protected premises in which one or more points are 
installed and for which a common zonal indication is 
provided. 


4 ABOUT CONTROL AND 
EQUIPMENT (CIE) 


INDICATING 


4.1 In fire alarm systems, control and indicating 
equipment (CIE) are the backbone of the entire network 
which perform three important functions, namely: 


a) Continuous and automatic monitoring and control 
of circuits external to the equipment (such as free 
detection and fire alarm device circuits) and also 
supply of power to these circuits. 


b 


ma 


Indication of fire signals, fault signals and their 
location. 


c) Manual control to facilitate actions, such as testing, 
disablement of devices, triggering of fire signals, 
silencing of audible fire warning and resetting the 
system after a fire signal. 


4.2 As these facilities are required by different people 
at different times all these facilities need not always be 
provided at a single location. For example, according 
to the premises, indication of faults might be required 
by an engineering personnel, who might not require 
detailed information on fire signals whereas accurate 
information on the location of a fire is essential to 
the safety/security personnel, who might need in 
specific information about system fault(s). Hence, 
annunciation of events, such as alarm, trouble and 
supervisory indications need to be located to alert 
the respective responsible responders. For example, 
it shall be permissible to direct trouble events to 
engineering personnel while alarm events are located to 
safety/security personnel. 


4.3 In small and simple systems, the control indicating 
and power supply equipment for the system normally is 
housed within a single enclosure. In large and complex 
premises, the main control equipment circuitry might 


IS 15908 : 2021 


be installed at one location, power supplies might be 
distributed around the building, while main indicating 
equipment incorporating certain basic controls is 
installed at another location, such as near a main 
entrance to the building and/or lastly repeat indicating 
equipment (with or without control) may be installed 
at other locations (such as security or control rooms). 
Ideally main control and indicating equipment should 
be networked with multiple control unit distribution 
panels located throughout the protected premises. 


4.4 Since buildings vary in size, complexity and fire 
strategy, it is essential that the nature and locating 
of manual controls and all indicating equipment, 
in particular, is suitable for the fire and evacuation 
procedure that are to be adopted and for the person 
that will use the system, including security or safety 
staff and fire-fighter attending a fire. Location of 
control circuitry and power supplies will more likely 
to be determined by engineering considerations and the 
preference of the personnel who are going to use the 
system. 


5 LOCATION OF 
INDICATING EQUIPMENT 


CONTROL AND 


5.1 The following requirements shall receive attention 
by the user and installers before locating CIE: 


a) Since the CIE is essential for the operation of 
the system, it shall be placed in an area of low 
fire hazard. In a complex building with multiple 
entrances, it may be necessary to provide repeat 
indicator panel(s) at the building entry point(s) to 
be used by the fire authorities. 


b 


wm 


CIE, in conjunction with suitable manual controls 
should be sited at an appropriate location for both 
staff and fire-fighters responding to a fire signal. 
This should normally be an area on the ground 
floor close to the entrance of the building likely 
to be used by the fire service, or a suitably sited, 
continuously manned control room or from which 
at least initial control of any fire incident, by safety 
staff and/or the fire fighters, will be implemented. 


c) The ambient light level in the vicinity of all 
CIE shall be such that individual indications 
can be clearly seen, controls easily operated and 
any instructions or legends can be easily read. 
Where this is impracticable, suitable illumination 
backed up by an emergency source shall be made 
available. 


d) Noise or other sound levels in the vicinity of the 
control equipment shall not dilute the audible 
alarm given by the CIE (such as the fault warning 
sounder) from being heard. 


e) In complex premises, there shall be consultation 
between the user, installer and the fire fighters, 
regarding the location of all CIE and the facilities 
provided. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


f) In buildings which are not continuously occupied, 
location of CIE shall be such that it will be visible 
to the fire brigade from outside the building that 
can be of benefit, particularly if there is a facility 
for transmission of alarms to an alarm receiving 
centre. 


5.2 All control indicating and power supply equipment 
that is likely to need routine attention for maintenance 
shall be located in readily accessible locations that 
facilitate safe maintenance work. 


5.3 CIE, power supply equipment for the CIE and other 
essential control facilities shall be located in safe areas, 
so that the equipment is unlikely to be involved in a fire 
before adequate warning has been given. 


5.4 It is preferable to provide detection system for the 
enclosure where CIE is installed though it is compulsory 
if installed in a part of the protected building. 


5.5 On or adjacent to the CIE, there shall be a 
diagrammatic representation of the building showing at 
least the building entrance, the main circulation area 
and the division into zones. Where the division into 
zones is not provided, a correctly orientated plan of the 
premises shall be displayed. 


6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE 
CONTROL AND INDICATING EQUIPMENT 
(CIE) 


6.1 Configuration 


6.1.1 The CIE shall form the central processing 
unit of the system, receiving and analyzing signals 
from initiating devices, providing audible and visual 
information to the user or initiating automatic alarm 
response sequences and providing the means by which 
the user interacts with the system. 


6.1.2 The CIE shall be modular in construction, where 
appropriate, to allow for future extension of the system. 


6.1.3 The CIE shall be easily configurable so as to 
meet the exact detection zone and output mapping 
requirements of the building, and also to provide for 
revisions due to change in layout of the premises, if 
required. 


6.1.4 The CIE shall be microprocessor based and 
operate under a multitasking software program. 
Operating programs and configuration data must be 
contained in easily up-datable non-volatile memory. 


6.1.5 The CIE shall incorporate a real-time clock to 
enable events to be referenced against time and date. 
This clock shall be accurate to within 1 min/year under 
normal operating conditions. 


6.1.6 It shall be possible for technical staff to perform 
configuration updates on site by plugging a portable 
personal computer into the CIE. Configuration data 
shall be retained on the personal computer’s hard drive 
and be capable of being backed up on to a central 
storage system. It shall also be possible, providing a 
responsible person is present at the CIE, for updates 
to be downloaded from a remote location over TCP/IP. 


6.1.7 In order to facilitate re-configuration and system 
extension, the user must (after suitable training) be able 
to carry out the following functions from the front of 
the CIE: 


a) Change panel text, 

b) Change zone text, 

c) Change sector text (for networked systems), 
d) Change individual point text, 

e) Add addressable devices, 

f) Delete addressable devices, 

g) Modify addressable devices, and 

h) Change individual point addresses. 


6.1.8 The company responsible for the installation 
shall operate an approved document control system for 
the retention of configuration data. 


6.1.9 The CIE shall comprise separate processors, 
cross-monitoring each other’s correct operation, for the 
major functions of the systems. In particular, different 
processors must be used for main control function, 
detection input and alarm output functions, and display 
and control function. 


6.1.10 The controller shall have the capacity to run up 
to 1 000 addressable devices. 


6.1.11 The address code for each addressable device 
shall be held within the addressable device (that is, 
detector head, ancillary module, call point, etc). 


6.1.12 Programming of the address code shall be 
through either the CIE or a dedicated programming 
tool. 


6.1.13 The CIE shall incorporate a key switch to prevent 
unauthorized use of the manual controls. 


6.1.14 The CIE shall have an on-board LCD display 
(or the like) with not less than 16 lines of text. 


6.1.15 The CIE shall be capable of operating with 
conventional detectors, digital addressable detectors, 
intrinsically safe conventional detectors and digital 
addressable detectors suitable for installation in 
hazardous areas and all modules, hooters, isolators, etc. 


6.1.16 Addressable input and output devices shall be 
connected to addressable loops capable of accepting up 
to 250 devices. 


6.1.17 The CIE shall have a minimum capacity for 
operating one fully loaded addressable loop. This 
shall be extendable up to a maximum capacity of 
8 addressable loops. 


6.1.18 Addressable panels shall be capable of 
displaying a minimum of 16 zones up to 240 zones for 
the larger systems. The section of wiring corresponding 
to each zone circuit shall be protected from faults in 
other sections by line isolator device. The operation 
of the line isolator shall be clearly indicated by a LED 
on the device. 


6.1.19 The CIE shall have provision for the connection 
of external power supplies, either local to the CIE or 
distributed throughout the system, to supply power in 
excess of that stated. 


6.1.20 The CIE shall have provision to drive and 
monitor up to 7 repeater panels providing a repeat of the 
indications on the CIE display and also incorporating 
the full set of system manual user controls. 


6.1.21 The CIE shall have provision to house the a.c. 
mains power supply and batteries required to power 
systems of up to 80 zones. Zonal indication shall be 
provided by the use of light emitting diodes. 


6.1.22 It shall be possible to connect a computer to the 
CIE to display the information that would otherwise 
appear on the printer. 


6.1.23 The CIE shall be capable of interfacing with 
third party equipment via a MODBUS interface. 


6.2 Functions (Monitoring) 


6.2.1 The CIE shall monitor the status of all devices 
on the addressable loops for fire, short-circuit fault, 
open-circuit fault, incorrect addressing, unauthorized 
device removal or exchange, pre-alarm condition, 
when selected, and contaminated detector condition. 


6.2.2 The CIE shall monitor the status of all internal 
connection and interfaces, including charger, battery 
and remote signaling functions. 


6.2.3 The CIE shall provide the following discrete 
visual indications: 


a) Common fire, fault, disable, and test; 
b) Power on, mains fault, system fault and day mode; 


c) Sounders activated, sounder fault, sounder 


disabled; 

d) Signaling activated, signaling fault, signaling 
disabled; and 

e) Protection activated, protection fault, protection 
disabled. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


6.2.4 The CIE shall provide a set of push button 
controls to enable an authorized operator to perform 
the following: 


a) evacuate; 

b) silence; 

c) resound; 

d) day/night setting; and 
e) delay investigation. 


6.2.5 The CIE shall provide a facility to manually check 
all the discrete LED indicators and the LCD display. 


6.2.6 The CIE shall provide facilities to drive visual 
indication LED mimic displays for each of the 
following zonal status, that is, alarm, fault and isolated. 


6.2.7 The CIE shall interrogate each addressable device 
at least once every 5 s. 


6.2.8 The response time of the CIE to two-state 
addressable detectors and conventional detectors shall 
not exceed 10 s. 


6.2.9 The CIE shall have a special scanning sequence 
so that designated manual call points provide alarm 
indication and warning within 3 s of operation. 


6.2.10 The CIE shall have a facility to automatically 
adjust the sensitivity of addressable detectors to a 
higher level for periods of time when the building is 
unoccupied. 


6.2.11 The CIE shall have the ability to automatically 
adjust the alarm and pre-alarm threshold levels to 
compensate for changes in detector sensitivity due to 
contamination over a period of time. 


6.2.12 The CIE shall have, as standard, the ability to 
provide automatic warning that a detector has reached 
a level of contamination which requires that it be 
replaced or serviced. 


6.3 Functions (Output) 


6.3.1 The CIE shall provide the necessary outputs to 
separately operate two monitored circuits of common 
system sounders. Each output shall be capable of 
driving a sounder load of up to 500 mA. 


6.3.2 The CIE shall be able to monitor and control 
the integrity of zonal sounder circuits, via a suitable 
addressable module. 


6.3.3 The CIE shall be capable of providing a two-stage 
alarm sounder facility that can be programmed, either 
on a zonal basis or common system basis. 


6.3.4 The CIE shall have the facility to change, on a per 
sounder-zone basis, the sound output signal dependent 
upon whether the source of alarm is an automatic 
detector, manual call point, others like an evacuation 
command, and also non-fire events like testing. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


6.3.5 The CIE shall provide an interface to drive a 
public address system. The signal from the fire system 
to the PA/VA system shall be dual path such that, in 
the event of a failure of the primary signal the public 
address system defaults to a full evacuation of the 
protected premises. 


6.4 Functions (Supervision and Reporting) 


6.4.1 The CIE shall monitor all critical system 
components and interconnections (internal and 
external). In the event of a failure occurring, which 
prevents correct operation of the alarm functions, 
a fault indicator will light and a message shall be 
given on the alphanumeric display within 100 s of 
occurrence. 
6.4.2 The following faults shall be reported at the CIE: 
a) Addressable device failure, 
b) Loop short circuit, 
c) Loop open circuit, 
d) Sounder wiring open circuit, 
e) Sounder wiring short circuit, 
f) Unconfigured and incorrectly configured devices, 
g) Device not responding, 
h) Detector power up fault monitoring, 
j) Detector condition monitoring warning, 
k) Auto self-test of each detector element, 
m) Conventional call point wiring open circuit, 
n) Conventional call point wiring short circuit, 
p) Conventional detector circuit wiring fault, 
q) Repeater/repeater LCD, 
r) Remote printer failure, 
s) PSU fault, 
t) Charger fault, 
u) Battery fault, 
v) Battery critical, 
w) Mains failure, 
y) Auxiliary PSU failure, 
z) Relay output inoperative, and 
aa) Signaling fault. 
6.4.3 To help rapid fault finding and repair, the CIE 


can also provide text messages to indicate the precise 
location of where a fault has occurred in the system. 


6.5 Management of Fire Alarm Status 


6.5.1 The CIE shall incorporate the following facilities 
for effective system verification for its health: 
a) Isolate/de-isolate a particular addressable point, 
b) Isolate/de-isolate a particular detector zone, 


c) Isolate/de-isolate a particular sounder zone, 


d) Walk-test of a selected zone to verify detectors 
and call points, 


e) View the number of alarms since power up, 


f) View the number of software initializations since 
power up, 


g) View common alarm status, 

h) view common fault status, 

j) View common disabled status, 
k) View zonal alarm status, 

m) View zonal fault status, 

n) View zonal isolated status, 

p) View point address status, 

q) View/print full event log, 

r) View/print filtered event log, 
s) View/print points isolated, and 
t) Print a list of dirty detectors and print point status. 


6.5.2 The CIE shall have an event log capable of 
storing up to the last 3 000 events that have occurred. 
It shall be possible to view the content of the log 
via the alphanumeric display. Events shall be displayed 
in chronological order in any of the following three 
options namely, newest events first; oldest event 
first; or highest priority event first. 


6.5.3 The CIE shall be capable, via a suitable timer 
unit, of isolating a group of selected detectors in areas 
of the building where maintenance work is carried out. 
The detectors shall be automatically re-instated after a 
pre-determined time. 


6.5.4 It shall be possible to provide short circuit wiring 
fault isolation to every detector on the loop. 


6.6 Other ancillary equipment like line modules for 
detector interface, relay interface, addressable contact 
monitoring, input/output, sounder driver, line isolator, 
power supply, loop powered sounder base, sounder 
beacon, sounder module, operations like doors, 
fire pumps, HVAC, etc, shall be available for direct 
connection to the system addressable loops. 


7 NETWORKED FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 


7.1 The functions of the CIE are not centralized 
in one location or panel, but distributed amongst a 
number of sub-panels located remotely from each 
other. These panels are then interconnected by a 
network which usually serves as a data highway. Some 
sub-panels may simply actas ‘data gathering’ panels and 
provide no indications. Others may be fully functional, 
control and indicating panels, configured so as to 
‘standalone’ and continue to operate normally in the 
event of a failure of the communication links between 
sub-panels. 


7.2 Networked system is usually installed in the 
following circumstances: 


a) Where the fire alarm system is large and beyond 
the capacity of single CIE; and 


b) Where there is a need for centralized monitoring 
and/or control of a number of fire alarm systems 
in different buildings in the same vicinity 
(for example, on the same site). 


7.3 The effect of the communication link and the 
implications for fire alarm operation will depend on 
the configuration of the networking system the type of 
network and whether or not the network forms part of 
the critical signal path. 


7.4 Ring or loop network are more resilient to 
communities failures than redial type network, peer to 
peer network with a central processor controlling panel 
to panel communications. All equipment used in and 
for a network shall be listed for the intended purpose. 


7.5 All sub-panels or data gathering panels shall have 
the ability to function in a degraded standalone mode 
when communications are lost from the primary control 
unit. The activation of initiating devices shall cause the 
appropriate notification appliances to activate even 
when data communications is lost from the primary 
control unit. 


8 POWER SUPPLY 


8.1 General 


The following general requirements of power supply 
system needs to be taken care: 


a) Power supply for the fire alarm system will 
normally be derived from the low voltage mains, 
the supply needs to be reliable and capable for 
supplying the largest load that can be placed on it 
under normal, fire and fault conditions. 


b 


wm 


Design of the main supply to the system needs 
to be such that it shall not be affected by faults 
on other circuits or equipment, or by isolation 
of supplies in the building for maintenance or 
economy in consumption of electricity. 


c 


wa 


Main supply shall need to be backed up by a 
standby supply that is able to support the system 
while the main supply is restored or fault in the 
mains supply is corrected. The standby supply 
also needs to be reliable, and transfer between the 
two supplies shall not affect the operation of the 
system. 


d 


wn 


Failure of the main supply may occur when the 
premises are unoccupied, the system might be 
inoperative on reoccupation. It is important that 
the presence of a power supply to the system is 
indicated by a visual indicator at the indicating 
equipment to enable total power failure to be 
identified by the personnel. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


e) There will be a need to set some practical limit on 
the duration of standby batteries. However, when 
the premises are not occupied for longer durations, 
the limit recommended in this standard could be 
insufficient to cater for the longest periods for 
which premises might be unattended. The user will 
need to consider this aspect and arrange frequent 
check on the batteries or consider the need for 
standby batteries with a longer duration. 


f) Ifthe premises are provided with emergency supply 
through a diesel generator or a captive power plant 
and if the process in the risk is continuous, then the 
capacity of the standby batteries may be reduced 
provided the circuits served by the generator 
include that of the alarm system. 


Va 


In some complex buildings, such as shopping 
centres, additional indicating equipment, such 
as colour graphics terminals, not essentials for 
compliance with this standard, may be provided to 
assist the user in the monitoring and control of fire 
incidents. Stand-by supply shall take care of this 
equipment also. 


8 


NOTE — Detailed requirements for the above are listed in 


various clauses below. 


8.2 Requirements 
The requirements shall be as given below. 


a) The system shall derive its power from either, 
the mains electricity supply single phase (normal 
supply), or the standby power supply that shall 
be immediately available in the event of failure 
of normal supply and shall be automatically 
connected (automatic switch-over) so as to 
maintain the equipment in ready condition of 
taking the maximum load. The standby shall 
be derived mostly from exclusive secondary 
batteries where captive power generation 
(like automatically started generation, continuously 
running generation) is readily and certainly 
available, such as in process plants, industrial 
complexes and other occupancies, a standby can 
be derived from there. 


b) The CIE shall be connected to the mains via 
a switch-fuse or moulded case circuit breaker 
(MCCB) reserved solely for the purpose, its cover 
being painted red and labeled ‘FIRE ALARM’, 
‘DO NOT SWITCH OFF’. Switch-fuse shall 
be contained in a securely closed box and the 
condition of ‘main-on’ shall be indicated by a new 
lamp. The voltage and ampere ratings shall be 
compatible with the requirements of various parts 
of the system and power capacity of the power 
supplies shall meet the maximum load likely to be 
placed on the system. 


eS 


Where the user requires isolating the building 
during closed hours, a separate supply shall be 
provided for the fire alarm system that shall not 
normally be isolating during closed hours. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


)) 


The minimum capacity of the normal mains 
supply shall be calculated so as to meet the 
total power consumption of the entire system in 
quiescent condition plus that of all the sounders 
and 25 percent zones in alarm condition. 


Main connection to the system shall be arranged 
such that the mains supply to the system (which is 
through exclusive switch-fuse) is not interrupted 
as a result of switching off mains power to 
premises/other services. Provisions made for 
normal and standby power supply shall be such 
that the switch-over from one supply to another 
is automatic and each is capable of supplying the 
largest load to be placed on them under normal, 
fire and fault conditions. Further, the power supply 
for the fire alarm system shall be totally dedicated 
and shall not be connected to other loads. 


The standby power supply shall be capable of 
maintaining the system in normal operation for 
a period of not less than 48 h after the failure of 
normal mains supply after which sufficient capacity 
would remain to provide full load operation for 
at least 30 min. The full load would be defined 
as that caused by the operation of all the alarm 
sounders operating simultaneously, operation of 
a detector in at least 25 percent of zones (with a 
minimum of two zones) and the operation of the 
fault indicator. The operation of trigger devices in 
further zones shall not result in cancellation of fire 
alarms existing at that time. 

NOTE — Where failure of normal mains supply is not likely to 
be made good within 24 h due to long unattended/unoccupied 
periods, the system inspection frequency needs to be arranged 
at intervals such that in the event of normal mains supply 
failure, at least 24 h standby capacity remains at the time of 
next Inspection. 

Standby power supply derived from exclusive 
back-up batteries shall have provision of 
automatic charging and automatic load 
switch-over whenever normal mains supply 
fails. It shall be ensured that charging conditions 
are matched to the system. The rate of battery 
charging shall be such that, having discharged to 
its final voltage, the battery can comply with the 
recommendations of 6.5 after a charging period 
of 24 h. 


External batteries shall be properly mounted. The 
best practice shall be to mount them on a metal 
stand at a well-ventilated location. 


Every isolator, switch and protective device that 
is capable of disconnecting the mains supply 
to the fire alarm system, shall be situated in a 
position inaccessible to antiauthority persons or 
be protected against unauthorized operations by 
persons without a special tool. 


Voltage of the batteries shall be monitored and 
low voltage indicated on CIE. 


k) 


m) 


Capacity of the battery shall be as per calculations 
shown in Annex B. 


Battery charger shall be designed for automatic 
charging. A battery discharged to its final voltage 
shall be provided with charging facility which 
provides at least 80 percent of the rated capacity 
within 24 h. 


Where distributed power supplies for fire alarm 
system to power sounders, beam detectors, 
etc, are installed, it shall be mandatory that the 
entire system be powered from the CIE panel 
power/back-up and the same shall be monitored. 


9 CABLES AND THEIR INSTALLATIONS 
AND CIRCUITS 


Proper selection of cables their installation and laying 
circuits are essential for the CIE to be effective. 


9.1 General 


The following general requirements shall be adhered in 
the installation of cables and circuits: 


a) 


b) 


d) 


The components of most fire alarm systems are 
connected by cables and wiring and hence, cables 
are the most important link between fire detection 
devices and the control centre. It is essential that 
the cables used for interconnection of devices 
and the control centre remain operational and 
maintain circuit integrity for adequate duration 
with inherent capability to resist direct exposure 
to fire. 


It is essential that all interconnections operate 
correctly at the time of a fire. This is particularly 
important in the case of cables that link CIE to 
manual call points, automatic fire detectors and 
fire alarm devices, and that transmit signals to an 
alarm receiving centre. 


It is not normally possible to predict, with any 
accuracy, those areas of a building in which fire 
can or cannot occur. At the design stage, the exact 
route that cables will follow may also be unknown. 
Therefore, to ensure that cables used remain 
operational for an adequate duration, cables, with 
an inherent ability to resist attack by fire, need to 
be used throughout. 


The integrity of the mains supply to the system is 
also regarded as essential, even though the system 
has a standby supply. Accordingly, mains supply 
circuits need to be adequately protected against 
the effects of fire. 


The probability of disablement of any part of the 
fire alarm system as a result of mechanical damage 
to cables can be reduced by the use of sufficiently 
robust cables, careful selection of cable routes and 
by the provision of protection against mechanical 
damage in areas where cables are susceptible to 
mechanical damage. Monitoring of circuits does 


not ensure that cable faults will not occur, but is 
essential to minimize the time between occurrence 
and identification (and hence repair) of the fault. 
Monitoring of circuits and protection of cables 
against damage are, therefore, complementary 
precautions, rather than alternatives. 


f) It is the responsibility of the designer to ensure 
that the electrical characteristics of the cables, 
including current carrying capacity and voltage 
drop are suitable for the system. The choice of 
cable and routes selected shall need to consider 
the need to avoid electromagnetic interference 
from other cables and source of electromagnetic 
radiation, particularly in the case of the system 
in which cables are used to be combative with 
the characteristics of the data transmission, for 
example, speed and waveform and remain so far, 
an adequate length of time during the relevant 
exposure to fire for category of cable. 


g) The circuit of fire alarm systems shall need to be 
segregated from the cable of the other circuit to 
minimize any potential for other circuit to cause 
malfunction of the fire alarm system arising from, 


1) breakdown of cable insulation of other circuit 
and/or fire alarm circuit; 


2) a fire caused by a fault on another circuit; 


3) electromagnetic interference to any fire alarm 
circuit as a result of the proximity of another 
circuit; and 

4) damage resulting from the need for other circuit 
to be installed in, or removed from, ducts or 
trucking containing a fire alarm circuit. 


h) In order to facilitate identification of fire 
alarm circuit, cable shall preferably be red in 
colour, unless another form of colour coding is 
appropriate. By this means, the possible need for 
appropriate segregation can be identified, and 
there will be less likelihood of inadvertent manual 
interference with the circuit of fire alarm systems. 


9.2 Cables 


9.2.1 The electrical characteristics of all cables, such 
as voltage drop, current carrying capacity, impedance, 
and where appropriate, ability to transmit data, shall be 
suitable for the system. 


The cable specification for fire alarm system is as 
follows: 


a) Armoured or unarmoured fire retardant low smoke 
(FRLS) cables of minimum 2 x 1.5 mm’ annealed 
tinned copper (ATC) cables for conventional fire 
alarm and multi-strand, twisted pair shielded 
cables for addressable fire alarm system; 


b) PVC insulated copper conductor cables 
conforming to IS 694 having minimum 1.5 mm? 


IS 15908 : 2021 


cross-sectional areas, if stranded at least 0.5 mm? 
cross-sections shall be used; 


c) Rubber insulated braided cables conforming to 
IS 9968 (Part 1); 


d) Armoured PVC/rubber insulated 
conforming to IS 1554 (Part 1); and 


e) Mineral insulated (MI) cables with overall LSF 
(low smoke and fumes). 


cables 


NOTE — It is strongly recommended to use cables mentioned 
under item ‘e’ above for certain specific occupancies like oil 
and hydrocarbon industries (high hazard, high fire potential), 
airports (high hazard and also large public presence), jetties 
(high hazard, high fire potential), power plants (critical for 
use), metro railways (underground and large public presence, 
life safety), and where huge public gathering is anticipated 
like shopping malls, multiplex and large assembly halls (life 
safety), etc, where either the fire load is high or the intolerance 
of downtime for the occupancy or life safety is foremost. 


9.2.2 The cables used shall be exclusively for fire 
detection system. The multi-core cables shall not be 
shared for other low voltage or high voltage circuits. 


9.2.3 Cables/wiring shall be laid down in 
metallic/rigid PVC conduits. PVC conduits shall be 
used only in concealed spaces. 


9.2.4 Cables connected to detectors shall be given ‘S’ 
loop on both the sides of the detectors which shall be 
properly clamped to the ceiling. Loop shall also be left 
where cables connect sounders, panels, dampers, etc. 
Appropriate glands shall be provided where the cable 
enters the junction box. 


9.2.5 All the cables and wires shall be tagged for proper 
identification. Wires shall be identified by ferrules 
at junction and cables by colour bands at every 3 m 
distance. 


9.2.6 When connecting different buildings, etc overhead 
lines for fire alarm system shall not be used. They shall 
be laid underground according to IS 1255. 


9.3 Conduit Wiring 
The following requirements shall receive attention: 


a) The conduits shall not be choked with cables. 
There shall be sufficient space inside the conduit 
even after the cable is pulled. The minimum size 
of the conduit shall be 25 mm. 


b) S-runs of conduits which shall be spaced at not 
more than 4.25 m between draw boxes, shall not 
deflect from the straight by an angle more than 
15°. B-runs of conduits shall not deflect from the 
straight by more than 15°. Conduits shall be kept 
at a minimum of 100 mm from the pipes of other 
non-electrical services. 


c) Wiring for short extensions to outlets in hung 
ceiling or to vibrating equipment, motors, etc, 


IS 15908 : 2021 


shall be installed in flexible conduits. No flexible 
extension shall exceed 1.2 m in length. 


d 


wn 


Cables and conduits running on surfaces shall be 
supported on galvanized steel 6 mm thick saddles 
and clamps which in turn are properly screwed to 
the wall or ceiling. Saddles shall be at intervals 
of not more than 500 mm. Fixing screws shall be 
with round or cheese head and of cadmium plated 
brass. 


e 


s 


Exposed conduits shall neatly run parallel or at 
right angles to the walls of the building. Unseemly 
conduit bends and offsets shall be avoided by 
using fabricated galvanized steel junction/pull 
through boxes for better appearances. 


f) No cross-over of conduits shall be allowed unless it 
is necessary and entire conduit installation shall be 
clean and neat in appearance. Conduits embedded 
into the walls shall be fixed by means of staples 
at not more than 500 mm intervals. Chases in the 
walls shall be neatly made and refilled after laying 
the conduit. 


Conduits buried in concrete structure shall be 
put in position and securely fastened to the 
reinforcement before the concrete is poured. 
Proper care shall be taken to ensure that the 
conduits are neither dislocated nor choked at the 
time of pouring the concrete. 


wa 


g 


h 


wm 


Suitable galvanized steel fish wires of not less than 
0.63 mm diameter shall be drawn in all conduits 
before they are embedded. Where conduit passes 
through expansion joints in the building, adequate 
expansion fittings shall be used to take care of any 
relative movement. 


wa 


Inspection boxes shall be provided for periodical 
inspection to facilitate withdrawal and removal 
of wires. Such inspection boxes shall be flush 
with the wall or ceiling in the case of concealed 
conduits. Inspection boxes shall be spaced at not 
more than 12 m apart or two 90° solid bends or 
equal. 


j 


k 


wa 


All junction and pull boxes shall be covered by 
6 mm clear plate truly cut and fixed with cadmium 
plated brass screws. These junction boxes shall 
form part of point wiring or conduit wiring as the 
case may be including the cost of removing the 
cover for painting and refixing. 


m 


wm 


Conduits shall be free from sharp edges and burs 
and the threading free from grease or oil. The 
entire system of conduits must be completely 
installed and rendered electrically continuous 
before the conductors are pulled in. 


n 


wn 


Conduits shall terminate in junction boxes of not 
less than 32 mm deep and the termination shall 
be rigid with check nuts and a smooth bushing. 
No wires shall be exposed in any part of the 
installation. 


10 


p) Conduits and cables shall be laid by skilled and 


q 


ma 


experienced workmen. Great care shall be taken 
while laying cables to avoid kinks. At all changes 
in directions (vertical and horizontal planes) 
the cables shall be bent smooth with a radius as 
recommended by the manufacturer(s). 


No joints shall be allowed between two points. 
The sleeve at joints shall be shaved off like a 
pencil and shall not be cut square to avoid cutting 
of conductors. 


10 CONTROL CENTRE (FOR HOUSING CIE) 


a) In high rise buildings and special buildings, a 


b 


wm 


control centre of an area of 15 m? to 20 m? shall 
be provided where the CIE, power supply units 
and other fire protection ancillary panels could be 
installed. This shall preferably be on ground floor 
(floor one) and manned 24 h. 

The control centre room shall have attached WC, 
bath, drinking water facilities and appropriate 
tables, chairs, record racks, etc. 


c) The control centre room shall have emergency 


lighting system. 


d) The control centre room shall have intercom and 


e 


11 


nN 


direct telephone facilities. Where possible, a direct 
hotline or any other means of communication to 
local fire brigade shall be provided. 


The control centre room shall have mimic panel 
of the premises protected and details of all the 
fire protection systems. Fire orders shall be 
prominently displayed. 

Control centre in air-conditioned premises shall 
be segregated from the rest of the buildings by 
fire walls, and provided with an independent air 
conditioning system. If ducts are common, the 
entry/exit points of ducts through the walls shall 
be provided with automatic damper units. Status 
of these dampers shall also be displayed in the 
mimic panel. 


CONTROL AND INDICATING 


EQUIPMENT (COMPONENTS) 


11.1 Sector/Zone Panels and CIE 


a) The sector/zone panel shall be installed on 


b 


c 


) 


wm 


individual sector/zone of the building and shall 
conform to the requirements given in Annex C. 


The CIE and other control panel shall be 
wall mounting/floor standing type and shall 
be made of mild steel sheet conforming to 
IS 513 (Parts 1 and 2). The minimum thickness of 
sheet shall be 1.6 mm. The colour shall be fire red 
(shade no. 536 of IS 5). 


Electronic/electric circuit shall have relay 
conforming to IS 5051 (Parts 1 to 3). 


d) Each sector/zone indicator, indicating fire shall 
consist of two LED/filament bulbs conforming 
to relevant Indian Standards connected in 
parallel. In case of fault indicators, only one 
LED/filament bulb shall be used — open and 
short circuit separately. Fire warning indicator 
shall be clearly labelled and coloured red while 
fault warning indicator shall be clearly labeled 
and coloured amber. 


e) The sector panels shall have the power capacity 
to be connected to all the zones in the sector. In 
addition, it shall have facility for connections to 
external sounders. 


f) If required, the panel shall have additional 
capacity to operate auxiliary equipment like fire 
dampers, fire doors, ventilation and/or pressurizing 
fans, emergency light, smoke exhausters, etc. 
Failure of power at the local sector panel shall be 
indicated in the main control room. 


11.2 Fire Alarm/External Fire Alarm Sounders 


a) A number of external fire alarm sounders are 
generally required for protecting premises. 
The number and distribution of these alarms 
in the premises shall be such that the sound 
level/audibility requirements are met with a view 
to alert the occupants and initiate firefighting 
actions with the least delay. 


b) The grouping of external fire alarm sounders 
can be done in either of the following way. 
The grouping scheme shall be reflected in fire 
instructions issued for the use of the occupants. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


c) Sounding of alarms can be so arranged that any 
alarm can operate all the sounders throughout 
the premises. This grouping is particularly 
suitable for smaller premises. 

d) Sounding of alarms can be so arranged that the 
alarms sound initially in the sector of fire origin 
or in this zone and on its adjoining areas, or in 
this zone and in specially selected areas of high 
flammability or difficult egress. 


11.3 Silencing 


The operation of silencing switch either for general 
fire alarm sounders or for signal controlling internal 
audio alarm of CIE shall cause an audible signal to be 
given in or near the CIE. This audible signal which 
may be the same as that for fault warning, is intended 
to act as a reminder that the silencing switch has been 
operated and shall give a distinctive sound different 
from that of any other alarm sounder (external or 
internal to CIE). 


NOTE — The requirement given here are not necessary in 
systems where automatic re-set is provided. 


11.4 Visual Alarm Signals 


In general, visual signals shall only be used to 
supplement audible alarms. A defect in visual alarm 
shall not cause a defect in audible alarm or vice 
versa. Only in special cases where audible alarm 
is ineffective, such as even the occupants are deaf, 
immobile, etc, visual alarms can be used in lieu of 
external alarm sounders. 


CONVENTIONAL (NON - ADDRESSABLE) 
DETECTION SYSTEM - CLASS B WIRING 


DETECTION BASE 


= 
zZ 
> 
-l 
O 
£ 
ke 
Z 
Q 
O 


DETECTION BASE 


Ww 
o 
a 
Be 
oD 
Z 
20 
<2 
= 
= 


(0) 


END OF 
LINE 
RESISTOR 
1 A CORRECT WIRING METHOD - TWO WIRE DETECTORS 
CONVENTIONAL (NON - ADDRESSABLE) 
DETECTION SYSTEM - CLASS B WIRING 
END OF 
LINE 
RESISTOR 


CIRCUIT 


Ww 
Eo 
ae 
Si 
LJA 
one) 
xz 
Zz 
QE 
(S = 
Z 


CIRCUIT WIRING 
LOOPED UNDER 
ONE TERMINAL 


CIRCUIT WIRE BENT 
BACK ON ITSELF AND 
SECURED IN ONE NOTCH 


1 B INCORRECT WIRING METHOD - TWO WIRE DETECTORS 


IS 15908 : 2021 


24V DC RELAY / CONTROL 
ISOLATOR MODULE 
MODULE 
[o} 
a * 
5 HOOTER 
Ww 
a 
< 
a 
d ISOLATOR MODULE 
0. 
« 
r4 
[0] 
O 
F A 
\ ADDRESSABLE PULL STATION 
* LOOP POWERED HOOTER / SOUNDER 
OR 
" SEPRATE POWERED HOOTER 
1 C ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEM- 
CLASS A WIRING 
END OF LINE 
RESISTOR 
ZONE ADDRESSABLE ATA 
MODULE RELAY / CONTROL 
MODULE 
~|~ HOOTER* 


CONTROL PANEL SLC 


ISOLATOR MODULE 


\ ADDRESSABLE PULL STATION 


* LOOP POWERED HOOTER / SOUNDER 
OR 


* SEPRATE POWERED HOOTER 


1 D ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEM- 
CLASS A WIRING WITH CLASS B TAPPING 


Fic.1 WIRING DETAILS FOR DETECTION AND ALARM SYSTEM 


11.5 Stages of General Fire Alarms 


General fire alarm system though external sounders can 
be provided in either of the following ways: 


a) 


b) 


Single Stage Continuous Alarm — In this scheme, 
a continuous alarm (evacuation alarm or signal) 
sounds in the sector/zone of fire and also on the 
CIE with a provision on CIE to sound continuous 
general fire alarm throughout the protected 
premises. This is normally done, particularly in 
smaller premises, sparsely populated premises or 
storage premises. 


Two-Stage General Alarms — In this scheme, 
two-stage alarm is provided in which a continuous 
evacuation alarm is immediately given in 
sector/zone of fire or in a restricted area, together 
with intermittent ‘alert’ signal in other parts 


12 


c) 


d) 


and on CIE. The provision shall be made at 
CIE for changing the ‘alert’ signal to ‘evacuate’ 
signal in any area, either manually or after a 
pre-determined period, automatically. In deciding 
the time delay between ‘alert’ and ‘general 
evacuation’, consideration shall be given to the 
communications that may be needed to control the 
evacuation. 


The ‘evacuation’ signal shall be continuous and 
intermittent ‘alert’ signal shall have ‘ON’ and 
‘OFF’ periods of 1.0 + 0.5 s each. 


In large installations and extensive high-rise 
buildings, two-stage alarm scheme may be more 
desirable to evacuate first the sector/zone where 
fire exists, other high-risk areas or restricted areas 
and simultaneously ‘alert’ other areas. 


11.6 Special System 


Here the alarm sounds only in the control centre of the 
CIE and may also have public address facility to alert 
personnel who are mobile within or in the vicinity of the 
building. Depending on the choice of the system, CIE 
shall have necessary controls. Where two stage alarm is 
chosen, zonal/sectors panels and CIE are needed and in 
case of single stage, zonal/sector panels are not needed. 
The system may also adopt any of the cabling scheme, 
that is connecting the zones/sectors directly to the CIE 
or through zone/sector control panels. The audible 
and visual alarm state shall be maintained by the 
sector/zonal control panels and control panel of CIE 
without a continued signal from fire detector. The sound 
characteristics of the alarm shall be similar throughout 
the protected premises. 


11.7 Fire Alarm Intimation 


The operation of fire detector/manual call point shall 
initiate transmission of signal(s) resulting in, 


a) an audible signal on the CIE (internal audio alarm 
of CIE); 


b) a visual signal in the CIE; 
c) at least one external alarm sounder; 


d) a visible indication for each sector/zone in which 
a detector/MCP is in operations; and 


e) audible signal (alert) on  sector/zonal panel 
concerned where sector/zonal panels have been 
provided. 


In case of two stage alarm systems, if the alarm in the 
first instance is not acknowledged on CIE, preferably 
within 60 s, a general evacuate alarm shall sound on 
all the floors. 


11.8 Silencing of Fire Alarm 


The audible alarm(s) as specified in 11.3 shall continue 
to operate until silenced manually. The alarm shall not 
be silenced automatically. The operation of the silencing 
switch shall automatically result in an audible/visual 
signal being given at CIE until the fire alarm is reset. 
NOTE — Provisions in this clause are not necessary in case of 
automatic reset system. 
The equipment shall be so designed that following the 
silencing of alarm sounders, in the event of subsequent 
operation of detector and MCP in any other zone, 
further fire alarm as specified in 9.3 shall be given. 


Any fault signal which the CIE may be giving shall not 
prevent a fire alarm being given, if the detector actuates 
at the same time or subsequently from the other zone. 


11.9 Fault Signals 


An immediate fault warning shall be given by visible 
indicator (amber) on the sector/zone control panel 
(where provided), and an audible alarm and visible 
indicator (amber) on the CIE in the control centre. The 
audible alarm shall be distinct from the fire alarm. 


13 


IS 15908 : 2021 


a) The zonal arrangement in the panel shall 
be modular and mere replacement of fault 
module/relay plug in components shall put the 
alarm system back in operation. 


b 


wm 


Fault warning shall be given at CIE in the event of 
the following occurrences: 


1) Failure or disconnection of normal power 
supply. 

2) Failure or disconnection of standby power 
supply. 

3) Failure or disconnection of battery charging 
equipment. 

4) Short-circuit or disconnection of the leads 


to trigger devices unless fault conditions 
reproduces the effect of operation of a triggered 
device. 
5) Removal of any triggered device of the plug-in 
type or disconnection from its transmitter or 
power supply. 
6) Short-circuit or disconnection of any of the 
leads to alarm sounders external to the CIE but 
if the alarm sounders are connected by a ring 
circuit, disconnection need not be immediately 
indicated but shall be capable of being detected 
by the routine test procedure. 
7) Rupture or disconnection of any fuse on the 
operation of any protective devices that would 
prevent a fire alarm being given. 


8 


wma 


Failure of a scanning device to interrogate the 
detector or zones at the correct time intervals 
or failure of any monitoring or interrogating 
system within the control equipment, such as 
to prevent an alarm being given. 


9 


wa 


A facility may also be provided for sending 
fault signal to remote centre. 


c) Itis desirable to have distinct earth fault indication 
of the zone wiring. 


d) A facility shall be provided for deliberate isolation 
of zones/sectors. This facility shall be inside the 
panel, not easily accessible to people. Whenever 
isolation is used, this shall be given visible 
indication. 


e 


wm 


Circuits and mechanical design of the panel shall 
be such that the operation of one indicator does 
not prevent the proper and separate operation of 
the other indicators and the alarm is not inhibited 
by any defect/failure in the indicator. 

Each fire/fault indicator shall be clearly labeled 


with the zone address on a metal label from which 
the call originates. 


wa 


‘System on’ and ‘Standby on’ indicators shall 
be provided. Where system test key/switch is 
lockable, indicator shall be provided. 


8 


IS 15908 : 2021 


h) Test facilities, shall be provided to test alarm 
circuit sounder, indicator, etc. 


j) The following shall be provided: 
1) Acknowledge button; 
2) Where required, alarm cancel indicator; 
3) Isolation/reset facility; and 
4) Related fuses/protective devices. 
k 


wa 


Sector/zonal control panel shall be provided 
with voltages appropriate to the rating of the 
interconnected detectors. The voltage drop in the 
cable risers shall be considered. 


11.10 Fire Alarm (Sounder) 


Depending on the floor area and its layout, external 
audible fire alarm sounders shall be provided to give 
the required sound level with a minimum of a pair of 
sounders in parallel. The number of fire sounders shall 
be sufficient to produce the sound levels as specified in 
IS 15575 (Part 1) (see Annex D). 


The circuit feeding power from control panel to these 
fire alarm devices shall be a ring circuit. If a ring circuit 
is not provided, design provision to give a fault signal 
on CIE in the event of short circuit or disconnection 
shall be made. 


11.11 Accessories and Controls 
The following shall be adhered: 


a) CIE shall be installed in the control room on 
ground floor, or in the case of industrial premises, 
separate process control rooms are provided, and 
shall be of the wall mounting/desk/floor standing 
type. 


The manual controls for switching off/on, 
main/stand by power shall not be accessible to 
outsiders. 


b) 


c) All manual controls shall be clearly labeled to 
indicate the mode of operation and their functions 
(metal label to be used). 


d) The CIE shall have electronic/electrical relays 
conforming to relevant Indian Standards and shall 
have the following facilities: 

1) A pair of red LED/bulb to indicate origin of 
fire and an amber LED/bulb to indicate the 
origin of fault; 

2) A sounder with distinct audible sounds for fire 
and fault alarm; 

3) Audible signal acknowledge/silence button 
and lamp/LED to indicate its operation, 
whenever necessary; 

4 


a 


Voltmeter and ammeter shall be provided on 
main d.c. power circuit; 

‘SYSTEMS ON’, ‘STANDBY ON’ indicators, 
test key/button operation indicator and facility 
to isolate zonal/sector/main control panel from 
the rest of the system; 


5 


wm 


14 


6) Where sector panel is isolated, its signal shall 
come on the main control panel and where 
zonal panel is isolated the signal shall come on 
the sector panel; 


7 


x 


Failure of any indicator circuit shall not 
prevent the fire alarm from sounding, nor 
acknowledgement/silencing of the alarm from 
one zone shall prevent another alarm coming 
from the other zone on the same sector; 

8) Switch to actuate alarms from CIE to one or 
more sectors/zones; 


Test facility to check fire alarm/fault circuit, 
indicators; and 


9 


<$ 


10 


eS 


Facility for indicators to acknowledge the 
operation of the ancillary system (one colour 
code shall be associated with one ancillary 
service and one or more indicator per zone). 
NOTE — In high rise/special building like educational, 
institutional, assembly, business, mercantile and hotels, a 
handset/two-way speaker with relevant indication switches 
shall be provided for voice communication with different 
floors when the circuit is actuated by inserting the handset in 
manual call point sockets (which is not a part of the fire alarm 
system). 

All zonal/sector control panels and CIE shall be 
provided with proper earthing. 


e 


<~ 


12 INSTRUCTION MANUAL 


The record drawings and operating instructions 
shall be supplied by the installers on completion of 
the installation. Drawings shall clearly indicate, for 
maintenance and record purposes, the position of 
various items of the equipment, junction boxes, sizes 
and routes ofall cables and wires and such other relevant 
details. If so desired by the user, circuit diagrams of 
the fire alarm system and its components shall also be 
supplied. These drawings and operating instructions 
shall be kept up-to-date and be available for convenient 
reference and shall be located in the control room. 


The installer shall supply the user with a log book. 
The log book shall be maintained for recording details, 
including causes of all the alarms (genuine, practice, test 
or false), faults, service tests and routine inspections, 
servicing/repairs, etc as and when done. Periods of 
disconnection/in-operation shall also be shown. 


13 INSPECTION, TESTING AND 


MAINTENACE 


13.1 General 


Even a well-designed and properly installed automatic 
fire alarm system will not be able to render reliable 
and trouble-free service unless high standard of 
maintenance and supervision are ensured during the 
entire service period of the system. Regular inspections 
and scheduled preventive maintenance are critical and 
shall include all the components of the system. 


13.2 Initial Installation Inspection Tests 


13.2.1 After installation, a visual inspection of all the 
detectors shall be made to make sure that they are 
properly sited. Each detector shall be inspected to 
ensure that it is properly mounted and connected. 


13.2.2 Restorable heat detectors and restorable 
elements of combination detectors shall be tested by a 
heat source, such as a hair dryer, or a shielded heat lamp 
until it responds, making sure that the sensing element 
is not damaged. After each heat test, the detector shall 
be reset. Precautions shall be taken to avoid damage 
of the non-restorable fixed temperature element of a 
combination rate of rise/fixed temperature detector. 


13.2.3 Non-resettable fixed temperature heat detectors 
which are not to be heat-tested shall be tested 
mechanically or electrically for fire alarm function. 


13.2.4 Heat detectors with replaceable fusible alloy 
element shall be tested first by removing the element 
to see whether contact operate properly and then 
re-inserting them in proper position. 


13.2.5 In periodic testing, heat detectors shall be 
visually examined for damage or other conditions 
(such as heavy coats of paints, etc) likely to interface 
with the correct operation. 


13.2.6 Each smoke detector shall be tested to initiate 
an alarm at its installed location with smoke or other 
approved aerosol which demonstrates that the smoke 
can enter the chamber and initiate an alarm. 


13.2.7 In order to ensure that each smoke detector is 
within its sensitivity range, it shall be tested using any 
of the following: 


a) Calibrated test method, 


b) Manufacturer’s/supplier’s 
sensitivity test instrument, 


approved calibrated 


c) Approved control equipment arranged for the 
purpose, and 
d) Other approved calibrated sensitivity test method. 


13.2.7.1 Detectors found to have sensitivity outside the 
approved range shall be replaced. 
NOTE — Detector sensitivity cannot be tested or measured 


using any spray/smoke producing device that administers an 
unmeasured concentration of aerosol/smoke into the detector. 


13.2.8 Other types of detectors like flame detectors, 
spark/ember detectors, aspirating type smoke detectors, 
etc shall be tested for sensitivity in accordance with 
the recommendations of the manufacturers and/or the 
standards according to which they are made. 


13.3 Servicing/Periodical Maintenance 


reliable 
and its 


13.3.1 To ensure 
servicing/maintenance 


that 
of 


regular and 
the systems 


15 


IS 15908 : 2021 


components is carried out, any of the following methods 
shall be adopted: 


a) Through an  agreement/contract with the 
competent contractor who shall attend to the 
maintenance/repair, when necessary, promptly. 

b) Where no such service contract can be entered 

into for any reason, atleast one qualified 

employee of the user with suitable experience 
of electrical equipment shall undergo special 
training to deal with all aspects of basic servicing 
and maintenance, including routine sensitivity 
tests/checks of the detectors, as and when required. 


13.3.2 For institutional occupancies, such as hospitals, 
hotels, old people’s homes, etc the provision shall 
include a requirement that an engineer shall be on call 
at all times and that request over the telephone for 
emergency service shall be executed promptly, within 
24 h. Serving arrangement shall be made immediately 
on completion of the installation whether the premises 
are occupied or not. If the premises are not occupied, 
special precautions shall be taken, if necessary, to 
protect the system against damage by dampness or 
other causes. 


13.4 Maintenance Schedule 


13.4.1 It is the responsibility of the user of the equipment 
to ensure that proper instructions are obtained from the 
manufacturer/supplier or installer regarding the routine 
attention and test procedures. 


13.4.2 The routine to be adopted in individual premises 
may vary with the use of the premises, equipment 
installed in corrosive or dirty environmental conditions 
will need to be checked more thoroughly and at more 
frequent intervals than that in clear and dry situations. 
Care shall be taken that all equipment are properly 
reinstated after testing. The occupants of the premises 
shall be notified of any test of the system that may 
result in the sounders being operated. 


13.4.3 Daily Attention by User 


A check shall be made every day to ascertain that the 
panel indicates normal operation, if not, that any fault 
indicated is recorded in the log book and is receiving 
urgent attention, and any fault warning recorded the 
previous day has received attention. 


13.4.4 Weekly Attention by the User 


The following tests shall be made every week to ensure 
that the system is capable of operating under alarm 
conditions: 


a) Once a week, at least one trigger device or 
end of line switch on one zone circuit shall be 
operated to test the ability of the CIE to receive 
a signal and to sound the alarm and operate other 
warning devices. If there is more than one zone 


IS 15908 : 2021 


on a system having unmonitored wiring, each 
unmonitored zone shall be tested each week, 
but without sounding the alarm more than once. 
For systems having monitored wiring and up to 
13 zones, each zone shall be tested in turn but 
if there are more than 13 zones, more than one 
zone may need to be tested in any week so that 
the interval between tests on one zone does not 
exceed 13 weeks. It is preferable that each time a 
particular zone is tested, a different trigger device 
is used. An entry shall be made in the log book 
quoting the particular trigger device that has 
been used to initiate the test. If the operation of 
the alarm sounders and/or the transmission of the 
alarm signal has been prevented by disconnection, 
then a further test shall be carried out to prove 
the final reinstatement to the sounders, and if 
permissible, the alarm transmission circuits; and 


b 


wm 


A visual examination of the battery and connection 
shall be made to ensure that they are in good 
condition. Action shall be taken to remedy any 
defect, including low electrolyte level. 


Any defect noticed shall be recorded in the log book 
and reported to the responsible person, and action shall 
be taken to correct it. 


13.4.5 Quarterly Inspection and Test by the User 


The following check-list and test sequence shall be 
carried out: 


a) Entries in the log book since the previous 
inspection shall be checked and any necessary 
action taken. 


b) Batteries and their connections shall be examined 
and tested to ensure that they are in good 


serviceable condition. 


wm 


Cc 


wa 


Where applicable, secondary batteries shall be 
examined to ensure that the specific gravity of 
electrolyte in each cell is correct. Necessary 
remedial action shall be taken and an appropriate 
entry made in the log book. Care shall be taken 
to ensure that hydrometers, vessels, etc used 
in the servicing of alkaline secondary cells 
are not contaminated by acid and vice-versa. 
Contamination of electrolyte can ruin a cell. 


d 


wn 


Primary batteries, including reserves, shall be 
tested to verify that they are satisfactory for a 
further period. 


The alarm function of CIE shall be checked by 
the operation of a trigger device in each zone 
as described. The operation of alarm sounders 
and any link to a remote manned centre shall 
be tested. All ancillary functions of the control 
panel shall also be tested where practicable. All 


e 


wn 


16 


fault indicators and their circuits shall be checked 
preferable by simulation of fault conditions. 
The CIE shall be visually inspected for signs of 
moisture ingress and other deterioration. 


A visual inspection shall be made that structural 
or occupancy changes have not affected the 
requirements for the sting of trigger devices 
(manual call points, smoke detectors and heat 
detectors). The visual inspection shall also 
confirm that a clear space of at least 750 mm 
radius is preserved in all directions below every 
detector, that the detectors are preferably sited and 
that all manual call points remain unobstructed 
and conspicuous. 


Any defect shall be recorded in the log book and 
reported to the responsible person, and action shall be 
taken to correct it. 


13.4.6 Annual Inspection Tests 


The following checks and test sequence shall be carried 
out: 


a) The instructions and test routines detailed in 
13.4.5 (a) to (f). 


Operation of at least 20 percent of the detectors 
in an installation shall be checked each year and 
the selection shall be done in such a way that all 
the detectors in an installation shall have been 
checked once in every 5 years and if required, 
replaced by a new one. 


b 


wm 


c 


wm 


Each detector shall be checked for correct operation 
using specified test equipment and method, except 
non-resettable detectors. The checks to be carried 
out are specified in 13.2.2 to 13.2.5 in respect of 
heat detectors and, 13.2.6 and 13.2.7 in respect of 
smoke detectors. 


d 


wm 


Visual inspection shall be made to confirm that 
all cable fittings and equipment are secure, 
undamaged and adequately protected. 


e 


mn 


At least once in every three years at the annual 
inspection, the electrical installation shall be 
tested. Any defect shall be recorded in log book 
and suitable remedial action shall be taken. 


On completion of the annual inspection, the entry 
shall be made in register in respect of defects 
found. After the defects are rectified, the entries 
shall then again be made. 


13.5 General Points about Detectors 


It is essential (particularly for installations involving 
life hazard) to ensure specified range of sensitivity 
of the detectors being installed and that the correct 
degree of sensitivity is maintained. Users shall satisfy 
themselves on this point. Sensitivity range shall be 


checked on equipment as already specified. It is 
essential to apply frequent sensitivity checks and 
routine tests as prescribed in the standard so that the 
correct sensitivity level/degree is maintained during the 
entire service span of the installation. 


13.6 Cleaning and Maintenance 


Detectors require periodic cleaning to remove dust or 
dirt that has accumulated. The frequency of cleaning 
depends upon the type of detector and local ambient 
conditions. In any case, the interval shall not exceed 
a period of 3 months. For each detector, the cleaning, 
checking, operating and sensitivity adjustment shall 
be attempted only after consulting manufacturer’s 
instructions. These instructions shall detail methods, 
such as creating vacuum to remove loose dust and 
insects, and cleaning heavy greasy deposits, following 
partial disassembly or the cleaning or the washing of 
detectors to remove contamination, the sensitivity test 
requirements in accordance with the relevant clauses 
shall be performed. 


17 


IS 15908 : 2021 


13.7 Tests Following an Alarm or Fire 


All detectors suspected of exposure to a fire condition 
shall be tested in accordance with the provisions 
contained in this standard pertaining to annual 
inspection tests. In addition, a visual check of the 
battery charger shall be carried out to ensure perfect 
serviceability. However, a check shall be made to 
the extent of damage, if any, to the cables and other 
components and also the operation of the systems as 
a whole. 


13.8 System Disconnection during Testing 


Care shall be taken to minimize the disruption of the 
normal use of the building by alarm sounding during 
detector testing. If detectors are removed for testing or 
servicing, replacement detectors shall be provided. 


13.9 Spares 


It may not be necessary to keep spares in premises 
other than covers for manual call point and fuses and 
other essential spares which shall be worked out based 
on installation. 


IS 15908 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
5 : 2007 Colours for ready mixed paints 
and enamels (sixth revision) 
513 Cold reduced carbon steel sheet 
and strip 


(Part 1 : 2016) Cold forming and drawing 
purpose (sixth revision) 


(Part 2 : 2016) High tensile and multiphase 
steel (sixth revision) 


694 : 2010 Polyvinyl chloride insulated 
unsheathed and sheathed 
cables/cords with rigid 
and flexible conductor 
for rated voltages up to 
and including 450/750 v 
(fourth revision) 


1255 : 1983 Code of practice for installation 
and maintenance of power 
cables upto and including 33 kV 
rating (second revision) 


1554 Specification for PVC insulated 

(Part 1) : 1988 (heavy duty) electric cables: 
Part 1 For working voltages 
upto and including 1100 V 
(third revision) 


IS No. Title 


2175 


: 1988 Specification for heat sensitive 
fire detectors for use in 
automatic fire alarm system 
(second revision) 


5051 Specification for relays 
for electronics and 
telecommunication equipment: 

Part 1 : 1982 General requirements and tests 
(first revision) 
Part 2 (Sec 1 to3) Reed relays 
: 1982 
Part 3/Sec 1: Armature relays, non-sealed: 
1985 Sec 1 Type RA 1 

8757 : 1999 Glossary of terms 
associated with fire safety 
(first revision) 

9968 Elastomer insulated cables: Part 


(Part 1) : 1988 1 For working voltages upto and 


including 1100 V (first revision) 


11360 : 1985 Specification for smoke 


1557 
201 


detectors for use in automatic 
electrical fire alarm system 


5 (Part 1): Electroacoustics — Sound level 
6/IEC meters: Part 1 Specifications 


61672-1 : 2013 (first revision) 


ANNEX B 
[ Clause 8.2 (k) ] 


METHOD OF CALCULATION OF STANDBY BATTERY 
CAPACITY FOR FIRE ALARM PANEL 


B-1 VALVE REGULATED LEAD ACID 
BATTERIES 

Apply the following formula: 

Caia = 1.25 (T, 4+ DL/2) 


where, 


C in | minimum capacity of the battery when new 
at the 20 h discharge rate and at 20 °C, in 


Ampere-hours; 


18 


T, | total battery standby period, in h; 

L total battery standby load, in Amperes; 
D de-rating factor; 

L total battery alarm load, in Amperes. 


NOTES 

1IfC,,/20 > L, then take D = 1. If C,, /20 < L, then the 
value of D = 1.75 or manufacturer’s recommended value. 

2 In actual practice, C,,, is unlikely to correspond exactly 
to an available battery capacity and hence the next available 
capacity size should be used. 


B-2 OTHER TYPES OF BATTERIES 


The minimum capacities should be determined in 
consultation with the manufacturer and should consider: 


a) standby load, 


IS 15908 : 2021 


b) alarm load, 


c) any required de-rating to consider the higher 
current drawn in the alarm condition, and 


d) a de-rating factor to consider battery ageing during 
the anticipated life of the battery. 


ANNEX C 
[ Clause 11.1 (a) ] 


PERFORMANCE TESTS/REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTROL 
AND INDICATING EQUIPMENT (CIE) 


C-1 GENERAL 


C-1.1 Control and indicating equipment (CIE) and 
sector/zonal panels shall be subjected to performance 
tests. For the purpose of these tests, standard production 
sample of equipment panel shall be taken and tested in 
minimum configuration arrangement. When the size 
is large, the tests are to be applied to damage prone 
electronic/electric parts of the unit. 


C-1.2 Proper operation of the fire alarm sounder 
being critical and essential, tests/performance criteria 
specified in C-3 shall apply to these devices. 
NOTE — It is the primary function of CIE to raise an effective 
alarm in response to the operation of a trigger device by 
automatically switching on alarm sounder at the protected 
premises, by indicating where the trigger device is situated 
and in certain cases, by transmitting a fire alarm signal to 
remote locations. Automatic indication of those faults directly 
affecting the primary function of the equipment is required. 
It is necessary to specify routine testing scheme and routine 
test frequency (time interval between tests). It is understood, 
however, that testing routine will vary widely with the type 
of equipment or system. All technical information (instruction 
manual, operational data, wiring and connection diagrams, 
provision of special and standard facilities and other relevant 
information) shall be provided with the CIE. Compatibility 
with other components/parts of fire alarm system shall be 
ensured. 
The test specified under performance clause are type 
tests only that neither ensure uniformity of quality 
in production or remove the essentiality of regular 
inspection and maintenance which are essential for 
reliable operation. 


CIE shall be appropriately labelled to include model 
number or code, number of zones, fixed or modular 
design and address of manufacturer/supplier. 


C-2 PERFORMANCE 


C-2.1 Control and Indicating Equipment (CIE) 


Prior to conducting each of environmental tests given 
in C-2.3, the equipment is preconditioned (see C-2.1.1) 


19 


and checked for functional tests (see C-2.2) and after 
undergoing each of the environmental tests given in 
C-2.3 (after being stabilized), the equipment is tested 
for functional tests (see C-2.2). 


C-2.1.1 Preconditioning and Recovery 


Before and after each environmental test, the 
temperature of the equipment shall be allowed to 
stabilize for at least 3 h to room ambient between 
15 °C and 37 °C and relative humidity lying between 
45 and 85 percent. The ambient temperature and 
humidity shall be substantially constant during 
precondition, during recovery and while a functional 
test is carried out. 


C-2.2 Functional Test 


These tests shall consist of the following operation in 
sequence: 


a) Operate momentarily a trigger device 
(automatic detector/MCP) from any zone to ensure 


correct functioning; 


Operate alarm silencing switch to ensure correct 
functioning; 

c) Operate another trigger device (detector/MCP) 
from another zone to ensure correct functioning of 
CIE and sector/zonal panel, in case of big/sectored 
equipment; 

d) 


e) 


Operate reset control to ensure correct functioning; 


Check the audible and visible warnings given on 
disconnection of normal (mains) power; and 


f) 


C-2.3 Test Environments 


Restore the equipment to quiescent condition. 


The equipment shall be subjected to the following test 
environment. 


C-2.3.1 Dry Heat Environment 


The equipment/electronic panels shall be introduced 
into the chamber/oven which shall be at the ambient 
temperature of the laboratory (see C-2.1.1). The 


IS 15908 : 2021 


chamber shall then be adjusted to temperature of 
45 °C to 50 °C and 40 to 45 percent relative humidity. 
The rate of temperature rise shall not exceed 1 °C/min. 
After the temperature equilibrium in the chamber has 
been reached, the equipment shall be exposed to these 
conditions for 16 h continuously. 


C-2.3.2 Damp Heat Environment 


The equipment/electronic panels shall be introduced 
into a chamber which shall be maintained at a 
temperature of 45 + 3 °C and relative humidity of 
90 to 95 percent. The equipment shall be exposed to 
these conditions for 16 h continuously. 


C-2.3.3 Cold Environment 


The equipment/electronic panel while being at the 
ambient temperature of the laboratory, shall be 
introduced into the chamber, which shall also be at that 
temperature at the start. The temperature shall then be 
lowered to 0 + 5 °C at the rate not exceeding 1 °C/min. 
The equipment shall be exposed to cold environment for 
a period of 16 h after the temperature stability has been 
reached. The equipment shall remain in the chamber 
during the recovery period (of 3 h) with cooling off. 


C-2.3.4 Vibrations 


The equipment mounted on vibrating table in its normal 
operating position and by its normal fastenings shall be 
subjected to vibrations as given in IS 2175. 


C-2.4 Inspection and Performance Requirements 


After each environmental test, the equipment shall 
be opened and inspected for faults consequential to 
that test. The equipment/panels shall be considered 
satisfactory, if: 


a) no damage is revealed during inspection which is 
a result of the faulty design or workmanship; and 


b) each operation made during the functional tests 
specified above cause the equipment/panel to 
operate normally. 


C-2.5 Operational Test 


With CIE in its quiescent condition for 20 h, the 
cumulative effect of the operation of trigger device 
shall be applied to each zone in succession, the audible 
alarm being silenced between each operation where this 
facility is provided. The equipment shall be considered 
satisfactory if all fire alarms supposed to be initiated 
by the operation of a trigger device functions normally 
and no-fault warning is given as a result of this test. In 
successive zone activation process for a control panel 
having more than three zones, heat detectors, smoke 
detectors and MCPs shall be used unless otherwise 


20 


specified. The following two conditions shall be 
observed: 


a) At least one zone shall be activated by a type of 
trigger device; and 


b) MCP shall be mounted and operated as intended 
while heat and smoke detectors shall be mounted 
(at least once) in hot air tunnel (as per IS 2175) 
and smoke tunnel (as per IS 11360), respectively 
and brought into operation by essentially slow 
buildup of temperature and smoke concentration. 
Rate of rise of temperature shall be 3 °C/min and 
rate of smoke build up shall be less than 0.2 dB/m 
as prescribed in the standard for measuring the 
response of smoke detectors. 


C-3 FIRE ALARM SOUNDER 


C-3.1 Continuous Normal Operation 


The fire alarm sounder shall be able to operate 
continuously for a period of at least 50 min without 
damage or malfunction. The sound output (peak value) 
shall not vary by more than + 5 dB(A) during this 
operation. 


C-3.2 Sound Level/Characteristics 


The sound level (peak value) shall be not less than 
65 dB(A) and not more than 120 dB(A) when 
measured at a distance of 1.5 m (measured in 
audiometric chamber). 


C-3.3 Environmental Stresses 


Construction and housing of sounder shall be such as 
to afford protection against fouling by dust and damage 
by other environmental stresses. 


a) Dust— One device shall be exposed to dust test as 
described in IS 11360. 


b) Corrosion — One device shall be suspended 
in corrosive atmosphere of SO, as described in 
IS 2175. 


c) Vibrations — One device shall be mounted on 
vibrating table and shall be subjected to vibrations 
as per IS 2175. 


d) Climatic conditions — One device shall be exposed 
to dry heat, damp heat and cold environment as 
per C-2.3.1 to C-2.3.3 above. 


After each environment stress test, device shall be 
inspected for faults consequential to that test and its 
sound output measured. Device shall be considered 
satisfactory if no damage is revealed and operates 
normally without output variation greater than 
+5 dB (A). 


ANNEX D 
( Clause 11.10) 


TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL NOISE LEVELS 


IS 15908 : 2021 


SI No. Location Decibel Level 
db 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Business occupancies 55 
ii) Educational occupancies 45 
iii) | Industrial occupancies 80 
iv) | Institutional occupancies 50 
v) Mercantile occupancies 40 
vi) Mechanical rooms 85 
vii) | Piers and water surrounded structures 40 
viii) | Places of assembly 55 
ix) | Residential occupancies 35 
x) Storage occupancies 30 
xi) | Thoroughfare and high density urban 7 
xii) | Thoroughfare and medium density urban 55 
xiii) | Thoroughfare and rural and suburban 40 
xiv) | Tower occupancies 35 
xv) | Underground structures and windowless buildings 40 
xvi) | Vehicles and vessels 50 
xvii) | Conferences and meeting rooms 40-45 
xviii) | Exhibition halls 63-73 
xix) | Commercial kitchens 65-75 
xx) | Boiler areas 75-85 
xxi) | Air conditioning plant 85-90 
xxii) | Cafeterias 68-78 
xxiii) | Railway stations 75-85 
xiv) | Shopping malls 70-75 
xv) | Sports halls 70-80 


21 


IS 15908 : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Fire Fighting Sectional Committee, CED 22 


Organization 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Central Industrial Security Force, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Centre for Fire & Explosive Environment Safety 
(DIFR), New Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Chhatariya Rubber & Chemicals Industries, 
Mumbai 


City and Industrial Development Corporation 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Pune 

Delhi Fire Services, New Delhi 

Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services, Goa 

Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

F.M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


Fire & Emergency Services, J&K, Srinagar 


Fire & Security Association of India, Chennai 
Fire Protection Association of India, Mumbai 
GAIL (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 
H. D. Fire protect Pvt Limited, Thane 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Noida 


Institution of Fire Engineers, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Suri D. K. SHAMI (Chairman) 


Suri D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI ARUN KUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBHASH KUMAR 
SHRI P. K. DEsHMukH (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Suri R. S. CHIMOTE 
SHRI SUVIR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNATH SINGH 
SHRI A. K. Verma (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. TuLaNı (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. JAIN 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


SHRI S. A. HAVELIWALA 
Suri H. S. HAvELIWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND P. MANDKE 


CONTROLLER QA (FE) 
JoINT CONTROLLER QA (FE) (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CuteF Fire OFFIcer (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK MENON 
SHRI NITIN V. RAIKER (Alternate) 


Suri R. B. BHUTDA 
SHRI VIPAN GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KrisHNAMOORTHY (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. SINGH 
SHRI BASHIR AHMED SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAS RIZWI 
PRESIDENT 


Suri S. P. GARG 
SHRI SANJEEV KUMAR KALKAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEwar (Alternate) 


Suri HarisH N. DHARAMSHI 
SHRI K. T. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AASHISH R. GOKHALE 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


22 


Organization 


Johnson Controls (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


K. V. Fire Chemicals (India) Pvt Ltd, Navi 
Mumbai 


Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services, 
Bengaluru 


Maharashtra Fire Services, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ MoD (Army), New 
Delhi 


Mumbai Fire Brigade, Mumbai 


National Association of Fire Officers, Mumbai 


National Building Construction Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RESQ Technologies, Ahmedabad 


Safex Fire Services Limited, Mumbai 
Shah Bhogilal Jethalal & Bros, Ahmedabad 


State Bank of India, Mumbai 


Surex Production and Sales Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Swastik Synergy Engineering Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Tamil Nadu Fire and Rescue Services 
Department, Chennai 


The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 
UL India Pvt Limited, Bengaluru 
Uttar Pradesh Fire Services, Lucknow 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, 
Kolkata 


In personal capacity (B-152, Ist Floor, East of 
Kailash, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) 


In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 
Vihar, New Delhi) 


IS 15908 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANTOSH MuUZUMDAR 
SHRI Nitin RASTOGI 


SHRI RasesH H. SABADRA 
Suri Upay K. Surorr (Alternate) 


Suri K. U. RAMESH 
SHRI K. Srinivasa (Alternate) 


SHRI S. S. WARICK 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
Suri A. K. Dusey (Alternate) 


Suri P. S. RAHANGDALE 
Suet H. D. Paras (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 


SHRIMATI SUNITA PURSWANI 
Suri R. K. AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ISHWAR IYER 
Suri S. K. NANDY 


SHRI VARADENDRA KotTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI RoniT V. SHAH 


SHRI JITENDRA SHAH 
SHRI SANDIP SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI Mukesu M. SHAH 
SHRI ABHAY D. PuRANDARE (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK GOKHALE 


SHRI DEBASHIS NEOGI 


SHRI MuKEsH D. SHAH 
SHRI KUNAL ZATAKIA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. VIJAYASEKAR 
SHRIMATI N. PRIYA (Alternate) 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
Suri G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH SHANMUGAM 
Suri S. P. Tey KUMAR BEHARA (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. Rao 
SHRI AMAN SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHIJIT PANDEY 
SHRI KAMAL Nanny (Alternate) 
SHRI HEMANT KUMAR 


Suri S. K. DHERI 


Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


Suri R. C. SHARMA 


23 


IS 15908 : 2021 


Organization 


In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior 
Citizens Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
SCIENTIST ‘E’ (CrviL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Fire Detection Alarms and Suppression System Subcommittee, CED 22:4 


Organization 
Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi 
Agni Controls, Chennai 


ASTRAL Polytechnik Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central for Fire Explosive Environment Safety, 
(DRDO), Delhi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited, Chennai 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, Pune 


Delhi Fire Service, New Delhi 


DSPA Fire Suppressions India Pvt Ltd, Pune 
EAST Corp, Thane 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


FOGTEC Brandschutz GmbH & Co KG, Mumbai 


F. M. Engineering International India Branch, 
Bengaluru 


FYRPROTEK (Fire Engineers & Consultants), 
New Delhi 


Gunnebo India Pvt Limited, Thane 
Honeywell International (I) Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Institution of Fire Engineers (India) Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Maple Engineering Design Services (India), 
Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 


Representative(s) 
Suri D. K. SHAMI (Convener) 


Suri D. BALACHANDRAN 
SHRI SELVAKUMAR BALACHANDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RITESH PATEL 
Suri Manos Duar (Alternate) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 


Suri Rasy GOEL 
Suri R. S. Cuimote (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAITANYA KUMAR VERMA 
Suri D. K. Turanı (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. Jain 
SHRI AMIT SAINI (Alternate) 


Suri J. P. K. HEPAT 


CoL V. V. KADAM 
CoL N. K. N. Rao (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
CHIEF FIRE OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETAN UDGIR 
SHRI HEMANT KHADSE 


SHRI VIPAN GOEL 
Suri R. B. Buutpa (Alternate) 


SHRI JACKSON JOSE 


SHRI SRIKANTH YAJJALA 
SHRI MANIKANDAN KrisHNAMooRTHY (Alternate) 


SHRI GULSHAN KHURANA 


SHRI ASHUTOSH SATPUTE 
SHRI GAJANAN MEDEWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANDAR SAWANT 
SHRI AKHAND Kumar (Alternate) 


PRESIDENT 
GENERAL SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI B. S. A. NARAYAN 
Suri H. R. RANGANNATH (Alternate) 


24 


Organization 


Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, 
Mumbai 


Newage Industries, Mumbai 


Nohmi Bosai (India) Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Proion Consultants, New Delhi 


Realty Automation and Security Systems Pvt Ltd, 


Pune 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 


SCHRACK SECONET AG, Gurugram 
Steel Authority of India, Salem 
The Supreme Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Johnson Controls (India) Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


West Bengal Fire and Emergency Service, Kolkata 
In personal capacity (A-45, Sector-70, Noida) 
In personal capacity (D-317, 2nd Floor, Nirman 


Vihar, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (27A, Tapovan Senior 


Citizens Foundation, Coimbatore 641 010) 


In personal capacity (K-33-A, Green Park, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity, (4-59, Sector 35, Noida) 


Nitin Fire Protection Industries Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


CHIEF FIRE OFFICER 
Deputy Fire OFFICER (Alternate) 


SHRI AsHOK M. SHAH 
SHRI SHETUL A. SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin M. SHAH 
SHRI PRAVIN SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT RAGHAVAN 
SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 


SHRI ANANT GOKHALE 


SHRI VARENDRA KOTI 
SHRI UMESH KHANDALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH CHANDRA MISHRA 
SHRI AJIT SAINI 
Suri D. KUMARESAN 


SHRI KISAN KUNDALKAR 
Suri G. K. SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH MuZUMDAR 
Suri AsHIsH DILEEP SAWANT (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Dr H. S. KAPRWAN 


Suri R. C. SHARMA 
Suri T. R. A. KRISHNAN 
Suri S. K. DHERI 


SHRI KANWAR A. SINGH 


25 


IS 15908 : 2021 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 22 (14642). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


