**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 6979 (1973) : Cerebral Palsy Chair, Tubular, 
Institutional Model [MHD 10: Medical Laboratory 
Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UOC 615-478 24 :«4-434 First Reprint SEPTEMBER 1983 ie . mto 1071 

( IncomofBt no Amendment No. 11 la . W9IS - iSfo 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CEREBRAL PALSY CHAIR, TUBULAR, INSTITUTIONAL MODEL 



1. Scope — Dimensional and other requirements for Institutional modfcl cerebral palsy chair. 

2. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1. 

3. Material 

3.1 Framework — Electric resistance butt-welded steel tubes ( ERW ) conforming to IS : 2039-1984 
' Specification for steel tubes for bicycle and allied purposes '. 

3.2 Best materials suited for the purpose shall be used for other components. 

4. Requirements 

4.1 The seat and the back of the chair shall be provided with a cane insert or shall be upholstered. 
Solid seat wiih foam-rubber cushion shall be supplied, if specifically asked by the purchaser. 

4.2 The back shall be capable of being tilted- from 80° to 120° to the seat. The tilting shall be 
achieved by a worm and worm gear. The tilting shall be only for the back, the seat not getting 
tilted when the back Is tilted. The tilting mechanism shall function smoothly without jerks. 

4.3 The legrest shall be upholstered. It shall be capable of being fixed at different angles between 
30° and 90° to the vertical. The clamping shall be positive and shall not loosen accidentally or 
under load. 

4.4 The distance of footrest from the seat shall be adjustable to suit tbe leg length of the user. 
The locking arrangement for adjustments shall be positive and the distance shall not change unless 
Intended. 

4.5 The various adjusting mechanisms In the chair shall be sturdy and easy to operate and shall 
allow the adjustments to be carried out smoothly without undue effort. 

4.6 The chair shall have a provision for fixing a partition to the seat to keep the knees of the patient 
apart. 

4.7 The legs shall be provided with rubber tips conforming to IS : 5150-1969 ' Specification for, 
rubber tips for crutches and walking sticks \ 

4.8 When placed on a level surface, the chair shall not rock and shall be completely stable. 

4.9 The chair shall have a removable tray fitted on Its armrests. There shall be a suitable 
arrangement to tilt the tray. 

4.10 All edges likely to be touched by the patient shall be rounded and nowhere sharp. All surfaces 
coming into contact with the body of the patient shall be smooth and free from any sharp imperfec- 
tions likely to Injure the patient. All corners shall be rounded. 

4.11 The tubular structure of the chair shall be spray painted with alr-drylng or stoving enamel. 
The colour of the paint and the number of coats shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and 
the supplier. Prior to painting, all surfaces shall be degreased, rust-proofed and then suitably 
protected by an anticorrosive primer. Each coat shall be separately stoved or air-dried as the case 
may be. The finished paint shall be hard and shall not readily chip or flake. 

4.12 All mild steel components shall be either plated or painted, if painted, the painting shall be 
done as in 4.11. If plated, the plating shall conform to Service Grade No. 2 of IS: 1068-1968 
1 Specification for electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium on Iron and steel (first revision ) \ 

4.13 The brass components shall be plated chromium over nickel. The plating shall conform to 
Service Grade No. 2 of IS : 4827-1968 ' Specification for electroplated coatings of nickel and 
chromium on copper and copper alloys '. 

4.14 The springs for the locking arrangements shall be hardened and tempered to 650 to 750 HV, 

5. Load Test— Put a load of 800 N on the seat of the chair. Attain this load gradually and allow 
to act for 5 minutes. The chair shall not suffer any damage and all the mechanisms shall continue 
to function satisfactorily after removing the load. 



Adopted 8 August 1073 



® September 1963, ISI 



Or 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 6979- 1973 

6. Marking — The chair shall have a name plate or label fixed to It showing the manufacturer's 
name, initials or recognized trade-mark. 

6.1 IS! Certification Marking— Details available with' the Indian Standards Institution. 

7. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 




f.OO THICK 




TrvLn 

inn >-iim 



- WORM GEAR FOR BACK 

TILTING MECHANISM 



DETAIL AT 2 



-450 



*-•$ 



SECTION XX 
DETAIL OF TRAY 



>- TIITINO BACK, 
s io'towto THE SEAT 




All dimensions art in millimetres. 

Fio. 1 Crrbbral Palsy Chair, Tubular, InmnmoNAL Model, Typical 



Reproduced by R«prO0f«phy Unit. 131, N«w D*lhl 



