( Reaffirmed 1996 )

IS : 1332 - 1986

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE STREET LIGHTING POLES

( First Revision )
Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee,
Chairman
DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA

BDC 2
and Building

Representing
National Council for Cement Materials, New Delhi

Members

ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR Research, Designs and Standards Organization STANDARDS ( B & S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow DEPUTY DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( B & S ) ( Alternate ) SHRI K. P. BANERJEE Larsen and Toubro Limited, Bombay SHRI HARISH N. MALANI ( Alternate ) `SHRI S. K. BANERJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI R. V. CHALAPATHI RAO Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI S. ROY ( Alternate ) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal CHIEF ENGINEER( BD ) Township SHRI J. C. BASUR ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIFF ENGINEER( DESIGNS) EXECUTIVEENGINEER( D )-III ( Alternate > CHIEF ENGINEER( RESEARCH-CUM- Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab _ DIRECTOR ) \ RESEARCHOFFICER( CONCRETE TECHNOLOGY) ( Alternate ) A. P. Engineering Research DIRECTOR Laboratories, Hyderabad JOINT DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi CHIEF RESEARCHOFFICER ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( C & MDD-I ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( C & MDD-I ) ( Alternate ) Structural Engineering SHRI V. K. GHANEKAR Research Centre ( CSIR ), Roorkee ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1987 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the caid Act.

( Continued from page 1 )

Members
SHRI A. V. GOKAK

SHRI S. S. MIGLANI( Alternate ) The India Cements Limited, Madras SHRI S. GOPINATH SHRI T. TAMILAKARAN ( Alternate ) Gannon Dunkerley and Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K.. GUHA THAKURTA SHRI S. P. SANKARNARAYANAN (Alternate ) Hyderabad tndustries Limited, Hyderabad SHRI A. K GUPTA The B$zbc$ed Cement Companies Ltd, SHRI P. J. JAGUS DR A. K. CHATTERWE ( Alternate ) Indian Hume Pipe Co Limited, Bombay SHRI N. G. JO~HI Rotlds Wing;~Ministry of Transport SHRI R. L. KAPOOR SHRI R. K. SAXENA( Alternate ) SHRI B. T. UNWALLA(Alternate
The Institution C~ntr$~~ri!l~

Representing Development Commissioner for Industty ( Ministry of Industry )

Cement

SHRI S. K. LAHA DR MOHAN RAI

)

of Engineers Research

( India ), Calcutta ( CSIR ),

Institute

DR. A. K. MULLICK

DR S, S. REH~I ( Alternate )

SHRI K. K. NAMBIAR SHRI S. N. PAL

National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi In personal capacity ( ` Ramanalaya `, II First M. N: Dastur and Calcutta

Crescent Park Road, Gandhinagar, Adyar, Madfas )
Company Private Limited,

SHRI BIMAN DASGUPTA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi SHRI H. S. PASR~CHA Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central SHRI Y. R. PHULL R& Research Institute ( CSIR ), New SHRI M. R. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) DR M. RAMAIAH Centrgey;d Research Institute ( CSIR ), NW Research Centre

Structural Engineering ( CSIR ). Madras

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) Dalmia Cement ( Bbarat ) Limited, New Delhi SHRI A. V. RAMANA DR K. C. NARANG ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI G. RAMDAS New Delhi National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHRI J. SEN GUPTA ( Alternate ) Gamtnon India Limited, Bombay SHRI T. N. SUBBARAO

Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI A. U. RXJHSINGHANI SARI C. S. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Army HeadEngineer-in-Chief's Branch, SHRI H. S. SATYANARAYANA quarters, New Delhi SHRI V. R. KOTNIS ( Alternate ) SECRETARY Cent$erbyd of Irrigation and Power, SHR~Ic. R. SAKEWA ( Alternate 9 ( Continued on pggc 15)

SHRI S. A. REDDI ( Ahernate )

New

IS : 1332- 1986

SPECIFICATION FOR PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE STREET LIGHTING POLES

( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 August 1986, after the draft finalized by the Cement, and Concrete Sectional Committee had been appproved by the Civil Engineering Division COUIICi& 0.2 This standard has been prepared with the object of providing guidance to the manufacturers and the users in obtaining precast reinforced concrete street lighting poles capable of giving, satisfactory service. The standard covers only poles in the manufacture of which mechanical compacting methods such as vibration, shocking, spinning, etc, have been adopted and does not include hand compac.ted poles in its scope. Recommendations regarding selection, handling and erection of poles are covered in 1s : 7321-1974*. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1959 under the title `Specification f"or reinforced concrete street lighting columns'. The present modification in title is intended to make'it more clear. 0.4 The present revision has been taken up with a view to incorporating, the modifications found necessary in the light of experience gained during the use of this st,andard. This rev&an incorporates significant modifications in re,pect of materials, design, earthing of poles, tests for poles and brackets, and sampling and inspection. In addition, modifications have been made in respect of some other provisions such as length, tolerance on dimensions, de@4 Qf planting, marking of poles, etc. 0.5 For the purpose of decidipg whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the'fina1 value, observed or calculatel, expressing the result df a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in *Code of practice for selection, handling and erection of concr:te ~01:s for overhead power and telecommunication lines. 3

IS:1332-1986
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1This standard covers the requirements for precast reinforced concrete poles suitable for use for street lighting, manufactured by mechanical compacting methods such as vibration, shocking, spinning, etc. This standard does not cover prestressed or hand compacted concrete poles.
1.2 The poles covered by this standard are not intended wiring purposes. 1.3 Concrete fittings attached to or forming covered by this standard as far as practicable. for overhead

part of a pole are also

ZTERMINOLOGY 2.0For the purpose of this standard,

the following definitions shall: apply. 2.1 Load Factor - The ratio of ultimate transverse load to the transverse load at first crack. For design, the transverse load at first crack shall be taken as not less than the value of the working load.

2.2 Maximum Working Load - The maximum working load in the transverse direction that is ever likely to occur including the wind pressure on the pole. This load is assumed to act at a point 600 mm below the connection of the bracket to the pole and will create a bending moment equal to the sum of the bending moments caused by the following loads : a) Wind pressure on the pole, bracket, luminaire and any raising or lowering contact gear; b) Overhanging weight of bracket and luminaire; and c) If raising and lowering gear is provided, the weight of such gear attached to the bracket plus 50 percent of the weight of the luminaire and the moving part of the gear. 2.3 Mounting Height - The mounting height is the vertical distance from the centre of the light source to the road surface or to the horizontal plane through the nearest point of the road where the light source is not vertically above it.,
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (
revised).

4

IS : 1332- 1986 2.4 Outreach - The outreach is the shortest distance between the vertical through the centre of the base of the pole and the vertical through the centre of the light source. 2.5 Ultimate Transverse Load - The load at which failure occurs when it is applied to a point 600 mm below the centre of light source and perpendicular to the axis of the pole along the transverse direction with the butt end of the pole planted to the required depth as intended in the design. 3. OVERALL LENGTH OF POLES

3.1 The minimum length of pole shall be arrived at after fixing the mounting height on the basis of traffic situation of the concerned street and adding thereto the minimum planting depth as mentioned in 5.3. However, in no case the pole length should be less than 5'2 m, considering the minimum mounting height of 4'0 m and the corresponding planting depth of 1'2 m. For longer poles, the lengths shall be in steps of 0'5 m. 3.2 Tolerances dimensions Tolerances The tolerance on overall length and cross-sectional respectively. of the poles shall be f 15 mm and ?l; mm on uprightness of the pole shall be 0'5 percent.

4. MATERIALS 4.1 Cement - Cement used in the manufacture of poles and fittings shall conform to IS : 269-1976*, or IS : 455-1976t, or IS : 1489-1976$, or IS : 8041-19785, or IS : 8043-197811,or IS : 8112-19761. 4.2 Aggregates - Aggregates shall comply with the requirements of IS : 383-1970**. Where specified, sample of aggregate shall be submitted to the purchaser for approval. The maximum size of aggregates shall in no case exceed 20 mm. *Specification for ordinary and low heat Portland cement ( third revision ).
lSpecification for Portland slag cement ( third revision ). $3pecification for Portland-pozzolana cement ( second revision ). �Specification for rapid hardening Portland cement (first revision). IlSpecification for hydrophobic Portland cement (first revision ). GSpecification for high strength ordinary Portland cement.

**Specification for coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete ( second revision ).

IS>1332-1986 4.2.1 Other types of aggregates such as slag and crushed overbumt brick or tile which may be found suitable with regard to.strength, durability of concrete and freedom from harmful effects may be used but such aggregates should not contain more than one percent of sulphates and should not absorb more than 10 percent of their own mass of water.

4.2;2 Heavy weight aggregates or light weight aggregates such as bloated clay aggregates and sintered fly ash aggregates may also be used provided the data on the properties of concrete made with them is satisfactory. 4.2.3 Fly ash conforming to IS : 3812-1981* may be used as part replacement of fine aggregates. 4.3 Reinforcement - The reinforcement shall be any of the following: a) Mild steel and medium tensile steelbars conforming to IS : 432 ( Part 1 )-1982?, b) `Deformed steel bars conforming to IS : 1786-1985f, or c) Structural steel bars conforming to IS : 226-19759.

4.3.1 The surface of all reinforcement shall be free from loose scales, oil, grease, clay or other materials that may have deteriorating,effect on the bond between reinforcement and the concrete. 4.4 Concrete - Concrete used for the concrete poles shall not be less than IS : 456-197811. manufacture of reinforced grade M 20 specified in of the

4.5 Admixtures - Admixtures may be used with the approval purchaser. The admixtures shall conform to IS : 9103-19797. 5. DESIGN

5.1 The poles shall be so designed that they do not fail owing to failure initiated by compression of concrete.
*Specification for fly ash for use as pozzolana and admixture (first revision ). tSpecification for mild steel and medium tensile steel bars and hard-drawn steel wire for concrete reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel and medium tensile steel bars ( third revision ). fSpecification for high strength deformed steel bars a: d wires for concrete reinforcement ( third revision ). SSpecification for structural steel ( standard quality ) (fifth revision ). $Zode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). TjSpecification for admixtures for concrete.

6

is:1332-1986
5.2 `The,maximum wind pressure to be assumed for computing the design transverse load at first crack shall be as specified by the State in this behalf under the Indian Governments who are empowered from Electricity Rules, 1956. In the absence of any data/information the State Governments, wind pressure may be determined as specified in IS : 875-1964*. The wind pressure may also be calculated considering the shape factor of poles and brackets depending on their plan shape as per IS : 875-1964*. 5.3 Depth of Planting - The minimum depth of planting of a. pole below ground level shall be'in accordance with Table 1, the actual depth being determined on the basis of ground conditions.
TABLE 1 MINIMUM
MOUNTING

DEPTH OF PLANTING CONCRETE PQLES
(2) 1'20

OF- REINFORCED
REMARKS 7 (3) In increments

HEIGHT, m

MINIMUM DEPTHIN GROUND,m

(1) 4-O to 6-O

6.5 to 7.5 8.0 to 9.0

1 50 1.80

J

k of preferably 0.5 m

5.4 Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the distance from the lantern support to the centre of light source shall be taken as given in Table 2.
TABLE 2
DISTANCE FROM LANTERN SUPPORT LIGHT SOURCE TO CENTRE OF

SL MOUNTING No. HEIGHT OF POLES,m

NOMINALDISTANCE FROMLANTERN SUPPORTTOTHECENTREOFLIGHT SOURCE,mm ~~_~_~_~~~~~ For Top For Side Entry Entry Lantern Lantern (3) 300 300 to 450' 450 (4) 100 100 to 150* 150

(1) i) ii) iii)

(2) 4-O to 5.5 6'0 to 7'5 7'5 to 9 0 by the purchaser.

*As specified

*Code of practice

for structural

safety of buildings:

Loading

standards

( revised ).

7

IS.: 1332 - 1986 5.5 Outreach This will be in standard length as specified in Table 3.
MOUNTING HEIGHT, m (1) 4'5 6.01 1'5 >
9.OJ

TABLE 3 STANDARD LENGTH OF OUTREACH
OUTREACH, m (2) Not exceeding O-5 m Varying from 0.50 m to 2 75 m in steps of b25 m

5.5.1 Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the distance between the vertical through the centre of light source of a side entry lantern and the extremity of the concrete on the bracket arm shall be taken as 300 mm nominal. 5.6 The poles shall be designed to resist the maximum bending moment due to a load of 90 kg or the maximum working load, whichever is greater, applied at 6C0 mm below the centre of light source or, if so specified by the purchaser, at a point immediately below the connection of the bracket to the pole. 5.7 The minimum load factor shall be 2'5 as stipulated in Rule No, 76 of the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956. This factor may be reduced to a value not ,less than 2'0 in case of street lighting poles by the State Governments who are empowered in this behalf under the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956. 5.8 In order to provide adequate impact resistance for poles in excess of 7'5 m in height and in particular to reduce the danger of collapse when subjected to impact, a minimum of 284mm2 of steel reinforcement shall be provided in the lower portion of the pole extending from a minimum distance of 600 mm below the ground line to a minimum height of 600 mm above the door opening. Effective means shall be provided for maintaining it in position during the manufacture of the pole and all spacers or other devices used for this purpose shall be of rustproof material. Such steel shall be continuous and suitably distributed over the section of the concrete to resist impact from any direction and shall be spaced by means of transverse reinforcement to form a rigid cage. The diameter of the transverse reinforcement shall not be less than 5 mm at a spacing not greater than 16 times the diameter of the longitudinal reinforcement in the pole. 5.9 Vertical Load on Bracket - The vertical load on the bracket shall be taken as equivalent to the weight of the lantern, weight of raising and" lowering gear attached to the bracket ( if used ) plus 50 percent of the weight of the lantern and of the moving part of that gear, the load 8

IS : 1332 - 1986 being applied at point of support of the lantern with the bracket rigidly fixed to the pole in the designed manner. 5.10 Transverse Load on Bracket - The load caused by wind pressure on the lantern and bracket is considered as acting at the point of support of the lantern with the bracket fixed to the pole. The design of the connections of bracket to pole shall provide for torsional stresses due to wind load on the bracket and the lantern. 6. FITTINGS 6.1 Spigot - When poles with top spigots are required, and unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, the following sizes shall be provided: a) For 6, 7'5 and 9 m mouting heights: A spigot with 100 mm dia and 150 mm long. b) For 4'5 m mounting height : A spigot with SO mm dia and 80 mm long. 6.2 Nipples -Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, nipples shall be provided at the end of the bracket as follows: a) For mounting heights, 7'5 and 9 m: 3 To Take Pendant Lanterns - Vertical 30 mm gas nipple having at least 40 mm of exposed thread; ii) To Take Side Entry Lanterns - 30 mm steel tubing with end horizontal and plain or threaded, as specified by the purchaser. b) For mounting heights, 4'5 and 6 m: i) To Take Pendant Lanterns - Vertical 20 mm or 30 mm gas nipple having at least 25 mm of exposed thread; ii) To Take Side Entry Lanterns - 20 mm or 30 mm steel tubing with end horizontal and plain or threaded, as specified by the purchaser. 6.3 Ladder Arms - If required, and unless otherwise specified, arms shall be as follows: a) Double arms, each of 250 mm overall projections; and b) Single arm, of 550 mm overall projection. ladder

6.4 Door and Door Openings - Unless otherwise specified by the purchaser, a weatherproof door with a locking device, which will resist unauthorised entry, shall be included in the pole. The door opening shall be of size agreed upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 9

4s : 1332 - 1986 6.4.1 .The bottom of the opening shall be at least 300 .mm above ground level. 6.5 All metal works shall be of non-corroding protected against corrosion. metal or of metal suitably

6,6 Bore - All ,poles shall have aasmooth *walled central duct of diameter not less than 30 mm for the,,purpose of,taking the supply from the base to the lighting unit at top. 6.7 Service Connections - Suitable apertures shall be provided on at least two sides of the, pole below ground~level $or the entry of electric cables or gas sexvice pipes. Unless otherwise specified, service slots shall be approximately 225 mm long and 75 mm wide with the top at least 300 mm below ground level. The edges of the slot shall be suitably rounded to prevent damage to the sheath or armouring of the cables. 6.8 Breathing Holes - Breathing holes shall be provided in the door and ,also as close to the top of the pole as is practicable to allow The holes shall be suitably circulation of air and to limit condensatioo. protected against the entry of rain water. 7. MANUFACTURE 7.1 All reinforcement shall be accurately placed and maintained in position during manufacture. All spacers and other devices used to obtain the necessary cover shall be of corrosion-resistant material. 7.2 Cover - Unless otherwise specified; the cover of concrete over alE reinforcement in the case of centrifugally spun poles, shall be not less than 15 mm. In the case of poles made by any other mechanical compaction process, the cover shall be at least equal to the maximum size of aggregate plus 2 mm but in no case less than 20 mm. In case of corrosive atmosphere, cover may be suitably increased. 7.3 Welding and Lapping of Reinfwcement joints shall be equal to the strength of the smaller bar where the bars joined differ in bars are lapped, these shall be staggered IS : 456-1978*. - The strength bars or at least to sectional area. and the lap shall of welded that of the Where the conform to

7.4 Compacting - Concrete shall be compacted shocking or other suitable mechanical means. not be permitted. 7.5 Curing - The concrete shall be covered ,canvas, hessian or similar absorbent material
*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete

by spinning, vibrating, Hand compaction shail

with a layer of sacking, and kept constantly wet
( third revision ).

10

IS : 1332 - 3936 until .the concrete attains sufficient strength. ,Then the poles and brackets may,be:temoved from the mould and watered at intervals to prevent surface ,craoking of the unit; the interval shall depend on the atmospheric humidity md Qem.perature. Steam curing nray also be permitted. 7.6 During manufacture, daily tests on concrete cubes shall be carried out till the concrete achieves the required strength. `Thereafter the tests on concrete shall be carried out as detailed in IS : 456-1978*. The lnanufacturer shall supply, w-hen required by the purchaser or his repkesentative, results of compressive tests conducted in accordance with fS : 456-1978* on concrete cubes made from the concrete used for the poles. If the purchaser so desires;tbe,manufacturer shall supply cubes for test purposes and such cubes shall r.be *tested in accordance with JS : 456-1978*. 7.7 Earthing - Earthing shall be provided by either of the following means: a) By having a length of galvanized iron wire of 4 mm diameter or equivalent strip or equivalent bare copper cable embedded in concrete during manufacture and the ends of the wire or strip or cable left projecting from the pole to a length of 100 mm at 2 15 mm from top and I 50 mm below ground level. b) By providing two holes of suitable dimensions 215 mm from top and 150 mm below ground level to enable a galvanized iron wire of 4 mm diameter or equivalent strip or equivalent bare copper cable to be taken from the top hole to the bottom hole through the central hollow.
IVOTE -

be as agreed

The details of embedment of the wire or strip or cable shall; upon between the manufacturer and the purchaser.

7.8 Finish - The poles shall be of good finish and free from honeycombing. The surfaces of the poles in contact with the moulds shall be smooth and regular in shape. All arrises shall be clear and well-defined so as to present a neat appearance. 8. TESTS 8.1 Transverse Strength Test for Poles - The transverse strength test of poles shall be cor,ducted in accordance with IS : 2905-1966t. The poles tested as above shall comply with the following requirements: a) The permanent set after removal of test load, 60 percent greater than the working load, shall not exceed 15 percent of the deflection at that lcad.
*Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). tMethods of test for concrete poles for overhead power and telecommunication lines.

11

JS : 1332 - 1986 b) The pole shall be deemed not to have passed the test if cracks wider than 0'1 mm appear at a stage prior to the application of the design transverse load at first crack and/or the observed ultimate transverse load is less than the design ultimate transverse load. 8.2 Strength Test for Brackets 8.2.1 The brackets shall be tested either in its normal position at the top of the pole or fixed into a special pole head of identical dimensions, which may be a portion cut from a pole. The pole or pole head shall be rigidly fixed in a vertical position. 8.2.2 Vertical and transverse test loads calculated in accordance with 5.9 and 5.10 shall be gradually applied at the end of the bracket, the ratio between the vertical and transverse loads being kept constant. When the maximum working leads are reached, it shall be maintained for at least 2 minutes and the maximum deflection shall be measured. 8.2.3 The load shall then be reduced to zero and the residual deflection shall be measured after 10 minutes. 8.2.4 The brackets shall be considered satisfactory if the recovery is at least 75 percent of the maximum deflection while under load. 8.2.5 The load causing failure shall be not less than ` the maximum working load multiplied by the load factor considered in the design `. 9. SAMPLING AND INSPECTION 9.1 Scale of Sampling 9.1.1 Lot - In a consignment, 500 poles ( or brackets ) or a part thereof of the same mounting height, same dimensions and belonging to the same batch of manufacture, shall be grouped together to constitutes .a lot. 9.1.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the materials in the lot to the requirements of this specification, samples shall be tested from each lot separately. 9.1.3 The number of poles or brackets to be selected from the lot shall ,depend on the size of the lot and shall be according to Table 4. `9.2 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity 9.2.1 All the poles/brackets selected according to 9.1.3 shall be tested for overall lerlgth, cross-section and uprightness ( see 3.2 >. A pole/ .bracket failirg to satisfy one or more of these requirements shall be considered as defective. All the poles/brackets in the lot shall be considered as conforming to these requirements if the number of defective poles/brackets found in the sample is less than or equal to the corresponding acceptance number given in co1 3 of Table 4. 12

IS : 1332- 1986
TABLE 4 SCALE OF SAMPLING AND PERMISSIBLE DEFECTIVES ( Claw3
OR BRACKETS IN THE LOT (1) to to to to

NUMBER

OF

9.1.3 and 9.2.1 )
TRANSVERSE STRENGTHAT FIRST CRACK (4) 2 3 4 5 may be used, T;I&Ns~~;; ULTIMATE (5) Nil Nil Nil 1 provided

No. OF POLES

DIMENSIONALREQUIREMENTS r_--~----5 Sample Acceptance Size Number (2) 10 15 20 30 (3) 1 1 2 3

up 101 201 301

loo 200 300 500

NOTE - The poles or brackets tested up to first crack the crack is closed after removal of the load.

9.2.2 The lot having been found satisfactory according to 9.2.1 shall be further tested for transverse strength ( see 8.1 ) of the poles. For this purpose, the number of poles given in co1 4 of Table 4 shall be tested. These poles may be selected from those already tested according to 9.2.1 and found satisfactory. All these poles tested for transverse strength shall satisfy the corresponding specification requirements. If one or more poles fail, twice the number of poles originally tested shall be selected from those a!ready selected and subjected to this test. If there is no failure among these poles, the lot shall be considered to have satisfied the requirements of this test. 9.2.3 All the brackets selected from the lot according to 9.1.3 shall be subjected to strength test for brackets (see 8.2 ). All the brackets tested for strength test shall satisfy the requirements of this specification. If one or two brackets fail, twice the number of bracketsoriginally tested shall be selected from the lot and subjected to this test. If there is no failure among these brackets, the lot shall be considered to have satisfied If more than two brackets fail, the requirements of the specification. the lot shall be considered not to have satisfied the requirements of the specification. 10. MARKING 10.1 The poles shall be clearly and indelibly marked with the following particulars either during or after the manufacture, but before testing, at a position so as to be clearly read after erection in position: a) Month and year of manufacture; b) Name of the manufacturer, or his registered trade-mark, or both; c) Serial number of the poles; and d) Position of centre of gravity of the poles with the words ` C.G. ' 13

10.1.1 Each pole may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.
of NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provision the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. IS1 marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

11.bNRFDoE"K"A'IONTO BE SUPPLIED
11.1 The following
Mounting

WITH THE ENQUIRY

OR

information
height;

shall be supplied with enquiry or order:

a) b) Type of lantern and outreach; 4 Weight of lantern and, if provided,

weight of raising and lowering gear; d) Spigot and nipples ( see 6;l and 6.2 ); 4 Angle which the axis of the nipple at the end of the bracket makes with the vertical ( see 6.2 ); f 1 Ladder arms, if required ( see 6.3 ); d Size of door opening ( see 6.4 ); h) Any special reqyirements in respect of depth of planting; and j), Position and size ofservice slots ( see 6.7 ).

( Continuedfrompage Members

2) Representing
of

SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER Public Works Department, Government Tamil Nadu. ( DESIGNS) EXECUTIVEENGINEER( SMD ) ( DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Orissa Cement Limited, New Delhi SHRI L. SWAROOP SHRI H. BHATTACHAKYYA( Akernafe ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( CIV Engg )

Secretary
SHRI N. C. BANDYOPADHYAY Deputy Direct or ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Concrete PolevSubcommittec,, BDC 2': 12
Convener
DR N. RAGHAV~NDRA National Council for Cement Materials, New Delhi Indian Posts Jabalpur and Telegraph and Building

Members
SHRI J. L. BANDYOPADHYAY Department, SHRI V. V. SURYA RAO ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI S. N. BASU New Delhi _ _ -.-SI-IRIT. N. OBOVEJA ( Afternate ) Punjab State Electricity Board. Patiala SHRI R. S. BHATIA SHRI S. K. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Orissa Cement Ltd, Rajgangpur SHRI P. C. CHATTERJEE SHRI U. N.~ RATH ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, Rural ElectriDIRECTOR ( RE `) fication. Directorate, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( RE ) ( Alternate ) RuralD$ictrification Corporation Ltd, New SHRI G, L.. DUA SHR~ S. K. SETHI ( SHRI P. C. JAIN

Afternate )

SHR~ S~JCHA SINGH ( Alternate ) Research, Designsand Standards Organization JOINT DIRECTQR STANDARDS ( Mmistry of Railways ), Lucknow ( B & S ) CB-IL ASSISTANT. DIRECTOR (E) ( B.&S )-I ( Afternate) The Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd. Bombay SHRI N. G. JOSHI Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi SHRI R. SAMPAT KUMARAM SHRI RAMESH CHANDER ( Alternate ) The Steelpipe and Fabrication Works, SHRI A. V. TALATI Vadodara SHRI H. C. SHAH ( Afternate ) Maharashtra State Electricity Board; Bombay SHRI T. G. TEPAM SHRI R. B. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Tamilnadu Electricity Board, Madras SHRI S. THIAGARAJAN SHRI LAKSHMINARASIMHAN( Alternate )

Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, quarters, New:Delhi

Army

Head-

15

INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS) Base Units Quantity Unit Symbol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance
Supplementary Units Quantity

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg s A K cd mol

Unit

Symbol

Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Units Quantity

radian steradian

rad
ST

Unit

Symbol N

Definition

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

1N 1J 1w 1T 1s 1v 1 Pa

= 1 kg.m/s2 = 1 N.m = 1 J/s

J W Wb T HZ S v Pa

1 Wb = 1 V.S = 1 Wb/m2 1 Hz = 1 c/s(@) = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/m2

