ts I 4410( Part xlv/scc Ir) - 1977

hdian Standard

( Reaffirmed 1998 )

GLOSSARYOFTERMSRELATINGTO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART XIV SOIL CONSERV`ATION Section 2 AND RECLAMATION Reclamation
1989 \

(First Reprint FEBRUARY

UDC

001.4:

627.81:

624.138

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MAR0

NEW

Gr 10

September

1977

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART XIV SOIL CONSERVATION
Section Terminology 2 AND RECLAMATION Reclamation

Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, BDC 46
Representing Irrigation Department, Chandigarh Government of Punjab,

Chairman SHRI I. P. KAPILA Members SEBI B. S. BHALLA CEIEE ENQINEER SHBI V. S. GUPTE ( Alternate ) CEIEQ ENGINEER

Beas Design Organization ( Ministry of Irrigation & Power ), Nangal Township Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay Public Works Department, Project Wing, ment of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad Govern-

SUPERINTENDINGE N o I N f: n a ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of CHIEB ENQINEER Tamil Nadu, Madras SUPERINTENDINQE N Q I N E E R ( Alternate ) CHIEE ENQINEEB ( D ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh DIRECTOR ( W R ) (Alternate ) Irrigation and Works Department, Government SEBI S. M. DEB of West Bengal, Calcutta DEPUTY SuRvEYon GENERAL I Survey of India, Dehra Dun DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( T & P ) ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR ( CD0 ) Irrigation Department, Government of hladhya Pradesh, Bhopal DIREOTOB(~RRIOATION RESEAROH ) ( Aftsrnate ) ( Continuedon page 2 )

@ Co&right 1977
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS I 4410( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977
( Continued from page 1 )
Members DIRECTOR ( HYDROLOGY ) SEBI N. K. DWIVEDI Representing Central Water Commission, New Delhi Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow In personal capacity ( M 18, New Delhi South Extension, Part II, New Delhi 110049 ) Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation Geological Survey of India, Calcutta Irrigation & Power Department, Government Orissa, Bhubaneshwar Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi University of Roorkee, Roorkee Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) Secretary SERI V. KALYANABUNDARAM Assistant Director ( Civ Engg), IS1 of

*

DR R. C. HOON JOINT COMMISSIONEB( S C ) SERI G. PANT Sam R. P. SINQH (Alternate) SERI R. K. SAElIJ PBOF SARANJIT SINQH DR P. P. SEFI~AL SHRI D. AJITEA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Panel for Soil Conservation and Water Management,
Convener DR R. C. HOON Members JOINT COMIVIISSI~NER ( S C ) DEPUTY COMMISSIONER( S C ENao ) ( Alternate ) Sasr R. S. MELEOTE DR A. M. MICHAEL DE R. S. MURTHY Ministry of Agriculture

BDC 46 : P 11

In personal capacity ( bf 18, &w Delhi Eden: ion, Part II, New Delhi 110049 ) and Irrigation

South

Central Watt r Commission, New Delhi Indian Agricultural Research Instirutc, New Delhi C'r,llnc,ll of Agricultural Research, Indian New DeIhi

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - I.977

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART XIV SOIL CONSERVATION Section AND

TO

RECLAMATION

2 Reclamation

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 March 1977, after the draft finalized by the Terminology Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 A number of Indian Standards have already been printed covering various aspects of river valley projects and a large number of standards are in, the process of formulation. These standards include technical terms, the precise definitions of which are required to avoid ambiguity in their interpretation. To achieve this end, the Institution is bringing out this glossary of terms relating to river valley projects ( IS : 4410 ) which is being published in parts. The other parts of this standard so far published are given on page 50. 0.3 Part XIV covers and in view of the sections. While this covers terms relating the important field of soil conservation and reclamation vastness of this subject, this is being covered in two section covers terms relating to reclamation, Section 1 to soil conservation. with drainage and water logging is

The glossary of terms connected under preparation.

0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: UNITED NATIONS. ECONOMICCOMMISSIONFOR ASIA AND THE FAR EAST. Glossary of hydrologic terms used in Asia and Far East. 1956, Bangkok. INDIA. INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON IRRIGATIONANDDRAINAGE. Multilingual technical dictionary on irrigation and drainage. 1967.

3

1s : 4510 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 INDIA. CENTRAL BOARD OF IRRIGATION AND POWER, Glossary of irrigation and hydro-electric terms and standard notations used 1954. Manager of Publications, Delhi. in India. . Nomenclature Engineers. for hydraulics. New York. 1962. American Society of Civil

technical dictionary 0.4.1 All the definitions taken from ' Multilingual on irrigation and drainage ' are marked wirh asterisk (*) in the standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part relating to reclamation. 2. PEDOLOGY 2.1 General Terms 2.1.1 Aggradation - A process by deposition of solid mntrrial. which tends to build up the land surface XIV /Set 2 ) covers the definitions of terms

science which deals with the 2.1.2 Agronomy - A branch of agricultural theory and practice of field crop production and soil management. 2.1.3 Braided River - River with many streams flowing around alluvial bars in a series of dividing and re-uniting channels due to inability to handle its bed load. 2.1.4 surface. 2.1.5
Degradation -A

process

which

tends

to wear

down

the

land

Meandering River -

River flowing in a sinuous which

curve. deals with the origin,

2.1.6 Pedology - A branch of soil science genesis and distribution of soils.

2.1.7 Soil - The soil is a three dimensional dynamic natural body of mineral and organic constituents, differentiated into horizons, of variable depth, which differ from the material below in morphology, physical makeup, chemical properties and composition, and biological characteristics. In agricultural practice the term soil is applied only to the thin uppermost weathered layer of earth's crust which is the seat of intense biologica activity in which plants are able to strike root, derive their food and all other conditions essential to their growth from it. 4

IS : 4410 ( Part xIv/Sec The following subdivision is recognized:
Surface a>

2 ) - 1977

Soil - The more or less completely weathered surface layer, rich in soluble material and containing a relatively higher proportion of organic matter and fine earth; also called top soil. The zone of aeration and intense root and microbiological activity. The layer ordinarily moved in tillage or its equivalent in uncultivated soil, about 10 to 20 cm in thickness.

b)

layer immediately below the surface soil in which Sub-soil -The roots normally grow. Although a common term, it cannot be defined precisely.

2.2 Soil Formation 2.2.1 AcoEiunSoil* Soil formed from wind-transported soil material.

2.2.2 Alluvial Soil* - Azonal soil, developed from material, mainly and relatively recently deposited by water (alluvium ) characterized by a weak modification ( or none ) of the original material by soil-forming processes. (Soils with well developed profiles that have formed from alluvium are grouped with other soils having the same kind of profiles and not with alluvial soils. ) 2.2.3 Calcification* - A general term used for that process or those processes of soil formation in which the soil is kept supplied sufficiently with calcium to saturate the soil colloids to a high degree with exchangeable calcium and thus render them relatively immobile and nearly neutral in reaction. 2.2.4 Carbokation - The act or process of impregnating acid or carbondioxide. 2.2.5
Colluvial Soil -

with carbonic

Soil derived from colluvium. Soil shaped by influences other than parent

2.2.6 Ectodynamorphic Soil* material.

2.2.7 Endodynamorphic Soil* - Soil influenced mainly by parent material. 2.2.8 Hydration - Any chemical water or the elements of water. process involving combination with

2.2.9 Hydrolysis - Reaction of a substance with water or more specifically with hydrogen and hydroxyl ions of water. 2.2.10 Hydromorphic Soil* water all or part of the time. 2.2.11
Immature Soil* -

Soil developed

in the presence

of excess

SoiI lacking a well-developed profile.

5

1S: 4410( Fart XIV/See

2 ) -1977

2.2.12 Loess -- Wind blown silt or silty clay having little or no stratification. Itspeculiarities are light colour, angularity of the particles, porous structure, high permeability and the tendency to break or cleave along vertical cliffs. 2.2.13 Mature Soil* -- Soil having with its present environments, a fully developed profile in equilibrium

are dominated by the 2.2.14 Mineral Soil -- A soil whose properties mineral matter, usually containing less than 20 percent organic matter, or with only a thin surface organic layer ( less than 30 cm thick ). 2.2.15 Organic Soil -- Soil containing tities to dominate its characteristics. organic matter in sufficient quanthe addition of change involving

2.2.16 Oxidation* -- Any chemical change involving oxygen or its chemical equivalent, technically any chemical an increase of positive or a decrease of negative valency. 2.2.17
which it was formed, that is,
in-~itv.

Residual Soil or Sedentary Soil -- Soil resting on the material from

neighbourhood of' 2.2.18 Rhizos@ere -- The soil region in the immediate root system of plants in which the abundance or composition of the microbial population is affected by the presence of the roots. 2.2.19 Skeletal Soil* -- An azonal soil having no clearly expressed soil morphology and consisting of a freshly and imperfectly weathered mass of rock fragments. of the soil including 2.2.20 Soil Morphology -- The physical constitution etc, of the various soil colour, texture, structure, porosity, consistency, horizons, their kind, thickness and arrangement in the soil profile, 2.2.21 horizons. Truncated Soil% -- Soil having lost all or part of the upper

2.2.22 Weathering* � The geological processes, caused by physical and agencies upon rocks at or near the surface chemical action by atmospheric of the lithosphere, which result in the disintegration and decomposition of such rock and in some instances its removal to other locations by separate wind and water action. 2.3 Soil Profile and Characteristics soil profile having

2.3.1 A Horizon -- The uppermost layers of a mineral maximum biological activity or cluviation or both.

of a soil profile' in which material 2.3.2 B Horizon -- The layer leached from the overlying ` A horizon ` is accumulated or clay developed
in-situ. 6

IS 14410 (Part

xIv/sec

a ) - 1977

2.3.3 C Horizon - C Horizon of weathered rock material little affected by biological soil-forming processes; usually referred to as parent material from which the overlying horizon ( or a part of B horizon ) has developed. 2.3.4 CLayPan - Dense subsoil horizon formed by washing down of clay Such a or by the formation of clay in-situ, manifesting slow permeability. pan is generally hard when dry thus limiting root penetration. 2.3.5 Concretion- Hard grains, pellets or modules formed from concentration, of certain compounds, such as calcium carbonates or iron and Concretion can manganese in the soil that cement the soil grains together. be of various sizes, shapes and colours ( in India, predominently carbonaceous concretions are known as KAJVKAR ). 2.3.6 Crotovineor Krotovineorganic and calcareous debris. 23.7 R Horizon* Animal burrows in soil filled with earthen,

Unweathered rock below the ' C horizon `.

2.3.8 Hard Pan - A hardened or cemented soil horizon which is formed by precipitation of ,dissolved materials, such as calcium carbonate, iron oxides or silica compounds, at certain depths below the surface with age. When such an accumulation takes place, the subsoil is rendered more or less cemented and is not amenable to softening when wetted, thereby limiting downward movement of water and penetration of roots ( also see 2.3.13 ). 2.3.9 Horizon ( Soil Horizon) - A layer of soil profile distinguished principally by its colour, texture, structure and chemical constituents produced by soil forming processes. NOTE -Further subdivisionsof various soil horizons designatedas A, B, C and R will come under the standard on agricultural soil classification ( under fmprsfion ). 2.3.10 Indurated - Cemented, hardened, or .rocklike condition of soil which will not soften when wetted. Induration is the process by which such soils are formed. 2.3.11 Iron Pan - Layer usually of sand, cemented with oxides of iron.

2.3.12 Monolith - A column of soil encased in a frame or mounted on a panel, with the profile preserved in its natural state. 2.3.13 Ortstein - Hard, dark yellow to nearly of the solum, unequally cemented by iron oxides. black sandy material

2.3.14 Plansols - An intrazonal, hydromorphic soil having a clay pan or hard pan covered with a leached surface layer, developed in a humid to sub-humid climate. 23.15 Plough Sole - A compacted layer of soil below surSace caused by compression due to passage of the plough bottom, Also called ' Plougbpan `.

7

IS I 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977 2.4 Soil Texture 2.4.1 Clay - The finer mineral soil less than 2 pm particle size, which is plastic, when wet and manifesting colloidal properties. See Textural Classification of Soil based on Triangular Diagrams Fig. 1 and 2.

TRIANGULAR O-002, 0.02 and respectively.

TEXTURE 2 0 mm for

D ia g ram based on Fractions the upper limits of the clay,

with effective Diameters silt and sand fractions,

FIG. 1

INTERNATIONAL TEXTURAL CLASSIFICATION
clay loam, loam, silt, etc is based on in the diagrams.

The Classification of soil into sand, sandy loam, the proportion of sand, silt and clay as depicted

2.4.2

Degree of Dispersion*

down to primary

particles

- Extent to which soil aggregates by any given treatment.

are broken

2.4.3 Intermediate Soil Textures - Some of the intermediate soil textures ( based on diRerent percentages of sand, silt and clay ) are termed as silty, clay, sandy clay, silty clay loam, sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty loam, sandy loam and Ioamy sand on the basis of the triangular classification as illustrated in Fig. 1 and 2. 2.4.4 and2). 2.4.5
Loam -

An even mixture
-

of sand, silt and clay fractions as of sand, silt, clay, etc. 8

( see Fig. 1

Primary Particle*

Particle

I!3 : 4410 ( Part XIV/!%

2 ) - 1977

2.4-6 Sand - The fine material, easily distinguishable by the unaided eye, resulting from the natural disintegration of rock or crushing of friable rock. According to the standards adopted by International Society of Soil Science, particles of sediment 0.02 mm to 2 mm in diameter ( or 0'05 mm to 2 mm according to U.S.D.A. Classification) ( See Fig. 1 and 2 ).

Chart showing the percentage of clay (below 0,002 mm ), silt ( 0.002 mm to 0.005 mm ) and sand ( 0.05 mm to 2 mm ) in the basic soil textural classes.

FIG.

2

-1USDA TEXTURAL

CLASSIFICATION clay loa?, loam silt, etc., in the chagrams. is based on

The classification of soil into sand, sandy loam, the proportion of sand, silt and clay as depicted

tPrescnt trend of soil classification is to base the same on USDA Soil Texanomy. As is obvious, the USDA Textural Classification differs from International in that the silt fraction ranges from 0.05 mm to 0.002 mm instead of 0.02 mm to 0.002 mm. 2.4.7

Secondary Particle* Silt

-

Particle

as of an aggregate.

2.4.8
a)

Individual mineral particles of soil that range in diameter between the upper size of clay 0'002 mm, and the lower size of very fine sand 0.02 mm (0'0 or 0'05 mm according to U.S.D.A. Classification ) and 0.002 mm to 0.075 mm according to IS : 1498-1970:.
and idrntilication of soils for general engineering purposrs
(first

rci'ision

fClassXcntion ).

9

IS t 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

2) - 1971

b) Sometimes the term silt is used broadly to denore composite sediment load carried by streams; in other instances it denotes only particles of a given size range within the composite load. c) See Textural classification of soil based on Triangular Fig. 1 and 2. unit, either primary or secondary, 2.4.9 Soil Particle -Any part of the make up of soil. Diagrams which is a

2.4.10 Soil pHThe @H value of hydrogen-ion concentration, is a measure of the acidity or alkalinity ( basicity ) of a soil. It is expressed as follows:

where H* is the hydrogen-ion concentration in moles / 1. 2.4.11 Soil Separates* -The definite size limits. 2.4.12 Soil Texture size distribution. 2.5 Soil Structure 2.5.1 Aggregate - A cluster of soil grains or particles mass, such as a ped, block, prism, crumb, or granule. gathered into a several groups of soil particles having

Characterization

of soil with respect to its particle

2.5.2 Bldcky Structure - Structure in which the cube-like peds are of considerable size having flat or rounded faces. When the faces are flat and edges mainly sharp angular, the structure is termed as ` angular blocky `, and when the faces and edges are mainly rounded it is called ` subangular blocky `. 2.5.3 Columnar Structure - Structure with vertically elongated and flat sided aggregates in the shape of prisms; where the prisms are rounded at the top', they are designated ' columnar `. 2.5.4 Crumb Structure* - A term applied to granular structure when the granules are more porous and irregular in size and shape. 2.5.5 Degree of Aggregation* aggregates are present. Measure of the proportion in which

2.5.6 Dispersion - The breaking down of soil aggregates to individual particles, resulting in a single grain structure. Ease of dispersion is an important factor influencing the erodibility of soils. 10

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 2.5.7 Floccules or Floe --. Individual particles clustered into a small loose open-structured gelatinous mass in the presence of coagulants or through biochemical processes. 2.5.8 Granule structure. 2.5.9
Granular

A cluster
Structure -

of soil particles

behaving as a unit in soil

Structures composed of soil granules.

2.5.10 Laminar Structure* - Structure having aggregates with horizontal dimension greater than vertical dimension. When the units are thin, they are termed laminar. 2.5.11 Macrostructure -Soil structure presenting the aggregates of the mineralogical complexes into larger units, as the result of cementation. 2.5.12 Massive* shape and cleavage. A large coherent mass of soil manifesting irregular

2.5.13 Microstructure - Refers to the pattern of the mineralogical complexes of the soil materials or ` soil fabric ' in relation to each other. 2.5.11 Penetrometer - An apparatus used for determination of variations in penetration resistance of soils alon,m depths; also applied as a device for measuring structural conditions of soil and index of tilth in-situ.
2.5.15 Platy Structure See 2.5.10.

2.5.16 Prismatic Structure - Structure with vertically elongated and flat sided aggregates in the shape of prisms; where the prisms are rounded at the top, they are designated ` columnar `"

change soil structure with a view to reduce 2.5.17 Puddle -To permeability and water losses. 2.5.18 Single-Grained Structure* - Physical state of soil in which there is no aggregation of the separate particles. process by which soil aggregates become 2.5.19 Soil Stabilization -The resistant to the disintegrating influence of water and mechanical manipulation. arrangement of soil particles into aggregates 2.5.20 Soil Structure* -The which occur in a variety of recognized shapes and sizes. 2.5.21 Structure Factor ( Dispersion Ratio ) - The ratio of the difference between the total clay obtained by complete dispersion and the clay obtained by water dispersion expressed as a percentage of the former. 2.5.22 Structure Index* - A soil property which is measurable and may be evaluated on a numerical scale and is related to soil structure, that is, aggregation, bulk density, moisture retention and penetrometer force. 11

fSx 4410 ( Part XIV/&x 2.6 Classification

2 ) - 1977 of Soils

and Types

2.6.1 Azonal Soil* -

Soil without well developed profile characteristics,

2.6.2 Brown (Steppe ) Soil* - A zonal group of soils having a brown surface horizon which grades below into a lighter-coloured soil and finally into a layer of carbonate accumulation; developed under short grasses, bunch grasses, and shrubs in a temperate to cool, semi-arid climate. 2.6.3 Catena - A sequence of different soils usually from similar parent material but varying in characteristics due to differences in relief and drainage. 2.6.4 Ct'zernozem- A zonal group of soils having deep, dark to nearly black surface horizons and rich in organic matter, which grade into lighter coloured soil below usually having accumulation of calcium carbonate. These group of soils develop under tall and mixed glasses in a temperate to cool sub-humid climate. 2.6.5 Desert Soil ( Kraspozem Soil ) - A zonal group of soil having a light-coloured surface soil, usually underlain by calcareous material and frequently by a hardpan, developed under an extremely scant vegetation in warm to cool, arid climates. 2.6.6 Intra<onal Soil* - Fairly well-developed soil whose morphology reflects the iufluence of some local factor, such as relief, parent material or age rather than of climate and vegetation, 2.6.7 Laterite Soil or Latosol - A zonal group of soil in humid tropical and equatorial regions which are deeply weathered; strongly leached; relatively low in organic matter, primary minerals and clay activity; and having an accumulation of sesquioxides and leaching of silica giving a low silica-sesquioxide ratio of the clay fraction. 2.6.8 Pedalfer -A soil with maturely developed profile in which there is a zone of aluminium and iron oxide accumulation in the profile but with no horizon of carbonate accumulation. 2.6.9 Pedacal - A soil with a horizon containing a concentration of carbonate usually calcium carbonate in the soil profile in higher percentages than in the parent geological formation. 2.6.10 Pedzol* - A zonal group of soils having a surface organic matter and a very thin organic mineral layer above grey-leached layers which rest upon an illuvial dark-brown horizon developed under coniferous or mixed forests or underneath vegetation in a cool, temperate, moist climate. 2.6.11 Ped Earth - Tropical moderately low in combined character. soil, usually leached, deep red, clayey and silica and predominantly of sesquioxidic

12

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

2 ) - 1977

2.6.12 Red Loam* - Tropical soil, usually leached, deep red, friable, having high percentage of aluminium silicate as constituent.

2.6.13 Regur pr Black Cotton Soil - Dark-coloured, clayey, predominantly montmorillonitic usually calcareous tropical soil with low organic matter content exhibiting high coefficient of expansion ( swelling ) on wetting and cracks deeply on drying. 2.6.14 Rendzina - An intrazonal, calcimorphic ed by a brown to black friable surface horizon yellow soft underlying horizon; developed under and semi-arid regions. It contains fragments of various sizes. group of soils characterizand a light grey or pale grass vegetation in humid lime stone or dolomite of

2.6.15 Sierozem or Grey 13esert Soil* - A zonal group of soils having a brownish grey surface horizon that grades through lighter coloured material into a layer of carbonate accumulation and frequently into a hardpan layer, developed under mixed shrub vegetation in a temperate to cool, arid climate. 2.6.16 Soil Association - A group of defined and named taxonomic units associated geographically in a defined proportional pattern. soil

2.6.17 Soil Complex - An association of series, types or phases of soil that cannot be differentiated individually. 2.6.18 Soil Family - Soil groups intermediate between soil series and great soil group and/or subgroups having similar edaphological characteristics. 2.6.19 Soil Phase* - A subdivision of any class or any category in the system of soil classification, based on features, such as relief, stoniness, erosion and others, important to soil use and management, but not significant in the natural landscope for native plants. Soil phase has most commonly been used as a segment of soil type. 2.6.20 Solum - The part of the earth's crust influenced by climate and vegetation. Solum in matured soils include A and B Horizons. 2.6.21 Transitional Soil* different soils., Soil intermediate in character between two

2.6.22 zonal Soil* - Soil having a well-developed dominant influence of climate and vegetation; 2.7 Physical
Properties

profile which shows a

of an equal volume

2.7.1 Absolute Spec$c Gravity -

of gas-free

The ratio of mass, referring to vacuum, distilled water under standard conditions. 13

IS : 4410( Part XIV/See 2 ) - 1977 2.7.2 Air Capacity of Soil* -The is at field moisture capacity. quantity of air in the soil when the soil

2.7.3 Apfiarent Specijc Gravity/ Volume Weight/Bulk Density - The ratio of mass of a unit of given volume of oven-dry soil, air space included, to the mass of an equal volume of water. 2.7.4 Bulk Density The mass per unit volume of a soil core or clod. by solid soil

2.7.5 Capillary Pore Space-Total space not occupied particles and which holds water by capillarity.

2.7.6 Cafiillary Porosity - The ratio of the capillary pore space to the total volume of the soil or rock. 2.7.7 Cohesion - The state or process by which the particles of a body or substance are bound together, due to the' force of attraction between the molecules. Cohesion is high in clays but may be very low in silt and entirely lacking in sand. 2.7.8 Consistency ( Soil Cohesion) - Resistance to separation of soil particles to the crushing of structural aggregates and to the deformation of whole mass. 2.7.9 Degree of Aeration of Air Space Ratio air and the volume occupied by the voids. Ratio between the volume of

2.7.10 Effective Porosity - The portion of pore space in saturated porous media in which movement of water takes. place. The ratio of the volume of the void of a soil mass that can be drained by gravity to the total volume of mass.
2.7.11 Electrical Conductivity - A physical quantity that measures the readiness with which the medium transmits electricity commonly used for expressing the salinity of irrigation waters and soil extracts.

2.7.12 Liquid Limit - Is that moisture conte;lt expressed as a percentage of the mass of overdried soil at which the soil wiil just begin to flow when lightly jarred. At this stage cohesion and internal friction are practically zero. The water content at which a part of soil cut by a groove of standard dimensions, will flow together far a distance of 12 mm under the impact of 25 blows in a standard liquid limit apparatus. 2.7.13 .Non-capillary Pore Space* - Total space occupied by large pores in soil that do not hold water by capiilarity. 2.7.14 ,Non-ctlpillary Porosity* - The ratio of the non-capillary to the total volume of soil or rock. 14 pore space

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 2.7.15 Plastic Limit - The lowest moisture content expressed as a percentage of the mass of the overdried soil, at which the soil can be rolled into thread 3 mm in diameter, without showing signs of crumbling. 2.7.16 Plastic State - The exhibits plastic properties. range of consistency within which a soil

property of a soil which allows it to be deformed 2.7.17 Plasticity -The beyond the point of recovery without cracking or appreciable volume change. 2.7.18 Plasticity Index - The numerical difference between the liquid and the plastic limit. This shows the percentage in moisture content through which soil remains plastic. 2.7.19 Pore Space - The fraction of bulk volume within a soil mass that is not occupied by solid particles. 2.7.20 Porosity- Porosity is an index of the void characteristics of a soil or stratum as pertaining to percolation and is the ratio, usually expressed as a percentage, of the volume of voids of a given soil mass, to the total volume of soil mass. 2.7.21 Shrinkage Limit - The maximum water content at which reduction in water content will not cause a decrease in volume of the soil mass. 2.7.22 Stickiness -The when wet. property of adhesion of soil to other substance lowest moisture content of soil at which

2.7.23 Sticky Point * -The stickiness first appears.

2.7.24 Void Ratio - The ratio of the volume of void space to the volume of solid particles in a given soil mass. 2.8 Colloidal Complex 2.8.1 Absorption - In contrast, it refers to surface penetration which takes place when nutrients and water enter plant roots. Thus, cat-ions for instance, are absorbed as they are taken in by plant roots but adsorbed by soil colloids. 2.8.2
Acidoid* -

Colloid manifesting acidic properties.

2.8.3 Adsorption - It refers to the adhesion of substances to the surfaces of solids. In soils, it has to do with the attraction of ions and of water molecules to colloidal particles. The ions are not too tightly held, being replaceable by or exchangeable with ions of a like charge.
15

383 : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 I- 1977
2.8.4 Aggregution - A term referring to the action of uniting homogenous particles of soil into masses; the state of being aggregated. Quantitatively aggregation is determined as the total mass of a given fraction in the undispersed state - the mass of thes ame fraction when completely dispersed is taken as the quantity of aggregates in the soil having that particular size. 2.8.5 2.8.6 Ampholytoid* Basoid* Colloid manifesting manifesting both acidic and basic properties.

Colloid

basic properties.

2.8.7 Coagulation - A separation or precipitation from dispersed state of suspensoid particles resulting from their growth; may result from prolonged heating, addition of an electrolyte, or from a condensation reaction between solute and solvent; an example is a setting of a gel. 2.8.8 Cohesion See 2.7.7.

2.8.9 Colloids - Very small sized particles of matter, both inorganic and organic, having correspondingly very large surface area per unit mass. They have high ionic-exchange activity, are filterable, can be dispersed, but fail to diffuse through a membrane. 2.8.10 Colloidal Moisture Equivalent Ratio - The percentage of colloids the soil divided by that of the moisture equivalent of the soil (set 2.9.29 It indicates the capacity of the soil to hold moisture. This ratio is used express the relative permeability and gives an idea of erosion with which is inversely related. in ). to it

218.11 Colloidal System OT Colloidal Complex* - A complex in which a tremendously large interface is attained by the very fine, heterogeneous dispersion of one ( or more ) substance in a second substance or material. - Reverse of flocculation; the reduction, separation 2.8.12 Defocculation* or breaking of soil aggregates of clays into their individual particles. 2.8.13 Double Layer* - Arrangements layers near the surface of a clay particle. 2.8.14 Flocculation or coalescing into wooly flakes of minute of two oppositely charged ions in

a) The coming together particles in liquid.

b) The formation of flocks; the coagulation of finely divided solids, which normally water and other liquid.

and rapid precipitation remain in suspension in

of particles in the soil itself into 2.8.15 Granulation* - The cementation masses as grains, aggregates or clumps, essentially as the result of flocculatiol~ followed by the JXOCXSS of' stabilization of the granules. 16

1s I 4410 ( Part XIV/&c 2.8.16 expressed
Heat of Wetting* -

2 ) - 1977 It is

The heat evolved in calories per gram of dry soil.

when dry soil is wetted. A colloid which which

2.8.17 Hydrophilic Colloid or Lyophilic Colloid disperses in water. 2.8.18 Hydrophobic or Lyophobic Colloid water only with difficulty.

readily in

A colloid sufficiently waters.

disperses

2.8.19 Mobile Soil Colloids* - Soil colloids they may move in the soil with the percolating

dispersed

so that of

0.20 Peptizing Agent* - A material which encourages the formation a colloidal dispersion and contributes to its stability when formed. 2.8.21
24.22 Plasticily See 2.7.17.

Viscosity of Colloidal Solution* -

molecules

The friction between of the water hull and those of the dispersion medium. SeeFig. 3 for details.

the

water

2.9 Soil Moisture -

2.9.1 Available Water a) The amount of water in the soil at any time in excess of the wilting coefficient, expressed either as percentage by mass of dry soil, or as equivalent of water per unit depth of soil. b) The difference point. between the field capacity and permanent wilting

2.9.2 Bound Water - In soils particularly containing large proportions of iolloided material and fine clay particles, water so tightly held by physical and chemical, forces that it cannot move, or be absorbed by plant roots. Also called ` unfree water `.
2.9.3 Capillarity -The

carried

by minute

phenomenon by which water or other liquids are pores throughout the soil or upwards into the plant.

2.9.4 Capillary Fringe - Water in the zone immediately above the water table. It may consist solely of capillary water ( called capillary fringe ) or it may be'combined with gravity water in transit to the water table. 2.9.5 Capillary~Moisture or Capillary Water - Water held by surface tension in the capillary spaces and as a continuous' film around the particles, free to move under the influence of capillary forces, and available to plants. 2.9.6 Capillary Movements* caused by capillary tension. Movements of soil moisture in any direction to which

2.9.7 Capillary Rise - The height water will rise by capillary action.

above a free water

clcvntion

17

1s t 4410 ( Part xIV/Sec 2) - I.977
of capillary water in nillimetres 2.9.8 Capillary Yield* - The quantity per day or in litres / second /hectare, rising through a plane parallel to the phreatic surface, situated at a certain depth below the ground surface. 2.9.9 Coeficient of Permeabilip, Hydraulic Conduc&ivity or Coejicietlt of Conrate of flow of a Auid through a unit cro$s section of a ductivity-The porous mass under a unit hydraulic gradient, at a specified temperature. Also sometimes called ` unit of permeability `, ' transmission constant ' or ' coefficient of transmission `.

rI
,

AVAILABLE

WATER-------

UNAVAILABLE WATER

GRAVITATIONAL WATER Y

CAPIL LkRY WATER
Y

HYGROSCOPIC WATER
\

`d

!
WATER HOLDING

I .

I
4 Y

FIELD CAPAC ITY

WiLTlNG POINT

I+@
FIG.

MAXIMUM

CAPACITY-t=

3

CLASSIFICATION OF SOIL MOISTURE

2.9.10Coejicient of Transmissibility ( I)
the aquifer to transmit 1- = kb where k = coefficient of permeability, 6 = aquifer thickness. 2.93 physical 2.9.12 Combined Water forces. Water

- Characterizes the ability water and is given by the following formula:

of

and

in the soil held by chemical

rather

than

Degree of Aeration* -

See 2.7.9. 18

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

2 ) - 1977

a) Ratio between the volume of water and the volume of voids. b) The ratio expressed as a percentage of the volume of water in a given soil mass to the total volume of voids. 2.9.14 Field Capacity or Field Moisture Capacity - The amount of water held in the soil after the excess gravitational water has drained away and after the rate of downward movement of water has materially decreased. 2.9.15 Field Moisture Deficiency -The amount of water required to bring the soil moisture content up to the field capacity. It is often expressed in centimetres of water per metre of Soil depth. 2.9.16 Fifteen-Atmosphere Percentage - The moisture percentage in a soil sample which has been wetted and then brought to equilibrium on a cellulose membrane in the pressure-membrane apparatus at a pressure of This 16 kgf/cm2 (225 lb/ in2 ) or pF of 4.2, or at 15 atmospheres. characteristic moisture value for soils is expressed in terms of moisture percentage, dry-mass basis and lies in the tiilting range for many soils. 2.9.17 Free Energy or Free Energy Dejcit* - The sum of the soil moisture tension and the osmotic potential of the soil solution. 2.9.18 Gravitational Head of Water* - Gravitational head of water in soil at,a given point is the elevation of the point with respect IO an arbitrary datum. 2.9.19 Gravitational Water the influence of gravity. Water which drains through the soil under in hydraulic head per unit

2.9.20 Hydraulic Gradient - The decrease distance in the soil in the direction of flow.

2.9.21 Hydraulic Head - The hydraulic head has a value at each point in the soil-water system and is defined as the height with respect to a standard datum at which water stands in a riser (or piezometer or manoIn soil-water, the kinetic meter ) which connects to the point in question. energy head associated with velocity is usually negligible compared with the pressure and gravity heads.

2.9.22 phere. 2.9.23

Hygroscopicig -The Hygroscopic Coeflcient

tendency to absorb moisture from the atmos-

a) The percentage of moisture (on an oven-dry basis ) that a soil holds when in equilibrium with an atmosphere saturated with water vapour. 19

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 b) Ratio of the mass of water absorbed by a dry soil in a saturated atmosphere at a given temperature to the mass of oven dried soil. 2.9.24 Hygroscopic Moisture or Hygroscopic Water - Water absorbed on the surface of soil particIes in equiiibrium with atmospheric vapour. 2.9.25 soil.
Infiltration `- The movement of water through the surface into the

2.9.26 I$iltration Rate - The rate at which infiltration takes place expressed in depth of water per unit of time usually in millimetres per hour. 2.9.27 Moisture Characteristics* - Refers to the relation between tilt. *oil moisture content and soil moisture tension. This may be expressed in terms of the soil moisture characteristic curve or discrete characteristic moisture values, such as the one-third atmosphere percentage and 15-atmosphere percentage. 2.9.28 Moisture Content - The ratio expressed as a percentage of the mass of water in a given soil mass to the mass of solid particles under a specified testing condition. 2.9.29 Moisture Equivalent - Ratio of mass of water which a soil, after saturation, will retain against a centrifugal force of 1 000 times the force of gravity, to mass of the soil when dry. 2.9.30 Moisture Gradient - The rate of change of moisture content of the soil with distance in a specified direction. 2.9.31 Moisture Holding Capacity or Maximum Water Capacity - The amount of water required to fill all the pore spaces between the soil particles, that is the upper limit of the possible moisture content. It is often expressed as percentage of the dry mass or as, equivalent centimetres of water per metre of soil depth. Also called ` saturation capacity `. 2.9.32 One-Third Atmosphere Percentage - The moisture retained in an air-dried and screened sample of soil that has been wetted and then brought to equilibrium on a permeable membrane at a soil moisture tension of 345 cm Hz0 or pF of 2'5 or a pressure of 0'345 kgf /cm2 ( 4'9 lb/in" ) or at one-third atmospheres. The characteristic moisture value for soils is expressed in terms `of moisture percentage, dry-mass basis, and closely approximates the moisture equivalent and field capacity for many soils. 2.9.33 Optimum Moisture* as a rule, thrive best. The quantity of soil moisture at which plants,

2.9.34 Osmosis - The diffusion which proceeds through a semipermeable membrane, separating two solutions or a solvent and solution, and tending to equalize their concentration. 20

IS 84410( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977
2.9.35 Osmotic Potential Osmotic pressure of the extracted soil solution.

2.9.36 Osmotic Pressure -The excess of pressure that the solvent molecules possess on the side of the pure solvent over the solvent molecules on the solution side of the semipermeable membrane. It may be measured by determining the excess of pressure that has to be applied upon the solution to produce a state of equilibrium in the system in order just to prevent osmosis. 2.9.37 pF of Soil Water - The common logarithm of the height in centimetres of water necessary to produce the suction corresponding to the capillary potential. Term introduced by Schofield to express the energy with which water is held by soils. 2.9.38 Pellicular Water - Water forming a film around soil particles over adsorption water and held by the forces of molecular attraction but with less strength than adsorption water and without perceptible emission of heat. Adsorption water is entirely fixed, whereas pellicular water may move from one particle to another. 2.9.39 Percolation response. The downward movement of water within the soil in

2.9.40 Permanent Wilting Point - The percentage of moisture in a soil at which the plants wilt and fail to recover when placed in an atmosphere saturated with water vapour. Also called ` wilting percentage `, 2.9.41 PermeabilitySoil permeability is defined as the quality of a soil horizon that enables water or air to move through it. Quantitatively it is expressed in terms of flow of water through a unit cross section in unit time under specified temperature and hydraulic conditions. 2.9.42 Pressure Head -The height of a column of fluid required to develop a given pressure the height at the hydraulic grade line above a point. It is the head represented by the expression P/r where p is pressure and r is mass. 2.9.43 Relative Wetness* to moisture equivalent. 2.9.44 2.9.45 Saturated Soil* Saturation CapaciQ A term to express the ratio of moisture content

Soil having all pore spaces filled up with water. See 2.9.31. solution extracted from a soil at its

2.9.46 Saturation Extract* - The saturation percentage,

moisture percentage of a saturated 2.9.47 Saturation Percentage* -The soil paste, expressed on a dry-mass basis, 21

IS:4410( Par@ XIV/Set 2).1977
water ( see 2.9.54 ) .

2.9.48 Soil Moisture

-Water

held within soil; also the quantity of that

2.9.49 Soil Moisture Accretion - That part of infiltration which is retained in the zone of soil moisture and which does not pass on downward to the water table, 2.9.50 Soil Moisture Deficit - The amount of water that must be applied to the soil to bring it to field capacity. 2.9.51 Saturated Soil Paste - A particular mixture of soil and water. At saturation the soil paste, as it reflects light, flows slightly when the container is tipped, and the paste slides freely and cleanly from a spatula for all soils at its saturation percentage. 2.9.52 Soil Moisture Stress- The sum of the soil moisture tension and the It is the suction or negative pressure osmotic pressure of the soil solution. to which water must be subjected to be at equilibrium through a semipermeable membrane with the solution in soil. 2.9.53 Soil Moisture Tension or Moisture Tension* - The equivalent negative pressure or suction in the soil moisture. This tension may be expressed in any convenient pressure units. In the 1 atmosphere tension range it is the negative pressure to which water in a porous cup must be subjected in order to bring the water in the cup into static equilibrium through the porous wall with the moisture in the soil, Tension does not include osmotic pressure values. 2.9.54 Soil Water - Suspended water in uppermost belt of soil of zone of aeration lying near enough to surface to be discharged into atmosphere by transpiration of plants or by evaporation from the soil; includes hygroscopic water, capillary and non-capillary water. Also called ` soil moisture `. 2.9.55 Total Soil Motsture Stress* which water is held in the soil. The osmotic and physical force with

2.9.56 Unavailable Soil Moisture or Unavailable Water* - Soil moisture held so firmly by molecular forces that it cannot ordinarily be absorbed by plant roots with sufficient rapidity to produce growth. 2.9.57 Unsaturated Soil filled with water. Soil in which the pore spaces are only partially

2.9.58 Water-Depth Ratio - The moisture content of soil in terms of the equivalent depth of free water per unit depth of soil. 2.9.59 material.
Water of Imbibation -

The moisture associated with soil colloidal

22

capillary water has drained out, leaving the interstices filled with air ad water held or suspended by molecular forces, such as cohesion, adhesion and surface tension. 3. MICROBIOLOGY

2.9.60 zone of Aeration, Aeration <one, <one of Suspended Water Umalurated one - Zone of earthen materials or rock from which the ground and 5

3.1 Actinomycetes* - One-celled organisms that are a higher form of plant life than bacteria and are thread like in shape. 3.2 Aerobic Organisms substates. Organisms using oxygen for the oxidation oi

3.3 Algae - Autotrophic thallophytes having simple mode of reproduction. They contain chlorophyll. 3.4 Aminization* compounds. Microbiological decomposition of protein to amino transformation of nitrogenous

3.5 Ammonification* - Microbiological compounds to ammonia nitrogen.

3.6 Anaerobic Decomposition* - The incomplete breakdown of organic material by bacteria in the absence of free oxygen. 3.7 Anaerobic Organisms oxygen for gaining energy. Organisms oxidizing substrate in absence of

- The breakdown of organic material by fungi and the 3.8 Ant&a&y* further transformation of the results by passage through the alimentary canals of`insectx and worms, giving a dark coloured soil. 3.9 Autotrophic Organisms - Organisms which obtain their energy by the oxidation of inorganic compounds and use inorganic materials, such as salts, water and carbon dioxide, for their development. Most of them use Solar energy. 3.10 Azotobactor* -A genus of bacteria including those species capable of fixing free nitrogen. 3.11 Carbon-nitrogen Ratio - Mass or percentage ratio of organic carbon to total nitrogen in a soil or plant, 3.12 Denitrification* - The complete reduction of nitrates to atmospheric nitrogen and oxides of nitrogen. 3.13 Edaphone* 3.14 Fulvic by acid. The whole living community of the soil. The alkali-soluble fraction of humus not precipitated Acid* -

23

IS t 4410 ( Part

XIV/Set

2 ) - 1977

3.15 Fungi - These are a group of primitive plants which lack chlorophyll and are mostly saprophytic or parasitic. These reproduce by fission, budding, fragmentation and scattering of spores. 3.16 Heterotraphic Organisms - Organisms which obtain their carbon from complex organic compounds and their energy from the oxidation of organic compounds. 3.17 Humic Acid* -Organic precipitated by acid. 3.18 Humifkation* 3.19 Hnmin* matter extractable from soil by alkali of humus. and

The process of the formation fraction

The alkali-insoluble

of humus.

brown-black colloidal organic matter of the soil, 3.20 Humus* -Dark, and so decomposed that it has lost all signs of its original structure; the organic portion of the soil. 3.21 Hymatomelanic acid. Acid* The alcohol-soluble matter fraction from organic of humic combina-

- Release of mineral 3.22 Mineralization* tion by microbial decomposition. 3.23 Mycorrhiza* 3.24 Nitrification* Symbiotic Biological association oxidation

of fungi and roots. of nitrogenous matter to nitrate.

of atmospheric nitrogen into a 3.25 Nitrogen Fixation - Conversion form available for plant use. Nitrogen may be fixed by bacteria in the nodules of leguminous plants and by blue-green algae and aerobic and anaerobic bacteria in the soil. 3.26 Non-symbiotic Bacteria any association with other plants, Organisms that live in the soil without

3.27 Photosynthesis -Synthesis of carbohydrates and other organic molecules from carbon dioxide and water by green organs in the presence of sunlight as the source. of energy. 3.28 Stable Humus* -The part of humus attack ( and is insoluble in acetyl bromide ). that is resistant to microbial

3.29 Sulfofication, or Sulphofication* - The oxidation of sulphur ( sulfur ), either free or from organic or inorganic compounds, into oxides of In the soil these sulphur largely through the action of micro-organisms. oxides are quickly changed into sulphites or sulphates. 3.30 Symbiosis Mutually beneficial 24 association of two organisms.

ISt4410 (Part XIV/Set 3.31 Symbiotics

2 ) - I977

Bacteria - Organisms that live in the nodules on the roots of legumes and take nitrogen from the soil air and supply it in reduced form to the host plant on which they live. 3.32 Synthesis simple molecules. The building up of complex organic molecules from the

3.33 Thallophyta ( Cryptogamia)* - A major division of the plant kingdom including fungi, algae, bacteria and a number of small groups. The plant body is a thallus, but varies a good deal in complexity and the plants do not produce flowers or seeds. 3.34 Thallus - A plant body without a clear stem and roots; it may,be a single cell, a filament of cells, or a complicated branching multicellular structure, in which case it has no true root. 3.35 Unstable Humus* - Readily decomposable part of humus, corresponding approximately to that soluble in 80 percent sulphuric acid, 4. BOTANICS 4.1 Available Nutrients* -- The amount of plant nutrients present in the soil in a condition available to plants. 4.2 Bade Unit* - Named after the scientist Baule, a unit of growth factor that will produce 50 percent of the maximum possible yield or yield producing capacity. 4.3 Burning* - Destruction of organic matter on soils by fire. Also the injury to seeds or plants from too high a concentration of fertilizer or spray or dusting material for control of insects or disease. 4.4 Critical Percentage* - The point ( percentage of the limiting element in the plant ) above which there is luxury consumption and below which there is poverty adjustment. 4.5 Daily Mean Soil Temperature* - The average of the values observed during a day ( at any regular intervals or maximum and minimum ) of soil temperature. 4.6 Daily Range of Soil Temperature* - The difference between maximum and minimum values of soil temperature. 4.7 Essential Elements or Primary Elements - Those elements that must be present for a plant to grow. These may be ` primary ' ( those needed in large quantity ) or ` minor ' elements (those needed in small amount ) . 4.8 Fertility a) The ability of soil to aid plant growth with supply of nutrients in desirable proportions and amounts. 25

1s : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set

2 ) - 1977

b) Quality of soil that enables it to provide compounds, in adequate amount and in proper balance, for growth of specified plants, when other growth factors, such as light, moisture, temperature and the physical conditions of the soil are favourable. 4.9 Foliar Diagonosis* on analysis of leaves.
-

Estimation of plant-nutrient requirement based

4.10 Halophobe * - A plant which will not grow in a soil containing any appreciable amount of salt. 4.11 Halophytes - A pIant which Iives in soil containing amount of common salt or of other inorganic salts. 4.12 Hydrophytes* or wholly immersed. 4.13 Hygroscopic atmosphere. an appreciable

Plants that grow in water or in wet soils partially Materials which absorb water or moisture from the conditions

4.14 Indicator Plants - Plants which reflect specific growth either by their presence or by character of growth.

4.15 Legume - A leguminous plant is one grown as a forage or green manure crop, such as various pulses, namely, kern, berseem, scyabcans, etc. 4.16 Lodging* or initial position. The inelastic displacement of the plant from the vertical

4.17 Luxury Consumption - The consumption of an eltmrnt above the point at which the element increases very small plant growth, resulting in an increase in content of that element in the plant. 4.18 Mesophytic Vegetation - Plants growing in an area with optional moisture not having both extremes of moisture or drought; plants which are immediate between ` hydrophytes ' and ` xerophytes `. 4.19 Non-symbiotic benefit to either. 4.20 Photosynthesia 4.21 Phreatophytes the water table, -

The living together of dissimilar organisms with no
See 3.27.

Deep-rcoted

plants which obtain their water from

4.22 Plant Food* - The organic compounds, elaborated within the plant, which nourish its cells (sometimes used loosely as an equivalent of plant nutrient ) . 26

AS: 4410 ( Part XlV/Scc 2 ) -1977 4.23 Plant Nutrients -The elements taken in by the plant, essential to its growth, and used by it in the elaboration of its food and tissue. These include nitrogen, phosphorous, calcium, potassium, sulphur, iron, manganese, boron, copper, zinc and others obtained from the soil and carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, obtained from the air and water. 4.24 Productivity ( of Soil )* - The capacity of a soil for producing a specified plant or sequence of plants under a specified system of management. It emphasizes the capacity of soil to produce crops and should be measured in terms of unit yields. 4.25 Response Curves* - Curves showing the relationship between yield and magnitude of any growth factor, such as nitrogen or phosphorous suPPlY* 4.26 Soil-Temperature * -The temperature values at any every location in the root zones of the plants being grown. 4.27 Symbiotic to both. The living together of dissimilar organisms, time and at

with benefit

4.28 Trace Elements -The essential elements needed only in small amounts ( iron, copper, zinc, manganese, boron, molybdenum, etc ). Also referred to as secondary or minor or micronutrients. 4.29 Transpiration Efficiency unit weight of water transpired. 4.30 Tolerant - Capable Some plants are tolerant alkalinity. The increase in dry weight of plant per

of withstanding of soil acidity

a condition usually unfavourable. and others are tolerant of soil with a small where excess AND SALT

4.31 Zerophytes or Xerophytes - Plants which can subsist amount of moisture, as a desert plant or plant under conditions of salts makes it difficuit to take in water. 5. RECLAMATION OF WATERLOGGED, AFFECTED SOILS 5.1 General Terms pertaining 5.1.1 Arterial Drainage* -Drainage as rivers, streams and large watercourses. 5.1.2 5.1.3
5.1.4 ArtiJicial Drainage* Ca)illary Water Drainage -

INUNDATED

to main

channels,

such

Drainage

laid by human

efforts.

See 2.9.5.

artificial

or natural

Process of removing means.
27

ground

water

or surface

water by

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 5.1.5 Drainage Area, Drainage Basin, Catchment, Catchment Area, Catchment Basin, River Baszn - The area from which a lake, stream or waterway and reservoir receives surface flow which originates as precipitation.
5.1.6 Drainage Channel - An open channel, either artificial or natural for carrying off surplus ground or surface water. 5.1.7 Drainage Coejicient or Drainage Modulus* - The discharge of an underdrainage system expressed in millimetres of depth of water which must be removed from the drainage area in 24 hours. 5.1.8 Drainage Head * - The difference between the level of water in a drain at any given point and the lowest level of the land. 5.1.9 Drainage System and subsidiary drains. 5.1.10 Free Water A system comprising a main drain, its branches

See 2.9.19.

pying the zone ofsaturation 5.1.11 Ground Water* - Surface water is not meant to include a which is free to move under gravity. The temporary saturated zone at or near the ground surface that is produced immediately after precipitation or by the awing. In a strict sense the term applies only to water below the water table. covered 5.1.12 Inundated Land* -Land water, such as from floods and tides. 5.1.13 Isopa&* -Lines specified period of time. 5.1.14 Isopiestic Lines artesian aquifer. 6f equal with or subject to overflows

ground-water

rise or fall during a

Contour drawn on the piezometric surface of an

5.1.15 Land ( Agricultural ) Drainage - The disposal of storm water from agricultural lands and removal of water excess from agricultural lands to prevent or to relieve waterlogging, the accumulation of harmful amounts of salts and deterioration of soil structure. 5.1.16 Natural Drainage* -As applied to a given area, refers to the natural condition of that area for disposing of surface water from it. 5.1.17 Natural RunofNatural runoff from an area is that part of the runoff from it which it will discharge without artificial works intended to collect the waters which fall upon it.

5.1.18Non-contributing Area, Closed-Drainage Area*
a) Area in which surface flow collects in sinks or lakes having no surface outlet either to other streams or to the sea. 28

IS : 4410 ( Part xIv/sec 2 ) - 1977

W

In hydrology, that portion of a drainage area that, because of physical characteristics or topography, does not contribute surface runoff into a river system. In determining drainage basin yields, a noncontributing area is that which does not contribute -1'I.e~ surface or ground water runoff. See 2.9.39.

5.1.19Percolation -

5.1.20Reclamation* -Act or process of reclaming swampy, marshy, deteriorated, desert and virgin lands and making them suitable for cultivation or habitation; also conversion of foreshores into properly drained land for any purpose, either by enclosure and drainage, M by deposition of material thereon.
54.21 RunofThat portion of the precipitation which is. not absorbed by the deep strata but finds its way into the streams after meeting the persistent demands of evapo-transpiration including interception and other losses. It includes surface runoff received into the channels after rainfall, delayed runoff that enters the streams after passing through portion of the earth, and other delayed runoff that has been temporarily detained as snow-cover and stored in natural lakes or swamps, 5.1.22 5.1.23 5.1.24 Saturated soil Soil Water* Waterlogging* See 2.9.44. See 2.9.54.

a) State of land in which the subsoil water table is located at or near the surface with the result that the yield of crops commonly grown on it is reduced well below the normal for the land, or, if the land is not cultivated, it cannot be put to its normal use because of the high subsoil water table. b) A condition of land where the ground water stands at a level that is detrimental to plant growth. It may result from excessive irrigation or seepage, coupled with inadequate drainage. 5.1.25 Waterlogged Land* Land effected by waterlogging.

5.1.26 Water Table* - The upper surface of a zone of saturation, where the body of ground water is not confined by an overlying impermeable Whereas overlying confining formation exists, the aquifer in formation. question has no water table. 5.1.26.1 Free water elevation (ground water surface ), free water surface (ground water elevation ) -Elevations at which the pressure in the water is zero with respect to the atmospheric pressure. 29

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 5.2 Subsurface 5.2.1 Box Drainage

2 ) - 1977

concrete,

Drain-A small rectangular drain constructed rubble masonry, wood, or other suitable material.

of brick,

of systems of tile drain arrange5.2.2 CompositeSystem- A combination ment, such as the herringbone and grid-iron system (see Fig. 4).

FIG. 4

COMPOSITE SYSTEM

5.2.3 Cutoff System or Interceptin,oSystem* - A drainage system for draining seepage along hill sides; tiles are placed along the hillside to intercept the seepage water to prevent it from reaching the bottom land. 5.2.4 Double-Main System- A system of drains, similar to a herringbone system, except that two main drains are used, one on each side of the depression ( see Fig. 5 ).

FIG. 5

DOUBLE MAIN SYSTEM 30 '

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/%x 2 ) - 197'1 5.2.5 Drain `Tile - Pipe of burnt clay, concrete, etc, in short usually laid with open joints to collect and remove drainage water. lengths,

5.2.6 Gridiron System- A form of layout of a system of drains, generally used for flat lands or lands with a uniform slope, where the field drains are constructed in parallel lines along the direction of the slope and join the main drain at its bottom ( see Fig. 6 ).

FIG. 6

GRIDIRON SYSTEM

5.2.7 Grouping System* - A system similar to the natural system, except that a few short laterals may be provided in wet areas or ponds along the system ( see Fig., 7 ). 5.2.8 Head of a Drain* The upstream end of a drain.

FIG. 7

GROUPING

SYSTEM

31

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977
5.2.9 Herringbone System - A form of layout of a system of drains, generally used for lands lying on both sides of a narrow depression or swale, and consisting of a main or subdrain along the depression with parallel lines of field drams sloping toward the main drain, and joining it at staggered intervals (see Fig. 8 ).

FIG.

8

HERRINGBONE SYSTEM

at the upper end of the 5.2.10 Intercepting Drain - A drain constructed area to be drained, to intercept surface or ground water flowing towards the protected area from higher ground, and carry it away from the area. Also called `curtain drain'. 5.2.11, Lateral Drain* - A single line which collects the water from the Also called `collector drain'. soil and empties into a main or sub-main. 5.2.12 Main Drain or Conducting Drain* - A principal drain which serves as an outlet to all subsidiary drains which discharge into it. 5.2.13 drains. Mole Drainage* The method of draining soil by means of mole

5.2.14 Mole Drains* - Cylindrical drains formed in the subsoil by pulling a mole plough usually at a depth of 60 to 70 cm. 5.2.15 Mole Plot&* - A plough by which a steel ball following a pointediron shoe makes an underground channel, resembling the track of a mole, to serve as a drain. 5.2.16 .Naturul Systems - A system of drains, similar to the trunk system, but covering a much larger area. The main drains are located along the deprcssiona, or low spots, to conform to topography. Such systems are generally installed in arcas of rolling or broken topography. 32

!S : 4410 (Part XlY/Sec

2 ) - 1977

5.2.17 Parallel System* - Asystem emptying into a single main drain.

of drains with long parallel,

laterals

5.2.18 Pipe Outlet* - A subsurface drainage For removing water from a ponded area where the drains or field ditches are not practicable. 5.2.19 Relief System* - A system which consists of a series of lateral tile lines laid out in a grid or herringbone pattern, each line being connected to a main trunk which in turn outlets into an open ditch. 5.2.20 Rubble Drain - A small shallow trench filled with coai-se rubble, clinker or similar material, with or without field drain pipes. 5.2.21 Sink Hole Drainage System* - A system of tile drains similar io the outoff system and used for the same purpose, namely, to intercept seepage water, but has, in addition, wells dug at regular intervals to let the water Also known as ` sinkcome up from a lower stratum and enter the drain. hole drainage ' ( See Fig. 9 ).

-/

f-c)--

----

`l/f A-v
/-

C-

-viv

_yL - YiL ----v
.J

--u-_x
h
"

-C

-

-

--

-cc-

--/

--//-A

~I$=__l-Q+-_

-=== -g--Z--d

FIG. `3 SINKHOLE DRAINAGE SYSTEM
5.2.22 Sub-lateral* -A

discharging it into a lateral.

line collecting the water from Also called ' branch `.

the

soil

and

5.2.23 Sub-main* - A subsidiary drain which discharges into a main drain and which serves as an outlet to all the laterals which discharge into it. 5.2.24
Subsurface Drain -

A conduit below the surface of the ground.

5.2.25 Subsurface D&age -The removal of surplus or excess ground water, it is accomplished by means of natural drainage ( for gravelly subsoil ) or by artificial means, such as drains placed under the surface. 5.2.26 Underdrained" - Land is said to be underdrained if tile laterals are spaced wider than desirable. 5.2.27 Vertical Drainage or Inverted M%11*- Disposal of drainage through wells into a porous layer of earth or an open rock formation. 33 water

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec

2 ) - 1977

52.28 zigzag System* - System in which field drains as well as mains are constructed zigzag to reduce high velocities ( see Fig. 10 ) .

Fm. 5.3 Surface Drainage

10

ZIGZAGSYSTEM

5 3.1 Annular Drainage in origin and associated (seeFig. 11).

Patlern* - A ring like drainage pattern subsequent with maturely dissected dome or basin structures

FIG. 11

ANNULARDRAINAGEPATTERN

by 5.3.2 Anastomatic Drainage Pattern - A drainage pattern characterized a network of interlocking channels found on flood plains and deltas ( see Fig. 12 ). 34

IS I 4410 ( Part XIV/See

2 ) - 1977

Fro. 12

ANASTOMATIC DRAINAGEPATTERN

5.3.3 Bedding - A method of surface drainage of land of narrow width in which shallow drains or dead burrows ( depth varying from 15 to 45 cm ) run parallel to the prevailing land slope. Suitable on flat slopes of less than 1'5 percent ( see Fig. 13 ) .
SHALLOW (OR DEAD ---X ---r I --I x DRAINING FURROW)

COLLECTING

DITCH 71'

I

I- DEAD

FURROW

CROSS

SECTION

XX

FIG. 13 BEDDING 35

IS : 4410 ( Part XW/Sec

2 ) - 1977

53.4 Carrier Drain* - Open or subsurface drain which receives the water from the relief drain and may in addition be also functioning as a relief drain for the area through which it passes. 5.3.5 Collecting Ditch - A field ditch which receives water from the dead furrows or small field ditches and conducts it to an outlet .ditch ( see Fig. 13 ). 5.3.6 Dead Furrow - A double furrow left in the middle of the field or between two lands in ploughing ( see Fig. 13 ). pattern treelike in form 5.3.7 Dendritic Drainage Pattern -Drainage generally typical of flat homogeneous lithology and indicative of easily corrodable rock material and horizontal structure ( see Fig. 14 ).

FIG. 14

DRAINAGEPATTERN

5.3.8 Dichotomic -- A diverging branching pattern found on alluvial fars and deltas ( see Fig. 15 ) .

FIG. 15

DICHOTOMIC 36

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977
5.3.9 Diversiun Ditch* - A ditch constructed to intercept the water which would otherwise flow into an area from the land outside it and to carry that water to the outlet stream below.

5.3.10 Drainage Dewily* - The sverage artificial, per unit area wtthin the basin.

length

of

streams,

natural

or

5.3.11 Drainage Pattern* - A special arrangement of natural drainages of an area and controlled by its slope, the resistance of the iormations and their structures. 5.3.12 Drainage Texture - The number and relative ( drainage courses ) per unit area of a basin or sub-basin. nents drainage density and stream frequency. spacing of streams It has two compo-

5.3.13 Draakage Tybe Terraces or Cross-Slope Ditch S$ern* - A system of Ditches III this system usually ditches for the drainage of sloping land. Where designed function both for surface drainage and for erosion control. specifically for the control of erosion, these ditches are called ` terraces ' (see Fig. 16). r& `lo SLOPE

15

TO 25

cm

5 TO Bcm

`-15

TO 25

cm

FIG. 16 5.3.14
5.3.15 Intercepting Drain Land Grading* -

DRA:NAGE-TYPETERRACES
see 5.2.10.

with a continuous

slope.

The operation of producing a plane land surface Also called ` land shaping or land smoothing `. Drainage accomplished by open

5.3.16 Open-Channel channels of ditches,

Draina,oe* -

37

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977 5.3.17 OpenDitches or Open Drains" -- Open drain which provide outlets
for tile drains and tributary
Ditches

dit&cs

and remove drainage

water directly.

5.3.18 Outlet primary function from any cause, to final outlets ( their tributaries

or Outlet Channels* - Large open ditches whose is to collect from large areas all free surface flow resulting and the discharge from tile drainage systems and to carry it rivers, lakes, seas, etc ).

5.3.19 Parallel Drainage Pattern * are parallel or nearly

Drainage pattern in which streams or parallel` to each other ( see Fig. 17 ).

FIG.17
5.3.20 Ponding* The

PARALLELDRAINAGE PATTERN
condition produced by surface water collecting in

shallow

pocket in an area.

5.3.21 Radial Drainage Pattern * -- Drainage pattern resembling thespokes of a wheel in which drainage channels flow radially either outward froma peak or .inwnrd toward a basin ( see Fig. 18 ).

FIG. 18

RADIAL DRAINAGE PATTERN
38

IS: 4410 ( Part XW/Sec 5.3.22 Rectangular Drainage influence of the angular pattern
Pattern* - Drainage pattern of rock joints ( see Fig. 19 ).

2)- I.977 the

showing

FIG. 19

KECTANGULAR DRAJNAGEPATTERN

5.3.23 Rectilinear Drainage Pattern -Man-made rectangular form of irrigation ditches. 5.3.24 Relief Drain - Open or subsurface drain provided IO relieve a saturated soil of its superfluous water which percolates from the soil into it. Also called ` seepage drain `. 5.3.25 Seepage Drain - see 5.3.9. which, though carrying a 5.3.26 Surface-cum-Seepage Drain* -Drains continuous seepage discharge, are designed to deal also with storm water in the area they traverse. 5.3.27 Surface Drainage - The removal of surplus or excess surface water It is accomplished by natural or artificial means, such collecting on land. as levees, open ditches and terracing. 5.3.28 Surface Drains * - Drains normally used surface irrigation water from the lower portions disposal of storm waters. for the removal of excess of the field, or for the to a vin:, pattern .

5.3.29 Trellis Drainage Pattern* -Drainage pattern comparable on a garden trellis ( see Fig. 20 ). Also called ` grapevine dramage

FIG. 20

TRELLJS DRAINAGE PATTERN

39

IS : 4410 (Part 5.4 Evacuation

XIV/Set of Water

2 ) - 1937

5.4.1 Bnckrcwter* -A discharged at low tide. 5.4.2 5.4.3 Bottom Land* Diurnal Daily,

water

rcscrvc land.

obtained

at

high

tide and to be

Low-lying recurring

once each day. between the mean higher high and their

5.4.4 Diurnal Range - The difference the mean lower low waters.

5.4.5 Diurnal Tides* -Tides requiring a full day to complete cycle, that is only one high and one low water in each lunar day. 5.4.6 5.4.7 Duration of Ebb Tide Duration of Flood Tide See 5.4.8. See 5.4.8.

5.4.8 Duration of Tide* - Duration of flood tide or a rising tide is interval of time from low water to following high water; and duration of ebb tide or falling tide is interval of time from high water to following low Together, thry cover a period of 12'42 hours for a semi-diurnal water tide; the duration of the flood tide and duration of the ebb tide are each approximately 6 21 hours, but the duration may be modified by the presence of non-tidal flow. In a river, duration of ebb tide is usually longer Also called than duration of flood tide because of fresh water drainage. ` duration of rise ' and ` duration of fall of tide'. 5.4.9 Dyke* - An artilicia1 bank built along a river for the purpose of protecting atl.jacent ldnd from inundation by flood. Also called ` embank`bund' [see also IS :4410 (Part III)-1967t]. ment', ` stop bank'or 5.4.10 5.4.11 Ebb Tide Flood Tide The occur-rence l'he occurrence of falling water surface of a tide. of rising water surface of a tide.

54.12 Foreshow* -- The portion of bank or shore, lying adjacent to water and sloping gradually to it, which is falling dry betlleen high water and low water. 5.4.13 Great Diurnal Range - Difference in elevation higher high waters and two low waters in each lunar day. 5.4.14 Littoral Current" to shore line. 5.4.15 Littoral Drift* littoral current. Current Movement between mean parallel

that moves along the seashore of material

along the cca coast due to

tGlosrr\ry of itarms relating to river valley projects: Part III River and river training. 40

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2) - 1977
5.4.16 Lunar Day - The interval between moon's centre over the same meridian.

two successive

transits

of the

5.4.17 Mean Tidal Range -Difference in elevation between mean high water and mean low water; ` spring range ' and ` neap range ' are the near ranges of spring tides and neap tides respectively. 5.4.18 Mixed Tides* - Those which are preponderantly sometimes and diurnal at others, according to the declination 5.4.19
Neap Range See 5.4.17.

semi-diurnal at of the moon.

5.4.20 .Neap Tide - Tide of small amplitude occurring twice during a lunar month, near the time of quadrature of the moon with the sun, that is, when the resultant tractive force active upon the Earth is at a minimum.

-5.4.21 Non-tidal Current* - Current brought about by causes independent of the tides and includes the permanent current in the general circulatory systems of the sea as well as temporary current arising from meteorological conditions; also, river current. 5.4.22 Polder* - A tract of low land reclaimed from the sea, or other body of water, by dikes, etc. In the polder, the runoff is controlled by sluicing or pumping and the water table is independent of the water table in the adjacent areas. 5.4.23 Tide Station - A place at which tide observations are taken. It is termed a primary tide station when continuous observations are to be taken over a number of years to obtain basic tidal data for the locality. A ` secondary tidal station ' is one which is operated over a short period of time to obtain data for a specific purpose. 5.4.24
Secondary Tidal Station See 5.4.23.

5.4.25 Semi-diurnal Tides* - Tides requiring approximately one-half lunar day to complete their cycle, that is, two high waters and two low waters in each lunar day; predominating type of tide throughout the world is semi-diurnal.

5.4.26 Sill Dam* - A dam generally of strong brushwood matters weighted with heavy rip-rap, constructed on the sea side in the foreground, for the purpose of guarding against scouring of the sea bottom by the overflowing water and consequent damage to t.he structures and other works. water during 5.4.27 Slack Water or Slack Tide -Tide there is no horizontal motion of water at the surface. 5.4.28 Solar Day - The interval sun's centre over the same meridian. 5.4.29
Spring Range See 5.4.17.

the period transits

where of the

between

two successive

41

IS t 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977 5.430 Spring Tide - Tide of large amplitude occurring twice during a lunar month when resultant tractive force of the sun and the moon acting upon the earth is at a maximum.
54.31 Stream Frequency its total area. Total number of streams of a basin divided by

5.4.32 Tidal Bench Mark - A bench mark set as reference to a tide staff at a tidal station and the elevation of which is determined with relation to the local tidal datum. 5.4.33 Tidal Bore* -High crested roaring wave caused by rushing flood tide up a tidal river or narrow estuary or by meeting of tides. of

caused by the tide-producing forces of 54.34 Tidal Current* -Current the moon and the sun and is a part of the same general movement of the sea that is manifested in the vertical rise and fall of the tides. 5.4.35 5.4.36 velocity. 54.37 channels 5.4.38
Tidal Datum* -

A datum Tidal

defined by a phase of the tide. flood current at the time of maximum

Tidal Flood Strength -

by interlacing Tidal Marsh* - Low, Bat marsh land traversed and tidal sloughs and usually inundated by high tides.
Tidal Outlet* -

A structure

to control the overflow of tidal water.

5.4.39 Tidal River* - A river in which flow and water surface slope are affected by tides. In some rivers, the effect may extend a hundred miles or more upstream from the mouth, and may be sufficient to reverse temporarily the direction of flow of the stream. 5.4.40' Tidal Tables* and heights of the tide. 54.41 Tables which give daily predictions reached of the times

Tidal Water Level* -Altitude

by tidal surface. to

5.4.42 Tide* -The periodic rise and fall of the water due principally the gravitational attraction of the sun and the moon. 5.4.43 Tide Day* - The interval between the arrival cutive high waters of the direct tide ( or of the opposite place, its average length being 24 hours 51 minutes. 5.4.44 Tide Gate* - An opening, through one direction, but which closes automatically flowing in the other direction. head of the stretch of land up to which 5.4.45 Tide Head* -The influence of the tide is felt or the utmost limit of land coming within zone of influence of the tide.

of any two consetide ) at any given

which water may flow freely in and prevent the water from the the

42

t!J:44lO(Part XlV/Sec

2).1977

5.&46 Tide Land or Tidal Land - All coastal areas that are situated above mean low tide and below mean high tide, particularly as such areas are alternately uncovered and covered by the ebb and ilow of the ordinary daily tides.

5.4.47 Tide Mark* - A high water, or rarely low water, mark left by tidal water of a flood; the point it reaches; also, a mark placed to indicate this point. 5.4.48 Tide Range - The difference in level between high water and low water of a tide. The range is specific to a particular tide if consecutive high and low water are used. Otherwise, fhe range can refer to extremes ( Tidal amplitude of high and low water over any specified period of time. may be regarded as the difference between the water level at high or low water and mean sea level at a given point or the mean elevation of the tide. ) 5.4.49
5.4.50 Tide Station See 5.4.23.

Tideway * -- A channel

water through

a channel

in which the tide runs; also a rush of tidal or stream. when the effect

5.4.51 Tropic 7ide * - The tide occurring semi-monthly of the moon's maximum declination is greatest.

5.4.52 Warping* - A process of allowing the tide to overflow low lying lands so as to deposit thereon the silt which it carries in suspension. 5.5 Organic under
and Peat Soils

5.5.1 Bog Soil* -- Muck

or peaty surface soil underlain swamp or marsh type of vegetation.

by peat developed

5.5.2 co~~posl* - A mingled and decomposed mixture for manuring. Plant parts, lime, soil, or commercial fertilizer that may be added, mixed, mdistered and placed in a pit and decomposed. 5.5.3 surface.
Dressing -

Application

of manure,

compost

or earth

to the soil

5.5.4 Fibrous Peat* - Peat formed from sedges of various kinds, mosses, Hence the names moss reeds and other grasses, cattails and their.mixtures. peat, sedge peat, reed peat, etc. 5.5.5 Half Bog Soil - Swampy overlying gray mineral soil. 5.5.6 5.5.7
Heathland* -I Shallow Humijcation -See 3.18.

or marshy

soil with

an organic

horizon

acid peat land.

43

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 5.5.8 Lacustrine, Lowmoor or Fen Soil* - Peaty land, concave in shape formed in low-lying positions under anaerobic conditions and containing much sedimentary material. 5.5.9 Liming* Manuring (amendment ) of the soil by lime.

5.5.10 Mild Humus or Mull* - Forest humus layer of mixed organic and mineral matter with a gradual transition to the underlying mineral horizon. 5.5.11 Muck - Fairly well decomposed in mineral content, dark in colour, and imperfect drainage. organic material, relatively high accumulated under conditions of organic matter

5.5.12 Peat* - Under decomposed or partly decomposed developed essentially under wet anaerobic conditions. 5.5.13 Peat Clay or Organic Silt *- The lowest layer mineral and organic constituents ale mixed.

of a moor

in which

5.5.14 Raw Humus or Du$The more or less firm organic layer in It consists of fallen vegetative matter in the process of decomposiforests. tion including everything from pure humus below to Jhe litter on the surface. Duff is a general, non-specific term. 5.5.15 areas. Slush* Soft mud or mire used as organic manure in some peat

5.5.16 Swamp -An area of moist or wet land, with water standing on or just below.the surface of the ground, usually covered wirh a heavy and dense growth of vegetation. The term is usually applied to rather large freshwater areas ( see also 5.4.37 ). 5.5.11 Woody Peat * - Peat, usually loose and non-fibrous, partially decomposed remains of deciduous and coniferous undergrowth. 5.6 Reclamation of Deteriorated Soils A built up from trees and their

5.6.1 Acid Sbil* - A soil having an acid reaction ( below PH 7'0 ). soil having a preponderance of H"' ions over OH ions in the soil solution.

5.6.2 Acid Saline Soils - A soil having a pH value of less than 7 0 and electrical conductivity of more than 4 mhos/cm at 25�C in saturation extract. 5.6.3 ApricuL&ral Lime - A compound of calcium and/or magnesium used to correct the harmful effects of acid soils on plant growth. 5.6.4 Agicultural Sla,q - Usually granulated slag in sizes 6 mm to dust, which is mixed with soil for the purpose of aeration and neutralizing acid soils.

IS : 4410 ( Part XIViSec 2 ) - 1977 Alkali Flal* - A sterile plain containing an excess of alkali, at the. bottom of an underdrained basin in an arid region. 5.6.6 Alkalinication ( Alkalinisation ) - The formation of sodium adsorption compounds through base exchange. 5.6.7 Ban&g Fertilizer* - The method of placement of commercial fertilizer in concentrated strips. Usually below the soil surface. 5.6.8 Black Alkali Soil* - h term introduced by Hilgard who divided the alkali soil into two types : white alkali and black alkali.
typically synonymous to

5.6.5

I\jo,p:-In

the current

literature,

the term

`white

alkali

soil

' is used as

` saline soil ' and ` black alkali soil ' to ` alkali soil `.

5.6.9 Bog Iron Or Bog Ore* - Hydrated iron oxide originating in marshy places. 5.6.10 Calcareous Soil* - Soil that is alkaline.because of the presence of free calcium or magnesium carbonate or both. 5.6.11 Caliche* - A more or less cemented deposit of calcium carbonate or of mixed calcium and magnesium carbonates, characteristic of soils of warm or hot desert and semi-desert regions ( popularly known as XrlNXAR ). 5.6.12 Capillary Fringe* - The zone immediately above the water table in which water is held above the water table by capillarity. 5.6.13 Carrier'~' - Per-tilizer materials are spoken as carrier. Superphosphate, rock phosphate, and bones are called carriers of phosphorous. Similarly, muria:e and sulphate of potash and kainite are said to be carriers of potassium. 5.6.14 Commercial Fertiiizer - Impure salts of the elements ( nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium) used as fertilizers. They may be of low analysis. ( l-2 percent or more ) or high analysis ( 18-20 percent or more ). 5.6.P5 Complete Fertilizer - A fertilizer containing all three of the fertilizer elements ( nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium ) in sufficient amounts to be of value as nutrients. 5.6.16 Compost - See 6.5.3. 5.6.17 Corvr Crops - Crops that are grown primarily to provide protection to the soil. 5.6.18 Crop Residue - The vegetative matter left in the field after harvest. 5.6.19 Crop Rotation - The process of planting or sowing different crops in rotation on the same land not only to retard the deterioration of the soil but also to improve the soil in some of the contents [see also IS:4410 ( Part I )-I9671 1.
tGlo?sary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part I Irrigation practices.

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 5.6.20 DecaliJication* leaching. Removal of calcium carbonate from the soil by

5.6.21 Degradation Solodization ( Solodisation OY Solotkation ) - The replacement of Na* ions by H* ions which tends to render the base-exchange material of the soil chemically unstable. 5.6.22 5.6.23 Degree of Salinity Desalini<ation* Percentage of soluble salts in the soil. ) of soluble salts. of Removal ( chiefly by leaching

5.6.24 Dialysis* - Separation of a colloid from a solute by diffusion the latter through a suitable semipermeable membrane. 5.6.25 Drilled Fertilizers* - Commercial surface, usually by a fertilizer-drill. fertilizer placed below

the soil

5.6.26 Electrodialysis* - An electro-reclamation process which increases the rate percolation and opens up the soil. Dialysis assisted by applying the potential difference between electrodes on either side of the semipermeable membrane. The ions of any salt present are attracted to the electrodes and diffusion is accelerated.

of

5.6.27 fertilizers

Fertilization? - The process of adding plant food through to the soil for purpose of plant growth.

chemical

essential elements; 5.6.28 Fertilizer Elements* - The three primary nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium artificially supplied to the soil as manure or commercial fertilizer. 5.6.29 Fertilizer Ratio* - The ratio of nitro,gen, phosphoric anhydride and potash in a fertilizer. The ratio is expressed in small, whole number, such as l-2-1, l-3-2. 5.6.30 Field Catacidy <one* - A buffer zone in which water is held It is this zone which holds the moisture against gravity under free drainage. and consequently prevents the salts from moving in a vertical upward direction. table and iron oxide 5.6.31 Gley Soil* - Soil with high ground-water accumulation in the region of water table. 5.6.32 Green Manure CYO~* - A crop grown mainly for ploughing into the soil in its green condition. sulphate ( CaS04, 5.6.33 Gypsum* - Calcium replacement of sodium by calcium in alkali soils. 2HzO ). Used for the

high percentage of clay (more 5.6.34 Heavy Soil - A soil containing than 35 percent ) with sticky and plastic consrstency and rendering it difficult for tillage operations. or intermittently moist soil with 5.6.35 Humic Gley Soil* - Continually or without a peaty covering, but having a prominent dark horizon and gleyed horizon. 46

1s : 4410( Pad XlV/sec 2 ) - 1977 5.6.36 f?ydrolytic Acidity* - Acidity produced solution of a salt of a strong base and weak acid. 5.6.37 Incomplete Ferti&:er, or Single Carrier* which supplies only one plant nutrient. 5.6.38
Leaching -

by treating

soil with a fertilizer

A commercial

a) Removal of materials in solution. 1~) Solution of minerals and organic matter followed by percolation of the dissolved substances. c) The removal of soluble constituents from soils or other material by percolating liquid. d) The removal of salts and alkali from soils by abundant irrigation combined with drainage. e) The disposal of a liquid through a non-watertight artificial structure conduit, or porous material by downward or lateral drainage, or both, into the surrounding permeable soils. 5.6.39 Leaching Requirement* -The fraction of water entering the soil that must pass through the root zone in order to prevent soil salinity from exceeding a specified value. Leaching requirement is used primarily under steady state or long-term average conditions. 5.6.40 LQJS" - Grasses and leguminous fodder crops included in a crop rotation to restore fertility by providing organic matter and nitrogen. 5.6.41 Marl* - An earthy crumbling deposit consisting chiefly of calcium carbonate mixed with clay or other impurities in varying proportions. It is used frequently as an amendment for soils deficient in lime. 5.6.42 Molasses* - A thick treacle that is obtained as a by-product in the manufacture of sugar from sugar-cane and used for reclamation of alkali soils. 5.6.43 Mottled* soil matrix. -Spots of different colours irregularly scattered in the

5.6.44 Mulch - A natural or. artificialiy applied layer of plant residues or any other loose material on the surface of the soil to help conserve moisture, control temperature, prevent surface compaction or crusting, reduce runoff and erosion, improve soil structure, or control weeds. 5.6.45 Neutral Soil* - A soil that is not significantly acid or alkaline; strictly, one having a PH of 7'0; practically, one having a pH between 6.6 and 7'3.
5.6.46 .hron-calcareous Soil* -

Soil free from calcium carbonate,
47

IS : 4410 ( Part XIV/Set 2 ) - 1977 5.6.47 jVon-saline Alakali Soil* - A soil contains sufficient exchangeable sodium to inhibit the growth of most crop plants and does not contain appreciable concentrations of soluble salts, The exchangeable sodium percentage is greater than 15, the conductivity of the saturation extract is less than 4 mmhos/cm at 25"C, and the PH of the saturated soil usually exceeds 8'5.
56.48 Parts per Million ( PPM > - The concentration of a substance expressed as the number of unit masses of that substance per million units of mass of water. 5.6.49 Pellicular <one* - The maximum depth from the natural surface up to which the evaporation can have us effect. 5.6.50 Percent Salt* - This is the quantity of salt expressed as a percentage of the dry mass of the soil. 5.6.51 Press Mud 2 The precipitated impurities, contained in the sugarcane juice after treatment and removed by filteration in the process of sugar manufacture. 5.6.52 Puddling - The process by which a soil loses structure. caused by excessive water, and tillage. 5.6.53 soil. Ridge Planting It is

Placement of plants on top or sides of ridges of

5.6.54 Saline Sodic Soils - A soil containing a combination of soluble salts and exchangeable sodium sufficient to interfere with the growth of most crops. The electrical conductivity of the saturation extract is more than 4 mmhos/cm at 25�C and exchangeable sodium percentage is more than 15 m.e/100 g.pH is usually 8'5 or less in saturation paste. 5.6.55 Saline Soil - A non-sodic soil containing sufhcient soluble salts to The electrical conductivrty of saturation extract is impair its productivity. more than 4 mmhos/cm at 25�C. 5.6.56 Salinization? - The process of accumulation of soluble salts at the surface or at some point below the surface of the soil profile. 5.6.57 Scraping* - Removal of the alkali incrustations that have accumulated at the surface due to excessive evaporation. 5.6.58 Side Dressing* - The placement of fertilizers along the side of the row after the row is established. 5.6.59 Slick Spots" - Small areas in a field that are some what slick when wet due to alkali or high exchangeable sodium. 48

IS : 4410 ( Part XlV/Sec 2 ) - 1977 5.6.60 Sodic Soils - A soil containing sufficient exchangeable sodium ( usually more than 15 m.e/lOO g ) to interfere with the growth of most
CMpS.

5.6.61 Sodium Complex - Colloidal dominant in its exchange components.

matter

in alkali

soil with sodium

5.6.62 Soil Amendment - Any material, such as lime, gypsum, sawdust or synthetic conditioners that is worked into the soil to make it more productive. 5.6.63 Soil Conditioner - Substance which is added to the soil in small quantities to improve its. structure, for example sodium or ammonium polyacrylates with very high molecular weights, such as Krilium. 5.6.64 Soil Horizon of Carbonate Accumulation - A developed soil horizon, beneath the surface, containing more calcium ( or magnesium and calcium ) carbonate than the soil above or below it. 5.6.65 Soil Sterli<ation* - The art or process of artificial treatment of soils and consists of adding physical or chemical agents which at first partially sterilize the soil by destroying animal and insect pests and organisms capable of invading plant roots but later restores soil fertility. 5.6.66 Solod or Solothe - An intrazonal group of soils, developed by intensive leaching of solonetz, having a thin surface layer of brown friable soil above a grey-leached horizon which rests upon a brown or dark-brown horizon. The formation of soled from solonetz is termed ` solodization ' or ` solotization `. 5.6.67 Solonchak* - An intrazonal group of soils having a high concentration of soluble salts, usually light coloured, without characteristic structural, form, 5.6.60 Solonetz* - An intrazonal group of soils having a variable surface horizon of friable soil underlain by dark hard soil, ordinarily with columnar The influence of sodium ion is dominant structure, usually highly alkaline. in the development of such soils by the leaching of rolonchaks. 5.6.69 S'ent Wash fermentation still. The liquid ( exhausted wash ) discharged from the

5.6.70 Subsoiling - A process of mechanically loosening or fracturing subsoil to increase infiltration, penetrability to plant roots and aeration. 5.6.71 5.6.72 Waterlogged Land White Alkali Soil Land effected by waterlogging. see 5.6.8.

49

INDIAN ON QLOSSARY Is:

STANDARDS OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS

4410 ( Part I )-1967 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part I Irrigation practice 4410 (Part II )-I967 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part II Project planning 4410 (Part III )-1967 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part III River and river training 4410 (Part IV )-I967 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part IV Drawings 4410 ( Part V )-1968 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part V Canals 4410 (Part VI)-1968 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part VI Reservoirs 4410 (Part VII )-1968 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part VII Engineering geology 4410 (Part VIII)-1968 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part VIII Dams and dam sections 4410 (Part IX)-1969 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part IX Siphons and spillways 4410 ( Part X )-1969 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part X Civil works of hydroelectric generation system including water conductor system 4410 ( Part XI/Set 1 )-I972 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XI Hydrology, Section I General terms 4410 ( Part XI/Set 2 )-1972 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XI Hydrology, Section 2 Precipitation and runoff 4410 ( Part XI/Set 3 )-1972 Glossary of ,t_erms relating to river valley projects: Part XI Hydrology, Section 3 InfiltraUon and water losses 4410 ( Part XI/Set 4)-1973 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XI Hydrology, Section 4 Hydrographs 4410 ( Part XI/Set 5 )-1977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XI J-Iydrology, Section 5 Floods 4410 (Part XII)-1975 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XII Diversion works 4410 (Part XIV/Set 1 )-I977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XIV Soil conservation and reclamation, Section 1 Soil conservation 4410 (Part XIV/Set 2)-1977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XIV Soil conservation and reclamation, Section 2 Reclamation 4410 (Part XIV/Set 3 )-1977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XIV Soil conservation and reclamation, Section 3 Water requirements of crops 4410 ( Part XV/Set 1 )-1973 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XV Canal structures, Secti0n 1 General terms 4410 (Part XV/Set 2 )-1973 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XV Canal structures, Section 2 Transitions 4410 (Part XV/Set 3)-1977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XV Canalstructures, Section 3 Flumes 4410 (Part XV/Set 4)-1977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XV Canal .structures, Section 4 Regulating works 4410 (Part XV/Set 5).1977 Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects: Part XV Canal structures, Section 5 Cross-drainage works river valley projects: 4410 (Part XVII )-1977 Glossary of terms relating to Part XVII Water requirements of crops

BUREAU OF
Headwaners :

INJIIAN STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan; 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams : Msnaksanstha Telephones : 3 31 01 31,3 31 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) Regional Offices : *Western ; Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 tEastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH -160036 Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 Telephone 6 32 92 95 36 24 99

{ %Z "4: $2 :; { 41 29 16

Branch Offices : Pushpak,' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 { 2 63 49 `F' Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square, 22 48 05 BANGALORE 560002 Gangotri Compiex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Napar, 6 27 16 BHOPAL 462903 Plot No. 82183, Ledis Road, BHUBANE%WAR 751002 5 36 27 5315 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane. GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, (Nampaily Station Road). 22 10 83 HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 63471 { 69832 117/418B Sarvodaya Nagar, lOANPUR 208005 21 68 76 { 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 Hantex Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), Rly Station Road. 52 27 TRIVANDRUM 695001 inspection Office ( With Sale Point ): Institution of Engineers ( India) PUNE 410005 Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 6 24 35
89 65 29 27 66 00

*Sales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers. Grant Road. Bombay 400007 tSaies Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach. P. 0. Princrp Sweat, Calcutta 70007&

Reprography

Unit,

BIS,

New Delhi,

India

