**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3937-2 (1974) : Recommendations for socketing of wire 
ropes^ Part 2: Socketing with white metal [MED 10: Wire 
Ropes and Wire Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 677'721 



IS: 3937 (Part II) -1974 




Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2001 ) 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SOCKETING OF WIRE ROPES 
PART 11 SOCKETING WITH WHITE METAL 

(First Revision) 



1. Scope — Covers the procedure to be adopted for socketing of stranded wire ropes by molten 
white metal so that the maximum safety is assured. 

2. Material — The material chosen for socketing shall be alloy conforming to Grade 5 of IS : 25-1966 
' Specification for antifriction bearing alloy ( second revision ) \ The composition, melting point and 
pouring temperature of the alloy are given in Table 1. 



TABLE 1 COMPOSITION, MELTING POINT AND POURING TEMPERATURE OP SOCKETING METAL 



Grade 



Grades of 13:25- 
1966 



Composition, M/n, Percent 

., A , : 



Sn 



Sb 



Pb 



4*5"5'5 14*0-16'0 Remain- 
der 



Cu 
0'30-0'70 



Approximate 

Melting 

Point 

226°C 



Pouring 
Temperature 

350° C 



3. Procedure 

3.1 Carefully seize the wire rope just below the point where it Is to be cut with tinned or galvanized 
seizing wires of Ihe sizes given in Table 2 and cut the wire rope. 



TABLE 2 DIMENSIONS OF SEIZING WIRE 


Nominai Diameter 
of Wire Rope 


Seizing Wire 
Diameter 


mm 


mm 


8 to 24 


1-0 


26 „ 36 


V6 


38 „ 56 


2-0 



3.2 Measure from the end of rope a distance indicated in Fig. t and 2. Provide a second seizing at 
this point. 

3.3 Thread the rope end through the socket. Remove the seizing at the cut end and unlay the wire 
rope. 

3.4 When the wire ropes have a fibre core, it shall be cut so as to remove the fibre core up to the 
throat of the socket when drawn into the position in socket. 

3.5 A metallic core, that is, an independent wire rope core or wire strand core shall not be cut but 
shall be unlaid to form a brush or bend inwards to form a hook with other strands. 

3.6 Splay each individual wire separately into a brush. The wire may also be folded in the form of 
hook facing inwards towards centre of the rope. The hook shall not be more than one-third ihe 
length of the basket. 

3.7 Clean the basket and brush to remove all grease and dirt; a degreasing agent or trichloroethy- 
lene may be used. Petrol or paraffin is not recommended. When using a degreasing agent, the 
fluid should be liberally used and worked well into the throat of the brush. Remove the fluid and 
lubricant emulsion by washing off with hot water. Shake off the surplus water and dry the brush, 
it is essential that it is held downwards In the vertical position to prevent degreasing fluid, water or 
solvent being trapped in the throat of the brush or percolating back into the main body of the rope 
forming a source of corrosion. Trichloroethylene or other organic solvent should only be used in 



Adopted 30 October 1974 



© April 1975, ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI IIOOOI 



ari 



IS: 3937 (Part II) -1974 

well ventilated conditions. When used indoors, purpose designed equipment shall be used. After 
cleaning, the wires should first be dried and protected from contamination and also kept clean and 
dry until the molten metal is poured. 

3,8 The cleaned brush is drawn into position in the socket basket with the ends of the wires or 
hooked ends flush with the end of the basket. Seal the junction of the rope of the socket with 
asbestos yarn or asbestos fibre to prevent escape of molten white metal and clamp the socket 
complete with the wire in a vertical position with large end of the socket uppermost. Care should 
be taken that the axes of the wire rope of the socket are in line and the rope is sensibly vertical 
over a length of at least 24 times the wire rope diameter from the socket end. 




2 TO 5- 



-^6 



ll ^1 



SEIZING 



/i ^ ei 
BRUSH PATTERN 




2 TO 5 




2 T0 5- 



SEIZING- 



/2 ~ H ei 
HOOK PATTERN 




2 TO 5 



AM dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 ARRANGEMENT OF SEIZING, SEIZING OUTSIDE SOCKET 




2T0 5- 



SEIZING 



L^o.sd 





/s » ei — 5 to 10 mm 
BRUSH PATTERN 



U « Hex — 5 to 10 mm 
HOOK PATTERN 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 2 ARRANGEMENT OF SEIZING, SEIZING INSIDE SOCKET 



3.9 Gradually and evenly heat the socket around the outside circumference by a blow lamp or by 
any other suitable method so that the basket surface temperature is raised between 100 and 200X. 

3.10 The molten white metal at the proper pouring temperature specified in Table 1 is poured into the 
heated socket. Before pouring dross accumulated on the surface of bath should be skimmed off. 
Care should be taken that only the clean bright fluid metal at the right temperature free from dross 
is poured into the socket. The ladle should be of sufficient capacity to hold the molten white metal 
to fill the socket in one filling. Pouring should be continuous, uniform until the metal completely 
fills the socket. To ensure that the poured metal penetrates the interestice between the wires 
completely tap the socket lightly, if necessary, while the molten white metal is being poured. 

3.11 After pouring the metal, allow the socket to cool gradually and do not disturb the socket till 
the metal is fully set and the socket cools to air temperature. The rope adjoining the socket shall 
then be carefully cleaned and treated with preservative dressing. After cooling, it is recommended 
that the seizing at the throat be removed enough to show any broken wire that may appear adjacent 
to the throat during service. 



IS : 3937 ( Part ri)^ 1974 

EXPL A N ATOR Y NOTE 

This standard was originally issued in 1967. The present revision has been taken up to 
include the provision for socketing of wire ropes with molten white metal. Opportunity of this revision 
taken to bifurcate the standard into two parts; Part I of the standard lays down the requirements for 
socketing of wire ropes with zinc and Part II lays down the requirements for socketing of wire ropes 
with white metal. 

Requirements pertaining to sockets have been excluded from the standard and It is proposed 
to include these requirements in a separate standard dealing with sockets for mining. 

Socketing by either zinc or white metal provides equally efficient and permanent terminal 
attachment for wire ropes. They are simple, practical for all the wire rope diameters. On the other 
hand their execution requires that all care be adopted in the operation, as inspection of the socket 
once it is completed is almost impossible. 

In the preparation of the standard, assistance has been derived from the following: 

ISO/DIS 3189 Sockets for wire ropes — General requirements. International Organization for 
Standardization. 

Notice 353/C.G.P. 9-1963 Patte Coulee Poor Cable Rond En Acior (Cast end for round steel 
wire ropes). Association Des Industriels De Belgique. 

DIN 83315:1963 Vergiessen von Verzinkten Drahtseilen fur den SchifTbau in Seillulsen mit 
Vergussmetallen; Richtlinien (Sweating of galvanized wire ropes for ships used in wire rope 
sockets with special metals, instructions). Deutscher Normenausschuss. 



Printed at NeeUuuxuU Priaters, Delhi, India 



