( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 795 - 1976

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF ABSTRACTS (

First Revision )
Sectional Committee, EC 2
Representing
Indian National Scientific ( CSIR ), New Delhi Documentation Centre

Documentation
Chairman
SHRIS.PARTHASARATHY

Members
DR J. V. S. R. ANJANEYULU SARI R. hl. CHITNIS ( Allernalc ) National Medical Library (Directorate General of SHRI C. DAnRAL Health Services ), New Delhi Small Industry Enterprises National Documentation S&RI S. DUTTA Centre (Small Industry Extension Training Institute ), Hyderabad Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi SHRI GIRJA KU~~AR National Archives of India, New Delhi SHRI R. C. GUPTA SnaI N. R. R. CHARI ( AllLrnatc ) Central Secretariat Library, New Delhi SIIRI D. R. KALIA Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR V. A. KAMATH Stfar M. K. RAGHAVENDRA RAO ( Alternate) Social Science Documentation Centre (Indian SHRI S. M. KETKAR Council of Social Science Research ), New Delhi Computer Centre, University of Delhi DRN. C. KHANDEKAR Department of Library Science, University of Delhi PROF P. B. hfANoLA SI~RI hf. M. KASHYAP ( Alternate) Indian Library Association, Delhi SHRIJ. C. MEHTA National Library, Calcutta SHRI M. N. NAGARAJ Documentation Research & Training Ckntre, PROF A. NEELAMEGHAN Bangalore SHRI M. A. GOPINATH (Alternate ) National Information System in Science & TechnoPROF R. C. NIGA~I logy ( Department of Science & Technology), New Delhi Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi SHRI S. P. PHA~NIS SHRI A. SHOIB (Alternate ) Central Statistical Organization, New Delhi SHRI V. R. Rao SHR~ M. G. SARDANA ( Alternate) Central Machine Tool Institute, Bangalore SHRI V. S. PRABHAKAR RAO SHRI K. N. VASUDEVA RAO (Alternate) ( Continued on pa.pe2 ) Defence Scientitic Information Centre ( Ministry of Defence & Documentation ), Delhi

@ Copyright 1976
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS t 795 - 1976
( Continucdfwn Mcmhs page 1) Representing Indian Association of Special mation Centrcs, Calcutta Libraries and

SHRI P. B. ROY SHRI N. K. GOIL ( Alkrnafe ) DR S.L. SARNOT
Dri D. SHANKAR NARAYAN PROF HARBANS LAL SIIARMA SHR~ D. N. PANT ( AQcmate) DR V. SIDDHART~~A DR K. S. PRABHU (Alternate ) SHRI RAM D. TANEJA, Director ( Pub )

Infor-

Electronics Commission ( Information Planning and Analysis Group ), New Delhi University Grants Commission, New Delhi Central, Hindi Directorate ( Ministry of Education & Social Welfare ), New Delhi Indian Space Research Director General, ISI Organization, Bangalore

( ,Yr-@ccio Member )

Secretary

SHRI P. V. GOPALAKRISHNAN
Deputy Director ( Pub ), ISI

Panel for Abstracts,
Convcnn

EC 2 : P3

SHRIS. DU=A

Small Tndustry Enterprises National Documentation Centre (Small Industry Extension Training Institute), Hyderabnd Indian Association of Special mation Centres, Calcutta Libraries and Infor-

hembrr SHRI N. K. GOIL

2

rs : 795 - 1976

hdiarz Standard
GUIDE FOR PREPARATION OF ABSTRACTS

( First Revisimz )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 2 February 1976, after the draft finalized by the Documentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee. 0.2 The number of learned periodicals has grown so large in recent years, that a reader has to spend considerable time in glancing through myriads of articles before selecting those really useful to him. Further, there is also the difficulty of having access to all the periodicals. To overcome these difficulties, abstracting periodicals are being published in several subject areas. 0.3 It is important that there should be some uniformity in the preparation Taking these into consideration an Indian and presentation of abstracts. Standard was published in 1956. This standard is being revised now to incorporate additional rules for abstracting based on the experience gained during the last few years. This revision gives the salient features of indicative and informative abstracts and also gives guidance for abstracting articles and other learned documents, such as overviews, review articles, theses, and the like. 0.4 In revising the standard, the following: ISO/DIS 214-1974 Standardization. considerable Abstracts. assistance has been taken from Organization for

International

ISA MANUAL -A draft for abstracting 1969. Indian National Scientific ( INSDOC ), New Delhi. ICSU/AB Guidelines for preparation

Indian science abstracts. Documentation Centre

of abstracts.

0.5 It is hoped that there guidelines will facilitate the work of authors, editors and others charged with preparing abstracts, and that the abstracts so prepared will prove more useful to readers. 3

IS t 795 - 1976 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down general guidelines for preparation ofabstracts.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. accurate 2.1 Abstract - An abstract is defined as an abbreviated, It is usually accompanied representation of the content of a document. by an adequate bibliographical description to enable the original documents to be traced. 3. PURPOSES 3.1` The primary purpose of an abstract is to help the users to decide whether the contents of the document are such that they need to read it in full.
NOTE- Secondary publications and services can often make verbatim use of the abstract provided in primary documents if these abstracts are carefully prepared.

4. TYPES

AND CHOICE

4.1 Abstracts may be broadly divided into two classes, theme oriented and user oriented ( slanted ). These abstracts can be either indicative or informative ( see Appendix A for examples ) . 4.1 .l Indicative Abstract -This embodies a genera1 statement of the nature and scope of a document. The primary purpose is to give the reader several clues as to whether or not the information being sought is contained in the original record. 4.1.2 Informative Abstract -This provides a concise but comprehensive summary of the significant contributions to the knowledge contained in a document. On many occasions it serves as an adequate substitute for the original for the purpose of obtaining a specific item of information. 4.2 Choice of Abstract - Informative abstracts are for texts describing experimental work and documents theme. However, some discursive or lengthy texts, review articles, or theses, may permit the preparation is only an indicative or descriptive guide to the original. 5. GUIDELINES and purpose especially desirable devoted to a single such as overviews, of an abstract that

FOR ABSTRACTING
new approach, 4 like the nature novel findings, results and

5.1 An abstract should contain all the essential information,
of the work,

IS t 795 - 1976 These essential aspects of the original document should be conclusions. The guidelines given in 5.2 conveyed in a concise but precise manner. to 5.4.2 are for indicative abstracts. 5.2 The author's treatment of the subject and the nature of the document should be explained by means of expressions, such as brief, comprehensive, theoretical, experimental, review, survey and case history. 5.3 Context - The purpose, methods, results and conclusions presented in the original document should be stated without repeating information already conveyed by the title of the document either in that order or with initial emphasis on findings. 5.3.1 Purpose - The primary objectives and scope of the study should be stated unless these are already clear from the title of the document or can be derived from the remainder of the abstract. 5.3.2 Methodology - The techniques or approaches employed should be described, but only to the degree necessary for comprehension. New techniqucs should be identified clearly and the basic methodological principle, the range of operation, and the accuracy obtained should be described. 5.3.3 Results and Conclusions - Results and conclusions should be clearly presented. They may be abstracted jointly to avoid redundancy. 5.4 Presentation - The main findings should be highlighted indicating the advance in knowledge. It should not contain evaluation or criticism of the material abstracted. However, obvious errors and omissions may be indicated. 5.4.1 Data - In the case of scientific publications where new data are presented the presence of the data should be specifically indicated in the abstract. 5.4.2 Collateral Information - Findings or information incidental to the main purpose of the study but of value to other subject areas should be included, for example, modification of methods, new instruments, new physical constants, and newly-discovered compounds, newly-determined documents or data sources. Their relative importance may not be exaggerated in the abstract. 5.4.2.1 Notwithstanding this, in slanted abstracts, the stress may be given to the collateral information when the abstract is meant for the secondary publication devoted to the specific subject field. 5.4.3 Additional Information - Presence of tables, illustrations, and references should be indicated within parentheses at the end of the abstract. This information may be given in abbreviated form. for example, 4 tab, 5 fig., 10 ref, etc. 5

is t 795 - 1976
in case there is 5.4.4 The address of the author should be mentioned. more than one author working at different places, the address of the first author may be given after the names of the authors. bibliographical reference should 5.4.5 Bibliographical Referewe - The precede the text. of the abstract and conform to the requirements of IS : 2381-1963*. 6. STYLE 6.1 Generally accepted rules for good writing are also applicable to the writing of abstracts. Clarity and concise expression characterize a good The abstract should be intelligible in itself without there being abstract. riced to rcfcr to the document abstracted. 6.2 .Language - Simple sentences should be used for abstracts. abstracts should be accurate, concise, and unambiguous. 6.2.1 Without prejudice not always be used. 6.2.2 context Abbreviations may be used. to precision or clarity, complete sentence The need in the

commonly

understood

or easily

intelligible

6.2.3 Standard nomenclature should be abbreviations, and symbols should be defined the abstract. 6.2.4 6.2.5 Trade jargon and colloquialism should

used. Unfamiliar terms, the first time they occur in be avoided. should be avoided. except when

Both overuse and awk\vard omission be written

of articles

6.3 The abstract should the abstract is ver)- long. 7. PLACEMENT

in a single

paragraph,

7.1 In a primary publication the abstract of an article should precede the text of the article. Abstracts in languages other than the language of the article should be placed at the end of the article.
8. FORMAT

8.1 It is desirable to present the abstract and its bibliographical citation in format suitable for documentation cards. Maximum printing dimensions of 70 x 100 mm will permit use of card sizes of either 74 x 10s mm ( A7 ) or 75 x 125 mm ( International Library Catalogue cards ).
*Recommendations for bibliographical reference ( Since revised ).

6

IS I 795

-

1976

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.1)
EXAMPLES A-l. SCIENCE OF DIFFERENT TYPES AND TECHNOLOGY

A
OF ABSTRACTS

A-l.1 Examples of the different types of abstracts for the following article are given below: CHAKRABORTI S K, KUNDU N ( Chemother. Dep, Chittaranjan Das Cancer Res Cent, Calcutta-26 ) : Pyrimidinodiguanidines as potential anticancer drugs : Synthesis of N1 ( 5-uraciI)Ns-substituted diguanidines. Indian J Cancer 1967, 4 ( 4 ), 409-I 1. Indicative abstract Six Ni-( 5-uracil )-Nh-substituted diguanidines have been synthesized and their constitution confirmed. A preliminary obsn. on the biological properties of these compds is also reported. One of the compds showed some anti-tumour activity. Informatiz abstract Six diguanidines substituted at 5 position have been synthesized as potential anticancer drugs, bv condensing 5-aminouracil with substituted cyanoguanidines. Uracil was nitrated with fuming HNO, and H,SO, and the 5nitrouracil was redd. to the corresponding 5-aminouracil. Substituted syanoguanidines prepd. by reacting dicyandiamide with different aromatic amines, were condensed with 5-aminouracil to obt. the reqd. pyrimidinodiguanidines. The constitution of these, compd. were confirmed by their clemental analysis, UV absorption maxima at 260 m, u, and the formation of characteristic coloured complexes with Cu and Ni salts. The aq. soln. of hydrochlorides of the diguanidines were used for biological testing. Their toxicity to mice was: LD,,, 300 "g/kg body wt. by IP injection and 40 mg/kg body wt. by IV injection. Little anti-tumour activity has been obsd. with N,-( 5-uracil )-Ns-p-chloropenyldiguanidine. Slanted abstract for chemistry Synthesis of the following substituted diguanidines is reported: N,( 5-uracil) diguanidine (I); N,-( 5-uracil )-Ns-phenyldiguanidine (IT); N,-( 5-uracil )-Ns-p-methyl phenyldiguanidine (III); N,-( 5-uracil)Nr- ( 5-uracil )-Ns-pNs-p-methoxy phenyidiguanidine IV); chlorophenyldiguanidine (V); and N,- t 5-uracil )-NF,-p-nitrophenyldiguanidine (VI). Uracil was nitrated with fuming HNOs and H,SO, and the 5-nitrouracil was redd. to 5-aminouracil. Substituted cyanoguanidines were prepd.. by reacting dicyanidiamide with 7

IS : 795 - 1976
to the procedure of Curd et al different aromatic amines according ( with trop Med 1945, 39, 208-16 ). A mixt. of 10 m mole. of 5aminouracil, 10 m mole. of the cynaguanidine in 10 ml of water was heated under reflux after adding 1 ml ( approx. 10 m mole. ) of cont. HCI, for 2-10 hr. The pyrimidinodiguanidines were deposited as tryst. hydrochlorides on cooling the mixt. overnight. The mother liquor on treatment with (NHd),SO, gave further crop of the The constitution of these compd. were product as normal sulphates. confirmed by their elemental analysis, UV maxima at 260 mu, as well as by their ability to form characteristic colour complex with -CU and Ni salts. Particulars of these compd. are listed below:
Cortlpd I

mP
350" 235"

Reaction time ( hr ) 2 2

Yield (%) 88 85

Formula

C,H,O,N:,.HCI Cr2Hr30&HC1 CI,H,,O,N,.HC~ Cr,HrsO,N,.HCI Ci,Hr,O,N,.C!.HCI C,,H,,O&.HCl these

II III IV V VI compd.
For Medicine

243' 242" 265" 275'

4 3 4 10

70 78 82 48

A preliminary obsn. on the biological properties of showed compd. (V) to have little anti-tumour activity.

Six N,-( 5-uracil )-N,-substituted diguanidines have been prepd. as possible anticancer agents. The aq. soln. of hydrochloridcs of the diguanidines were tested for their biological properties. Their toxicity to mice was av. LDj,, 300 mg/kg body wt. by IP injection and 40mg/kg wt. by IV injection. No significant change in the lcucocyte count in the peripheral bood was seen on adming. some of these compd. 50 mg/kg body wt., IP for 6 days. In another set of cxpt., little anti-tubour activity was seen in the compd. Nr-( 5-uracil)N,-p-chlorophenyl-diguanidine, when it was admind. 15 mg/kg body wt., IV daily for 6 days, 24 hr. after transplantation with Schwartz leukamia solid variety on strain A inbred male mice. Compared to control, in 30% cases the survival time increased slightly and the nodule decreased though not significantly.

